
Information design 
research and practice
Information design provides citizens, business, and government with a means of 
presenting and interacting with complex information. It embraces applications 
from wayfinding and map reading to forms design; from website and screen lay-
out to instruction. Done well it can communicate across languages and cultures, 
convey complicated instructions, even change behaviours. This book offers an 
authoritative guide to this important multidisciplinary subject. 
Information design: research and practice weaves design theory and methods with 
case studies of professional practice from leading information designers across 
the world. The heavily illustrated text is rigorous yet readable, and offers a single, 
must-have reference to anyone interested in information design or any of its 
related disciplines such as interaction design, information graphics, document 
design, universal design, service design, map-making, and wayfinding.
Alison Black is Professor of User-Centred Design and directs the Centre for 
Information Design Research at the University of Reading. A psychologist by 
training, she has always worked with designers, both in industry and academia. 
Her research focuses on public communication in health settings and on the 
presentation of weather and extreme events forecasting.
Paul Luna both researches and designs complex texts. He designed the last 
two editions of the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary and has written on the 
relationship between typography and lexicography, including a study of the 
typography of Samuel Johnson’s Dictionary. Paul is an Emeritus Professor at 
the University of Reading and co-editor of the Department of Typography & 
Graphic Communication’s publication Typography Papers.
Ole Lund is Associate Professor in the Department of Design at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology, and a former Programme Director for the 
MA Information Design at the University of Reading. He has a special interest in 
the history, theory, and practice of typography, i.e. design for reading.
Sue Walker is a Professor at the University of Reading with an interest in 
typography and language, the design of learning materials for young children, 
and information design in public services. She is a partner in the information 
design consultancy, Text Matters, and was one of the principal researchers on the 
AHRC-funded ‘Isotype revisited’ project.


iii
Information 
design
research and practice
edited by
Alison Black, Paul Luna, Ole Lund, and Sue Walker
Centre for Information Design Research, University of Reading
foreword by
Erik Spiekermann

First published 2017
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2017 selection and editorial matter, Alison Black, Paul Luna, Ole Lund, and Sue Walker; 
individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Alison Black, Paul Luna, Ole Lund, and Sue Walker to be identified as the 
authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has 
been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trade-
marks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
CIP data has been applied for
ISBN: 978-0-415-78632-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-58568-0 (ebk)
Publisher’s Note
This book has been prepared from camera-ready copy provided by the editors.  
Typeset in Adobe Text, Monotype Classic Grotesque, and TypeTogether Abril families 
by luna.design
Links to third-party websites are provided in good faith and for information  
only. The publisher disclaims any responsibility for the materials contained in  
any third-party website referenced in this work.

v
Contents
Foreword by Erik Spiekermann  ix
Introduction  xi
Contributors  xiv
Part 1  Historical perspectives
Early visualizations of historical time  3
Stephen Boyd Davis
Images of time  23
Christian Tominski et al., Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, and 
Heidrun Schumann
William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs  43
Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
Ship navigation  61
Thomas Porathe
Technical and scientific illustration  85
Clive Richards
The lessons of Isotype for information design  107
Robin Kinross
Marie Neurath: designing information books for young people  117
Sue Walker
Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information  127
Eric Kindel
Some documents for a history of information design  147
Paul Stiﬀ
Moral visualizations  161
Alberto Cairo
Part 2  Theoretical approaches
Graphic literacies for a digital age  177
Robert Waller 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

vi / Contents
Visual rhetoric in information design  204
Jeanne-­Louise Moys
Multimodality and genre  221
John A. Bateman
Interactive information graphics  243
Wibke Weber
Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions in information 
design  257
Charles Kostelnick
Textual reading on paper and screens  275
Anne Mangen
Applying science to design  291
Andrew Dillon
Part 3  Cognitive principles
Does my symbol sign work?  303
Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
Icons as carriers of information  315
Alison Black
Warning design  331
Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
Diagrams  349
Barbara Tversky 
Designing static and animated diagrams for modern learning 
materials  361
Richard K. Lowe
Designing auditory alarms  377
Judy Edworthy
Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets  391
Patricia Wright
On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers  405
Frode Eika Sandnes
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Contents / vii 
Contrast set labelling  417
Ian Watson
Gestalt principles  425
Rune Pettersson
Information design research methods  435
Mary C. Dyson
Methods for evaluating information design  451
Will Stahl-­Timmins
Public information documents  463
Dana P. Skopal
Part 4  Practical applications
Choosing type for information design  479
Paul Luna
Indexing and information design  487
Glenda Browne
When to use numeric tables and why  503
Sally Bigwood and Melissa Spore
Wayfinding perspectives  509
Colette Jeffrey
Designing for wayfinding  527
Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
The problem of ‘straight ahead’ signage  541
Joan Zalacain
Park at your peril  553
Martin Cutts
Indoor digital wayfinding  561
Žiga Kropivšek
Visualizing storyworlds  577
Jona Piehl
Exhibitions for learning  591
María González de Cossío 
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

viii / Contents
Form follows user follows form  607
Borries Schwesinger
Information design & value  619
Andrew Boag
The LUNAtic approach to information design  635
Robert Linsky 
Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool  643
Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
Design + medical collaboration  655
Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
Developing persuasive health campaign messages  669
Carel Jansen
Information design in medicine package leaflets  685
David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil  701
Carla Galvão Spinillo
Medical information design and its legislation  715
Karel van der Waarde 
Index  733
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

ix
Foreword
We’re constantly bombarded by messages, all trying to make us look, to 
make us listen, to make us react. Some of these messages, however, are 
more important than others. Maybe we’d be better off without the junk 
mail, the commercials, and the cat videos, but often the information we 
do need isn’t provided in a way we can readily understand; think of all the 
instruction booklets, road maps, highway signs, electricity bills, tax forms, 
and travel booking sites you’ve tried to read that never seem to have the 
answer to your questions.
These familiar forms of communication all contain information which 
may not necessarily excite or even interest you – but not understanding 
it could be expensive. How you interpret some information could even 
be a matter of life or death. The difference between being a survivor and 
a casualty may be as simple as finding the ‘way out’ sign. Not to mention 
badly designed voting forms deciding important elections.
When things become too complex, when an environment defies com-
mon sense, when technical requirements are allowed to prevail over 
human considerations, then there’s a need for information design, for data 
that is organized, written, and presented so everyone can perceive, under-
stand, and act upon it.
As long as complex or critical information was mainly displayed on 
paper and static objects (think of forms or road signs), most graphic de­
signers regarded its design as something somehow beneath them; they 
didn’t want to spend their time taking apart and reorganizing complex data 
and making it intelligible. There were no gold medals to be had for doing 
that. Graphic designers preferred to leave these thankless tasks to bureau-
crats or engineers. More money was made shaping beautiful objects that 
made people buy things they didn’t need with money they didn’t have. 
In the late 1980s, Richard Saul Wurman tried to elevate our profession 
by calling us ‘information architects’. He recognized that information had 
to sell itself by being more than functional, it had to be attractive as well. 
While some of us felt that the new moniker sounded a trifle too grand – 
well, American – we soon found out that he had a point. A new medium 
was born in the mid 1990s: the internet’s world wide web. Indeed, a web-
site is architecture: access structures and navigational devices are vital, the 
website’s structure must be logical, the elements have to interact with each 
other, and the different functions need to be clearly distinguishable. 
As soon as our phones could provide more information than all the 
world’s encyclopaedias put together, signal overload turned into an obses-
sion. Now most of us suffer from ‘information anxiety’ – another phrase 
Wurman had coined in the 1980s. We’re afraid to miss out, constantly 
checking for even the most trivial of messages. 

x / Foreword
A golden age for information designers, one should think, as we are 
now called upon to arrange all those blinking icons, scrolling texts, moving 
images. Or is it? Are we now paid to add noise to the cacophony of modern 
life? Often beautiful noise, but this time telling people to pay attention to 
things that they don’t know they don’t need?
Identifying the problem and analysing the context and audience before 
shaping the message: this used to be what information design was all about. 
And whatever the medium, substrate, or location, this is what we are still 
called upon to do. Information design can show the way through – and 
perhaps out of – the jungle that is our modern world. Applied properly, it 
can turn data into information and information into effective communica-
tion and appropriate action.
This book provides 750 (expertly designed) pages to show just how 
complex and multifaceted the history, the methodology, and the practice 
of information design are. I am very happy that our discipline has finally 
come of age and that we now have our own bible to prove it.
Erik Spiekermann

xi
Introduction
The info designer structures and arranges information elements and pro-
vides orientation aids to enable the user to find a way through the maze of 
information. In this situation the graphic designer becomes an information 
manager. This shift presupposes cognitive and organisational competence 
that is generally neglected in design education today. (Bonsiepe 1999, 59)
Information design makes complex information clear with the needs of 
users in mind. It may use words or pictures, it may deliver that information 
on paper, digital devices, or public information displays such as directional 
signs. Information designers transform and present an intended message to 
suit the purposes, skills, experience, preferences, and circumstances of the 
intended users. Engagement with users, including an iterative approach 
of design, testing, and modification based on their input, delivers results 
that are tailored to people’s needs. Sometimes this engagement is local and 
informal; sometimes it is formal and extensive in order to guarantee safety 
and efficiency.
This volume reflects the work of information design researchers and 
practitioners, who engage with information providers and users to find the 
best ways of organizing and presenting information across a wide range of 
contexts. Their work has potential to support our many everyday interac-
tions: our efficient use of forms, bills, signs, or operating instructions; and 
the efficiency of organizations in presenting their services to and gathering 
data from their users or customers. 
The interdisciplinary nature of information design is reinforced through 
the topics of our chapters and approaches they describe. This anthology 
joins other such collections. The two volumes of Kolers, Wrolstad, and 
Bouma’s The processing of visible language (1979, 1980) reflected the inter-
disciplinary contributions at key conferences of the period. Easterby 
and Zwaga’s Information design (1984) and, later, Zwaga, Boersma, and 
Hoonhout’s Visual information for everyday use (1999) clearly articulated 
the benefits of interdisciplinarity for those involved in working with infor-
mation, including research by specialists in human factors, psychology, 
and design. These books covered wayfinding and signs, instructional 
text, forms design, legibility, safety information, symbols, and design 
process, setting the scene for topics that continue to interest information 
design practitioners and researchers today. Duffy and Waller’s Designing 
usable texts (1985) focused particularly on the design of documents, as 
did Schriver’s widely referenced Dynamics in document design (1997) and 
Carliner, Verckens, and de Waele’s volume Information and document 
design (2006). Frascara’s recent collection, Information design as prin-
cipled action (2015), reinforces the currency of interest in information 

xii / Introduction
design. Some of our chapters are written by authors included in these 
earlier volumes, and others are by authors who are less well known in 
the information design field, and by recent graduates of MA and doctoral 
programmes. These introduce new ideas and approaches and also suggest 
that information design is both rele­vant to today’s problems and sustain­
able as an academic discipline. 
Information design has a history of innovation and experimentation in 
communication to serve information users, and this is demonstrated by 
the chapters in Part 1 of this book. Many of these chapters are based on 
archival research which reveals ingenious design solutions. Some demon-
strate early use of design practices that may, mistakenly, be thought of as 
contemporary, such as iterative prototyping and revision in response to 
user consultation.
Part 2 highlights the need for design solutions to be sensitive both to the 
cultural context and traditions within which they are developed, and to the 
fundamental perceptual and cognitive constraints of their users. Digital 
technology has opened opportunities for dynamic and highly interactive 
information environments but information designers must make choices 
between the freedom that new technologies provide and the need for users 
to be able to use new information formats confidently and effectively.
Part 3 considers the tools and methods used by information designers 
working to respond to different requirements, from safety and warning 
information to instructional tools. The chapters include frameworks for 
organizing and classifying different kinds of information and describe 
methods for developing and evaluating design solutions. They reflect 
the cross-fertilization of approaches between designers and behavioural 
researchers which has been beneficial to the discipline.
Part 4 includes examples of the application of information design to 
different environments, including museums, roads, and car parks, and in 
business, health, and education. Many of these chapters are written by 
practitioners who reflect on the impact of their work or by researchers 
who engage with the public in their research.
As the field of information design evolves, this book aims to capture 
both where it has come from and its current status. We hope for continued 
recognition of its importance as new challenges of open data, globalization, 
and the availability of technology increase public access to information.
We extend thanks to our authors and reviewers, who have met our 
deadlines and responded to our queries; they have been patient and kind 
about inevitable changes in our schedule. We are grateful to Jonathan 
Norman at Routledge for suggesting this volume and for his support and 
encouragement. And finally, to colleagues and students in the Department 
of Typography & Graphic Communication at Reading and members of 
the Information Design Association for their interest in the project.
The editors

Introduction / xiii 
References
Bonsiepe, Guy. 1999. Interface: an 
approach to design. Maastricht: Jan van 
Eyck Academie.
Carliner, Saul, Jan Piet Verckens, 
and Cathy de Waele, eds. 2006. 
Information and document design: 
varieties on recent research. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Duffy, Thomas M., and Robert Waller, 
eds. 1985. Designing usable texts. 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Easterby, Ronald, and Harm Zwaga, eds. 
1984. Information design: the design 
and evaluation of signs and printed 
material. Chichester: John Wiley. 
Frascara, Jorge, ed. 2015. Information 
design as principled action: making 
information accessible, relevant, 
understandable, and usable. 
Champaign, IL: Common Ground 
Publishing.
Kolers, Paul A., Merald E. Wrolstad, and 
Herman Bouma, eds. 1979. Processing 
of visible language, vol. 1. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Kolers, Paul A., Merald E. Wrolstad, and 
Herman Bouma, eds. 1980. Processing 
of visible language, vol. 2. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Schriver, Karen A. 1997. Dynamics in 
document design: creating texts for 
readers. New York: John Wiley.
Zwaga, Harm J. G, Theo Boersema, 
and Henriëtte C. M. Hoonhout, eds. 
1999. Visual information for everyday 
use: design and research perspectives. 
London and Philadelphia, PA: Taylor 
& Francis.

xiv
Contributors
Austin Sorby Adams was a Senior Lecturer in Psychology at University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, Australia, and latterly on secondment to James Cook University, 
Singapore. He is now retired.
Wolfgang Aigner is a Professor at the Institute of Creative\Media/Technology, 
St Pölten University of Applied Sciences.
John A. Bateman is Professor of Appliable English Linguistics at the University of 
Bremen.
Sally Bigwood is a data presentation specialist and founder of Plain Figures.
Alison Black is Professor of User-centred Design and Director of the Centre for 
Information Design Research at the University of Reading. 
Andrew Boag is an information designer, writer, lecturer, and publisher.
Theo Boersema is Assistant Professor of Ergonomics in the Faculty of Industrial 
Design Engineering at Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands, and is a 
member of the Dutch (NEN) and international (ISO) standardization committees.
Stephen Boyd Davis is Professor of Design Research at the Royal College of Art. 
William B. Brinkman is Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of General and 
Community Pediatrics at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.
Glenda Browne is a freelance indexer.
Alberto Cairo is the Knight Chair in Visual Journalism in the School of 
Communication at the University of Miami.
Petra Černe Oven is an Associate Professor at the Academy of Fine Arts & Design, 
University of Ljubljana, Co-founder of the Institute of Design.
Martin Cutts is Editing Director of the Plain Language Commission.
David Dickinson is Principal Consultant at Consumation.
Andrew Dillon is the Louis T. Yule Regents Professor of Information at the University 
of Texas at Austin.
Mary C. Dyson was an Associate Professor in the Department of Typography & 
Graphic Communication at the University of Reading. She is now retired.
Judy Edworthy is Professor of Applied Psychology at Plymouth University.
Suzy Gallina is a graphic and typographic design consultant.
María González de Cossío is Executive Director of Centro de Estudios Avanzados 
de Diseño Cholula Puabla, and Professor-researcher at Universidad Autónoma 
Metropolitana Cuajimalpa, Mexico.
Carel Jansen is Professor in Communication and Information Studies at the 
University of Groningen and an Extraordinary Professor at Stellenbosch 
University.
Colette Jeffrey is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Visual Communication at 
Birmingham City University.
Eric Kindel is a Professor in the Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication at the University of Reading.
Robin Kinross is an author and publisher on the topic of visual communication and 
typography.
Charles Kostelnick is a Professor in the Department of English at Iowa State 
University.
Žiga Kropivšek is a designer at Soapbox, London.
Robert Linsky is the Director of Information Design at NEPS.

Contributors / xv 
Richard K. Lowe is an Adjunct Professor in the Faculty of Humanities at Curtin 
University.
Paul Luna is an Emeritus Professor in the Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication at the University of Reading.
Ole Lund is an Associate Professor in the Department of Design at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology.
Anne Mangen is a Professor at the Reading Centre at the University of Stavanger.
Christopher B. Mayhorn is a Professor in the Department of Psychology at North 
Carolina State University.
Paul Mijksenaar is the founder of Mijksenaar wayfinding experts.
Silvia Miksch is an Associate Professor in the Institute of Software Technology and 
Interactive Systems at the Vienna University of Technology.
Jeanne-Louise Moys is a Lecturer in the Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication at the University of Reading.
Rune Pettersson is Professor Emeritus at Mälardalen University, Sweden.
Jona Piehl is an Associate Lecturer at Central Saint Martins and London College of 
Communication, University of the Arts London.
Thomas Porathe is a Professor in the Department of Design at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology. 
Barbara Predan is Co-founder and Director at the Institute of Design, Ljubljana.
Clive Richards is President of the International Institute for Information Design and 
an Emeritus Professor at Birmingham City University.
Fenne Roefs is Senior Project Manager at Mijksenaar wayfinding experts.
Frode Eika Sandnes is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science at Oslo 
and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences.
Heidrun Schumann is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science at the 
University of Rostock.
Borries Schwesinger is a brand and information designer and author.
Dana P. Skopal is a communication strategist and researcher at Opal Affinity Pty Ltd. 
She also lectures at Macquarie University.
Ian Spence is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Psychology at the University 
of Toronto.
Erik Spiekermann is an information designer and type designer. He founded 
Metadesign, FontShop, and Edenspiekermann.
Carla Galvão Spinillo is a Professor at the Universidade Federal do Paraná.
Melissa Spore (1948–2015) was an instructional designer at the University of 
Saskatchewan and partner at Plain Figures.
Will Stahl-Timmins is Interactive Data Graphics Designer at BMJ.
Paul Stiff (1949–2011) was a Professor in the Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication at the University of Reading.
Christian Tominski is a researcher and Lecturer in the Department of Computer 
Science at the University of Rostock.
Barbara Tversky is a Professor Emerita of Psychology at Stanford University and 
Professor of Psychology and Education at Teachers College, Columbia University.
Karel van der Waarde is founder of a research consultancy in Belgium specializing in 
the testing of information design.
Howard Wainer is Distinguished Research Scientist at the National Board of Medical 
Examiners.

xvi / Contributors
Sue Walker is a Professor in the Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication at the University of Reading.
Robert Waller is Director of the Simplification Centre.
Ian Watson is an Associate Professor in the Department of Design at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology.
Wibke Weber is Professor in the Institute of Applied Media Studies at Zurich 
University of Applied Sciences.
Lea E. Widdice is Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Adolescent Medicine 
at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.
Michael S. Wogalter is Professor Emeritus in Psychology at North Carolina State 
University.
Patricia Wright is an Emerita Professor in the School of Psychology at Cardiff 
University.
Joan Zalacain is an information designer and the founder of London-based Zalacain 
Wayfinding.
Mike Zender is Professor of Design in the School of Design, College of Design, 
Architecture, Art, and Planning at The University of Cincinnati.

Part 1
Historical 
perspectives


3
Early visualizations of 
historical time
‘To see at one glance all the centuries that have passed’
Stephen Boyd Davis
This chapter focuses on the visualization of historical time, illustrated by key 
examples from the eighteenth century when the modern timeline was invented. 
We are fortunate in having not only surviving examples of printed timelines from 
the period but also explanations written by their makers, revealing the ambitions 
they had for visualization. An important divergence is evident, between those 
who want to use rhetorical visual metaphors to tell a graphical story, and those 
who prefer to let the data ‘speak for itself’, allowing patterns to emerge from the 
distribution of data points across a surface. 
Emergence of the modern timeline
Timelines are routinely used to represent history, plotting events chron-
ologically.1 In the eighteenth century, the first modern timelines replaced 
typographic representations of historical time such as lists and tables on 
the one hand, or symbolic shapes on the other. These designs made novel 
use of space, in formats that we continue to recognize in modern informa-
tion visualization. In doing so they reflected a changed model of how time 
is conceived, one where the past is a uniform, arithmetic space in which 
events are situated.
Perhaps the simplest representation of past time is the list. Events are 
named, and maybe dated, in sequential order, and are organized as a row 
or column. Even now, the name ‘timeline’ is regularly used for such lists, 
in which events are packed close on one another, and the space occupied 
by each event is a simple outcome of the size of the label or description. 
Such lists tell us about order, and not much else. A significant step up in 
representational capacity is the table or matrix. These make it possible 
to coordinate multiple lists in time, showing not only sequence but syn-
chrony. A landmark is Eusebius’s chronicle of c.300, which synchronized 
Christian history with that of the pagans and Jews in a series of parallel 
columns (Feeney 2007, 29). Such matrices still fail to offer two important 
pieces of information: the intervals between events and an overall sense 
  1	 In 1753, the term ‘chronographie’ was used by Jacques Barbeu-Dubourg to distinguish 
his predominantly visual approach to chronology from the textual emphasis of 
‘chronologie’. The terms chronography and chronographics are used in this chapter with 
the same intention.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 3–22
1

4 / Stephen Boyd Davis
of scale. Only by mapping time arithmetically can these features of history 
be represented; they appear in the true timelines that emerged in the early 
to mid eighteenth century. Within these designs, a range of graphical rhe-
torical devices was available to highlight trends, connections, and influ-
ences. These continued an alternative tradition that was not based on lists 
or tables but used vivid figurative images to represent the shape of history. 
Examples from across the centuries appear in Rosenberg and Grafton’s 
Cartographies of time (2010), including chains (p. 39), trees (p. 50, p. 57), 
the hand (p. 51), the body (p. 55), architecture (p. 80), and animals 
(p. 91). Those authors who eschewed such figurative imagery preferred 
to use only the patterns, empty spaces, outliers, and other shapes that 
emerge from spatially organizing the data against time and other meas-
ures. The innovative examples presented here fall mainly into the latter  
category.
In our own time, two similar contrasting approaches to visualization 
can be identified. At one extreme lies the designer who does not trust the 
reader or viewer to engage with the ‘story’ unless given vivid visual clues. 
Such clues have been memorably characterized as ‘chart junk’ by Edward 
Tufte (1983), though it should be said that there is no simple equation: 
decorated charts bad, undecorated good. There has been considerable 
debate, and experimental investigation, concerning the possible value of 
rhetorical images in visualization (e.g. Bateman et al. 2010; Borgo et al. 
2012; Borkin et al. 2012; Hullman, Adar, and Shah 2011; Inbar, Tractinsky, 
and Meyer 2007; Vande Moere and Purchase 2011; Vande Moere et al. 
2012). This may be seen as part of a broader question concerning how far 
all design is a form of rhetoric (Buchanan 1985), pursued in specific con-
texts by, for example, Joost and Scheuermann (2006), Crilly et al. (2008), 
Kostelnick (2008), Lockton, Harrison, and Stanton (2008), and Wrigley, 
Popovic, and Chamorro-Koc (2009). In the chronographics of the eight-
eenth century, two contrasting approaches to visualization are already 
apparent – those adopting strongly authorial visual structures tending to 
tell the viewer what to think, and those where the patterns in the data are 
allowed to emerge more automatically.
Christoph Weigel’s Discus chronologicus: a mechanical  
model of history 
In 1720 Christoph Weigel of Nuremberg (1654–1725) published a Discus 
chronologicus that epitomizes a  mechanical, unadorned approach to 
historical data. It organizes history from the birth of Christ down to the 
author’s own time as though it were a clock face. The sequence of years 
begins and ends not at the top but at the left of the dial. Concentric rings 
represent each of fourteen European kingdoms. This clock has a hand: 
a  paper pointer fastened at the centre that can be rotated, so that the 
reader is always certain which ring represents which kingdom (Figure 1). 

Early visualizations of historical time / 5 
The spandrels are filled with a textual explanation drawing attention to the 
chart’s features. The claims made by Weigel will be repeated by many sub-
sequent authors of diagrams of time. It is worth quoting his whole opening 
sentence: ‘In order to understand and use this round chronological table 
properly it should be noted that it was our goal to present together on 
a single sheet all emperors and kings in the European empires flourishing 
in the years of Christ, along with the Roman popes, in their correct year 
order and succession, beginning from the Nativity down to current times, 
in such a way that one can see in one effortless view which rulers reigned 
in the same time together.’2 These claims are, then: that all the knowledge 
is condensed within a single sheet; it may be seen in one view; its use is 
effortless; and it represents both sequence and synchrony of the historic 
events represented. The sense of a large body of knowledge, even a total-
ity, being brought under a single gaze, in which information is more or less 
  2	 ‘Gegenwärtige rundte chronologische Tafel recht zu verstehen und zu gebrauchen 
ist zu mercken, daß man auf solcher, gleichsam als auf einen eintzigen Blate alle 
Kayser und Könige in denen annoch blühenden Europäischen Reichen, sambt denen 
Römischen Bäbste, in ihrer richtigen Jahr-ordnung und folge, von Christi Geburt an bis 
auf ietzige Zeit, hatt dergestalt wollen vorstellig machen, daß man auch dabey in einem 
anblick onschwer sehen könne, welche zu gleicher Zeit miteinander regieret haben’ 
(Weigel, Christoph. 1720. Discus chronologicus. English translation by Florian Kräutli 
and Stephen Boyd Davis).
Figure 1
Weigel, Christoph. 
1720. Discus 
chronologicus. 
Nuremberg: 
Weigel. 51 × 49 cm. 
Detail.
Collection: Stephen 
Boyd Davis. Photograph: 
Stephen Boyd Davis. 

6 / Stephen Boyd Davis
effortlessly acquired, will recur through the remainder of the century and 
beyond. 
Weigel makes no attempt to shape the sequences of events into any 
narrative beyond that which simply emerges from seeing time flow from 
year to year around the dial, and from being able to see, with the help of 
the ruler, when events in different kingdoms coincide. We can speculate 
on the reasons why his chart has this abstemious form, forgoing figura-
tive metaphor. The clock is an obvious influence. While clock faces were 
sometimes decorated, and often surrounded by figurative allusions to time 
and fate, clocks are essentially machines, modelled on – and arguably pro-
ducing – a mechanical model of undifferentiated time (Dohrn-van Rossum 
1996; Sherman 1996). It is significant that such a model of uniform time 
should be applied by Weigel not just to the time of day but to history. It is 
really only with Newton that the idea takes hold of time as ‘absolute, true, 
and mathematical’ (Newton 1687), part of a general shift to quantification 
and a growing admiration for mechanical systems and principles (Boyd 
Davis 2010; Crosby 1997). Newton himself spent thirty years working on 
the chronology of ancient kingdoms (Buchwald and Feingold 2012), a syn-
thesis of his mathematical and occult interests – though he seems never to 
have made a diagram of history. 
More than a hundred years earlier, Helvicus (1581–1617) had consciously 
departed from the traditional packed table of history that gave no sense of 
scale or interval, by using each double-page spread of his Theatrum his-
toricum to represent exactly one hundred years. A phrase from Weigel’s 
rubric, ‘in equal intervals of centuries’ (‘aequalibus seculorum intervallis’, 
Weigel 1720) echoes one in Helvicus: ‘on the equal intervals of centuries 
and decades’ (‘de aequalibus centenariorum et denariorum intervallis’, 
Helvicus 1609). Few publishers had taken up Helvicus’ challenge to use 
equal graphic space for equal time, but the clock-like arrangement per-
haps encouraged Weigel to think along those lines. 
Mathematical divisions of time and space were also fundamental to 
another publication format, the volvelle. These used cut-out paper com-
ponents, typically a small movable disc mounted within a larger one, cali-
brated with numbers and other signs, to function as a paper substitute for 
larger, more expensive wood and metal instruments. They were used to 
determine the locations of the heavenly bodies, tides, the timing of Easter, 
and as other kinds of analogue calculator (Kanas 2012). Being constructed 
on mathematical-mechanical principles they necessarily treated time as 
a uniform quantity, while the marks printed on them were generally lim-
ited to the bare facts of the calculation (Figure 2). Any rhetorical shaping 
of the knowledge presented was confined to the accompanying text. There 
seems an obvious continuity between such devices and Weigel’s chart of 
history.
As mentioned above, Weigel’s claims (1720) include the idea that the 
user’s glance encompasses a totality of information. He also emphasizes 

Early visualizations of historical time / 7 
the structural qualities that his chart brings out – the ‘correct year-order 
and succession’ (‘richtigen Jahr-ordnung und folge’). He emphasizes how 
‘one can see immediately, on one line through all the empires, who lived at 
the same time’ (‘so wird man in einer lienie durch alle Reiche so gleich sehen, 
welche mit denselbigen zu gleicher Zeit gelebet haben’). He explains that the 
century-lines have been emphasized so that ‘they catch the eye quickly 
without a lot of searching’ (‘ohne vieles Nach-suchen desto eher in die Augen 
fallen’). This emphasis on visible, even self-revealing structure builds on 
the claims made for the knowledge that such diagrams represent – that of 
chronology. 
Chronology is today perceived as incidental, taken for granted as an 
aspect of history, but prior to the eighteenth century it was fundamental to 
civilized knowledge (Grafton 1975; 1993, 4), partly because of its relation to 
the prevailing understanding of the Bible as both factual history and a tem-
poral image of God’s plan. The structure contributed by chronology was 
thought to add rigour, form and memorability to the anecdotal qualities 
of history. Dodsley (1754, xxi) is typical in remarking, ‘History can only be 
made intelligible by some Knowledge of Chronology, the Science by which 
Events are ranged in their Order, and the Periods of Computation are set-
tled; and which therefore assist the Memory by Method, and enlighten the 
Judgment, by shewing the Dependence of one Transaction on another.’ 
Here chronology contributes a correct understanding of sequence, inter-
val and causality; the resulting structure enhances both wisdom and recall. 
Figure 2
Gallucci, Giovanni Paolo. 1588. 
A volvelle. ‘Wheels to find the 
position of the sun, and of the 
moon, in the zodiac’ (‘Rotulae ad 
inveniendum locum solis, et lunae 
in zodiaco’). Theatrum mundi 
et temporis. Venice: Giovanni 
Battista Somasco. Book Three, 
p. 119. Approx 10 × 10 cm.
Collection: Library of the Middle Temple, 
London, by kind permission of the 
Benchers of the Honourable Society of 
the Middle Temple. Shelfmark BAY L (C). 
Photograph: Stephen Boyd Davis.  

8 / Stephen Boyd Davis
Chronographics, the diagrammatic representation of historical time, was 
the visual instantiation of these same principles. 
Martignoni’s Imago Romani imperii: figurative  
graphic metaphor
Girolamo Andrea Martignoni (died c.1743), Italian scholar and poet, 
makes similar claims to Weigel. In 1718 he published a large engraved chart 
of history (Martignoni 1718) inspired by geographic maps and centred 
on the Roman empire (Figure 3, overleaf), together with a substantial 
Explication de la carte historique de la France et de l’Angleterre (Martignoni 
1721a) and corresponding Spiegazione della carta istorica dell’Italia, e di 
una parte della Germania (Martignoni 1721b), containing sample portions 
of a still larger version of the same chart, apparently never produced in its 
entirety, together with lengthy, even tedious, explanations. He emphasizes 
the wealth of data, conceived not just as a still picture but as visibly chang-
ing over time, that has been condensed into a single view. These include 
the principal changes in the Roman empire and its antecedents and succes-
sors; the extent of the relevant territories and other aspects of geography, 
and information on great families, their titles, honours and arms, the suc-
cession of kings and other rulers, and the acquisition, growth and decline 
of their estates. This information is made visible in summary form – ‘faire 
voir en abrégé/rappresentare in compendio’ (Martignoni 1721a, 1721b). The 
notion of a visual summary acknowledges that visualization involves omis-
sion and abstraction. In making sense of history within a single view, deci-
sions have had to be made about what to omit. Nevertheless, it is implied 
that the benefits of such visual summaries outweigh the disadvantages of 
omission. 
What exactly are the advantages claimed by Martignoni? Whereas 
Weigel remarks that time in his chart can be interrogated in terms of both 
sequence and synchrony, Martignoni claims that, thanks to its design, his 
chart allows three forms of inquiry: by events, by century, and by great 
families (‘da successo in successo, da secolo in secolo, e da signoria in ­signoria’, 
Martignoni 1721b, title page). Rather than use a minimal clock face or a lin-
ear diagram of time, Martignoni adopts a geographical metaphor – one full 
of rhetorical potential but, as will become clear, fraught with difficulties. 
He explains at great length the principal metaphor he has adopted, that of 
the river of time. He seems somewhat defensive about graphical metaphor, 
citing precedent: previous authors ‘have, for example, imagined Trees to 
represent Genealogies; Circles, to enable the movements of the Heavens 
to be understood; Animals such as Bears, Lions, Rams, Dragons etc, to 
understand the Stars and their influences and location; others, Trees and 
Chariots to explain certain parts of Logic and Metaphysics: I have even 
seen Theology, queen of the sciences, represented in a Design by Circles, 
Squares and Triangles’ (Martignoni 1721a, 1721b). Perhaps desperate to 

Early visualizations of historical time / 9 
convince, he points out that God himself uses ‘similes and images, such as 
a Vine and its branches, a Tree, a Treasure, a Field etc’ (ibid.), as does the 
Church. If metaphors are good enough for God, they are good enough for 
Martignoni.
Martignoni’s design is a hybrid, and a key example of a metaphorical 
approach to visualization. It is a  circle, at the centre of which lies the 
Roman empire, represented by a topographic map within a smaller circle. 
From the inner circle to the perimeter, the design is calibrated with a series 
of equally spaced concentric rings representing the boundaries of the cen-
turies – the ‘lignes séculaires/linee secolari’. The whole chart is bisected 
horizontally by a double-ruled line that separates time before Christ above 
from that after Christ below. Six radial axes pass through the central zone, 
each representing a nation or region of Europe, but these axes are not 
merely diagrammatic. As Martignoni explains: ‘There are six Rivers in the 
Upper Part, which progress towards the Centre of the Design by means of 
six . . . Lines, and which before arriving at the Centre, unite their waters in 
a single circular Sea. These six rivers represent, . . . the British Isles, part of 
Germany, Italy, France, Spain, and that part of Turkey, now in Asia, Africa 
and Europe, that was subject to the Romans. The circular Sea formed by 
their union represents the Roman empire as constituted by these parts’ 
(Martignoni 1721a, 1721b).
The most remarkable feature of Martignoni’s chart is the way it com-
bines standard cartography with metaphorical mapping of time. The 
uncertainties (and perhaps indiscipline) of the pre-Roman world are 
represented by rivers of time which meander and are fed by many trib-
utaries expressing the domains, provinces and towns of which the larger 
regions are composed. Once the six rivers emerge from the Roman ‘sea’ 
and improbably continue each to trace their respective axes towards the 
lower perimeter (representing the present day), each river has been for-
malized and generally straightened, and more closely resembles a stand-
ard genealogy.
In the upper part, the metaphorical rivers of time ‘widen and take on 
the form of Lakes, in which one sees, like so many Islands, the modern 
Geography of each Country’. The mixing of topographic and metaphori-
cal maps creates problems both graphically and textually. Graphically, the 
cartographic depiction of the Roman empire in the lower half of the central 
circle has to be inverted and rotated in the upper half, in order to ensure 
that the radial axes continue to pass through the correct countries in both 
halves. Textually, the use of the river metaphor creates its own problems. 
When we read of the ‘Fleuves principaux de l’Angleterre et de la France’ we 
might imagine that geographic rivers are being discussed, but it transpires 
that these ‘principal rivers’ are the respective metaphorical rivers of time 
for the two countries.
Despite its many problems, Martignoni’s chart illustrates important 
themes in early chronographics. Its double dependence on geography – as 

10 / Stephen Boyd Davis

Early visualizations of historical time / 11 
Figure 3
Martignoni, Girolamo Andrea. 1718. 
Portrait of the Roman empire (Imago 
Romani imperii). Turin: Tasniere. 
56 × 57 cm (detail approx. 60% linear).
Collection/photo: © Institut Cartogràfic i Geològic 
de Catalunya.

12 / Stephen Boyd Davis
both map and metaphor – is significant. Geography and chronology had 
long been regarded as companion supports for history, and were regularly 
characterized as its ‘two eyes’ long before chronology was actually made 
visual as chronography, the textual metaphor appearing at least as early 
as 1563 (Boyd Davis 2015). The tendency to see time as just another meas-
urable dimension – and specifically as like coordinates on a map – added 
further to the relevance of geography. D’Alembert’s article on chronology 
for the Encyclopédie (1753, 390) opens with a quotation from Newton: ‘All 
things are placed in time as to order of succession; and in space as to order 
of situation’ (‘In tempore . . . quoad ordinem successionis, in spatio quoad 
ordinem situs locantur universa’). If time is just another coordinate, like 
those of maps, what is more natural than to make cartographies of time? 
Another powerful influence must surely have been the current state of 
the cartographic trade. We can imagine someone in the early eighteenth 
century seeking a visual expression for historical time. Their understanding  
is conditioned by the relatively new Cartesian conception of number as 
mappable to a line (as in a simple number-line) and to space when extended 
over two or more dimensions. The writings of Descartes (1596–1650), par-
ticularly the Compendium musicae of 1619, are suffused with the ideas of 
clear representation, of grasping magnitudes at a glance, and specifically 
of line-lengths which correspond to number (Gaukroger 1995). In rule 12 
of the posthumous Regulae of 1684 we find Descartes claiming that there is 
a graphical equivalent to any variable quantity: ‘the infinite multiplicity of 
figures is sufficient for the expression of all the differences in perceptible 
things’ (Gaukroger 1995, 162). Newton’s proposal that time, including cos-
mological-historical time, is just a dimension like space, would entice any-
one working in his shadow – and Newton cast a long shadow – to conceive 
of maps of history: maps that are drawn, engraved, and printed using the 
same techniques as maps of territories and terrains, published by the same 
publishers, and sold to the same well-to-do public. All the chronographic 
charts discussed in this chapter are engravings on copperplate, executed to 
a high standard, printed on large sheets, and generally coloured (by hand): 
they were not cheap. As consumer goods they are directly comparable to 
maps and globes, objects which since the time of Mercator (1512–1594) 
and Ortelius (1527–1598) had been increasingly available graphic aids 
to understanding. Pedley (2005, 3) notes the increased spending power 
and availability of such goods in the eighteenth century. New institutions 
emerged to promote cartography. ‘The market for maps was buoyant. By 
the eighteenth century, maps and globes had become a regular feature 
in the life of the literate. The number of maps found in personal librar-
ies in both England and France increased throughout the century’ (p. 6). 
Rosenberg and Grafton point out that already by the seventeenth century, 
the map had become a key symbol not only of the power of monarchs 
but of the power of knowledge itself (2010, 17). In this context, one could 
almost ask: what other model was there for mapping time? 

Early visualizations of historical time / 13 
Barbeau de la Bruyère’s Mappemonde historique:  
a map, but in a new sense
Martignoni’s chart resembles, and contains, terrestrial cartography. He 
calls it Imago Romani imperii – an image, portrait, or imitation of the 
Roman empire. Thirty years later, another chart appears, in some ways 
equally beholden to cartography but expressing that influence in very dif-
ferent ways. While Martignoni sought to dictate how the pattern of events 
and the relations between them were perceived by the viewer, shaping 
his patterns using drawn rivers and landscapes, Jean-Louis Barbeau de la 
Bruyère (1710–1781) organizes time and space in a proto-scientific way. He 
prefers to plot events in time and space, and allow the patterns to emerge. 
Any rhetorical shaping is subtle, as it conventionally is in geographic maps 
(Figure 4, overleaf). 
In Barbeau’s chart, space and time really are treated as equivalent di-
mensions. Space is organized across the chart, while time runs down. He 
acknowledges that in using a single axis for space, he has been obliged to 
compress the two (strictly speaking, three) dimensions of the global map 
into one, so that each country, represented as a column of the chart, can 
only have two neighbours, one on either side, whereas in reality it may 
have four or five (Barbeau de la Bruyère [1750], 19). He implies that this is 
a small price to pay, and points out that colour has been used to visually 
reunite parts of empires that have become separated as columns. He also 
admits (p. 7) that though in principle the width of a column represents the 
geographical extent of each kingdom, in practice he has reduced the col-
umns for Africa and America because of the paucity of historical data for 
those regions. Time is organized from the origins of the various nations at 
the top down to the present day at the bottom. Throughout his thirty-eight 
page explanatory booklet, Barbeau ([1750]) repeatedly reminds the reader 
that each event can be positioned in his two dimensions of space and time, 
and cites the two equal eyes of history, the knowledge of places and of 
times (p. 6), incorrectly ascribed by him to Cicero. Barbeau’s life prior to 
1750 had provided him with many opportunities to learn from cartography. 
Living in Holland for fifteen years, he imported several important charts 
into France for the use of Philippe Buache (Hérissant 1782, 2), who was 
a member by marriage of the Delisle cartographic dynasty (Pedley 2005, 
110), and is said to have lived in Buache’s household for more than twenty 
years (Hérissant 1782, 2). A glance shows his indebtedness to cartographic 
conventions: variation of lettering to express the scale and importance of 
territory, the use of solid colour and coloured inlining to distinguish em-
pires and related lesser states, and the use of different kinds of boundary 
lines to express different relations between adjoining graphic blocks.
Though la Bruyère does not pretend that his chart is a conventional 
map, he calls it a Mappemonde, a term then normally denoting two circular 
maps together representing the whole world. As for other chronographic 

14 / Stephen Boyd Davis
Figure 4
Barbeau de la Bruyère, Jean-Louis. 1750. Mappemonde historique. 50 × 127 cm. Detail. 
Collection: Bibliothèque Municipale de Dijon (12990, Fonds Ancien).  
Photo : Stephen Boyd Davis. Used with permission.

Early visualizations of historical time / 15 
innovators, this notion of totality is important: he pours scorn (Barbeau 
de la Bruyère [1750], 36) on publications that claim to be total histories 
but omit newly discovered peoples and even great empires. Not only 
does his chart show ‘everything’; it can apparently be instantly grasped. 
In the opening rubric on the chart itself, he makes the familiar claim of 
immediate understanding: ‘Here can be seen in the first glance, not just 
the succession of the principal monarchies . . . from the dispersion of men 
after the great Flood to the present day. Within that same view can be seen 
the entire World . . .’ (‘On voit ici du premier coup d’oeil, non seulement la 
suite des principales Monarchies . . . depuis la Dispersion des Hommes après 
le Déluge jusqu’a present. On a sous un même point de vûe, l’état du Monde 
entier . . .’, Barbeau de la Bruyère 1750). Again instant comprehension is 
emphasized, in a passage suggesting that the chart resembles God’s own 
view of all history in a glance: ‘Would it be too much to suggest, that God 
who is called in Scripture, the Beholder of all Ages, and who has created 
Man in His image, enables Man by this Plan, and others like it, to see at one 
glance all the Centuries that have passed, as though present before him?’ 
(‘Seroit-ce trop dire, que Dieu qui s’appelle dans les Ecritures, Conspector 
Seculorum, . . . & qui a créé l’Homme à sa ressemblance, . . . le met en état par 
ce Plan, & autres semblables, de voir d’un coup-d’oeil tous les Siécles passés, 
comme présens devant lui?’ Barbeau de la Bruyère [1750], 38).
Barbeau’s chart strips away the pictorial aspects of cartography and 
adopts a pared-down, mechanical series of graphical codes that anticipate 
the quantitative visualizations of the next century and even the data visual-
izations of our own time. In common with them, every point on the surface 
has a meaning, as it does for example in a modern ‘treemap’ (Shneiderman 
1991): each point inhabits a coordinate space defined by place and time.
Barbeu-Dubourg’s Chronographie ou description  
des tems: a history machine
Like Barbeau, Jacques Barbeu-Dubourg (1709–1779) aimed for complete-
ness. His chart begins with the creation and ends at his own times. Barbeau 
had applied a series of decreasing scales as he moved further back in time 
(and up the sheet), creating a kind of perspective where more distant time 
occupies less space than recent times. However, Barbeu-Dubourg argues 
that this means one never knows what scale one is looking at (Barbeu-
Dubourg 1753, 7), with the result that his own chart – in which time is now 
laid out horizontally (see Boyd Davis 2012 for a discussion of this deci-
sion) and at a constant scale – is 16.5 metres long, and the left-most parts 
are almost devoid of content. It comprises 35 sheets printed from copper 
engravings, glued together to form a continuous scroll (Figure 5, over-
leaf). It was optionally available mounted in a ‘machine,’ a scrolling device 
with handles. A copy of the machine survives in the library of Princeton 
University, one that the librarian Stephen Ferguson suggests may have 

16 / Stephen Boyd Davis
been Barbeu-Dubourg’s own, as its handwritten additions seem to match 
his known interests and expertise (Ferguson 1991, 207). 
The familiar image of the eyes of history appears in his explanation 
(Barbeu-Dubourg 1753, 4), as does the notion of seeing at a glance (p. 13), 
but some of the emphasis is new. Now the dullness of learning chronology 
as names and numbers is emphasized, and the point is explicitly made that 
geography has for long been supported by visual aids, while chronology 
has not: ‘it must be admitted that Geography is much more cultivated, and 
less frequently ignored than Chronology; and the reason is easily detected, 
that we have aids to studying the one, which until now we have not had 
for the other’ (‘Il faut avouer malgré cela que la Géographie est beaucoup 
plus cultivée, moins généralement ignorée que la Chronologie; & la raison en 
est bien sensible, c’est que l’on a des facilités pour étudier l’une, que jusqu’ici 
l’on n’a pas eues pour l’autre’, p. 4). More than any of the pioneers already 
cited, Barbeu-Dubourg emphasizes ‘automatic’ learning. In his design, 
he claims, ‘events so strike the senses, organize themselves so effortlessly 
in the memory, and are imprinted there so strongly, that we learn almost 
automatically, hardly needing to think what we do (‘tous les événemens 
mémorables frappent tellement les sens, s’arrangent si aisément dans la 
mémoire, & s’y impriment si fortement, qu’on s’instruit presque machinale-
ment & sans trop y songer’, p. 8). This notion of easing and even automating 
learning through visualization is all part of the increasing affection for the 
machine noted earlier, an aesthetic of the mechanical and mathematical. 
Related to this is the key claim that such forms of learning become a pleas-
ure: ‘to see Chronology metamorphosed into Chronography, to see that 
a science of memory so cold, so sterile, so insipid, may become a science 
that is entertaining, and so to speak mechanized, which speaks to the eyes 
Figure 5
Barbeu-Dubourg, 
Jacques. 1753. 
Chronography or 
depiction of time. 
40 × 1650 cm. 
Detail. 
Collection: Rare Book 
Division, Department 
of Rare Books and 
Special Collections, 
Princeton University 
Library. Photo: Stephen 
Boyd Davis. Used with 
permission.

Early visualizations of historical time / 17 
and to the mind’ (‘voir la Chronologie métamorphosée en Chronographie, 
de voir qu’une science de mémoire si froide, si stérile, si insipide, doit devenue 
une science amusante, & pour ainsi dire méchanique, qui parle aux yeux & 
à l’imagination’, p. 8). Geography, he argues, has long offered these pleas-
ures: ‘the study of Geography is pleasing, easy, attractive; it presents – it 
lays out before our eyes – a picture of every Country of the World; one 
may roam through it eagerly, and return to it with pleasure’ (‘l’Étude de la 
Géographie est riante, aisée, attrayante; elle présente, elle expose sous les yeux 
un tableau de tous les pays de l’Univers; on la parcourt avec empressement, 
on y revient avec plaisir’, p. 5). Now through chronography, a term Barbeu-
Dubourg promotes as the title of his work, chronology has achieved its 
own enjoyable graphic expression.
Joseph Priestley’s Chart of biography – against rhetoric
The final great innovator of eighteenth-century chronographics, Joseph 
Priestley (1733–1804), has some striking points of resemblance with 
Barbeu-Dubourg. Both friends of Benjamin Franklin, they equally reflect 
the incursion of mechanical thinking at the expense of a visual rhetoric 
modelled on geography or other metaphors, though as noted in Boyd 
Davis (2015) they both cling to such metaphors in their textual explana-
tions. Like Barbeu-Dubourg, Priestley strips away everything but the bar-
est indications of his data. He is the first to use a simple line to denote each 
life, refining these with one, two, or three dots to denote any degree of 
uncertainty (Figure 6). Both Barbeu-Dubourg and Priestley were enthusi-
astic educators and communicators who favoured a simple style of writing. 
For Priestley, rhetoric was to be mistrusted. In The rudiments of English 
Figure 6
Priestley, Joseph. 
1765. A chart 
of biography. 
London. 
76 × 108 cm. 
Detail.
Collection: Chetham’s 
Library, Manchester. 
Photograph: Stephen 
Boyd Davis. Used with 
permission. 

18 / Stephen Boyd Davis
grammar (1761, 61) he contrasts expression that is merely designed to 
please with that which conveys information, as Tufte might do in our own 
time. In his Course of lectures on oratory and criticism (1777, 24) rhetoric is 
for ‘set declamations on trite subjects’ but not for ‘the communication of 
original matter.’ In the Lectures on History (1788, 136, 151) classical rhetoric 
suffers his disdain. Elsewhere the rhetoric of figures as diverse as Lord 
Bolingbroke, the dean of Canterbury, the scholastics, and Edmund Burke 
all come in for condemnation (Priestley 1776, 273; 1787, 8; 1780; 1791, 84). 
As a dissenter, Priestley was convinced that the religion of the established 
Church was corrupted by the accretion of non-biblical material, and 
advocated stripping these back to the true gospel (Priestley 1782). Imbued 
with this suspicion of rhetoric and liking for unadorned ‘truth’, Priestley 
was devoted to creating the simplest possible ‘ocular demonstration’ of 
Newtonian time (Priestley 1764, 14), devoid of rhetorical graphics, based 
on a uniform mechanical scale, and as far as possible allowing organization 
in space to do the work. He is the first to make the explicit claim that empty 
space is in itself meaningful: ‘the thin and void places in the chart are, in 
fact, not less instructive than the most crowded, in giving us an idea of the 
great interruptions of science, and the intervals at which it has flourished’ 
(Priestley 1764, 24). The sheer efficiency of visualization is for him one 
of its most appealing characteristics: ‘a more perfect knowledge of this 
kind of history may be gained by an hour’s inspection of this chart, than 
could be acquired by the reading of several weeks’ (Priestley 1770, 12). 
And visualization brings enjoyment: ‘it is a peculiar kind of pleasure we 
receive, from such a view as this chart exhibits, of a great man, such as Sir 
Isaac Newton, seated, as it were, in the circle of his friends and illustrious 
cotemporaries [sic]. We see at once with whom he was capable of holding 
conversation’ (Priestley 1764, 24). We can feel Priestley’s excitement at the 
vividness with which a particular person and their temporal context jumps 
from the page.
Metaphors and not
As Boyd Davis and Kräutli (2014) make clear, claims made for early chron-
ographics are still repeated today, though sometimes supported by sci-
entific evidence. By the end of the eighteenth century, we seem to reach 
a moment where the battle against ‘chartjunk’ is already over. Most of 
the examples discussed above seem to demonstrate an inexorable shift to 
lean, undecorated, anti-metaphorical charts of time. Martignoni’s Imago 
with its rivers, islands, seas and lakes looks like a survivor of an outdated 
metaphorical tradition. Yet the subsequent history of timelines and related 
chronographics reveals a further host of graphic metaphors: clouds, tem-
ples, trees, streams and rivers and other images abound. Rosenberg (2007, 
83) points out how the explanation of the 1804 chart Strom der Zeiten by 
Strass (1766–1845) objected explicitly to the flatness and neutrality of 

Early visualizations of historical time / 19 
Priestley’s view, favouring its author’s delineation of currents and tributar-
ies in his eponymous ‘Stream of Time’, which it claimed – wrongly in light 
of Martignoni’s precedent – as an original idea. 
In a  single final example, the words of American educator Emma 
Willard (1787–1870) reprise the arguments for visualization in general, but 
also for figurative visual rhetoric. She proposes a vivid image, the Temple 
of time (Willard 1846). The rubric on her chart – which shows a temple 
in perspective, with timelines on the ceiling and floor and columns rep-
resenting key historic figures at either side – first makes a standard claim: 
‘The attempt to understand chronology by merely committing dates to 
memory, is not only painful, but it is as useless as to learn latitudes and 
longitudes without the study of maps. As in geography, the relation of any 
place to all other places is what is important to know; so in chronology, 
the relation which any given event bears to others constitutes the only 
useful knowledge. Whosever [sic] wishes, can here locate himself in any 
point of time, and see what characters are cotemporary [sic], what before, 
and what to follow.’ Willard goes on to say: ‘The poetic idea of “the vista 
of departed years”3 is made an object of sight; and when the eye is the 
medium, the picture will by frequent inspection, be formed within, and 
forever remain, wrought into the living texture of the mind. If this be done 
by a design whose beauty and grandeur naturally attract attention, then 
the teacher or parent who shall place it before his pupils and children, will 
find that they will insensibly become possessed of an inner “Temple” in 
which they may, through life, deposit, in the proper order of time, the facts 
of history as they shall acquire them. This, we repeat, is as important to the 
student of time as maps are to the student of place.’ The practical benefits 
of such spatial mnemonics had been known since classical times (Yates 
1966).
As we depart the eighteenth century, we may seem to end just as we 
began, witnessing an impassioned advocacy for visualization in general, 
with parallels drawn between chronology and geography, and with one 
more in a long train of arguments for the appeal and memorability of vivid 
graphic metaphor. The two existing traditions in visualizing chronology 
with which the century began – the one heavy with figurative metaphor, 
the other abstemious and confined to presentation of the ‘facts’ – continue 
long after the century’s close. But what has changed is the introduction 
into representations of history of a mechanical, mathematical mapping of 
time on the Cartesian/Newtonian model: this was new and would have 
a profound effect on the future of visualization. 
  3	 Ferguson (2008) points out that ‘the vista of departed years’ is a quotation from ‘The 
flight of time’, a poem by John Lowe, published in Edinburgh in 1845.

20 / Stephen Boyd Davis
20 / Stephen Boyd Davis
Acknowledgements
The author gratefully acknowledges advice on French, German, Italian, and 
Latin translation from Florian Kräutli, Marzia Manera, Christine North, Olivier 
Richon, and Rachael Stone. He also appreciates the kind assistance provided by 
staff at Princeton University Department of Rare Books and Special Collections; 
Chetham’s Library, Manchester; Bibliothèque Municipale, Dijon; John Rylands 
Library, University of Manchester; Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge; 
and the Library of the Middle Temple, London.
References
Barbeau de la Bruyère, Jean-Louis. [1750]. Explication 
générale de la mappemonde historique. Paris: 
Hérissant. Bibliothèque municipale, Dijon. Fonds 
Ancien 12990 CGA. 
Barbeau de la Bruyère, Jean-Louis. 1750. 
Mappemonde historique ou carte chronologique, 
géographique et généalogique des états et empires du 
monde. Paris: Ph. Buache. <http://catalogue.bnf.
fr/ark:/12148/cb40753112q>. 
Barbeu-Dubourg, Jacques. 1753. Chronographie, 
ou description des tems [sic] (Chronography or 
depiction of time). Paris. Explanatory booklet 
for chart. Acesed 26 May 2014. <http://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/
cb300543695>.
Bateman, Scott, Regan L. Mandryk, Carl Gutwin, 
Aaron Genest, David McDine, and Christopher 
Brooks. 2010. ‘Useful junk? The effects of 
visual embellishment on comprehension and 
memorability of charts.’ In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’10), 2573–2582. New 
York: ACM New York.
Borgo, Rita, Alﬁe Abdul-Rahman, Farhan Mohamed, 
Philip W. Grant, Irene Reppa, Luciano Floridi, 
and Min Chen. 2012. ‘An empirical study on 
using visual embellishments in visualization.’ In 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 18 (12): 2759–2768.
Borkin, Michelle A., Azalea A. Vo, Zoya Bylinskii, 
Phillip Isola, Shashank Sunkavalli, Aude Oliva, 
and Hanspeter Pﬁster. 2012. ‘What makes 
a visualization memorable?’ IEEE Transactions 
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 19 (12): 
2306–2315.
Boyd Davis, Stephen. 2010. ‘Time machines.’ Paper 
presented at Technology and the ‘Death of Art 
History’, CHArt 26 annual conference of British 
Computer Society, London, 10–11 November. 
<http://www.chart.ac.uk/chart2010//papers/
boyd-davis-paper.pdf>.
Boyd Davis, Stephen. 2012. ‘History on the line: time 
as dimension.’ Design Issues 28 (4): 4–17.
Boyd Davis, Stephen. 2015. ‘May not duration be 
represented as distinctly as space? Geography and 
the visualisation of time in the early eighteenth 
century.’ In Knowing nature in early modern 
Europe, edited by David Beck, 119–137. Abingdon: 
Pickering and Chatto.
Boyd Davis, Stephen, and Florian Kräutli. 2014. 
‘Scholarly chronographics: can a timeline be 
useful in historiography?’ Paper presented at the 
European Social Science History Conference, 
23–26 April, Universität Wien, Vienna. Available 
from the authors on request.
Buchanan, Richard. 1985. ‘Declaration by design: 
rhetoric, argument, and demonstration in design 
practice.’ Design Issues 2 (1): 4–22.
Buchwald, Jed Z., and Mordechai Feingold. 2012. 
Newton and the origin of civilization. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Crilly, Nathan, David Good, Derek Matravers, and P. 
John Clarkson. 2008. ‘Design as communication: 
exploring the validity and utility of relating 
intention to interpretation.’ Design Studies 29 (5): 
425–457. 
Crosby, Alfred L. 1997. The measure of reality: 
quantification in Western Europe, 1250–1600. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D’Alembert, Jean le Rond. 1753. ‘Chronologie.’ In 
Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, 
des arts et des metiers 3: 390–400. Paris. <http://
artflsrv02.uchicago.edu/cgi-bin/philologic/
getobject.pl?c.2:853.encyclopedie0513>.
Dodsley, Robert. 1754. The preceptor: containing 
a general course of education. London: R. & J. 
Dodsley.
Dohrn-van Rossum, Gerhard. 1996. History of the 
hour: clocks and modern temporal orders. Trans. 
Thomas Dunlap. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Feeney, Denis. 2007. Caesar’s calendar: ancient 
time and the beginnings of history. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Ferguson, Stephen. 1991. ‘The 1753 carte 
chronographique of Jacques Barbeu-Dubourg.’ 
Princeton University Library Chronicle (Winter 
1991): 190–230. <http://www.princeton.
edu/~ferguson/>.

Early visualizations of historical time / 21 
Early visualizations of historical time / 21 
Ferguson, Stephen. 2008. Standing within ‘The 
temple of time.’ Rare Books Collections @ 
Princeton Blog, December 3. <https://
blogs.princeton.edu/rarebooks/2008/12/
standing-within-the-temple-of/>. 
Gaukroger, Stephen. 1995. Descartes: an intellectual 
biography. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gallucci, Giovanni Paolo. 1588. Theatrum mundi et 
temporis. Venice: Giovanni Battista Somasco. 
Grafton, Anthony T. 1975. ‘Joseph Scaliger and 
historical chronology: the rise and fall of 
a discipline.’ History and Theory 14 (2): 156–185.
Grafton, Anthony T. 1993. Joseph Scaliger: a study in 
the history of classical scholarship. Vol. 2. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Helvicus [Helwig], Christophorus. 1609. Theatrum 
historicum (Historical and chronological theatre). 
Gießen: Nicolaus Hampelius. 
Hérrisant, Louis Théodore. 1782. Notice historique 
sur la vie et les ouvrages de M. J. L Barbeau de la 
Bruyère, (adapted from his article for the Mercure 
de France. N.º 4. 26 Janvier 1782). John Rylands 
Library Richard C. Christie Printed Collection 
(46 d 17 (14)).
Hullman, Jessica, Eytan Adar, and Priti Shah. 2011. 
‘Benefitting InfoVis with visual difficulties.’ IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 17 (12): 2213–2222.
Inbar, Ohad, Noam Tractinsky, and Joachim Meyer. 
2007. ‘Minimalism in information visualization: 
attitudes towards maximizing the data-ink ratio.’ 
In Proceedings of the 14th European conference on 
cognitive ergonomics (ECCE07), 185–188. New 
York: ACM New York.
Joost, Gesche, and Arne Scheuermann. 2006. 
‘Audiovisual rhetoric: a metatheoretical approach 
to design.’ In Wonderground: Design Research 
Society International Conference 2006, edited by 
Ken Friedman, Terence Love, Eduardo Côrte-
Real, and Chris Rust. Portugal: CEIADE (Centro 
Editorial do IADE). h<ttp://www.iade.pt/
drs2006/wonderground/proceedings/fullpapers/
DRS2006_0031.pdf>.
Kanas, Nick. 2012. Star maps: history, artistry, and 
cartography. 2nd edn. New York: Springer. 
Kostelnick, Charles. 2008. ‘The visual rhetoric of 
data displays: the conundrum of clarity.’ IEEE 
Transactions on Professional Communication 51 (1): 
116–130.
Lockton, Dan, David Harrison, and Neville A. 
Stanton. 2008. ‘Design with intent: persuasive 
technology in a wider context.’ In Persuasive 
2008, edited by H. Oinas-Kukkonen, P. Hasle, 
M. Harjumaa, K. Segerståhl, and P. Øhrstrøm, 
274–278. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer. 
Martignoni, Girolamo Andrea. 1718. Imago Romani 
imperii (Portrait of the Roman Empire). Turin: 
Tasniere.
Martignoni, Girolamo Andrea. 1721a. Explication de 
la carte historique de la France et de l’Angleterre. 
Rome: Rossi. British Library General Reference 
Collection C.106.f.19.
Martignoni, Girolamo Andrea. 1721b. Spiegazione 
della carta istorica dell’Italia, e di una parte della 
Germania. Rome: Rossi. 
Newton, Isaac. (1687) 1803. Mathematical principles 
of natural philosophy (Philosophae naturalis 
principia mathematica). Book 1. Scholium. 
Symonds, London. British Library General 
Reference Collection, 958.c.25.
Pedley, Mary Sponberg. 2005. The commerce of 
cartography: making and marketing maps in 
eighteenth-century France and England. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Priestley, Joseph. 1761. The rudiments of English 
grammar. London: R. Griffiths.
Priestley, Joseph. 1764. A description of a chart of 
biography. Warrington. British Library General 
Reference Collection 10604.aa.11.
Priestley, Joseph. 1765. A chart of biography. London. 
British Library General Reference Collection 
611.l.19.
Priestley, Joseph. 1769. A new chart of history. 
London: Johnson. British Library Cartographic 
Items Maps *999.(137.)
Priestley, Joseph. 1770. A description of a new chart of 
history. London.
Priestley, Joseph. 1776. An examination of Dr. Reid’s 
inquiry into the human mind. London: J. Johnson.
Priestley, Joseph. 1777. Course of lectures on oratory 
and criticism. London: J. Johnson.
Priestley, Joseph. 1780. Miscellaneous observations 
relating to education. London: J. Johnson.
Priestley, Joseph. 1782. A history of the corruptions of 
Christianity. 2 vols. London: J. Johnson.
Priestley, Joseph. 1787. Letters to Dr. Horne, dean of 
Canterbury. London: J. Johnson.
Priestley, Joseph. 1788. Lectures on history. Dublin: P. 
Byrne.
Priestley, Joseph. 1791. Letters to the right honourable 
Edmund Burke. London: J. Johnson.
Rosenberg, Daniel. 2007. ‘Joseph Priestley and the 
graphic invention of modern time.’ Studies in 
Eighteenth Century Culture 36 (1): 55–103.
Rosenberg, Daniel, and Anthony T. Grafton. 2010. 
Cartographies of time: a history of the timeline. New 
York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Sherman, Stuart. 1996. Telling time: clocks, diaries, 
and English diurnal form, 1660–1785. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Shneiderman, Ben. 1991. ‘Tree visualization with 
treemaps: a 2-d space-filling approach.’ ACM 
Transactions on Graphics 11 (1): 92–99.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The visual display of quanti­
tative information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Vande Moere, Andrew, and Helen Purchase. 2011. ‘On 
the role of design in information visualization.’ 
Information Visualization 10 (4): 356–371.

22 / Stephen Boyd Davis
22 / Stephen Boyd Davis
Vande Moere, Andrew, Martin Tomitsch, Christoph 
Wimmer, Christoph Boesch, and Thomas 
Grechenig. 2012. ‘Evaluating the effect of style 
in information visualization.’ IEEE Transactions 
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18 (12): 
2739–2748.
Weigel, Christoph. 1720. Discus chronologicus. 
Nuremberg: Weigel. 
Willard, Emma. 1846. The temple of time, Willard’s 
map of time: a companion to the historic guide. 
New York: A. S. Barnes & Co.
Wrigley, Cara, Vesna Popovic, and Marianella 
Chamorro-Koc. 2009. ‘A methodological 
approach to visceral hedonic rhetoric.’ Paper 
presented at the International Association of 
Societies of Design Research Conference 2009, 
Seoul, Korea, 18–22 October. <http://www.
iasdr2009.or.kr/Papers/Orally%20Presented%20
Papers/Behavior/A%20methodological%20
approach%20to%20visceral%20hedonic%20
rhetoric.pdf>.
Yates, Frances A. 1966. The art of memory. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.

23
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 23–42
Images of time
Visual representations of time-­oriented data
Christian Tominski et al., Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, and 
Heidrun Schumann
Time is a special dimension with much more to it than a simple linear succes-
sion of consecutive moments. Time-­oriented data, that is data collected over or 
related to time, are a rich source of multifaceted information. Visual representa-
tions are often used as an aid helping us to untangle the complexities of the data 
and to understand the essential information they contain. Expressive depictions 
of time-­oriented data can only be designed by taking into account the special 
nature of time.
We discuss principal design aspects for conceptualizing time and time-­
oriented data, and based on that, fundamental ways of visualizing time-­oriented 
data will be explained. Examples of implemented visualization techniques illus-
trate the diversity of possible solutions. To assist practitioners and researchers 
in finding relevant techniques amidst this diversity, we developed the TimeViz 
Browser, an interactive visual survey of visualization for time-­oriented data. 
The TimeViz Browser categorizes more than 100 visualization techniques with 
respect to the nature of the dimension of time, the character of the data, and 
the properties of the visual representation.
Today, we live in a world full of data. Our daily life depends to a large 
degree on our ability to efficiently work with the information contained in 
these data. However, technological advances have led to a situation where 
we collect far more data than we can make sense of. This problem has 
become known as information overload. 
As early as the 1980s, visualization pioneers recognized the enormous 
potential that modern computers would offer to address the information 
overload. Considering analytic power, graphics output, and interactive 
manipulation, they formulated the key idea behind visualization as follows:
Visualization is a method of computing. It transforms the symbolic into the 
geometric, enabling researchers to observe their simulations and compu-
tations. Visualization offers a method for seeing the unseen. It enriches the 
process of scientific discovery and fosters profound and unexpected insights. 
(McCormick, DeFanti, and Brown 1987, 3)
Gaining insight into and understanding time-­oriented data are challenges 
of continued relevance. Learning from the past, comprehending the pres-
ent, and predicting the future are key themes in many fields with wide 
applications in business, science, politics, and humanities.
2

24 / Christian Tominski et al.
In this chapter, we lay out the fundamentals of the dimension of time 
and discuss different models of how data can be connected to time. We 
outline basic strategies for designing visual representations of time and 
time-­oriented data and illustrate how these basic strategies are imple-
mented in different ways by existing visualization techniques. With the 
goal of providing an overview of the wealth of available solutions, we 
designed the TimeViz Browser as a publicly available interactive website. 
It is based on a visual bibliography that currently contains brief descrip-
tions and thumbnails of more than 100 different visualization techniques 
for time-­oriented data. To enable users to find the techniques relevant to 
them, the TimeViz Browser supports dynamic filtering according to vari-
ous delineating criteria. These criteria were derived from an analysis of the 
properties of time and time-­oriented data.
Conceptualizing time and time-­oriented data
In this section, we discuss the particularities of time and the characteris-
tics of data as key factors influencing the design of visual representations 
for time-­oriented data. Here, we consider time to be the key reference 
with respect to which the data are given. 
Time is one of the most deeply entrenched phenomena for mankind. 
Perceivable by the succession of day and night and the seasons of the year, 
it influences literally every aspect of living creatures on earth. Considering 
that, it comes with no surprise that some of the earliest known artefacts 
of humans are bone engravings used as calendars (Lenz 2005). In many 
branches of science such as philosophy, physics, astronomy, or biology, 
time has been a central theme for centuries. Two of the most influential 
theories on time are Newton’s concepts of absolute vs. relative time and 
Einstein’s four-­dimensional spacetime. Further information on the con-
cept and history of time can be found in Gerald James Whitrow’s What is 
time? (2003).
The dimension of time
Time is a universal concept. No one can escape the steady progress of 
time. Yet, there is more to time than a seemingly linear progression. Upon 
a closer look, time reveals several facets, each of which play an important 
role in understanding time-­dependent phenomena. The key facets to look 
at are:
•	 time primitives (instants and intervals)
•	 time arrangement (linear and cyclic)
When working with time, we usually create anchors that allow us to pin-
point certain events in the time continuum. An example is to agree on 
a specific time to meet for lunch. In this case, the anchor is a time prim-
itive in the form of an instant, a single point in time (see Figure 1). Time 
12:00 noon
01:00 pm
02:00 pm
03:00 pm
04:00 pm
11:00 am
10:00 am
meet for lunch 
Figure 1 
Instant. A single 
point in time, e.g. 
12.00 noon.

Images of time / 25 
instants can be used to construct time intervals, which allow us to expand 
our view of time from simple events to phenomena that exhibit duration. 
For example, when we enter a meeting in our electronic calendar, we do 
not only have a single point in time but usually reserve a stretch of time 
delimited by a beginning and an end or a beginning and a duration, respec-
tively (see Figure 2). 
Moreover, we also need to take a look at the underlying time dimension 
that these time primitives are tied to. When thinking about time, two main 
metaphors are used. The first conceptualizes time as a linear progression 
from past to present and future (see Figure 3). The second emphasizes the 
cyclic nature of time based on natural phenomena such as the rhythms of 
night and day and the seasons, as well as human creations such as semes-
ters or fiscal years (see Figure 4). These two metaphors are of fundamen-
tal importance to the visualization of time-­oriented data. Depending on 
the nature of the problem and the goals of the user, it can be beneficial 
to emphasize one point of view or the other, but both can also exist in 
parallel.
Despite the fact that the key facets mentioned are the most important 
ones to consider, they can only cover parts of the complexity of the time 
dimension. On a  more detailed level, there are further design aspects 
when modelling time, such as the scale of time (ordinal vs. discrete vs. 
continuous) and viewpoints on time (ordered vs. branching vs. multi-
ple perspectives). Moreover, the granularity of time and corresponding 
calendar systems are a complex topic. There are many issues to be taken 
into account, including irregularities in days of months and leap years, 
different time zones, and calendars in different cultures. Last but not least, 
uncertainty is another important topic of time, specifically when dealing 
with future planning. For further details, we would like to refer to Aigner 
et al. (2011), where the dimension of time is dissected in full detail.
Taking these characteristics of time into account is crucial in order to 
achieve expressive visualizations. Therefore, a data and problem analy-
sis step is necessary in every visualization design project to identify the 
nature of the data at hand and choose or design visual representations that 
fit (Munzner 2014). For example, when we would like to visualize tasks of 
a project plan, we need to choose a visualization technique that is capable 
of representing time intervals, like a Gantt chart rather than a line plot.
12:00 noon
01:00 pm
02:00 pm
03:00 pm
04:00 pm
11:00 am
10:00 am
sales pitch
Figure 2 
Interval. Portion 
of time with 
a duration, e.g. 
11.00 a.m. to 
3.00 p.m.
Fall
Spring
Winter
Summer
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2013
2012
Figure 4 
Cyclic arrangement of 
time. Set of recurring 
time values, such as 
seasons of the year.
Figure 3 
Linear arrangement 
of time. Time 
progresses from 
past to present and 
future.

26 / Christian Tominski et al.
Time-­oriented data
Time, as described in the previous section, serves as the backbone of time-­
oriented data. Data tuples are tied to time primitives to establish a con-
nection between time and data. Just as there are key facets of time, there 
are key characteristics of data that need to be considered when designing 
visual representations. Two of these characteristics are:
•	 frame of reference (abstract and spatial)
•	 number of variables (univariate and multivariate)
One fundamental question is whether the data tuples additionally relate 
to a spatial dimension, for example, if each was measured at a different 
location. In such cases, we have a spatial frame of reference in addition to 
time. When this is not the case, data are said to be abstract, i.e. data elem-
ents do not explicitly contain a ‘where’ aspect and are not connected to 
space. The distinction between abstract and spatial data has consequences 
for the way the data should be visualized. With spatial data, the spatial 
dimension ought to be exploited to reflect the position of data elements in 
space in addition to time. For abstract data, there is no naturally given spa-
tial mapping and it is up to the visualization designer to create an expres-
sive layout of the data.
Apart from the frame of reference, the number of time-­dependent vari-
ables to be represented is an important issue. In the case of univariate data 
– that is, a single variable over time – a wide range of visualization tech-
niques exists such as line plots or bar graphs. If we have more than one data 
variable (multivariate data), things tend to get more complex and more 
sophisticated visual representations are needed to communicate the rela-
tionships involved. Because of that, the available palette of visualization 
techniques is much smaller for multivariate data than for univariate data.
In addition to the frame of reference and the number of variables, there 
are further facets to characterize data, such as the scale of variables (quan-
titative vs. qualitative) and the nature of the stored information (events vs. 
states).
Visualizing time-­oriented data
As explained in the previous section, both time itself and data presented 
with respect to time can be complex and multi­faceted. The enormous 
bandwidth of human visual perception opens up many possibilities for 
exploring and communicating the richness of time-­oriented data. To this 
end, the temporal reference as well as the data must be represented vis-
ually. Haber and McNabb (1990) think of this process as a pipeline and 
describe it as a transformation with three steps: filtering, mapping, and 
rendering. The filtering is a data processing step to prepare the data for 
visualization. This includes data correction, interpolation, clustering, and 

Images of time / 27 
filtering operations on the data. At the heart of the visualization pipeline is 
the mapping step. In this step, the prepared data are mapped to geometric 
primitives and associated graphical properties. The final step of the visual-
ization pipeline is rendering the output (display or print). Here geometry 
and graphical properties are handed over to the graphics processor, which 
generates the visual representation on the output device.
As the mapping step largely decides about the expressiveness and effec-
tiveness of the visualization, we will next take a closer look at it. We first 
introduce basic visual variables for the mapping and then describe the 
principal ways of mapping time and time-­oriented data.
Visual variables
In his seminal work, Semiology of graphics, Jacques Bertin (1983) defines 
seven visual variables for representing data visually. Bertin lists position, 
size, value, texture, colour, orientation, and shape as variables that can 
encode data. For example, the position of a dot on a chart tells us where it 
is located in the value range associated with the chart’s axes. The size of the 
dot and its colour can encode additional information.
Other researchers, including Cleveland and McGill (1986) and Mackin­
lay (1986), have largely concurred with Bertin’s analysis, but made minor 
modifications and extensions. While the classic visual variables consider 
static representations, Ward, Grinstein and Keim (2015) additionally 
include motion as a dynamic visual variable, which is particularly relevant 
for time-­oriented data. Figure 5 illustrates a selection of the visual varia-
bles mentioned in the literature.
Size
Hue
Position
Orientation
Saturation
Focus
Shape
Brightness
Texture
Figure 5 
Illustration of visual variables for encoding data.

28 / Christian Tominski et al.
The question that remains is which visual variables to use. Cleveland 
and McGill (1986) and Mackinlay (1986) suggest that a visual variable’s 
suitability to encode data depends on the data’s scale (quantitative, ordi-
nal, or nominal data). For example, according to Mackinlay (1986), posi-
tion, length, and angle are top-­ranked for quantitative data, whereas for 
ordinal data, position, density, and colour saturation take the lead (see 
Figure 6). Consequently, depending on the character of the dimension of 
time, different visual encodings are possible and useful.
Mapping time and data
In order to visualize time-­oriented data, we first have to think about how 
to map the dimension of time. There are two principal representations:
•	 static: time is mapped spatially;
•	 dynamic: time is mapped temporally.
Mapping time spatially means that a visual representation of the dimen-
sion of time is embedded directly into the display space. Typically such 
visual representations do not change while the viewer observes them, 
which is why we call such visualizations of time-­oriented data static. On 
the other hand, one can use physical time (i.e. the real time whose passage 
we experience) to encode the temporal dynamics of data. In such cases, 
the visual representation changes as it is viewed as an animation, and 
hence, we call them dynamic. Both static and dynamic approaches have 
advantages and disadvantages, as we will see in the next paragraphs. 
Static representations 
In static representations, time, or more precisely an interval of time, 
has a spatial embodiment on the screen or on paper. The most common 
approach is to use the horizontal display dimension (the x-­axis) to represent 
time. There are, though, examples where two or more display dimensions 
are used in conjunction for mapping time. Using more display dimensions 
allows us to construct more elaborate representations of the dimension of 
time, for example, as two-­dimensional spirals or three-­dimensional heli-
ces, which are capable of emphasizing cyclic patterns in the data.
Position
Length
Angle
Slope
Area
Volume
Density
Colour hue
Texture
Connection
Containment
Shape
Position
Length
Angle
Slope
Area
Volume
Density
Colour saturation
Colour hue
Texture
Connection
Containment
Shape
Position
Length
Angle
Slope
Area
Volume
Density
Colour saturation
Colour hue
Texture
Connection
Containment
Shape
Quantitative
Ordinal
Nominal
Colour saturation
Figure 6 Ranking of visual 
variables by data type (Mackinlay 
1986).

Images of time / 29 
The actual time-­oriented data can be visualized in many different ways. 
When time is shown along the horizontal x-­axis, classic charts or plots 
typically show a time-­dependent data variable along the vertical y-­axis. 
For example, point plots, line plots, and bar graphs represent data values 
by varying the distance of a graphic element from the time axis. When 
two or more display dimensions are already occupied for mapping time 
(e.g. with a spiral or a helix), visual variables other than position and size 
must be used. In such cases, colour is a good choice. That means assigning 
to each point or interval on the time axis a specific colour that represents 
the relevant data value. The choice of the colours to use is not trivial and 
depends on the characteristics of the data and the visualization task. The 
ColorBrewer (<http://www.colorbrewer2.org>) is a helpful tool in assist-
ing the selection of appropriate colour scales for visualization purposes.
As an alternative to using basic visual variables to encode time-­
dependent data, one can follow an approach called small multiples by 
Tufte (1983). Small multiples are visual snapshots of the data. A snapshot is 
devoted to showing an elaborate depiction of the data at a particular time. 
Only in a second step are several snapshots arranged in a temporally mean-
ingful fashion (see Figure 7). The advantage is that individual snapshots 
may be more sophisticated than a basic visual encoding. On the other 
hand, the number of snapshots (and so the number of time primitives) that 
can be shown simultaneously is limited and their size is restricted.
Dynamic representations 
In contrast to static representations, dynamic representations change over 
time in order to represent changes in the time-­oriented data. For each time 
primitive in the data, an individual visual representation is generated (also 
called frames). So each frame encodes the data of a particular time point or 
interval, where visual variables are employed as needed. Once generated, 
the frames are rendered successively one after the other, which leads to 
an animation that represents the dynamics in the data as dynamic changes 
of the display. Theoretically, one could think of a one-­to-­one mapping of 
time steps and frames, so that the dynamic visualization represents time 
authentically. In practice, however, there is typically a need to interpolate 
Figure 7 
Small 
multiples.

30 / Christian Tominski et al.
intermediate results in cases where only a few time steps are present, or to 
aggregate or sample the data to reduce the size of an animation when too 
many time steps exist.
The speed with which dynamic representations are presented to the 
user should match the underlying data. For data with a large number of 
observations of highly dynamic processes, animations with 15 to 25 frames 
per second are suitable. In contrast, data consisting of only a few measure-
ments of the underlying phenomenon should preferably be represented 
at a slower pace. To avoid creating a false impression of seamless change, 
a new frame can be shown every 2 to 4 seconds. Irregularly sampled data 
should be represented using an adaptive mapping.
The distinction between static and dynamic representations is impor-
tant, because they suit different visualization tasks and goals. Dynamic 
representations are good for communicating general dynamics and major 
trends in a data set. Yet, they have also been criticized (Tversky, Morrison, 
and Bétrancourt 2002; Simons and Rensink 2005). For example, in 
dynamic representations of a complex multivariate time series, users may 
have difficulty following all of the changes; the flood of information may 
be indigestible. It is smart to pair dynamic approaches with interactive 
controls that allow the user to go through the data in slow motion or fast 
forward and rewind to interesting points in time.
In contrast to animations, which show only one time primitive at 
a time, static representations typically show many if not all time primi-
tives simultaneously. Thus, static representations have the advantage of 
providing a single-­frame overview of the time domain and the associated 
data. This suits tasks such as trend detection or finding temporal patterns, 
which typically involve visual comparison of the data from several points 
in time. On the other hand, it is clear that integrating many time primitives 
and their associated data in a single image can lead to an overcrowded rep-
resentation that is difficult to interpret. In such cases, it makes sense to use 
automated data analysis methods to extract meaningful features prior to 
the visualization and to enhance the visualization with interaction tech-
niques that support the navigation in time.
In general, the visualization designer has to find a good balance of how 
much of the dimension of time and how much of the data can be commu-
nicated with a visual representation.
A brief history of visual representations for time-­oriented data
Visual methods for understanding data over time have a long and vener-
able history. The earliest known visualization has been found in a mon-
astery school and dates back to the tenth century (Funkhouser 1936). It 
depicts planetary movements over time using line plots along a horizontal 
time axis. In his Chart of biography, Joseph Priestley depicted the lifetimes 
of a number of historic figures in 1765 (see Figure 8). He came up with the 
concept of using horizontal lines that span from the beginning to the end 

Images of time / 31 
of a time interval (timelines). Interestingly, he even used special symbols 
to denote temporal uncertainties in cases where the exact dates of birth 
or death were not known exactly. As intuitive as using a horizontal line 
to denote an interval might seem for us today, it was certainly different 
in Priestley’s days, as he spent four pages of text to explain how the visual 
representation is to be read.
The probably single most influential individual for data visualization 
was William Playfair (1759–1823). He single-­handedly invented the major-
ity of business charts still in use today such as line plots, bar graphs, pie 
charts, or silhouette graphs (see Figure 9 for an example). 
Further, two of the most well-­known historical representations of 
time-­oriented data were created in the nineteenth century. First, Florence 
Nightingale’s rose charts (1858) that show causes of death of soldiers in the 
Crimean war using polar area charts (see Figure 10, overleaf), and second, 
a flow map that depicts Napoleon’s deadly Russian campaign across space 
and time by Charles Joseph Minard in 1869 (see Figure 11, overleaf). 
As we have seen in this brief section, the topic of visualizing time-­ 
Figure 8 
A very small 
specimen 
extract of Joseph 
Priestley’s 
extensive Chart of 
biography (1765).
Photograph Stephen 
Boyd Davis.
Figure 9 
Chart by William 
Playfair (1821) 
depicting wages 
(line plot), prices 
of wheat (bar 
graph), and 
historical context 
(timelines).
A letter on our 
agricultural distresses 
(1821), chart no. 1. 
Princeton University 
Library.

32 / Christian Tominski et al.
oriented data has a very long and rich history. Apart from the mentioned 
direct ancestors, also different areas of the arts such as cubism, comics, 
or music and dance notations have dealt deeply with the notion of time 
and can serve as fruitful sources of inspiration for visualization design-
ers today. Interested readers can find more information about historical 
representations of time-­oriented data in Boyd Davis (2012), Boyd Davis 
(2017, chapter in this volume), Rosenberg and Grafton (2010), as well as in 
Brinton (1914, 1939), Tufte (1983, 2006), and Wainer (2005).
The historical examples already illustrate the communicative power of 
visual representations of time-­oriented data. While historically created by 
hand, today we can use the power and flexibility of computers to quickly 
Figure 10 
Rose charts 
showing causes 
of death in the 
Crimean War 
by Florence 
Nightingale.
Notes on matters 
affecting the health, 
efficiency, and hospital 
administration of the 
British Army: founded 
chiefly on the experience 
of the late war (1858). 
Wellcome Library, 
London, CC-BY-4.0.
Figure 11 
Napoleon’s 
Russian campaign 
of 1812 by Charles 
Joseph Minard 
(1869).
Bibliothèque nationale 
de France. GE DON-4182.
 

Images of time / 33 
generate expressive depictions of large amounts of data. In the recent dec-
ades a large variety of visualization techniques have been developed par-
ticularly for time-­oriented data. A selection of interesting examples will be 
presented in the following paragraphs.
Contemporary visualization techniques for time-­oriented data
This section illustrates how the characteristics of the dimension of time 
and the associated data can be considered when visualizing time-­oriented 
data. We present several examples that individually emphasize different 
aspects of the topics discussed so far: time instants vs. intervals; linear vs. 
cyclic time; abstract vs. spatial frame of reference; univariate vs. multivar-
iate data; and static vs. dynamic representation.
Probably the oldest and surely the most well-­known representation for 
time series are line plots where time is usually mapped to the horizon-
tal axis and a quantitative variable is mapped on the vertical axis of a plot 
(Tufte 1983). A common problem when displaying real-­world data is to 
find ways to deal with multivariate data when the number of time-­oriented 
variables is large. Two principal ways are to show all variables in the same 
space (superimposition) or to partition the available space and show each 
variable in a  separate part (juxtaposition). In both cases, the number 
of variables that can be displayed while retaining reading precision and 
avoiding clutter is severely limited. For example, when stacking many line 
plots on top of each other, the individual plots become thin stripes, which 
no longer provide the same precision as a full-­frame line plot. To mitigate 
these problems, horizon graphs have been developed by Reijner (2008).
As shown in Figure 12, the basic idea of horizon graphs is the slicing 
and layering of line plots using a technique called two-­tone pseudo colour-
ing (Saito et al. 2005). In a first step, areas under the curve of the plot are 
divided into equally sized bands. Second, these bands are coloured using 
different hues to distinguish areas below and above zero (e.g. blue above 
Figure 12 
Horizon Graphs 
(Reijner 2008). 
a. Construction of 
a horizon graph. 
b. Due to their 
space efficiency, 
a large number of 
time-dependent 
variables can be 
compared on 
a single screen 
effectively.
1
2
3
4
a

b

34 / Christian Tominski et al.
zero and red below zero) as well as variations in brightness to represent 
different magnitudes (e.g. darker colours for high values and lighter col-
ours for low values). Optionally, the parts below zero are mirrored to even 
better make use of the available screen space. Finally, the individual bands 
are moved on top of each other. In this way, the virtual information reso-
lution of the display is increased (Lam, Munzner, and Kincaid 2007) and 
a much richer and more precise representation of a large number of time 
series plots becomes possible. User studies by Heer, Kong, and Agrawala 
(2009) show that mirroring does not have negative effects and that lay-
ered bands are more effective than the standard line for small-­sized charts. 
A further development of the horizon graphs concept by Federico et al. 
(2014) combines qualitative abstractions of data with the quantitative data 
values into so-­called qualizon graphs. 
Sparklines (Tufte 2006) are an allied technique that also compresses 
data into a small horizontal space. Sparklines are small, word-­sized graph-
ics meant to be integrated directly into text, such as this: 
. 
The main idea of this technique is to more tightly integrate text with data 
visualization by interweaving them instead of laying them out separately. 
Sparklines can be integrated seamlessly into paragraphs of text, can be laid 
out as tables, or can be used for information dashboards (see Figure 13). 
Different subtypes of sparklines display data in various ways such as lines 
 and bars 
. Sparklines are usually miniaturized versions 
of well-­known chart types.
Our third example is a visualization method suitable for representing 
time cyclically. Cycle plots by Cleveland (1993) are used to emphasize both 
linear trends and cyclic patterns in a data set (see Figure 14). On the left 
chart, the seven coloured lines represent data for the same day of the week 
over four successive weeks. For comparison, the chart at right shows the 
same data day by day. With the cycle plot, it is easy to spot trends (such as 
increasing sales on Mondays) that might not be visible on a standard linear 
plot. At the same time, the linear plot emphasizes the cycles in the data. 
Visual representations can show whether cycles are present in the 
data and what the lengths of the cycles are. With the Enhanced Interactive 
2007-01-03
36 months
2009-12-31
low
high
volume
AAPL
83.80
210.73
78.20
211.64
AMZN
38.70
134.52
35.03
142.25
GOOG
467.59
619.98
257.44
741.79
MSFT
28.01
30.20
14.77
35.11
2009/2010
Points
Bayern Munich
70
Schalke 04
65
Werder Bremen
61
Bayer Leverkusen
59
Borussia Dortmund
57
Figure 13 
Sparklines (Tufte 2006): simple, 
word-like graphics intended to be 
integrated into text.

Images of time / 35 
Spiral technique presented by Tominski and Schumann (2008) this can be 
done interactively. The technique combines the idea of two-­tone pseudo-­
colouring (similar to horizon graphs) with a spiral layout of the data as 
shown in Figure 15. By interactively adjusting how much time one 360° 
cycle represents, different cycle lengths can be brought into focus. The 
existence of a cyclic feature can be easily detected by the emergence of a 
regular pattern which is perceived instantly by human visual perception.
The techniques so far have been appropriate for data that relate to 
instants (points in time). Other techniques are appropriate for data that 
relate to intervals of time. Gantt charts are a well-­known and widely used 
representation technique for project planning (Gantt 1913). Tasks in a pro-
ject plan are represented as bars along a time scale and tasks that need to be 
processed in a certain order are connected by arrows. When planning for 
the future, temporal uncertainties are unavoidable and need to be consid-
ered. For example, it might not be known for sure how long a certain task 
will take or when exactly it can start. To model and represent such uncer-
tainties, Aigner et al. (2005) developed PlanningLines (see Figure  16). 
These can be thought of as bars that are held by caps on both ends. The 
glyph represents a complex set of time attributes in an integrated manner 
(earliest start and latest start by the extent of the left cap, earliest finish and 
latest finish by the right cap, and minimum and maximum duration by the 
two bars in the centre). 
Figure 15 
Enhanced 
Interactive Spiral 
(Tominski et al. 
2008). Time ­series 
data are drawn 
along a spiral 
for showing and 
detecting cycles in 
the data.
Figure 14 Cycle 
plots (Cleveland 
1993) allow for 
showing both, 
seasonal and 
trend components 
of a time ­series 
(left), which is 
hardly possible 
when using 
standard line plots 
(right).
Figure 16 
PlanningLines 
(Aigner et al. 
2005) allow the 
depiction of 
interval data 
with temporal 
uncertainties.
March 31, 2003
31.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
April 7, 2003
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
April 14, 2003
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
April 21, 2003
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
April 28, 2003
28.
29.
30.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Walls and Ceilings
Foundation
Earthworks
Windows / Doors
Roof
Screed
Activity A
earliest
starting time 
latest
starting time
earliest
finishing time
latest
finishing time
minimum duration
maximum duration
PlanningLine glyph
40
0
10
20
30
days
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
a
h
o
v
b
i
p
w
c
j
q
x
d
k
r
y
e
l
s
z
f
m
t
A
g
n
u
B
overall shape:
seasonal part (weekly pattern)
trend for 
day of week
mean for 
day of week
28
0
7
14
21
40
0
10
20
30
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y z
A
B
days

36 / Christian Tominski et al.
Also applicable for future event data, but with different goals is the 
SpiraClock technique by Dragicevic and Huot (2002). SpiraClock’s aim is 
to fill the gap between classical calendar applications and pop-­up alerts 
for calendar events. It shows future event data as bars along a spiral layout 
that resembles a clock’s face (see Figure 17). The amount of time shown in 
the future, i.e. number of hours or cycles, can be adjusted interactively. In 
contrast to the techniques presented so far, SpiraClock is a dynamic tech-
nique that updates automatically based on the current time and upcoming 
event data.
So far, we have focused on techniques for univariate data where one var-
iable is displayed at a time. Next, we will present two techniques that are 
particularly well suited for multivariate data over time. The first of these 
follows the idea of stacking a number of layers on top of each other (see 
Figure 18) and are called stacked graphs (Byron and Wattenberg 2008). 
They allow users to see both the sum of a number of variables and how 
the different variables contribute to the overall sum at each point in time.
Scatter plots are a basic and widely used visualization technique that 
shows the relationship between two variables as marks in a  Cartesian 
coordinate system. One way to use this technique for time-­oriented data 
is to animate the scatter plot to show how the relationship between the 
variables changes over time. Animated scatter plots received considerable 
attention through the Gapminder Foundation’s1 Trendalyzer tool and the 
famous TED talks by Hans Rosling,2 who used this technique to present 
data on global health developments (see Figure 19 for a screenshot). Not 
just the x- and y-­coordinates, but also the size and colour of bubbles can be 
used to convey data values. Moreover, one can display traces that let users 
see a path showing variables’ developments over time. VCR-­like controls 
are used to start, pause, skip sections, and adjust animation speed.
What we haven’t covered so far are time-­oriented data with a spatial 
frame of reference. Such data have an explicit relation not only to time, but 
also to physical space. The spatial dimensions pose additional challenges 
  1	 <http://www.gapminder.org/world/>. 
  2	 <http://www.ted.com/speakers/hans_rosling>.
Figure 17 
SpiraClock 
(Dragicevic and 
Huot 2002). Future 
appointments 
are aligned along 
a spiral on the 
clock face.
Figure 18 
Stacked graph 
(Byron and 
Wattenberg 2008). 
Multiple graphs are 
stacked on top of 
each other.

Images of time / 37 
for the visual design. How can we integrate space, time, and data attributes 
in a single visual representation?
The Trajectory Wall by Tominski et al. (2012) is a technique that rep-
resents spatio­temporal movement trajectories on top of a map display. 
Individual trajectories are represented as 3D bands that are stacked above 
a map display. Figure 20 shows trajectories of migrating storks. A red-­
yellow-­green colour scale visualizes the storks’ speed. In this way, the map 
display shows where storks move slower (red) or faster (green). But when 
they move at which speed cannot be discerned.
This question can be answered by using an interactive spatial query 
(circle in the centre of the map) that is linked to an additional radial display 
(bottom ­right corner). The radial display shows a cyclic time axis, in our 
case the months of the year. The speed distribution per month is shown 
Figure 19 
Trendalyzer/
animated scatter 
plot. Two data 
variables are 
mapped to the 
horizontal and 
vertical axes, 
symbol size 
represents a third 
variable, and 
animation is used 
to step through 
time.
Figure 20 
Trajectory Wall (Tominski et al. 2012). Movement patterns can be explored by 
mapping trajectories to 3D bands that are stacked above a map display.

38 / Christian Tominski et al.
as coloured histogram bins. When the spatial query is moved across the 
map, the radial display is updated to show the temporal information cor-
responding to the specified query region. The map display in combination 
with the interactive query enable users to explore data with regard to spa-
tial and temporal dependencies.
In this section we have provided examples of visualization designs that 
illustrate how the conceptual issues introduced at the beginning can be 
addressed. Table 1 summarizes the techniques and categorizes them along 
the facets discussed earlier.
Table 1  Overview of presented visualization techniques
instant
interval
linear
cyclic
abstract
spatial
univariate
multivariate
static
dynamic
Horizon Graph
Sparklines
Cycle plot
Enhanced Interactive Spiral
PlanningLines
SpiraClock
Stacked Graphs
Trendalyzer
Trajectory Wall
The TimeViz Browser
The previous section gave several examples of visualization techniques for 
time-­oriented data. Yet, these examples represent only a fraction of the 
rich body of existing work. As time-­oriented data are common in many 
application areas, a great number of valuable techniques and tools for visu-
alizing time and associated data have been developed. The problem is how 
to find a solution that fits a user’s particular needs. As an answer to this 
problem, the TimeViz Browser has been designed. It enables practitioners 
and researchers alike to explore, investigate, and compare visualization 
techniques for time-­oriented data.
The idea behind the TimeViz Browser is to bring together the visu-
alization techniques available for time-­oriented data in a  single place. 
Otherwise they would be inconveniently distributed across a variety of 
conference and workshop proceedings, journals, and books. To reach 
a wide audience, the TimeViz Browser is available as a website accessible 
at browser.timeviz.net.
The TimeViz Browser provides an overview of what is possible when 

Images of time / 39 
visualizing time-­oriented data. As the diversity of possibilities is best com-
municated visually, the overview is visual in nature as well, rather than 
a textual list of references. In this sense, the TimeViz Browser is a survey 
– not an ordinary survey, but a visual survey. Importantly, a searching and 
filtering function allows users to narrow down the scope of techniques 
that interest them.
The design of the TimeViz Browser is depicted in Figure 21. The main 
view shows thumbnail pictures to provide a  compact, yet expressive 
visual summary of the available visualization techniques. The collection 
of approaches covers more than 100 exemplars. Many of them are also col-
lected in Aigner et al. (2011). The TimeViz Browser explicitly encourages 
contribution of new techniques from the community.
Each technique can also be explored in greater detail. Selecting a tech-
nique opens up the detail view. This view offers a brief abstract for the 
technique, a larger figure, and a list of relevant publications. Small icons 
indicate the technique’s place in the categorization schema (e.g. frame 
of reference: abstract vs. spatial or number of variables: univariate vs. 
multivariate). 
The filter interface (left in Figure 21) covers the data aspect (frame of 
reference: abstract vs. spatial; and number of variables: univariate vs. mul-
tivariate), the time aspect (arrangement: linear vs. cyclic; and time prim-
itives: instant vs. interval), as well as the visualization aspect (mapping: 
static vs. dynamic; and dimensionality: 2D vs. 3D ). Using these filters it 
is possible to narrow down the collection of thumbnails presented in the 
main view, for example, to techniques that use a cyclic arrangement of the 
time axis in 3D .
Figure 21 
The TimeViz 
Browser provides 
an overview 
of existing 
visualization 
techniques for 
time-­oriented 
data and a filter 
interface to search 
for techniques 
with particular 
characteristics.
<http://browser.timeviz.
net>.

40 / Christian Tominski et al.
With the TimeViz Browser, we have a platform for collecting state-­
of-­the-­art techniques and methods for visualizing time-­oriented data. 
In addition to that, the TimeViz Browser also links to other surveys, for 
instance, of visual representation of trees, dynamic graphs, sets, software, 
and text documents.
Conclusion
This chapter explored the visual world of time and time-­oriented data. We 
briefly characterized the dimension of time and the data associated with it. 
We described basic ways of visualizing data in general and time-­oriented 
data in particular. A  collection of historical and contemporary visual­
ization techniques illustrated the variety of designs already employed in 
existing work. A good way to explore this variety is the TimeViz Browser, 
which we introduced in the last part of this chapter.
Here we could only cover a fraction of the richness of the topic of vis-
ualizing time-­oriented data. For more details, see the reference list, in 
particular the books by Aigner (2011) and Wills (2012), and the TimeViz 
Browser website at <http://browser.timeviz.net>.
This chapter focused on visual methods for time-­oriented data. Yet, 
studying large amounts of time-­oriented data typically requires sup-
port in the form of data analysis methods (Montgomery, Jennings, and 
Kulahci 2015) and interaction techniques (Tominski 2015). On a broader 
scope, integrating visual, interactive, and analytic methods is the objec-
tive of Visual Analytics research (Keim et al. 2010). The goal is to utilize 
the power of digital machinery in terms of computation and storage and 
multiply it with the strengths of humans in sense-­making and creative 
­problem-solving. In the light of Visual Analytics, data analysis workflows 
will change in the future. We will be able to look not only at the raw data, 
but also at features extracted analytically on the fly. Interaction techniques 
will provide us with the flexibility to create different perspectives on the 
data on demand in order to unveil patterns in subspaces and across mul­
tiple dimensions.
As this vision gradually becomes reality, a number of research chal-
lenges has to be addressed. Dealing with huge time-­oriented data with 
many variables is a key challenge. On the one hand, technical aspects such 
as data management and computational efficiency are relevant topics in 
this regard. On the other hand, we know that human perception and cog-
nition has strengths and also weaknesses, but we do not yet fully under-
stand all the mechanisms involved in human sense-­making processes. 
Developing integrated and well-­balanced solutions based on automated 
analysis, visual representation, and interactive control is therefore still 
challenging. We are convinced that researching new Visual Analytics 
methods will make it easier for us in the future to extract valuable insight 
from time-­oriented data.

Images of time / 41 
Images of time / 41 
References
Aigner, Wolfgang, Silvia Miksch, Heidrun Schumann, 
and Christian Tominski. 2011. Visualization of 
time-­oriented data. London: Springer.
Aigner, Wolfgang, Silvia Miksch, Bettina Thurnher, 
and Stefan Biffl. 2005. ‘PlanningLines: novel 
glyphs for representing temporal uncertainties 
and their evaluation.’ In Proceedings of the 
International Conference Information Visualisation 
(IV), 457–463. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer 
Society. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IV.2005.97>.
Bertin, Jacques. 1983. Semiology of graphics: diagrams, 
networks, maps. Translated by William J. Berg. 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Boyd Davis, Stephen. 2012. ‘History on the line: time 
as dimension.’ Design Issues 28 (4): 4–17.
Boyd Davis, Stephen. 2017. ‘Early visualisations 
of historical time: “To see at one glance all the 
centuries that have passed”.’ In Information design: 
research and practice, edited by Alison Black, Paul 
Luna, Ole Lund, and Sue Walker, 3–22. Abingdon: 
Routledge.
Brinton, Willard C. 1914. Graphic methods for 
presenting facts. New York: The Engineering 
Magazine Company.
Brinton, Willard C. 1939. Graphic presentation. New 
York: Brinton Associates.
Byron, Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. 2008. ‘Stacked 
graphs: geometry & aesthetics.’ IEEE Transactions 
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 
14 (6): 1245–1252. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TVCG.2008.166>.
Cleveland, William S. 1993. Visualizing data. Summit, 
NJ: Hobart Press.
Cleveland, William S., and Robert McGill. 1986. ‘An 
experiment in graphical perception.’ International 
Journal of Man-­Machine Studies 25 (5): 491–500. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0020-7373(86)80019-0>.
Dragicevic, Pierre, and Stéphane Huot. 2002. 
‘SpiraClock: a continuous and non-­intrusive 
display for upcoming events.’ In CHI ’02 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
604–605. New York: ACM Press. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/506443.506505>.
Federico, Paolo, Stephan Hoffmann, Alexander 
Rind, Wolfgang Aigner, and Silvia Miksch. 2014. 
‘Qualizon graphs: space-­efficient time-­series 
visualization with qualitative abstractions.’ In 
Proceedings of the 12th International Working 
Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces 
(AVI2014), 273–280. New York: ACM Press. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2598153.2598172>.
Funkhouser, H. Gray. 1936. ‘A note on a tenth century 
graph.’ Osiris 1 (1): 260–262. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/368425>.
Gantt, Henry Laurence. 1913. Work, wages, and 
profits. New York: The Engineering Magazine 
Company.
Haber, Robert B., and David A. McNabb. 1990. 
‘Visualization idioms: a conceptual model for 
scientific visualization systems.’ In Visualization 
in scientific computing, edited by Gregory M. 
Nielson and Bruce D. Shriver, with Lawrence 
J. Rosenblum, 74–93. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE 
Computer Society Press.
Heer, Jeffrey, Nicholas Kong, and Maneesh Agrawala. 
2009. ‘Sizing the horizon: the effects of chart size 
and layering on the graphical perception of time 
series visualizations.’ In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, CHI’09, 1303–1312. New York: ACM Press. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518897>.
Keim, Daniel, Jörn Kohlhammer, Geoffrey Ellis, 
and Florian Mansmann (eds). 2010. Mastering 
the information age: solving problems with visual 
analytics. Goslar: Eurographics Association. 
<http://www.vismaster.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2010/11/VisMaster-book-lowres.pdf>.
Lam, Heidi, Tamara Munzner, and Robert 
Kincaid. 2007. ‘Overview use in multiple 
visual information resolution interfaces.’ IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 13 (6): 1278–1285. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TVCG.2007.70583>.
Lenz, Hans. 2005. Universalgeschichte der Zeit. 
Wiesbaden: Marix Verlag.
Mackinlay, Jock. 1986. ‘Automating the design of 
graphical presentations of relational information.’ 
ACM Transactions on Graphics 5 (2): 110–141. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/22949.22950>.
McCormick, Bruce H., Thomas A. DeFanti, and 
Maxine D. Brown (eds). 1987. ‘Visualization in 
scientific computing (ViCS): definition, domain 
and recommendations.’ Computer Graphics 21 (6). 
New York: ACM SIGGRAPH 
<http://www.sci.utah.edu/vrc2005/McCormick-
1987-VSC.pdf>.
Montgomery, Douglas C., Cheryl L. Jennings, and 
Murat Kulahci. 2015. Introduction to time series 
analysis and forecasting. 2nd edn. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley.
Munzner, Tamara. 2014. Visualization analysis & 
design. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Playfair, William. 1821. A letter on our agricultural 
distresses, their causes and remedies: accompanied 
with tables and copper-­plate charts, shewing and 
comparing the prices of wheat, bread, and labour, 
from 1565 to 1821. London: William Sams. 
Priestley, Joseph. 1765. A chart of biography. 
[London]: J. Johnson.
Reijner, Hannes. 2008. ‘The development of the 
horizon graph.’ In Electronic Proceedings of the 

42 / Christian Tominski et al.
42 / Christian Tominski et al.
VisWeek Workshop From Theory to Practice: 
Design, Vision and Visualization.
Rosenberg, Daniel, and Anthony Grafton. 2010. 
Cartographies of time: a history of the timeline. 
New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Saito, Takafumi, Hiroko Nakamura Miyamura, 
Mitsuyoshi Yamamoto, Hiroki Saito, Yuka 
Hoshiya, and Takumi Kaseda. 2005. ‘Two-­tone 
pseudo coloring: compact visualization for 
one-­dimensional data.’ In IEEE Symposium on 
Information Visualization 2005, 173–180. Los 
Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFVIS.2005.1532144>.
Simons, Daniel J., and Ronald A. Rensink. 2005. 
‘Change blindness: past, present, and future.’ 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9 (1): 16–20. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.11.006>.
Tominski, Christian. 2015. Interaction for 
visualization. San Rafael, CA: Morgan & 
Claypool. Also published as digital-­first e-­book 
in series Synthesis Lectures on Visualization 
3 (1): 107 pp. <http://dx.doi.org/10.2200/
S00651ED1V01Y201506VIS003>.
Tominski, Christian, and Heidrun Schumann. 
2008. ‘Enhanced interactive spiral display.’ In 
the conference proceedings of SIGRAD 2008: 
The Annual SIGRAD Conference Special Theme: 
Interaction, edited by Kai-­Mikael Jää-­Aro and Lars 
Kjelldal, 53–56. Linköping: Linköping University 
Electronic Press. <http://www.ep.liu.se/ecp/034/
ecp08034.pdf>.
Tominski, Christian, Heidrun Schumann, Gennady 
Andrienko, and Natalia Andrienko. 2012. 
‘Stacking-­based visualization of trajectory 
attribute data.’ IEEE Transactions on Visualization 
and Computer Graphics 18 (12): 2565–2574. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2012.265>.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The visual display of 
quantitative information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics 
Press.
Tufte, Edward R. 2006. Beautiful evidence. Cheshire, 
CT: Graphics Press.
Tversky, Barbara, Julie Bauer Morrison, and Mireille 
Bétrancourt. 2002. ‘Animation: can it facilitate?’ 
International Journal of Human–Computer Studies 
57 (4): 247–262. 
Wainer, Howard. 2005. Graphic discovery: a trout in 
the milk and other visual adventures. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ward, Matthew, Georges Grinstein, and Daniel Keim. 
2015. Interactive data visualization: foundations, 
techniques, and applications. 2nd edn. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press.
Whitrow, Gerald James. 2003. What is time? [the 
classic account of the nature of time]. New 
edition, with an introduction by J. T. Fraser, and 
a bibliographic essay by J. T. Fraser and M. P. 
Soulsby. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wills, Graham. 2012. Visualizing time: designing 
graphical representations for statistical data. New 
York: Springer.

43
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 43–60
William Playfair and the invention 
of statistical graphs
Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
William Playfair (1759–1823), Scottish engineer, political economist, writer, 
and entrepreneur, was the first important inventor and developer of statistical 
graphics. His two great works, that introduced three of the fundamental forms, 
recognized that charts and graphs function because of their ability to exploit 
our uniquely human perceptual and cognitive capacities. The inventor of the 
time-series line graph, the bar chart, and the pie chart was astute in his choice 
of designs, and his inventions are at the heart of most statistical communication 
and information visualization today. Remarkably, the basic elements of the 
charts that he introduced over two centuries ago have not been supplanted or 
materially improved. He invented a universal language useful to science and 
commerce alike and, although his contemporaries failed to grasp their signifi-
cance, Playfair never faltered in his conviction that he had found the best way 
to discover and communicate suggestive patterns in data. 
In 1786 William Playfair published The commercial and political atlas. 
Unlike conventional atlases, the volume contained no maps but it did 
contain charts of a novel and unfamiliar variety. The Atlas contained sev-
eral tables and 44 charts summarizing trade between England and other 
countries. The use of tables to present economic data was not new, having 
been common for more than a century after John Graunt (1620–1674), 
who had used them extensively in his Natural and political observations 
made upon the bills of mortality, and Sir William Petty (1623–1687), who 
had examined the role of the state in the economy in his Treatise on taxes 
and contributions; coincidentally, both books were published in 1662. But 
Playfair’s pictorial representation of economic data was revolutionary. 
Today there is scarcely any human activity that does not make use of 
statistical charts. The invention can lay fair claim to being one of the most 
versatile and useful tools for understanding and displaying data in the 
sciences and humanities, in commerce and the arts, and in everyday life. 
Graphs convey comparative information in ways that no tables of numbers 
or written accounts ever could. Trends, differences, and associations are 
seen immediately. The eye perceives instantly what the brain would take 
seconds or minutes to infer from a table of numbers, and this is what makes 
graphs so attractive to scientists, business persons, and many others. 
Charts allow the data to speak to all – a Chinese can read the same graph 
that a Russian draws. There is no other form of human communication 
that more appropriately deserves the description ‘universal language’.
This chapter is an 
abridged and edited ver-
sion of the introduction 
to the facsimile edition 
of Playfair’s major works 
containing statistical 
charts (Playfair 2005, 
1–35). The authors are 
grateful to Cambridge 
University Press for 
granting permission 
to publish this version, 
and again acknow­
ledge, with grateful 
thanks, the funding, 
cooperation, advice, 
and assistance of the 
various individuals and 
institutions listed in the 
preface to the facsimile 
edition (vii–viii).
3

44 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
William Playfair (1759–1823): a brief biography
William Playfair was trained as a  practical engineer by giants of the 
Industrial Revolution. Although a craftsman by trade, he was exposed to 
the best academic minds of the Scottish Enlightenment, which has so pro-
foundly helped to shape our modern world (Broadie 2003; Buchan 2003; 
Herman 2001). Upon the death of his father, James Playfair, when William 
was just 12, the role of teacher was thrust upon his brother John, then 24. 
John would soon gain worldwide fame as a mathematician, physicist, and 
geologist, and would become one of the most distinguished professors at 
the University of Edinburgh. William Playfair was raised and educated in 
the presence of genius. 
John Playfair’s scientific approach was unequivocally empirical; one 
task that he gave his younger brother was to keep a graphical record of 
daily temperatures. Many years later William acknowledged this child-
hood exercise as the inspiration for his economic time series line chart. 
John introduced William to many of the great figures of the Scottish 
Enlightenment, such as the philosopher Dugald Stewart and the econo-
mist Adam Smith. John also introduced William to the brothers William 
and Robert Small, who were exceedingly well-­connected educators in 
the world of letters, science, medicine, and politics. The Small brothers 
played a crucial role in the future training of William Playfair.
At the age of 14, William Playfair became apprenticed to the engi-
neer Andrew Meikle, miller and millwright to the Rennie family, near 
Edinburgh. After three years with Meikle, William was recommended by 
Robert Small to the position of draftsman and assistant to James Watt at 
his Birmingham steam-engine factory. 
James Watt (1736–1819) ranks among the most famous of engineers. 
This consummate craftsman and scientist was not the first to build a steam 
engine, but his improvements transformed Newcomen’s primitive and 
inefficient device into the workhorse of the Industrial Revolution. His 
collaboration with the industrialist Matthew Boulton, starting in Birming-
ham in 1774, was crucial for Watt’s great commercial success. This part-
nership was encouraged by William Small and led to the development of 
the steam-­engine manufacturing company Boulton & Watt, which revo­
lutionized work throughout the world in the most fundamental way. 
William Playfair arrived at Boulton & Watt in 1777. He worked as drafts-
man and clerk to Watt until 1781, and helped Watt with his engineering 
drawings. Playfair’s experience in drafting and printing drawings for Watt 
would later serve him well when he turned his hand to writing.
During his time in Birmingham, Playfair became acquainted with 
several members of the Lunar Society. This distinguished group of entre-
preneurs and scientists included Boulton, Erasmus Darwin, Edgeworth, 
Keir, Priestley, Watt, and Wedgwood (Uglow 2002; Schofield 1963). The 
unusual name of the society derived from the meeting time of the group 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 45 
– they met monthly, from 1765 until 1813, on the Monday evening closest to 
the full moon so that there would be sufficient light for the late-­night walk 
home. The members of the Lunar Society were the heart and soul of the 
Industrial Revolution, and they were convinced – with much justification 
– that they were changing the world for the better. Thus William Playfair 
was privileged to be at the cutting edge of science and industry in a Britain 
that was to dominate the world in the century following the Industrial 
Revolution – a revolution that was spawned in late-­eighteenth-­century 
Birmingham. Playfair rubbed shoulders with the leading figures of the day 
in science, engineering, business, and politics, and they, unknowingly, 
helped to shape his statistical creations.
Playfair’s interest in economics was intensely practical. As Andrew 
Meikle’s apprentice and James Watt’s draftsman, Playfair had been a first-­
hand witness to the work of several great engineer-­entrepreneurs, includ-
ing not only Meikle and Watt, but also Matthew Boulton, John Rennie, 
Josiah Wedgwood, and James Keir. He had observed the development 
and success of Boulton’s Soho Manufactory, the world’s first factory to be 
organized and run in ways that we would recognize today. Playfair’s first 
publication on economics appeared in 1785, but it contained no charts. 
A preliminary edition of the Commercial and political atlas, with engraved 
charts, also appeared in 1785 and was privately circulated to a select few 
for criticism. The Atlas of 1786 was the first publicly available volume to 
contain charts and it exhibits forty-­three variants of the time series line 
graph together with a solitary bar chart. Playfair issued a second edition, 
which was little changed, in 1787, when he left England to seek his for-
tune in Paris. British industry and commerce were leading the world and 
Playfair believed that with his experience at Boulton & Watt he would be 
well placed to profit in a France striving to industrialize and catch up to her 
neighbour and rival.
He spent the years between 1793 and 1814 mostly in London, where he 
published several books that included charts, the most notable being Lineal 
arithmetic (1798), the Statistical breviary (1801), and the Decline and fall of 
powerful and wealthy nations (1805). His illustrated British family antiquity 
(1809–1811) included chronological diagrams; hopes of subscriptions from 
the aristocracy were the motivation behind this mammoth nine-­volume 
endeavour. He continued to write – his eventual output numbering over 
one hundred books and pamphlets – but without great monetary success. 
His many writings on economics include a critical edition (1805) of Adam 
Smith’s Wealth of nations. Smith’s admirers thought Playfair’s commentar-
ies disrespectful and the edition was not well received. 
Playfair’s last years saw a renewed interest in economics and the dif-
ficulties experienced by English farmers in the early nineteenth century 
inspired some very fine charts (the Letters on agricultural distresses; 1821, 
1822) that, until recently, were widely thought to be his sole late graph-
ical efforts. However, Symanzik, Fischetti, and Spence (2009) have 

46 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
rediscovered another chart – among the last to appear in print. It was 
published as a large coloured fold-out in an annually updated Chronology 
of events by Sir Richard Phillips, entrepreneur, political radical, and spec-
ulative publisher, who commissioned contributions from individuals to 
include in his chronologies and other compendia (Issitt 1998). Playfair’s 
coloured chart of multiple time series of revenues, expenditures, exports, 
debt, and the price of stocks, wheat, and bread appeared in the volume 
spanning the years 1770–1820, taking pride of place as the first item in the 
book (Phillips 1821). In subsequent years, before and after Playfair’s death, 
the chart was updated along with the rest of the volume. The time series 
line of imports to Britain was almost certainly added after his death.
During his life, Playfair’s invention of statistical graphs went largely 
unacknowledged. Although he was a tireless advocate for his charts, he 
made few converts. His obituaries ignored the graphical inventions and 
concentrated upon his political and economic writings, which were not 
held in high regard by his contemporaries, although they have attracted 
renewed interest today. 
Eighteenth-century barriers to statistical charts
The simplicity of statistical graphs accounts for much of the appeal and for 
that reason we give little thought to the ingenuity required to invent them. 
Familiarity has dulled our appreciation of their significance and dimin-
ished the importance of their creator, whose name until the late twentieth 
century was largely unknown, even to professional statisticians. The idea 
of devising and publishing statistical charts was not obvious two centuries 
ago and, even today, the form is not nearly as self-­evident as it appears 
(Cleveland 1983; Tufte 1983; Kosslyn 1993; Spence and Lewandowsky 
1990; Spence 2005, 2006; Wainer and Velleman 2001; Wainer 2000, 2005). 
Since the time of Graunt and Petty, more than a century before Playfair, 
large collections of economic statistics were widely available. The data 
were present in abundance, but no one else had the inspiration to repre-
sent them as pictures. There were various impediments to the publication 
of illustrations in serious writing. There were philosophical objections 
and technical barriers and, perhaps most importantly, concerns regard-
ing accuracy or misrepresentation, Tilling (1975) has noted that in the 
seventeenth century information in charts produced by automatic graph-
ical recording devices, such as weather clocks, was often translated into 
tabular form before dissemination. Presumably the continuous graphical 
record was not regarded as being as trustworthy as the corresponding 
sequence of numbers.
Plants have been portrayed in print since the fifteenth century. From 
early Renaissance herbals to increasingly naturalistic depictions of plants 
and flowers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, printed illus-
trations of natural history were well accepted. But similar illustrations in 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 47 
serious scientific writing were viewed with suspicion. Eminent experi-
menters like Robert Hooke had serious misgivings. In his Micrographia 
of 1665, which contained many illustrations, Hooke took great pains to 
assure the reader of their accuracy, and to point out how the reader might 
misunderstand the illustrations. 
Biderman (1990) and Valois (2000) have argued that a mistrust of sense 
perception was an impediment to the development of empirical methods. 
Beginning with Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, British empiricists in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries argued that knowledge comes from 
experience, whereas the rationalists, such as Descartes, maintained that 
knowledge may be derived solely through reason based on innate ideas, 
deducing theorems from axioms. The empiricists rejected the notion of 
innate ideas and argued that almost all knowledge is based on sensory 
experience. The Scottish realist philosophers Thomas Reid and Dugald 
Stewart took this idea further by emphasizing the process of inductive rea-
soning from sense data. Although the Scottish empiricists also used deduc-
tive reasoning when appropriate, they attached much greater importance 
to the inductive method. Reid and Stewart rejected much of Cartesian 
philosophy, preferring to rely on observation and inductive reasoning.
The Playfair brothers were well acquainted with the leading empir-
icist philosophers of the Scottish Enlightenment and their own think-
ing was in the same empirical mould. John Playfair and Dugald Stewart 
were firm friends and colleagues and their approaches to mathematics 
and natural philosophy were highly compatible. In 1785, John Playfair 
succeeded Stewart as Professor of Mathematics at Edinburgh. As a boy, 
William Playfair had absorbed the prevailing Scottish empirical approach 
in science, learning to represent physical data by line graphs under the 
instruction of his brother John (Playfair 1805, xvi). However, although 
such charting had become common among natural philosophers for track-
ing their experimental data in private, they did not employ these devices 
to buttress arguments in their publications. John Playfair, for example, 
never made public use of the line graph (J. Playfair 1822). It was William 
Playfair’s genius not only to apply the line graph to economic data but to 
see its value in publications. However, despite the general shift to empiri-
cism, a mistrust of pictorial representation persisted, with eighteenth- and 
early-­nineteenth-­century academics reluctant to publish graphs of physi-
cal or statistical data, because of lingering concerns regarding accuracy, or 
simply the technical difficulty of production for publication. 
A significant barrier was the process of copperplate printing (Wood­
ward 2007) which required considerable skill. As ’Espinasse (1962) has 
noted, in the seventeenth century scientists were versatile, used to manu-
facturing their own apparatus and to dealing with tradesmen and crafts-
men, whereas by the eighteenth century the scientists had become more 
specialized and were less likely to possess the expertise to engrave their 
own plates. Since copper is a soft metal, it was rare to take more than one 

48 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
thousand impressions before the plate deteriorated. This is one of the 
reasons why many works at the time appeared in several editions soon 
after the original. These new editions provided an opportunity to add new 
information, as Playfair did with the third edition of the Atlas. In that edi-
tion, reproduced in Playfair (2005), there are obvious blunders in a few 
plates and minor errors in several others. Playfair frequently engraved the 
lines himself – perhaps to save money – leaving the more delicate work of 
lettering and decoration to the printer; unfortunately, his engraving was 
often careless or inexpert.
The commercial and political atlas (1786–1801)
In 1785, Playfair circulated a private version of the ­Commercial and political 
atlas. He sought criticism that would help him to improve the published 
version. He sent copies to both Watt and Boulton. Watt, ever the careful 
scientist and engineer, was concerned with the accuracy and provenance 
of the data. Playfair, who revered Watt, was persuaded to include tables in 
the first (1786) and second (1787) editions of the Atlas. But by 1801, he had 
decided to ignore Watt’s advice and there are no tables in the third edition.
The bulk of the Atlas examined English commerce during the eighteenth 
century. The first edition was published in foolscap folio (216 × 330 mm), 
with the pages printed in landscape format rather than in the normal por-
trait format. The charts appear on separate pages. Illustrations printed 
from copper plates, where the lines were engraved into the printing 
surface, could not be combined in a single process with the printing of 
text from relief. The only solution was to print the illustrations separately 
(Biderman 1981; Spence 2000). In using a landscape layout, Playfair seems 
to have anticipated modern ideas regarding the optimal aspect ratios of 
graphs (Cleveland 1985). Although the second edition uses an identical lay-
out, by the third edition Playfair had adopted a more conventional vertical 
portrait format for the text. Partly because of this change, some charts, 
which are two to three times wider than the portrait page, appear as folded 
flyouts. Playfair could have achieved the same end by printing these charts 
sideways – and he did this in most instances – but he clearly wanted to be 
able to present the more important charts with sufficient detail.
In the first edition, all of the 44 charts, except one, plotted values (in 
pounds sterling) on the vertical axis against time on the horizontal axis. In 
addition, a solitary bar chart – an oddity made necessary because Playfair 
did not have sufficient data to construct a line graph – was the only chart 
that did not include time as a  dimension. The bar chart was directly 
inspired by Priestley’s (1765) chronological charts and Playfair must have 
been aware of the irony when he apologized for the anomaly: ‘This Chart 
. . . does not comprehend any portion of time, and it is much inferior in 
utility to those that do’ (Atlas 1786, 101).
The graphs in the three editions of the Atlas were remarkably similar to 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 49 
those in use today: hachure, shading, colour-coding, and grids with major 
and minor divisions were all introduced in the various editions of the Atlas. 
Actual, missing, and hypothetical data were portrayed, and the kind of 
line used, solid or broken, differentiated the various forms. Playfair filled 
the areas between curves in most of the charts to indicate accumulated or 
total amounts. All included a descriptive title either outside the frame (as 
in the first edition) or in an oval in the body of the chart (as in the third 
edition). The axes were labelled and numbered where the major gridlines 
intersected the frame.
Graphical innovation
Despite minor numerical errors, technical slips, and graphical functions 
that are occasionally more fanciful than accurate,1 all three editions of the 
Atlas introduced an astonishing number of novel charting constructions 
that are still in common use today (Tufte 1983; Biderman 1990; Costigan-­
Eaves and Macdonald-­Ross 1990). We shall comment on only a small sam-
ple of Playfair’s inventions (some of which are seen in the first and second 
editions only) and we invite the reader to discover others (see Playfair 
2005, for plates that are discussed below but not reproduced here):
The time-series line graph 
The third edition has one simple time-­series line graph (Plate [26]; Fig-
ure 1). Although all other charts use a line to display variation in amounts, 
most also include colouring or shading between the curves and may alter-
natively be described as area charts. Playfair introduced several different 
variations of this form.
  1	 The Atlas is not a model of precision. Several arithmetical errors and careless drawing 
are evidence of rushed production. Some of the curves that connect the data points 
seem to have derived their shapes from Playfair’s opinion of how the intervening data 
should look. His curves are drawn freehand, often crudely, betraying a lack of practice 
in the demanding skill of engraving. For further examples see Playfair (2005, 16–23).
Figure 1
Time-series line 
graph.
Playfair (2005), Plate 
[26]. All images 
reproduced from 
the facsimile edition 
of the third edition 
by permission of 
Cambridge University 
Press.

50 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
The divided surface area chart
A good example is found in the first edition, Plate 38, after p. 153. This chart 
does not appear in the third edition and is one of several charts due to 
James Corry. In the third edition, Plate 19 is a divided area chart (Figure 2). 
Area charts are ideal for showing trends when the variation in two or more 
time series must be shown simultaneously. The area between each line and 
the abscissa is filled with a colour for that data series, with the colours in 
the lower areas occluding those higher up. The use of colour (or hachure 
or stippling) serves to emphasize the ways in which accumulated amounts 
have varied.
The bar chart
This chart, inspired by chronological diagrams (Funkhouser 1937; Wainer 
and Spence 2005), was introduced in the first edition, but by the third 
edition this chart had disappeared and Playfair did not use the form again. 
Titles and textual descriptions
The first edition used descriptive titles above the chart, outside the frame. 
Explanatory notes regarding the scaling of axes appeared below the frame. 
Curves and stained areas in the charts were labelled. Other information 
often also appeared below the frame, for example, the engraver’s name, or 
the date. By the third edition, Playfair had arrived at a more designed – and 
more expensive – look. The title was relocated to an oval or other shape 
Figure 2
Divided surface 
area chart with 
time-period 
indicators, and 
titles and textual 
descriptions.
Playfair (2005), Plate 19. 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 51 
within the frame; decoration of the text in this caption was common, as in 
Plates 19 and 21.
Framing
The charts were invariably framed. In the first edition, this consisted 
of a simple double-­lined box. By the third edition, the frame included 
a coloured border just inside the double-­lined box. This provided a space 
for the labels and scale values, and also made the chart more pleasing to 
the eye.
Colour-coding
Plate 17 in the third edition provides a good example (Figure 3). A thick 
red hand-­painted line is used for exports; a yellow-­orange line for imports; 
solid blue-­green fill colour between the export and import lines shows 
when the balance of trade is positive – exports exceed imports – and 
a pink-­red solid fill shows when the balance of trade is negative. Colour is 
used by Playfair to emphasize the qualitative differences between the time 
series and the quality and quantity of the varying accumulated amounts. 
Labelling of axes
Figure 3 shows the left border with a vertical label ‘Money’; the top border 
with a horizontal label ‘Time’. The bottom border is the time scale; the 
right border, money in pounds sterling. This scheme forces the graph to 
have a frame, unlike common practice today where the labels and scales 
tend to be together on the left and bottom sides only. 
Hachure and stippled dots
Where colour was not available, as in the second edition, Playfair adopted 
the engraver’s practice of simulating dark colour by hachure and lighter 
colours by stippling.
Figure 3
Colour-coding and 
labelling of axes.
Playfair (2005), Plate 17. 

52 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
Gridlines
Major gridlines are engraved more heavily than minor gridlines. Plate 1 
in the third edition is a good example (Figure 4). Minor vertical gridlines 
are not used where there are no data (as indicated in the tables of the first 
edition). Presumably, after 1780, Playfair had data for each individual year.
Suppression of non-­significant digits
Plate 5 in the third edition is a good example (Figure 5). The scale is implic-
itly defined by the first label where full precision is used, thus indicating 
the value of the intervals between gridlines (however, Playfair is not con-
sistent in his use of this device).
Time period indicators
In Plate 19 of the third edition (Figure 2), the reigns of the kings of England, 
Britain, and France are shown in the style of the chronological diagram 
that Priestley used in 1765 to show the life spans of persons from classical 
antiquity. Another example is found in Plate 31, first edition, after p. 133; 
the upper three black horizontal bars indicate times of war. In the corres-
ponding Plate 25 of the third edition, Playfair has dropped these bars.
Event markers
In Plates 6, 20, and 21, in the third edition, Playfair uses vertically oriented 
text, in the body of the figure, positioned to mark important historical 
events that may have had some influence on the subsequent trend in the 
time series (Figure 6).
Figure 5
Suppression of non-­
significant digits.
Playfair (2005), Plate 5, 
detail.
Figure 6
Event markers.
Playfair (2005), Plate 20, 
detail. 
Figure 4
Gridlines.
Playfair (2005), Plate 1, 
detail. 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 53 
Theoretical/hypothetical/projected values
Plate 21 in the third edition (Figure 7) shows the projected reduction 
in the national debt after a ‘sinking fund’ was established by the Prime 
Minister, Pitt the Younger, to reduce the debt. Each year, £1,000,000 of 
the surplus revenue raised by new taxes was to be added to the fund, and 
the accumulated interest was to be used to pay off the national debt. The 
system worked in peacetime – with regular annual surpluses – but, after 
the country went to war in 1793, the debt was redeemed by new borrowing 
at higher rates of interest. The chart in Plate 21 shows Playfair’s model for 
the time course of the reduction in the national debt. Playfair does not 
explain the mathematical basis for the construction of his curves, other 
than to allude to compound interest, but he is sceptical of the claims of 
others, whom he refers to as ‘arithmetical pedants’. 
Although the national debt was a growing concern in 1786, and Playfair 
discusses both the debt and the sinking fund in the first edition (pp. 131–133, 
Figure 7
Theoretical/
hypothetical/
projected values.
Playfair (2005), Plate 21. 

54 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
Plate 30), his early graphical approach was different from that of the third 
edition (Plate 21 and its often-­reproduced empirical partner, Plate 20).
Solid and broken lines
While most of the lines and curves that Playfair drew are solid, he occa-
sionally used broken lines. He may have sometimes intended this to indi-
cate uncertainty in the data. For example, in Plate 33 of the first edition, he 
uses a broken line as a companion to a solid line representing the national 
debt to indicate that ‘the state of the debt is exact, or very nearly so’. Thus 
the broken line indicates a lower degree of confidence in the accuracy 
of the data. However, in the Statistical breviary, broken lines are used to 
indicate the relationship between population size and taxation (Charts [1] 
and [2]; Figure 8), and in this instance there is no suggestion that the data 
are inaccurate. A broken line is also used with the outer of two concentric 
circles that represent the area of France and the other territories that it 
controlled (Chart [2]); it is difficult to know whether Playfair intended to 
indicate a lack of confidence in the data in this case.
The statistical breviary (1801)
Playfair introduced three new statistical diagrams in the Breviary: the 
circle chart, the pie chart, and a figure to show joint properties, similar 
to a Venn diagram. Like the line and bar charts, introduced 15 years pre-
viously, his designs have not been materially improved upon to this day 
(Spence 2005).
The Statistical breviary presented statistical data for European coun-
tries at the beginning of the nineteenth century (see Playfair 2005; Spence 
2005). Playfair used charts since he believed that ‘making an appeal to the 
eye when proportion and magnitude are concerned, is the best and readi-
est method of conveying a distinct idea’ (p. 4). The most important graph-
ical innovation in this volume was the pie chart. The intellectual origins of 
the pie chart remain obscure – although Playfair acknowledged and wrote 
about the inspirations for the time-­series line chart and the bar chart, he 
was silent regarding the pie chart. It seems almost certain to have derived 
its inspiration from the logic diagrams of Leibniz and Euler (Spence 2005), 
but it is likely that pies, circles, and intersecting circles were such simple 
and familiar forms that Playfair did not think that explanation was neces-
sary. Playfair was a  capable and inventive adapter of ideas from other 
domains (Spence and Wainer 2001) and his adaptation of logic diagrams 
to portray and compare empirical data was ingenious.
The first chart in the Statistical breviary depicts European countries 
before the French Revolution of 1789 and the second chart shows how 
circumstances had changed by 1801 (Figure 8). Circles represent the land 
areas; for example, Russia, the largest country, is symbolized by the circle 
of greatest diameter, while small nations like Portugal are represented by 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 55 
tiny circles. Just below the horizontal diameter of most circles, Playfair has 
inscribed the values of the areas in square miles. The charts also depict the 
sizes of the populations and the revenues of the countries, and whether 
individual countries were maritime powers (area coloured green) or non-­
maritime powers (coloured red). The sizes of the populations and the tax 
revenues are represented by vertical red lines on the left of each circle and 
by the vertical yellow lines on the right. The dotted lines joining the tops of 
the lines show the tax burden on the populations. However, as Funkhouser 
(1937) has noted, ‘the slope of the line is obviously dependent on the diam-
eter of the circle’ and so it cannot serve as an accurate index of the tax 
burden. Playfair probably intended the reader simply to note whether the 
slope was positive or negative.
To show how some countries were subdivided, Playfair used several 
strategies. For example, the Russian empire was divided into European 
and Asiatic dominions with the former represented by the inner circle and 
the latter by the surrounding ring. This diagram uses the two distinct areas 
to represent the distribution of the empire between the two continents. 
The Asiatic dominions were represented by the annulus which was stained 
green indicating a sea power. The inner circle was coloured red to indi-
cate that the European dominions were land powers. The Turkish empire 
was harder to accommodate since it was spread across three continents: 
Asia, Europe, and Africa. Three concentric circles would have made visual 
comparison of the areas even more difficult than in the case of the Russian 
empire. Playfair’s whole purpose in creating these diagrams which repre-
sented quantity by area was to make comparisons effortless and to make 
the data more memorable. Playfair, who appears to have recognized and 
Figure 8
Solid and broken 
lines, circle chart, 
pie chart, and 
figure showing 
joint properties 
from the 
Statistical breviary.
Playfair (2005), 
Chart [2], detail. 

56 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
understood the perceptual issues involved (Spence 2005, 2006), realized 
that concentric circles yield areas whose sizes are hard to compare accu-
rately. Accordingly, he divided the circle representing the Turkish empire 
into three sectors proportional to the Asiatic, European, and African land 
areas. Again, he used colours: green to signify maritime power (the Asian 
sector); red to denote land power (the European sector); and yellow (the 
remaining African sector). Playfair gave no rationale for his use of these 
particular colours but this diagram was the first pie chart to display empir-
ical proportions and to distinguish the component fractions by colour. 
Playfair and the psychology of graphs
During the last two decades, cognitive science has played an important 
role in advancing our understanding of the power and utility of statistical 
graphs. Graphs achieve their success by capitalizing on the perceptual and 
cognitive capacities of human beings. However, interest in the psychologi-
cal aspects of charts is not new. Playfair seems to have well understood that 
our cognitive and perceptual capacities are critically important (Costigan-­
Eaves and Macdonald-­Ross 1990; Spence 2006). Perhaps we should not 
find this surprising since the Playfair brothers were well acquainted with 
the ideas and methods of the Scottish empiricist philosophers whose 
enquiries focused on questions in perception and cognition that continue 
to occupy cognitive scientists.
Playfair believed that graphs would be a powerful aid to memory; intui-
tively, he appreciated that visual memory was more robust than memory 
for words or numbers. When he was searching for a better way to present 
tabular data he said (Atlas 1801, xiv), ‘a man who has carefully investigated 
a printed table, finds, when done, that he has only a very faint and partial 
idea of what he has read’. He also appreciated that intuitive visual compar-
isons of size could be made much more rapidly, and almost as accurately, 
than by mental arithmetic computations, using the numbers themselves. 
He claimed that
The advantages proposed by [the graphical] mode of representation, are to 
facilitate the attainment of information, and aid the memory in retaining it: 
which two points form the principal business in what we call learning. . . . Of 
all the senses, the eye gives the liveliest and most accurate idea of whatever is 
susceptible of being represented to it; and when proportion between different 
quantities is the object, then the eye has an incalculable superiority. (Breviary 
1801, 14)
He understood that,
the eye is the best judge of proportion, being able to estimate it with more 
quickness and accuracy than any other of our organs . . . this mode of rep-
resentation . . . gives a simple, accurate, and permanent idea, by giving form 

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 57 
and shape to a number of separate ideas, which are otherwise abstract and 
unconnected. (Atlas 1801, x)
He anticipated modern ideas in cognitive psychology by noting that 
people remember information better when they process it in a meaningful 
rather than superficial way: ‘Information that is imperfectly acquired, is 
generally as imperfectly retained’ (Atlas 1786, 3). He speculated that his 
charts were an aid to meaningful memorization:
Whatever presents itself quickly and clearly to the mind, sets it to work, to 
reason, and think; whereas it often happens, that in learning a number of 
detached facts, the mind is merely passive, and makes no effort further than 
an attempt to retain such knowledge. (Breviary 1801, 6–7)
Playfair’s circle and pie diagrams were intended to facilitate the compar-
ison of land areas; comparing the irregular shapes formed by the bound-
aries of countries in a conventional atlas was problematic and ordering 
countries by size was a difficult visual task. Playfair’s solution was to use 
a common shape and thus exploit the eye’s capability of making compara-
tive judgements with high accuracy; ‘for where the forms are not similar, 
the eye cannot compare them easily nor accurately’ (Breviary 1801, 15). 
Playfair was able to offer remarkable insights into graphical perception 
two centuries before the flowering of modern cognitive neuroscience 
(Spence 2005, 2006).
Playfair’s legacy
Beniger and Robyn (1978) observed that, beginning with maps of Nor­thern 
Mesopotamia, there was a 3,000-­year-­old tradition of representing physi-
cal space (the world) by space (the map). Although sufficiently inspired by 
mapmakers to use the word ‘atlas’ in the title of his treatise, Playfair ended 
their monopoly on the use of spatial displays. His genius was to realize 
that non-­spatial quantities such as expenditures and historical time could 
be represented by physical space and that such representation offered 
advantages denied to tabular presentation. But others did not share his 
conviction that he had found a superior way of presenting data, especially 
in his own country where concerns regarding accuracy were heightened 
by Playfair’s carelessness, brashness, and disreputable personal reputa-
tion (Funkhouser and Walker 1935; Funkhouser 1937; Spence and Wainer 
1997). He was received more kindly on the continent, where Humboldt 
thought highly of his creations (see Hankins 1999), but there was consid-
erable opposition from many statisticians. Adoption of the new methods 
had to wait until the second half of the nineteenth century when Minard 
and Bertillon used some of Playfair’s inventions in their cartographical 
work (Palsky 1996; Friendly 2002). In Britain, Playfair was almost com-
pletely forgotten until William Stanley Jevons, in 1861, adopted Playfair’s 

58 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
58 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
References
Author unknown. 1823. ‘Mr. William Playfair.’ 
Edinburgh Annual Register 16: 332–334.
Beniger, James R., and Dorothy L. Robyn. 1978. 
‘Quantitative graphics in statistics: a brief history.’ 
The American Statistician 32 (1): 1–11. 
Biderman, Albert D. 1981. ‘The graph as victim of 
adverse discrimination and segregation: comment 
occasioned by the first issue of information design 
journal.’ Information Design Journal 1 (4): 232–241.
Biderman, Albert D. 1990. ‘The Playfair enigma: the 
development of the schematic representation of 
statistics.’ Information Design Journal 6 (1): 3–25.
Brinton, Willard C. 1914. Graphic methods for 
presenting facts. New York: The Engineering 
Magazine Company. (Reprinted, 1980, New York: 
Arno Press.)
Broadie, Alexander, ed. 2003. The Cambridge 
companion to the Scottish enlightenment. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
’Espinasse, Margaret 1962. Robert Hooke. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.
Buchan, James. 2003. Capital of the mind: how 
Edinburgh changed the world. London: Murray.
Cleveland, William S. 1985. The elements of graphing 
data. Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Costigan-­Eaves, Patricia, and Michael Macdonald-­
Ross. 1990. ‘William Playfair (1759–1823).’ 
Statistical Science 5 (3): 318–326.
methods in his own economic atlas (noted by Keynes 1936). Jevons (1886) 
wrote, ‘in statistics, the [graphical] method, never much used, has fallen 
almost entirely into disuse. It ought, I consider, to be almost as much used 
as maps are used in geography.’ Ironically, Jevons never succeeded in pub-
lishing his economic atlas. Nonetheless, Jevons’s advocacy of the graphical 
method found sympathetic ears in the British statistical establishment. 
Most prominent was Karl Pearson, who not only embraced graphs, but 
included a lecture on charting in his famous series of statistical lectures at 
University College, London. Pearson acknowledged Playfair’s contribu-
tions in generous terms. 
In the twentieth century, the use of graphs increased markedly and text-
books soon appeared. Brinton (1914) may have been the first widely sold 
primer on statistical graphs, but his text was quickly followed by a host 
of imitators. Today, it is normal to find graphs in newspapers, magazines, 
periodicals, and professional journals to communicate quantitative phe-
nomena; other visual media, such as the internet and television, make 
widespread use of charts for the same reason. Graphs are also used to 
explore and analyse data: statistical charting is an integral part of almost 
all computer software used in the sciences and commerce. Playfair was 
well aware that charts were not merely a new way of presenting data to 
others. He recognized that graphs could stimulate new ideas or suggest 
models. After making a trial chart of some data, he said that ‘the first rough 
draft [gave] me a better comprehension of the subject, than all that I had 
learnt from occasional reading, for half my lifetime’ (Playfair 1805, xv–xvi). 
Playfair charted data to discover as well as to present; in that respect, he 
anticipated the exploratory uses of graphs that were to become popular 
at the beginning of the twentieth century (Spence and Garrison 1993). 
William Playfair’s vision, which he was unable to communicate to others 
during his life, affects and benefits us all. If he could see how his inventions 
have changed the ways in which we analyse and present data, he would be 
enormously proud.

William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 59 
William Playfair and the invention of statistical graphs / 59 
Friendly, Michael. 2002. ‘Visions and re-­visions of 
Charles Joseph Minard.’ Journal of Educational 
and Behavioral Statistics 27 (1): 31–51.
Funkhouser, H. G. 1937. ‘Historical development of 
the graphical representation of statistical data.’ 
Osiris 3: 269–404.
Funkhouser, H. G., and H. M. Walker. 1935. ‘Playfair 
and his charts.’ Economic History (A supplement 
to the Economic Journal) 3: 103–109. 
Hankins, Thomas L. 1999. ‘Blood, dirt, and 
nomograms: a particular history of graphs.’ Isis 
90 (1): 50–80.
Herman, Arthur. 2001. How the Scots invented the 
modern world: the true story of how Western 
Europe’s poorest nation created our world and 
everything in it. New York: Crown.
Issitt, John. 1998. ‘Introducing Sir Richard Phillips.’ 
Paradigm (Journal of the Textbook Colloquium) 
26: 25–29.
[Jevons, Harriet A.], ed. 1886. Letters & journal of W. 
Stanley Jevons. London: Macmillan.
Keynes, J[ohn] M[aynard]. 1936. ‘William Stanley 
Jevons 1835–1882: a centenary allocution on 
his life and work as economist and statistician.’ 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 99 (3): 
516–555.
Kosslyn, Stephen M. 1994. Elements of graph design. 
New York: W. H. Freeman.
Palsky, Gilles. 1996. Des chiffres et des cartes: naissance 
et développement de la cartographie quantitative 
française au XIXe siècle. Paris: Ministère de 
l’enseignement supérieur et de la recherche, 
Comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques.
Phillips, Richard. 1821. Chronology of public events and 
remarkable occurrences within the last fifty years, 
or, from 1771 to 1821: with a general chronology, 
from the earliest records to the year 1770. Cornhill, 
London: W. Lewis.
Playfair, William. 1785. The commercial and political 
atlas: representing, by means of stained copper-­
plate charts, the exports, imports, and general trade 
of England, at a single view. London (privately 
circulated). 
Playfair, William. 1786. The commercial and political 
atlas; representing, by means of stained copper-­
plate charts, the exports, imports, and general trade 
of England, at a single view. To which are added, 
charts of the revenue and debts of Ireland, done in 
the same manner by James Corry. First edition. 
London: Debrett; Robinson; and Sewell.
Playfair, William. 1787. The commercial, political, and 
parliamentary atlas, which represents at a single 
view, by means of copper plate charts, the most 
important public accounts of revenues, expenditures, 
debts, and commerce of England. To which are 
added charts of the revenues and debts of Ireland, 
done in the same manner, by James Corry, Esq. 
Second edition. London: Stockdale.
Playfair, William. 1789. Tableaux d’arithmétique 
linéaire, du commerce, des finances, et de la dette 
nationale de l’Angleterre. Translation of 1787 by 
Hendrik Jansen. Paris: Chez Barrois l’aîné.
Playfair, William. 1798. Lineal arithmetic: applied to 
shew the progress of the commerce and revenue of 
England during the present century. London. 
Playfair, William. 1801. The commercial and political 
atlas, representing, by means of stained copper-­plate 
charts, the progress of the commerce, revenues, 
expenditure, and debts of England, during the whole 
of the eighteenth century. Third edition. London: 
Wallis. 
Playfair, William. 1801. The statistical breviary: 
shewing, on a principle entirely new, the resources 
of every state and kingdom in Europe; illustrated 
with stained copper-­plate-­charts . . . to which is 
added, a similar exhibition of the ruling powers of 
Hindoostan. London: Wallis. 
Playfair, William. 1802. Élémens de statistique: où l’on 
démontre, d’après un principe entièrement neuf, les 
ressources de chaque royaume, état et république de 
l’Europe: suivis d’un état sommaire des principales 
puissances et colonies de l’Indostan. Orné de 
cartes coloriées, représentant, d’un coup-­d’oeil, les 
forces physiques de toutes les nations Européennes. 
Translation of 1801 by Denis Francois Donnant. 
Paris: Batilliot et Genets. 
Playfair, John. 1822. The works of John Playfair: 
with a memoir of the author. Edited by James G. 
Playfair. Edinburgh: Constable. 
Playfair, William. 1805. An inquiry into the permanent 
causes of the decline and fall of powerful and 
wealthy nations. London: Greenland & Norris.
Playfair, William. 1809–1811. British family antiquity 
illustrative of the origin and progress of the rank, 
honours, and personal merit, of the nobility of 
the United Kingdom. London: Reynolds & 
W. Playfair.
Playfair, William. 1821. A letter on our agricultural 
distresses, their causes and remedies: accompanied 
with tables and copper-­plate charts, shewing and 
comparing the prices of wheat, bread, and labour, 
from 1565 to 1821. London: William Sams
Playfair, William. 1822. A letter on our agricultural 
distresses, their causes and remedies: accompanied 
with tables and copper-­plate charts, shewing and 
comparing the prices of wheat, bread, and labour, 
from 1565 to 1821. 3rd edn with an additional chart. 
London: William Sams.
Playfair, William. ‘1822–1823.’ Unpublished 
manuscript, held by John Lawrence Playfair, 
Toronto, Canada. Transcribed and annotated by 
Ian Spence.
Playfair, William. 2005. The commercial and 
political atlas and Statistical breviary. Edited and 
introduced by Howard Wainer and Ian Spence. 
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Reid, Thomas. 1764. An inquiry into the human mind, 

60 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
60 / Ian Spence and Howard Wainer
on the principles of common sense. Edinburgh: 
Kincaid & Bell.
Schofield, Robert E. 1963. The Lunar Society of 
Birmingham: a social history of provincial science 
and industry in eighteenth-­century England. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Smith, Adam. 1805. An inquiry into the nature and 
causes of the wealth of nations. 11th edn, with notes, 
supplementary chapters, and a life of Dr. Smith, 
by William Playfair. London: Cadel and Davies.
Spence, Ian. 2000. ‘Discussions and comments. 
Approche graphique en analyse des données. The 
invention and use of statistical charts.’ Journal de 
la Société Française de Statistique 141 (4): 77–81.
Spence, Ian. 2004. ‘William Playfair.’ Oxford 
dictionary of national biography, vol. 44, 562–563. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spence, Ian. 2005. ‘No humble pie: the origins and 
usage of a statistical chart.’ Journal of Educational 
and Behavioral Statistics 30 (4): 353–368.
Spence, Ian. 2006. ‘William Playfair and the 
psychology of graphs.’ In Proceedings of the 
American Statistical Association: Section on 
Statistical Graphics, 2426–2436. Alexandria, VA: 
American Statistical Association. 
Spence, Ian, and Robert F. Garrison. 1993. 
‘A remarkable scatterplot.’ The American 
Statistician 47 (1): 12–19. 
Spence, Ian, and Stephan Lewandowsky. 1990. 
‘Graphical perception.’ In Modern methods of data 
analysis, edited by John Fox and J. Scott Long, 
13–57. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Spence, Ian, and Howard Wainer. 1997. ‘William 
Playfair: a daring worthless fellow.’ Chance 10 (1): 
31–34.
Spence, Ian, and Howard Wainer. 2001. ‘William 
Playfair (1759–1823): inventor and ardent advocate 
of statistical graphics.’ In Statisticians of the 
centuries, edited by C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta, 
105–110. New York: Springer-­Verlag.
Spence, Ian, and Howard Wainer. 2004. ‘William 
Playfair.’ In Encyclopedia of social measurement, 
edited by Kimberly Kempf-­Leonard, 71–79. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Symanzik, Jürgen, William Fischetti, and Ian Spence. 
2009. ‘Commemorating William Playfair’s 250th 
birthday.’ Computational Statistics 24 (4): 551–566.
Tilling, Laura. 1975. ‘Early experimental graphs.’ 
British Journal for the History of Science 8 (3): 
193–213.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The visual display of quanti­
tative information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press. 
Uglow, Jenny. 2002. The Lunar men: five friends whose 
curiosity changed the world. London: Faber & 
Faber.
Valois, Jean-­Paul. 2000. ‘Sur l’approche graphique 
en analyse des données’ (plus discussions). 
Journal de la Société Française de Statistique 
141 (4): 5–40.
Wainer, Howard. 2000. Visual revelations: graphical 
tales of fate and deception from Napoleon 
Bonaparte to Ross Perot. 2nd edn. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wainer, Howard. 2005. Graphic discovery: a trout in 
the milk and other visual adventures. Princeton, NJ 
and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Wainer, Howard, and Paul F. Velleman. 2001. 
‘Statistical graphics: mapping the pathways of 
science.’ Annual Review of Psychology 52 (1): 
305–335.
Wainer, Howard, and Ian Spence. 2005. ‘Graphical 
presentation of longitudinal data.’ In Encyclopedia 
of statistics in behavioral science, edited by Brian 
S. Everitt and David C. Howell, vol. 2, 762–772. 
Chichester: John Wiley.
Woodward, David. 2007. ‘Techniques of map 
engraving, printing and coloring in the European 
renaissance.’ In The history of cartography, volume 
3: cartography in the European Renaissance, 
edited by David Woodward, 591–610. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.

61
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 61–84
Ship navigation 
Information integration in the maritime domain
Thomas Porathe
In the maritime domain, the design of information for ship navigation tells us 
a story of information integration. As voyages became longer, knowledge about 
geography and fairways developed. What first could be harboured in the mind of 
a single person soon became written sailing directions, and later diagrammatic 
nautical charts. Today, navigators can rely on advanced static geographic infor-
mation as well as dynamic information about the ship’s position, other ships’ 
positions, and the weather. For centuries, the problem was lack of information; 
today the problem risks being information overload. Our ways of designing 
information for navigation have changed, but the same limited human brain is 
still on the receiving end. This chapter uses the maritime world as an example of 
how information design has integrated enormous amounts of information into 
artefacts that allow users easy access to the right information at the right time. 
There is one hundred years between the two pictures shown in Figure 1. 
The contrast is striking. On the left is the bridge of the Oceanic (a sister to 
Titanic); the photograph was taken some time before Oceanic grounded 
and sank in 1914. We can see the engine telegraphs and the compass bin­
nacle; the ship’s steering wheel was in the wheelhouse behind the two offi-
cers. Behind that was the chart room, where there were navigational charts; 
a sextant, chronometer, and bar­ometer; and astronomical and tidal tables. 
On the right we see the bridge of a modern ship, one of the Hurtigruten 
RoRo­ passenger ferries that cruise along the Norwegian coast today. We 
can see the integrated bridge system with numerous instruments, screens, 
and gauges that supply the bridge officer with information. 
One hundred years ago, the instrumentation needed to navigate an 
ocean-­going vessel could be carried in a mariner’s bag. The instruments 
Figure 1
Knowledge in the  
head and know­
ledge in the world. 
a. A ship’s bridge 
100 years ago 
(RMS Oceanic). 
Harland & Wolff 
Collection, Ulster Folk 
& Transport Museum, 
HOYFM.HW.H297. 
© National Museums 
Northern Ireland. 
b. A ships’s bridge 
today (MV Kong 
Harald).
a
b
4

62 / Thomas Porathe
were few and the amount of data accessible to the bridge crew was very 
limited. Knowledge was mostly carried in the head as experience and rules 
of thumb. Navigational aids were few; the seafarer was everything. The 
fate of the Oceanic serves as an example: shortly after being commissioned 
into the Royal Navy in 1914, she ran aground and sank on a reef west of 
Shetland, following an inaccurate position fix during the night.
Today the situation is different. The number of instruments on a mod-
ern ocean-­going vessel amounts to several hundred. On the bridge alone 
a  couple of dozen displays are monitored by the officer of the watch. 
The amount of data available is enormous, and there is no need to be in 
doubt about position, the whereabouts of rocks and shoals, the prevailing 
weather, the weather for the coming days, the wind and the current, the 
best course to avoid storms, and the position of other ships in the darkest 
night or the heaviest fog. No longer can the officer of the watch carry all 
available instruments in a bag; neither can he keep all his knowledge in his 
head. Much of his knowledge is instead placed ‘in the world’ (cf. Norman 
1993). The problem for the officer of the watch is to integrate the available 
data to form a coherent picture of the world. But there is a limit to the 
integration work that a human can cope with. So integration must be done 
beforehand, to present the mariner with the right information at the right 
time. This is easier said than done. This chapter will look at how this inte-
gration has been done in the context of maritime navigation throughout 
history.
Information design on ships yesterday
The past was dominated by scarcity of information, of not knowing where 
you were, of not knowing if you would arrive at your intended destination, 
of not knowing what the world as a whole looked like. The great achieve-
ment of the past was the mapping of the world.
Reading-­maps
Although navigation is as old as mankind, no documentary evidence has 
survived of how it was done in early history. Although we have pictures on 
seal engravings of large ships driven by sail and oar, from Crete in the sec-
ond millennium BC (Taylor 1956, 1), documents about navigation appear 
relatively recently in history. It is also likely that the art of navigation was 
a well-kept secret within the mariners’ guild (Cotter 1980, 7).
In the Scandinavian countries, the art of wayfinding at sea reached 
a peak by the end of the first millennium AD. The Vikings in their long-
ships voyaged east to Russia and the Black Sea, along the western shores of 
Europe into the Mediterranean – and even further, to Iceland, Greenland, 
and Newfoundland. Landnámabók, an eleventh-century Icelandic manu-
script (probably of much earlier origin), offers a description of the sailing 
route from Norway to Greenland:

Ship navigation  / 63 
From Hernam (near Bergen) in Norway you must hold on to a due western 
course, and that will take you to Hvarf in Greenland. On your way you will 
come so close to the Shetland Islands that you can just see them in clear 
weather. And you will sail so far from the Faroe Islands that you will see half 
of the hills in the water. And you will be so close to Iceland that you will see 
whales and birds from there. (Pettersen 1993)
This sailing direction is good enough to take a navigator from Norway 
to Iceland even today, and short enough to be memorized by one person. 
Climatology findings imply that the weather was warmer and more stable 
during the turn of the first millennium. The Vikings would not have to face 
the harsh North Atlantic climate as we know it today. Nevertheless, it was 
a vast undertaking to navigate the 1,400 nautical mile long journey from 
Norway to Greenland. The directions of the wind rose were already named 
by the Vikings (norðr, vestr, austr, suðr). To find the right course at that 
time, before the knowledge of the magnetic compass had reached Nordic 
areas, the Vikings might have used a ‘sun compass’. The only archaeolog-
ical evidence is a piece of a wooden disk found in southern Greenland 
in 1948 (see Figure 2). The finding was interpreted thirty years later as 
a sun compass (Vebæk and Thirslund 1992). The simple instrument was 
a wooden plate with a wooden needle sticking up from its centre. Along 
the sides of the disk were marks like the direction marks on the compass 
rose. On the top of the disk were cuttings forming a hyperbolic curve. This 
curve could be interpreted as the curve described by the tip of the shadow 
from the ­needle during a four-­week period around midsummer at latitude 
62° N, providing the disk were horizontal and kept oriented in a steady 
position. Alternatively, it could also be used to find directions: by keeping 
the disk horizontal and turning it so that the tip of the shadow from the 
needle touched the line, courses within a few degrees could be held on the 
same latitude during the same time period of year.
The sun compass could be the device the Vikings used when the sky 
was clear. In cloudy weather the direction of the underlying swell that is 
ever-present on the ocean could have been used as a reference. A skilled 
mariner could read many helpful signs from the ‘book of nature’: the 
direction of a steady wind, the coming and going of birds on their way 
between their home cliffs and their fishing grounds, and the smell from 
land (Haasum 1974, 96). There is no evidence that the Vikings ever used 
the mythical sun-­stone, a crystal which could polarize the light and thus 
show the direction of the sun on overcast days (Roslund and Beckman 
1994).
But knowing which direction to sail is one thing. Not only would the 
compass not be very precise, but neither would the steering of a longship. 
The effect of currents and wind over long distances could be consider-
able. These factors could add up to a large error if the navigator had no 
way of establishing his position. The Vikings crossing the North Atlantic 
used a method known as latitude sailing – based on the fact that the height 
Figure 2
A Viking ‘sun 
compass’, 
a wooden 
fragment found in 
Greenland in 1948.
National Museum, 
Copenhagen. 
Photograph: Lennart 
Larsen. CC-BY-SA.

64 / Thomas Porathe
of the sun at midday would always be the same as long as they were on 
the same latitude. To keep track of the height of the sun they used a sol­
skuggefjǫl, a ‘sun­-shadow­-board’. This was a device much similar to the 
sun compass, and the two functions could easily have been integrated into 
one instrument. Like the sun ­compass, the solskuggefjǫl was a wooden disk 
with a wooden needle sticking up from its centre. However, the disk rested 
in a barrel of water to ensure that it was horizontal (see Figure 3). 
Along the rim of the disk one or more concentric circles were cut, each 
representing a different latitude or a different time of the year. Viking voy-
ages were undertaken in a short period in the middle of the summer and 
along the 61st or 62nd parallel, so that only one circle would be needed. 
The reading was done at midday, and if the needle’s shadow crossed the 
line, it meant that the sun was too low and that the ship had drifted too far 
north, requiring a correction. Later in history the sextant was used for the 
same purpose.
Apart from the sailing directions in Landnámabók, no written evi-
dence for how the Vikings navigated has survived. Although some Vikings 
ventured over the open seas, most Nordic sea traffic in this period clung 
anxiously to the coasts. Weather and pirates were a constant threat to 
the traders. As long as boats were small, dangerous shallow shoals could 
be spotted by lookouts, and if a boat ran aground, the crew could climb 
overboard and lift it off. But bigger boats were needed that could take 
more cargo and house the crew on longer journeys. These bigger boats 
had deeper draughts, and it would not always be possible to spot deeper 
shoals. Nor could such boats easily be lifted off if grounded, and their rel-
atively thinner planking could easily be damaged. The need for safer and 
better known routes increased. 
As long as early seafarers stayed near their home ports, the geographic 
knowledge necessary to find way could reside in one man’s memory. But 
when voyages became longer the question arose – how could knowledge 
of distant waters and coasts be communicated from locals to the maritime 
community? No doubt local pilots were of crucial importance, and trading 
trips required a constant stream of pilots boarding and leaving the ship. 
Pilots had to be paid, and one can imagine that they were not always avail-
able, so it is only natural that once a literate mariner turned up, he would 
make notes of his voyage – the places, the distances, and the landmarks. 
It is in this form, as a verbal narrative, later illustrated by simple drawings, 
that the first accumulated knowledge of wayfinding at sea has come down 
to us. We can call such an artefact a ‘reading-­map’. 
In the thirteenth century directions were written for a sailing route from 
the south-­western corner of Sweden, up the east coast to Stockholm, and 
eastward through the archipelagos of Åland and south-­eastern Finland, 
and south to what is now Tallinn in Estonia. This document (named for the 
reigning Danish king) is written in Latin, but its Nordic origin is proved by 
the use of local names and local units of distance (Dahlgren and Richter 
Figure 3
The Vikings could 
have used a 
solskuggefjǫl (sun-
shadow-board) to 
keep the latitude 
between Norway 
and Greenland.

Ship navigation  / 65 
1944, 10). The sailing direction (Figure 4) is simply a list of places and dis-
tances. It says nothing about which sounds are deep or where shoals are. 
No directions are mentioned, as this pre-dates the use of the compass in 
Nordic countries. Nevertheless, sailing directions were invaluable to for-
eign trading ships that could sail up the coast with the help of local pilots.
The Mediterranean
Although mariners in the Mediterranean had sailed very much larger ships 
for thousands of years, archaeological evidence of nautical information 
is of relatively recent date. The first evidence of Mediterranean naviga-
tion survives in a document called a periplus.1 The periplus of Scylax of 
Caryanda is a set of sailing directions for the Mediterranean and the Black 
Sea from the fifth century BC. Trading routes still hugged coasts, so peripli 
were accounts of ports and distances, of prominent landmarks, with occa-
sional warnings for underwater shoals, and identifying places for taking on 
supplies, especially water. The following fragment is typical:
Libya begins beyond the Canopic mouth of Nile . . . The first people of Libya 
are the Adyrmachidae. From Thonis the voyage to Pharos, a desert island 
(good harbourage but no drinking water) is 150 stadia. In Pharos are many 
harbours. But ships water at the Marian Mere, for it is drinkable. It is a short 
sail from Pharos to the mere. Here is also Chersonesus and harbour: the 
coasting thither is 20 stadia. Beyond Chersonesus is the bay of Plinthine. The 
mouth of the bay to Leuce Acte (white beach) is a day and a night’s sail . . . 
(Cotter 1971, 250)
Peripli and the later portolanos and compassos of the Italians and the lees-
kaarten of the Dutch Renaissance all had the narrative in common. They 
were sequential descriptions of a voyage, verbal snap­shots from specific 
points of the coast, as seen from the perspective of the ship’s bridge. They 
were written to be used when sailing in one direction, and could not as 
easily be used for sailing in the opposite direction.
But some features along the route might not be so easy to describe ver-
bally. A drawing could more easily show the shape of an island or a cliff. 
It would only be natural if these early mariners, once they had started to 
document their sailing routes, also started making drawings of the coast 
from the same egocentric perspective.
Coastal views
A moment of utmost importance for the mariner, once he had left the 
coast and ventured out on to the open sea, is landfall on a new coast. Has 
he reached the shores he had been heading for? Will an open harbour 
await him – or unfriendly rocks? From Old Norse landkenning, the word 
kenning has been incorporated into the English language. A kenning is 
‘a unit of distance used by the early mariners, equivalent to the distance at 
  1	 Latin, from the Greek word periplous meaning ‘round voyage’ or ‘circumnavigation’.
Ärvö
Vinö
Runnö
Vållö
Skäggenäs
Utlängan
Figure 4
a. Detail from 
Kung Valdemars 
jordebok.
The Danish National 
Archives, Copenhagen.
b. Map of the 
Swedish east 
coast today. The 
names in bold 
type correspond 
to the names 
in the sailing 
description.

66 / Thomas Porathe
which the shore could first be seen from the offing when making a landfall’ 
(Cotter 1971, 260). It follows that the distance of a kenning was furthest off 
a mountainous coast. Once land had been sighted, the mariner quickly had 
to identify the location by whatever means he had, often just based on his 
recollection of earlier encounters, or the verbal descriptions from fellow 
mariners, or maybe a sailing direction. Not all destinations had as prom-
inent and easily described a landmark as the tower on Faros outside the 
port of Alexandria, or the Colossus of Rhodes. Thus a drawing of coastal 
features would have been of great help.
In 1483 the French pilot Pierre Garcie published Le grant routtier et 
pyllotage (Figure 5), its text was interspersed with woodcut illustrations 
of coastal views. Such illustrations were later developed and refined by 
the Dutch (see Figure 6). The perspective is ‘from the bridge’. The shore 
profile depicted the coast from a specific point at sea and the silhouette of 
land was emphasized. It was crucial for the pre-­GPS mariner to be able to 
establish his position by identifying landmarks. The same techniques are 
still used by pilots using drawings or photographs (see Figure 7).
Figure 5
A coastal view of Cap Higuer on the 
border between France and Spain in 
the Bay of Biscay. From Pierre Garcie’s 
Le grant routtier et pyllotage (1483).
Figure 7
A chart of the approach to 
Lysekil and corresponding 
coastal view. ‘Ft.’ at the 
bottom left of the chart is 
the point of origin for the 
coastal view. The chart’s 
diagonal fairway line 
(highlighted in red here) 
through ‘Ft.’ towards the 
port corresponds to the 
vertical stippled line on 
the coastal view; the tip of 
the island and the peak on 
the horizon provide points 
of reference.
Figure 6
A coastal view of Ushant at the tip of 
Brittany. From Robert Norman’s The 
safegarde of saylers (1590), translated 
from the Dutch (Taylor 1956, 169).

Ship navigation  / 67 
The sailing direction was the major medium for communicating naviga-
tional information to the mariner until the end of the eighteenth century, 
when its function was overtaken by the chart (Hutchins 1995, 108). The 
reason is simple: the information commmunicated by sailing directions 
and coastal views was serial. By following a specific route, the landmarks 
and the views would follow in the order of the direction. But what if you 
wanted to travel the opposite way? Once large amounts of data had been 
acquired and the geographical layout of the seas became better known, 
new direct routes became an option, making sequential sailing directions 
less useful. A new integrative medium was needed and the nautical chart, 
or mariners’ map, was the answer.
Nautical charts
A map is a representation of the world around us. However, the view is not 
from our own egocentric perspective; instead, the world is depicted from 
above, from an artificial viewpoint. Although early cartographers might 
have had the opportunity to climb a high mountain, it was not until the 
eighteenth century, with the invention of the hot-air balloon, that humans 
could experience this bird’s-eye perspective. And even a  balloon pilot 
would only see the area directly underneath the balloon without perspec-
tive distortion, as the view would become more and more obliquely com-
pressed and distorted towards the horizon. This is not how a map works. 
On a map every location is seen from straight above. While this artificial 
perspective cannot be experienced in real life, we do not seem to have 
a problem with it when reading a map. It seems that we have a built-in 
cognitive ability to imagine that we are looking down on ourselves from an 
elevated position. Most of us have at some point drawn a map after walking 
around a location, or just by recalling it. Something in the structure of the 
human mind seems to facilitate these dual perspectives of the world, the 
egocentric and the exocentric. Indeed, the earliest maps from Babylon, 
some 3,500 years old, use an isometric bird’s-eye perspective and are 
already fully featured (Figure 8).
Figure 8
A clay tablet from Mesopotamia from 
the 16th century BC. The map depicts 
Nippur on the Mesopotamian river 
plain east of Babylon in present-­day 
Iraq. A part of the city wall and 
a temple can be seen to the far right. 
A canal is represented by two parallel 
lines just right of centre, and to the 
far right is a branch of the River 
Tigris. 
HS 197, Hilprecht Collection, University of Jena. 
Used with permission.

68 / Thomas Porathe
It is one thing to make a map of the world immediately around you, 
the world that you can easily see and measure. It is quite another thing to 
make a map that covers vast areas that cannot be seen from one position. 
In Western culture it was the Greeks, as far as we know, who started to 
think about the form of the world. Homer considered the earth as being 
a flat disc surrounded by water. The sun rose from the ocean in the morn-
ing and sank back into it in the evening. However, in the sixth century 
BC Aristotle concluded that ‘the sphericity of the Earth is proven by our 
senses’ (Holmes 1991, 24). If you have ever sat by a harbour and watched 
a sailing ship approaching from the open sea, the first part of the ship to 
come into view would be the top sails, then the rest of the rigging, and 
finally the hull itself. This is as true today as it was 2,000 years ago. If the 
ship was not being lifted up from the water, then the only explanation must 
be that the earth is round. The Greeks also noted that the stars every night 
travelled their paths from east to west. But if you sailed south from Piraeus 
to Alexandria, new stars would rise in their paths over the southern hori-
zon and the paths of the northern stars would sink towards the horizon. 
This could only be the case if the earth was round. Some astronomers also 
noted that the shadow of the earth while crossing the surface of the moon 
as she travelled into an eclipse was rounded, thus indicating that the shape 
of the earth must be spherical.
The  Greek mathematician Eratosthenes, who worked at the library 
in Alexandria in the third century BC, even managed to calculate the cir-
cumference of the earth. In a famous experiment his accuracy was such 
that the result was only 14% off the correct distance. Unfortunately, the 
man who was to become the father figure of cartography, Ptolemy, in the 
second century AD, used a calculation from the first century BC, by the 
geographer Strabo, when he compiled the geographic knowledge of his 
time. Strabo had calculated the circumference of the earth to 32,700 km 
and Eratosthenes to 45,500 km (the circumference is about 40,000 km). 
Eratosthenes’ measure was forgotten, while Ptolemy’s lived on. Ptolemy’s 
calculation would, more than a  thousand years later, led Columbus to 
believe he had reached India, when he had only reached the Caribbean.
Ptolemy compiled the knowledge of his time and made great additions 
to it. He was probably the first who systematically used longitude and lat-
itude to describe positions on earth (see Figure 9). Realizing the problem 
of depicting the surface of a round sphere on a flat paper, he also did some 
basic work on the problem of projection. 
Three hundred years after Ptolemy died, the library in Alex­andria, 
where he had worked, had ceased to exist, and for a long time it was as if 
cartography had been forgotten. In the Christian Europe of the Middle 
Ages, the language of the scholars was Latin and few could read the sur-
viving books of the Greek masters. Ptolemy’s Geography was not trans-
lated to Latin until 1406, but his ‘new’ knowledge of the world then spread 
across Europe. Ptolemy’s maps, revised by findings of the early explorers, 

Ship navigation  / 69 
remained the main source of geographic knowledge until the seventeenth 
century (Holmes 1991, 91). 
During the Middle Ages cartography developed in different directions. 
The medieval monks were not interested in scientific cartography and 
their maps were not used for navigation. While the Church clung to their 
mappae mundi depicting a flat earth centred on the Mediterranean and 
Jerusalem, mariners developed maps for their own practical purposes. 
Portolan charts
While makers of land maps depicted towns, roads, rivers, and mountains, 
mariners were interested in quite different things such as depths and 
coastlines. John Blake notes that the sea chart has to ‘reflect varying infor-
mation in a fluid situation’ (2004, 8) – meaning that the chart had to be 
able to reflect the changing environment that the sailor would meet during 
different tidal situations, when the changing depth of water could affect 
the accessibility of fairways and harbours hour by hour.
The earliest nautical chart that has survived, the Carta Pisana, is from 
Pisa and dates from 1275 (Taylor 1956, 109; Figure 10, overleaf). It is a map 
of the whole of the Mediterranean Sea. Large amounts of information 
from the sequential sailing directions is integrated in a  diagrammatic 
form that allows the reader to make inferences at­ a­ glance about distances 
Figure 9
A late 15th 
century non-
illuminated 
woodcut map, 
as a double-page 
spread in a 
Latin translation 
(Cosmographia) 
of Ptolemy’s 
Geography. The 
orientation is 
north-up and a 
geocentric grid 
is presented. The 
longitudes start at 
0° at the Canary 
Islands and end 
at 180° in China. 
(Ptolemaeus 
1482).

70 / Thomas Porathe
between locations. The coastlines are filled with names of ports, bays, 
and rivers. These features are colour-coded, with red text for major ports 
and black text for minor, and sometimes the religious status of the port 
is also denoted. This kind of chart is called a portolan chart, named after 
portolano,2 the Italian type of sailing direction which appeared at the end 
of the twelfth century after the compass was introduced in Western navi-
gation. In these new sailing directions, compass directions (bearings) for 
different destinations are set out, and the most characteristic trait of the 
portolan chart is the maze of intersecting lines covering the sea areas. Each 
is a rhumb line – a straight course (technically a loxodrome) that will take 
you from one point to another (Cotter 1971, 260). 
The portolan charts were expensive pieces of art, written and painted 
by hand on vellum, and often embellished with luminous colours. They 
were certainly not intended for the rough environment on board an ordi-
nary trading ship. Simple, practical navigation was still done with the aid 
of sailing directions and pilots.
The Dutch were the next to take the lead in cartography. In 1543 Cornelis 
Anthoniszoon published the first real nautical chart of Scandinavian 
waters: Caerte van Oostlant. It was based on copper­plate engraving as 
opposed to the earlier woodcut technique. The new technique made it 
possible to make much finer details (see Figure 11).
From an information design point of view Anthoniszoon’s chart was 
a failure. Geographically, the chart was the best available, but in an ambi-
tion to include as much information as possible, the chart is cluttered to 
the point of obscurity. As an example, it is very difficult to distinguish the 
tiny dots depicting shallow water from the predominantly decorative wave 
texture.
  2	 The Italian word portolano means ‘book of ports’ (Dahlgren and Richter 1944, 4).
Figure 10
Carta Pisana 
(1275), the first 
known nautical 
chart, was 
depicting the 
Mediterranean 
and drawn on 
a sheepskin. 
The intersecting 
rhumb lines of 
the wind ­­rose are 
constructed in 
a large circle.
CPL GE B-1118 (RES). 
Bibliothèque nationale 
de France.

Ship navigation  / 71 
The nautical chart made great advances during the Dutch era. In 1569 
Gerard Mercator published his famous world atlas, and with it the map 
projection that carries his name. It allowed mariners to draw a straight line 
between two points on the chart, to measure its angle to the meridian on 
the chart, to compensate for magnetic variation and the ship’s deviation, 
and then to sail that course on the compass. And, once current and leeway 
were taken into consideration, be confident of reaching the intended goal. 
This was indeed a great step forward. The Mercator projection became 
standard for most short- and medium-distance navigational charts.
The next important person in the development of the modern chart 
was the pilot and geographer Lucas Janszoon Waghenaer. From 1584 to 
1585 he published an atlas, Spieghel der Zeevaerdt (translation into English 
as The Mariner’s Mirrour), with nautical charts extending from Spain to 
the Baltic Sea (see Figure 12, overleaf).
Waghenaer’s Spieghel der Zeevaerdt was something new. No one had 
previously tried to compile such an extensive amount of hydrographic 
information. The problem of clutter on Anthoniszoon’s charts was ele-
gantly solved by dividing a large area up in several smaller charts at different 
scales. Himself an experienced pilot, Waghenaer knew what he was doing. 
For the first time, depth soundings printed on a chart was standardized 
to mean water level. Many new map symbols were also introduced, some 
Figure 11
The Dutch 
Cornelis 
Anthoniszoon’s 
Caerte van 
Oostlant, 
published in 1543.
From Dahlgren and 
Richter 1944.

72 / Thomas Porathe
Figure 12
Plate 38 in Waghenaer’s Spieghel der Zeevaerdt, 1585. The chart covers the bay of 
Danzig in the south-east Baltic Sea. Waghenaer did not use the north-­up convention, 
but instead rotated the map to fit the paper format in the most economical way. 
Utrecht University Library.
Figure 13
A section of the Swedish coast (Västervik to Söderköping) in Waghenaer’s Spieghel der 
Zeevaerdt, 1585 (Plate 33). Note the coast profiles incorporated into the beach lines 
and the odd surface perspective of the central island. Symbols used are an anchor, 
a cross indicating underwater rocks, and a two-armed cross indicating a wreck. 
Utrecht University Library.

Ship navigation  / 73 
of which are still in use. Waghenaer also tried a new innovative approach 
when he mixed the bird’s eye perspective of the chart with the surface 
perspective of the coastal view, by incorporating coastal views into the 
shorelines of the map (see Figure 13). This technique worked fine for flat 
coastlines, but became more troublesome the more inlets, peninsulas, and 
small islands the coast had. Waghenaer tried to overcome this problem by 
drawing some selected islands in perspective (see the island in the lower 
part of Figure 13).
Waghenaer’s sea atlas became a success and was soon translated into 
several other languages. But he did not succeed in all respects: his atlas 
never became common onboard seagoing ships. The large, expensive, 
hand-coloured volume was unsuitable for the rugged environment at sea. 
Waghenaer realized this himself, and in 1592 he published Thresoor der 
Zeewaerdt, a traditional text-­based sailing description in a smaller format, 
where he had added some coastal views and smaller versions of some of 
his charts.
Experimentation with different kinds of representation soon disap-
peared, and the chart eventually found its stable form as an orthographic 
bird’s-eye perspective. New symbols evolved to improve communication. 
Examples of symbols that would remain in use up to the present day are 
the anchor to indicated a safe and protected anchorage, dot-textured areas 
to depict shallow water, the cross sign to mark a dangerous shoal, and the 
stylized keel and frames of a sunken ship to denote a dangerous wreck (see 
Figure 14).
The Dutch were still the major chart makers during the first part of 
the seventeenth century. In fact it was the Dutch that charted the English 
coast. But in 1669, an Englishman, John Seller, announced his intention 
to prepare a ‘sea waggoner for the whole World’. The first volume of The 
English pilot was published in 1671. At first Seller used discarded Dutch 
Figure 14
Examples of chart symbols that have 
survived from the sixteenth century. 
a. anchorage
Waghenaer 1585, plate 6; Sjöfartsverket, chart 
no. 121, Norra Vättern, 1978.
b. shallow water
Waghenaer 1585, plate 6; Kungliga Sjökartverket: 
chart no. 276a, Kattegatt, Inloppen to Göteborg, 
1933.
c. shoals
Waghenaer 1585, plate 6; Sjöfartsverket, chart 
no. 931, Marstrand, Göteborg, Tistlarna, 1981.
d. wreck
Waghenaer 1585, plate 4; British Admiralty chart 
2646, Point de Penmarc’h to Île d’Yeu, 1995.
a
b
c
d

74 / Thomas Porathe
plates for his charts, but in 1689 the fourth volume of The English pilot 
appeared as the first wholly English sea atlas of American waters (Cutter 
1979, 10). Coastlines are depicted with a single solid line like on modern 
charts. The rhumb lines from the portolan charts are still there, but the grid 
of longitude and latitude that we know today is also present. The modern 
chart was born, becoming the major navigational aid for the mariner, and 
sailing directions gradually lost their importance (see Figures 15 and 16).
A summary of yesterday’s information design on ships 
Two perspectives have been present in this overview of the development 
of mediated communication at sea: the ‘bridge’ perspective of the sailing 
direction with its sequential narrative of a ship’s journey, and the static 
bird’s-eye perspective of the chart. The two perspectives represent two 
different methods for communicating geographic information to the mar-
iner. In the first case, the perspective is that of a static observer, with the 
surrounding world passing by. In the other case, the perspective is that of 
a third person: the world is static and we imagine ourselves as an observer 
travelling over the representation with a bird’s-eye view. Both of these per-
spectives have their advantages and disadvantages.
The coastal views of the sailing directions are very good at communi-
cating the actual look of the coast to facilitate our orientation and decision-­
making. But note that this is only the case for one specific position, the one 
from which a picture is drawn or a photo taken. Only a slight change in 
position might make the coastal view unrecognizable. Also, topographic 
features, which most often are omitted from charts, give the mariner val-
uable information. The most obvious advantage of the coastal view is the 
‘natural’ perspective, facilitating mariners’ intuitive decision-­making – as 
opposed to the synthetic perspective of the chart, which has to be learned. 
The biggest problem is the static nature of the sailing directions’ coastal 
views.
The chart is superior when it comes to planning the voyage and moni-
toring progress. Geographic positions are easy to plot, and the chart can 
be described as working like an ‘analogue computer’ (Hutchins 1995, 61). 
Used in the conventional north­-up mode, the chart facilitates our sense 
of direction (‘I am going south’). Used in a head­-up mode (for example 
turning the map upside-down when going south) the sense of relative 
direction is enhanced (a left turn on the map is a left turn in reality), but 
the sense of absolute direction is hampered. And a nautical chart is also 
a wonderful container of geographic knowledge. A single chart can ‘rep-
resent the accumulation of more observations than any one person could 
make in a lifetime. It is an artefact that embodies generations of experience 
and measurements’ (Hutchins 1995, 111). 
Information needed for one single  voyage could indeed be kept in 
the head of one man, but to harbour information for a large number of 
voyages the sequential narrative of the sailing directions was needed. 
Figure 15
The New England 
chart from the 
fourth volume 
of The English 
pilot, 1689, 
engraved by John 
Thornton. His 
chart was the first 
chart depicting 
American waters, 
accurate enough 
for navigational 
use. It includes 
soundings as well 
as banks, shoals, 
islands, and 
coastal features.
© The British Library 
Board, Maps.C.22.d.18

Ship navigation  / 75 
Figure 16
The modern paper 
chart at its height 
of cartographic 
development. 
Uncluttered and 
with only relevant 
information for its 
scale. This coastal 
chart is designed 
for­ sailing through 
the Kattegat or 
making landfall 
at Gothenburg 
(Göteborg) 
harbour. 
The Danish Farvands-
direktoratet. Chart no. 
92 from 1980, scale 
1:360,000.

76 / Thomas Porathe
The knowledge of all those sailing directions was later integrated into the 
diagrammatic form of the nautical chart, allowing any number of voyages 
to be planned and executed. But possibly, it can be argued, at the cost of 
a less user-­friendly medium.
Information design on the bridge today
If the past was about the lack of information, the present is about an abun-
dance of information. Today the problem is to digest and understand the 
mass of available information in a timely manner. The great challenge of 
the present is to generate and provide all this information.
Positioning
The problem of the ancient navigator was lack of information. Sailing 
by latitude – by keeping track of the height of the sun or the stars – was 
improved by the development of better instruments: the cross-­staff, the 
octant, and finally the sextant. However, perfecting the instruments did 
not solve the problems of rolling decks, of a horizon obscured by haze or 
waves, or the fact that the sun or the stars could be hidden by clouds for 
long intervals. No azimuth reading meant no latitude. 
Finding longitude remained a problem up until the 1730s, when John 
Harrison succeeded in making a chronometer that could keep time on 
a rolling ship with sufficient precision to allow the time of a reference lon-
gitude to be transported across the ocean. By comparing the time when 
the sun was at its peak, noon at the ship’s longitude, to the reference time of 
the chronometer allowed the navigator to calculate the current longitude. 
The advent of practical radio communication with Marconi’s first trans­
atlantic radio transmission in 1901 allowed a  new positioning method, 
based on measuring the runtime of electromagnetic waves, significant 
after Einstein postulated, in 1905, that the speed of such waves was con-
stant. This eventually led to the development of radar, the Decca and 
LORAN navigation systems, and, from the 1980s, satellite-based position-
ing systems.
Having longitude and latitude shown on a little display – instead of 
doing the cumbersome calculations based on sun height and a stopwatch – 
was a great achievement. At first the number of satellites was limited, and 
the position calculated could at times be inaccurate. Today, with global 
navigation satellite systems like the American GPS, the Russian GLONASS, 
the Chinese BeiDou, the European Galileo, and Indian and Japanese sys-
tems under development, fixing a position is less of a problem.
The electronic chart
But why should you have the position spelled out as numbers on a small 
display, when what you really want to know is your current position on a 
chart? The answer to this question has been the development of Electronic 

Ship navigation  / 77 
Chart Display and Information Systems (ECDIS). Together with a satellite 
positioning system, this allows the officer of the watch to see the ship’s 
position plotted on a map and allow the ship to automatically follow a pre-­
planned course between two ports (see Figure 17).
Experiments with electronic chart systems started in the late 1970s (see 
for example CAORF Research Staff 1978; and Rogoff and Winkler 1980). 
This became the ultimate tool for integration and display of maritime 
information. In 1989 the International Maritime Organization issued the 
first provisional performance standards for ECDIS (IMO 1989). In 1995 the 
US Coast Guard Research and Development Centre presented a human 
factors study of two commercial ECDIS on a simulator bridge. One of the 
principal findings was:
ECDIS has the potential to improve the safety of navigation, compared to 
conventional procedures. There was strong evidence that the use of ECDIS 
increased the accuracy of navigation, as measured by a smaller cross­track dis-
tance of the ship from the planned track line, and reduced the proportion of 
time spent on navigation, with a corresponding increase in the proportion of 
time spent on the higher risk collision avoidance task. In addition, ECDIS was 
shown to improve geographic ‘situational awareness’ and to reduce navigation 
‘errors’. (Smith et al. 1995, viii)
The study also found that the availability of ECDIS on the bridge sub-
stantially reduced the mariners’ workload as a result of less time spent 
on navigation. A year later the US Coast Guard presented another study, 
this time including both sea and simulator trials. The conclusion from 
that study was that ECDIS could provide equivalent or greater safety than 
Figure 17
An electronic 
chart is a vector-
ized, seamless 
geographic 
information 
­system where 
layers can be 
shown or hidden 
as necessary. The 
figure shows an 
electronic chart in 
a Swedish Adveto 
ECDIS-certified 
system. The 
ship (black-filled 
symbol) is in the 
central upper 
part of the screen 
heading on a SSW 
course. The sys-
tem is predicting 
the ships position 
30 seconds into 
the future (black 
unfilled symbol). 
The red line is 
the course as 
programmed 
from waypoint to 
waypoint.
Courtesy Adveto AB.

78 / Thomas Porathe
the paper chart and other traditional methods of navigation. Another key 
finding was that navigation workload was reduced, allowing the mariner 
to concentrate on collision avoidance or other tasks of similar importance. 
With respect to user interface design, it was found that the mariner wanted 
an ‘uncluttered’ display during route monitoring, with more features 
immediately available if needed (Gonin, Dowd, and Alexander 1996, iii).
A number of simulator studies have since been carried out comparing 
the traditional bridge with modern forms of integrated bridge systems. 
Sauer et al. (2002) published an experimental navigation study comparing 
electronic charts and radar integrated in the same display with separate 
electronic charts and radar displays. The results indicated a slight advan-
tage of the integrated display. A simulator study (Donderi et al. 2004) 
compared a traditional bridge set-­up with paper charts and radar against 
electronic charts with separate radar and also against electronic charts 
with integrated radar overlay. In a navigational scenario the study found 
slightly better performance with the use of ECDIS, with participants pre-
ferring integrated radar overlay. 
A Norwegian simulator study compared performance between ECDIS 
navigation and traditional paper chart navigation in high-speed naviga-
tion in very confined waters (Gould et al. 2009). ECDIS navigation was 
found to be more efficient, but with no significant differences in subjective 
workload. A similar study found only a small advantage for the integrated 
bridge with ECDIS and separate radar, as compared to paper chart and 
radar (Nilsson, Gärling, and Lützhöft 2009). In a  doctoral thesis from 
2004, Lützhöft presented empirical findings from several ethnographic 
studies. She reports problems between the human operator and the sys-
tem, and describes how operators have to put in a lot of work to create 
a working system. She therefore emphasizes the need for a user-­centred 
design approach to the development of new on-­board systems (Lützhöft 
2004).
The new, highly integrated electronic chart systems seem to have 
improved the performance and efficiency of navigation, but have perhaps 
not led to the expected decrease of workload. The reason for this may be 
found in a less successful development of the human–system interaction 
environment.
One might also note that while the printed chart has at least 300 years 
of cartographic design development under its belt, the new electronic 
medium has still some way to go before achieving the legibility of tradi-
tional paper charts – compare Figure 18 with the paper chart in Figure 16.
Information design on the bridge tomorrow
Tomorrow will bring more and bigger ships, and less navigable space due 
to an ever growing number of offshore energy and aquaculture installa-
tions. The complex traffic environment will be a challenge for tomorrow’s 

Ship navigation  / 79 
navigators. Clever automation with better information system integration 
and enhanced user-­friendliness will be needed – for as long as humans 
remain on board.
E-­navigation
In 2006 the International Maritime Organization started the work on a 
concept called ‘e­-navigation’ (IMO 2006). E­-navigation is defined as: 
the harmonized collection, integration, exchange, presentation and analysis 
of marine information on board and ashore by electronic means to enhance 
berth to berth navigation and related services for safety and security at sea 
and protection of the marine environment. (Kystverket 2014) 
The driving force behind the e-­navigation initiative was a  concern 
shared by many stakeholders: That a  lack of standards made develop-
ment of new applications difficult, and that of this reason it is difficult to 
achieve the potential benefits of system integration. The concerns were 
about safety and efficiency, and the human navigator who had to deal 
with a plethora of unintegrated systems. Information necessary to solve 
real-world problems was already out there, but needed to be made avail-
able in a human-­friendly way. Some of the misunderstandings leading to 
accidents could perhaps be avoided by presenting the information more 
effectively.
Figure 18
An electronic navigational chart covering the Belt in Denmark. This type of chart 
still has some way to go before it can automatically generate a view as legible as the 
traditional paper chart. Compare with the Danish paper chart in Figure 16.

80 / Thomas Porathe
Visualization of intentions: sea traffic management
Initially, the nautical chart served as a repository for static information 
(slowly changing over time). Dynamic information like the radar image, 
or the names of ships through the Automatic Identification System (AIS), 
was shown on separate screens, and then ‘manually’ integrated in the head 
of the user.
In Figure 19 we can see how the radar information has been integrated 
with the chart image and that the chart is correctly positioned relative to 
own ship (A). The radar also confirms the AIS target of an approaching 
ship (B) and the position of a boat without AIS transponder (C).
The cost of this integration is higher information density. An untrained 
observer might call it clutter, but the fact is that it allows the navigator to 
filter out unimportant information since he sees relevant and important 
information in its appropriate place.
In Figure 17 we saw an example of an ECDIS where the planned voyage 
of the own ship was drawn on the map in red. We might say that this course 
is a visualization of the future position of the vessel. You can also see the 
predictor, the ghost ship symbol ahead of the real position, which is an 
extrapolation of the ship’s speed and turn-rate 30 seconds into the future. 
In an attempt to make ship traffic more efficient and safe, several projects 
are now attempting to communicate information not only of a ship’s pres-
ent position but also its intended course to other ships in the vicinity. 
Figure 19
An ECDIS with 
radar overlay and 
AIS integrated. 
Three screen 
displays have 
been integrated 
into one, allowing 
the navigator to 
see all information 
in its right 
position. The port 
of Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
Courtesy Transas AB.

Ship navigation  / 81 
Cognitive off­loading: the egocentric 3D map
Using the bird’s-eye perspective of a map for finding your position is 
not a trivial task, but one that requires training and good spatial ability. 
First, you have to decide on your own presumed position on the map and 
imagine how the surrounding terrain would look like from that point. This 
mental view then has to be compared to the real view to see if it fits. If not, 
the whole procedure has to be redone. Modern technology can change 
all this. By creating a  3D model of the map and letting the navigation 
system position the camera, a dynamic coastal view can be created (see  
Figure 20).
Laboratory experiments in a maze showed clearly that the egocentric 
3D out-­of-­the-­window coastal view provided faster decision-making and 
fewer errors than the traditional exocentric map types. The egocentric 
3D map was also ranked as the most user-­friendly in experiments done 
with amateurs and navigators in Sweden, and with navigators in China 
(Porathe 2006, 2012).
By removing the need for performing mental rotations, the egocentric 
map display lessens the cognitive workload of the user. A known prob-
lem in automation is that the situation awareness of the operator may be 
reduced when going from manual control to just monitoring (Wickens 
and Hollands 2000; Endsley 1996).
This in turn leads to what has become known as an out­-of­-the-­loop 
performance problem. Once something goes wrong, forcing the human 
to retake control, there is often a lack of situation awareness, and certain 
types of accident are characterized by the operator’s sudden loss of ori-
entation. Valuable time is lost when trying to regain situation awareness 
– which might lead to a disastrous situation. When vehicles navigate on 
autopilot and crew members need to retake control, time will be a valu-
able asset. Thus, a cognitively less demanding display system might save 
valuable seconds. One might speculate that a transparent head-up display 
Figure 20
Two map displays. 
a. The traditional 
exocentric north-­ 
up bird’s-­eye view.
b. The new 
egocentric out-­of-­
the-­window view.
Screen dump from 
prototype application.
a
b

82 / Thomas Porathe
‘superimposed’ on the natural out-of-the-window view will become a 
common way to display information at sea just as it has been for many 
years in the air (Figure 21).
The end of the story of navigation: unmanned ships?
Will ever more advanced integration of information, including knowing 
the whereabouts and intentions of all ships, lead to unmanned ships? Some 
think so. In February 2014 Rolls-Royce presented a project of unmanned 
ships, and the author of this chapter has earlier been involved in the EU 
project MUNIN (Maritime Unmanned Navigation through Intelligence in 
Networks). Figure 22 shows a concept drawing from the project.
Will unmanned ships also be the end of information design solutions 
on the ship bridge? If there is no one on the bridge, there is no need to 
visualize information, because visualization is about making abstract and 
complex information easily understandable for humans. However, some-
where there will always be someone monitoring the unmanned vessels, 
and if this place is in a location far away from the actual scene, the need for 
visualization might be even bigger than on a bridge at sea. Maybe it is in 
this location the real benefit of 3D nautical charts – creating an immersive 
virtual presence of the scene at sea – will come.
Figure 22
A concept 
drawing from the 
autonomous and 
unmanned ship 
project MUNIN.
Figure 21
A vessel’s own 
track and the 
positions of 
other vessels 
projected on to 
the windscreen in 
a head-up display.
IMO 123486
COG 080°
SOG 14.0kn
Daylight and IR cameras
Satellite link
Shore control 
centre
The unmanned/
autonomous ship
Automatic collision avoidance
Rendezvous control
Autonomous
bridge
Autonomous
engine room

Ship navigation  / 83 
References
Blake, John. 2004. The sea chart: the illustrated history 
of nautical maps and navigational charts. London: 
Conway Maritime Press. 
CAORF Research Staff. 1978. MRIT navigation aid 
experiment. CAORF Technical Report 34–7801–01. 
Kings Point, NY: National Maritime Research 
Center.
Cotter, Charles H. 1971. ‘A brief history of sailing 
directions.’ Journal of Navigation 36 (2):  
249–261.
Cotter, Charles H. 1980. ‘Coastal views in the 
development of the nautical chart.’ The 
Hydrographic Journal 17: 7–11.
Dahlgren, Per, and Herman Richter. 1944. Sveriges 
sjökarta. Stockholm: Statens Sjöhistoriska 
Museum.
Donderi, Don C., Robert Mercer, M. Blair Hong, and 
Douglas Skinner. 2004. ‘Simulated navigation 
performance with marine electronic chart and 
display systems (ECDIS).’ Journal of Navigation 
57 (2): 189–202.
Endsley, Mica R. 1996. ‘Automation and situation 
awareness.’ In Automation and human 
performance: theory and applications, edited 
by Raja Parasuraman and Mustapha Mouloua, 
163–181. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Gonin, Irene M., Marylouise K. Dowd, and Lee 
Alexander. 1996. Electronic chart display and 
information system (ECDIS) test and evaluation: 
summary report. Washington, DC: United States 
Coast Guard Research.
Gould, Kristian S., Kati Hirvonen, Vilhelm F. 
Koefoed, Bjarte K. Røed, Mikael Sallinen, 
Anu Holm, Robert S. Bridger, and Bente E. 
Moen. 2009. ‘Effects of 60 hours of total sleep 
deprivation on two methods of high­speed ship 
navigation.’ Ergonomics 52 (12): 1469–1486.
Haasum, Sibylla. 1974. Vikingatidens segling och 
navigation. Theses and papers in North­European 
archaeology. Stockholm: Scandinavian University 
Books.
Holmes, Nigel. 1991. Pictorial maps: history, design, 
ideas, sources. New York: Watson­Guptill.
Hutchins, Edwin. 1995. Cognition in the wild. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
IMO. 1989. Provisional performance standards for 
electronic chart display and information systems 
(ECDIS). NAV 35/WP.31989.
IMO. 2006. ‘Aids to navigation in a digital world.’ 
Keynote address by Efthimios E. Mitropoulos, 
Secretary-­General of the International Maritime 
Organization, Shanghai, 22 May. Link on: <http://
www.imo.org/es/OurWork/Safety/Navigation/
Paginas/eNavigation.aspx>. 
Kystverket. 2014. E-­navigation: enhanced safety of 
navigation and efficiency of shipping. Norwegian 
Coastal Administration. <http://www.kystverket.
no/globalassets/e-navigation/e-nav-folder-2012.
pdf>.
Lützhöft, Margareta. 2004. ‘ “The technology is 
great when it works”: maritime technology and 
human integration on the ship’s bridge.’ PhD 
thesis, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
University of Linköping.
Nilsson, Robert, Tommy Gärling, and Margareta 
Lützhöft. 2009. ‘An experimental simulation 
study of advanced decision support system for 
ship navigation.’ Transportation Research Part F: 
Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 12 (3): 188–197.
Norman, Donald A. 1993. ‘Cognition in the head and 
in the world: an introduction to the special issue 
on situated action.’ Cognitive Science 17 (1): 1–6.
Pettersen, Franck. 1993. ‘The Viking sun compass: 
or how the Vikings found their way back from 
New York 1000 years ago.’ The Planetarian 22 (1): 
6–8. <http://www.ips­planetarium.org/?page=a_
pettersen1993&hhSearchTerms=%22viking%22>.
Porathe, Thomas. 2006. ‘3-D nautical charts and safe 
navigation.’ Doctoral dissertation. Department of 
Innovation, Design and Product Development, 
Mälardalen University. <http://www.diva-portal.
org/smash/get/diva2:120506/FULLTEXT01.
pdfAn>.
Porathe, Thomas. 2012. ‘Mental rotations and 
map use: cultural differences.’ In Proceedings of 
Scandinavian Maritime Conference 2012. <http://
publications.lib.chalmers.se/records/fulltext/
local_166912.pdf>.
Ptolemaeus, Claudius. 1482 [around 150 AD]. 
Cosmographia. Ulm: Lienhart Holle. James Ford 
Bell Library, University of Minnesota. <http://
gallery.lib.umn.edu/exhibits/show/bell-atlas/
item/1035>.
Rogoff, Mortimer, and Peter M. Winkler. 1980. 
‘Integrated vessel navigation and control.’ In 
IEEE Plans ’80 Position Location and Navigation 
Symposium, 361–366. New York: IEEE.
Roslund, Curt, and Claes Beekman. 1994. ‘Disputing 
Viking navigation by polarized skylight.’ Applied 
Optics 33 (21): 4754–4755.
Sauer, Juergen, David G. Wastell, G. Robert J. 
Hockey, C. Martin Crawshaw, Mai Ishak, and 
Jonathon C. Downing. 2002. ‘Effects of display 
design on performance in a simulated ship 
navigation environment.’ Ergonomics 45 (5): 
329–347.
Smith, M. W., R. A. Akerstrom-­Hoffman, C. M. 
Pizzariello, S. I. Siegel, T. E. Schreiber, and 
I. M. Gonin. 1995. Human factors evaluation of 
electronic chart display and information systems 
(ECDIS). United States Cost Guard Research and 
Development Center, and National Maritime 

84 / Thomas Porathe
84 / Thomas Porathe
Research Center. Alexandria, VA: National 
Technical Information Service.
Taylor, E. G. R. 1956. The haven­finding art: a history 
of navigation from Odysseus to Captain Cook. 
London: Hollis & Carter, for The Institute of 
Navigation.
Vebæk, Christen Leif, and Søren Thirslund. 1992. 
The Viking compass: guided Norsemen first 
to America. Helsingør: Danish Maritime  
Museum.
Wickens, Christopher D., and Justin G. Hollands. 
2000. Engineering psychology and human 
performance. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-­Hall.

85
Technical and scientific illustration
Picturing the invisible 
Clive Richards
This chapter discusses the graphical characteristics and presentational 
uses of technical and scientific illustrations, of the sort that can be seen in 
technical support documentation, mainly as used in engineering contexts but 
also as found in scientific texts, including those aimed at the popular market. 
Illustrations in maintenance manuals for mechanical devices, spare parts 
catalogues for machinery, and user instructions for technical goods are covered. 
Also considered are other specialist domains, such as anatomical depictions 
presented in medical books in which similar graphical presentation techniques 
are used. Currently deployed solutions for portraying hidden detail in techni-
cal illustrations are set out, including their historical precedents, especially 
those devised and used by Leonardo da Vinci for his anatomical drawings 
and renderings of his mechanical inventions. These include cutaway section 
views, see-­through surfaces, and exploded parts. The role of perspective and 
perspective-­like projections for such drawings is indicated and some ways they 
may be integrated with text are described.
This chapter draws on the author’s professional experience as an informa-
tion designer working in technical publishing for the aerospace industry, 
along with academic research into aspects of graphic communication. It 
is a survey of custom and practice, including historical precedent, and is 
informed by some experimental findings.
Technical and scientific illustration is concerned with the picturing of 
component parts in physical systems (including single objects comprising 
multiple parts) together with the spatial disposition of those parts plus 
any physical and functional connections between them. The purposes to 
which such representations can be put may include:
•	 helping the viewer to identify the component parts of a system; 
•	 showing the appearance and physical arrangement of the parts in 
a system;
•	 aiding the viewer’s understanding of how the configuration of the 
parts supports the operation of a depicted system. 
An example might be an illustration of a mechanical engineering assem-
bly, such as a jet engine, or a pictorial representation of the human digestive 
system. This includes three-­dimensional assemblages of actual physical 
objects (although this can also embrace ‘virtually’ existing objects, such 
as those comprising an imagined piece of technology). Typically technical 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 85–106
5

86 / Clive Richards
illustrations are used in maintenance manuals, spare parts catalogues, 
operator handbooks, and their digital screen-­based equivalents, collec-
tively known as ‘technical documentation’. Scientific illustrations may 
be found in a variety of publications, aimed both at the expert and non-­
experts, and usually have an educational or training purpose. Additionally 
technical and scientific pictorial illustrations may be used for promotional 
purposes and examples of work used in this way will be shown. 
Technical and scientific publishing also makes use of graphic rep-
resentations of systems that are not strictly physical in the same sense as 
a jet engine – for example a figure in a textbook showing the carbon cycle.1 
Here the attempt is to characterize a process scenario where the ‘actors’ are 
widely dispersed in the environment, rather than being gathered together 
locally for the convenience of inspection, even if they were visible in the 
ordinary way. In such cases the use of graphic metaphor comes into play to 
represent interrelationships and the various components of a system are 
indicated by symbols. 
This is another specialist type of graphic representation using forms 
generally not referred as ‘illustrations’ but rather called ‘diagrams’. Study 
in this field may be referred to as ‘Diagrammatics’2 and is not dealt with 
directly in this chapter. However, in order to illustrate how systems oper-
ate, some pictorial illustrations of three-­dimensional objects also use 
hybrid forms, incorporating both symbolic and metaphorical features. 
These hybrid forms, and the challenges to understanding that they can 
sometimes present, will be touched upon.
A common characteristic, often shared between diagrammatic forms 
and technical and scientific illustrations, is the use of graphic devices for 
representing things that are normally not directly viewable. In the case of 
a diagram this may be by using, say, a tree-­like structure to stand for some 
conceptual notion, such as family relationships between industrial prod-
ucts. In the case of technical or scientific illustration of a three-­dimensional 
object, for example an actual industrial product, the need may be to show 
some parts, the views of which are occluded by enclosing components. 
This capacity for revealing through pictures things otherwise inaccessible 
and hidden from view can be regarded as one of the defining characteris-
tics of technical and scientific illustration.
Revealing the hidden
The pictorial illustration of three-­dimensional objects is generally achieved 
by representing them using linear perspective, whether drawn by hand, 
including the use of computer drawing tools, or generated automatically, 
  1	 Annegrete Mølhave extensively examines the information design of ecological cycle 
network diagrams in science textbooks in her PhD thesis (Mølhave 2010). 
  2	 ‘Diagrammatics’ is the term used by Clive Richards in his analysis of the fundamental 
graphic constituents available for designing diagrams (Richards 1984). 

Technical and scientific illustration / 87 
directly from digital models created by means of computer-­aided design 
processes. 
Linear perspective deals with the geometry of things as they may appear 
when ‘projected’ on to a flat plane.3 Simply put one may imagine looking 
with a single stationary eye at a scene through a pane of glass. Tracing the 
outline of objects in the scene on the pane will give you their perspectives. 
This is effectively the same process by which a photograph is taken. Light 
is reflected off objects in straight lines in all directions, but only that which 
reaches the single point of the lens of the camera, or the observer’s eye, 
captures the scene. This ‘bundle’ of light rays may be thought of a pyra-
mid, the apex of which is the point of sight. Any plane that cuts across the 
pyramid and on to which the points of intersection of the rays of light are 
plotted will produce a linear perspective projection (Figure 1). 
Arguments have raged about whether perspective may be regarded as 
a ‘naturalistic’ form of representation and the extent to which it can be said 
to correspond to human optics and perceptual mechanisms.4 However, 
the theoretical principle behind linear perspective produces an extremely 
elegant geometrical formulation that can be used to create astonishingly 
convincing effects. Its utility, for example in 3D computer animation, is 
beyond question. Linear perspective, or perspective-­like presentational 
styles (e.g. isometric)5 are the almost universal pictorial means of rep-
resentation used for technical and scientific illustration. 
Leonardo da Vinci used perspective-­like illustrations extensively in 
  3	 As well as linear perspective there is also aerial perspective. The further an object is 
away from an observer, the greater the density of atmosphere through which is viewed. 
The visual effect of this can be emulated in aerial perspective by rendering more distant 
objects paler than those nearer. This technique is frequently deployed in landscape 
painting (Richards 2014).
  4	 Nelson Goodman offers a strident challenge to the notion of the ‘naturalness’ of 
perspective in his Languages of art (1976).
  5	 In addition to linear perspective projection there is also ‘axonometric’ projection of 
which ‘isometric’ is a special case. In axonometric projection the presumed viewer is at 
infinity, thus the lines of projection that meet the picture plane will be parallel to each 
other. This in turn means that parallel lines in any depicted object do not converge to 
a vanishing point as they do in linear perspective. This is not very noticeable if what is 
being drawn is small in size.
Figure 1
This shows the core idea of 
perspective projection. Taken 
from Plate 4 of a nineteenth-
century book on perspec­tive 
(Malton 1800).

88 / Clive Richards
his notebooks. Well over half of Leonardo’s extant works on paper deal 
with engineering and scientific subjects (Zöllner 2003). Leonardo used 
drawing as a tool for his extensive analyses and detailed recording of his 
enquiries into natural phenomena as well as a means of developing and 
expressing his ideas for a multitude of novel mechanisms that were the 
product of his prolific imagination. These applications necessitated using 
techniques for showing the appearance of things behind enclosing sur-
faces, or the configuration of inter­related parts within a mechanism. The 
methods he deployed were: 
•	 cutting-­away revealing what was underneath an object, e.g. a right 
angular section through a human skull (Figure 2);
•	 exploding parts along an axis, e.g. to depict the separate components 
of a mechanical device (Figure 6);
•	 drawing surfaces as if see-­through, e.g. used in an anatomical study to 
display the disposition of bodily parts within a torso (Figure 10). 
Whilst Leonardo was one of the earliest to deploy some of these graphical 
methods, especially the exploded arrangement, they only appear in his 
notebooks and were never published in his lifetime.6 So it is hard to say to 
what extent his work actually had an influence on the development of illus-
tration practice. However, these three methods are commonly deployed 
today in technical and scientific publishing. Cutaway and exploded line 
drawings are widely used in many maintenance and overhaul manuals 
for mechanical engineering assemblies of all kinds. Black-­and-­white cut-
away drawings have also appeared in popular magazines, such as those 
of aircraft in Flying Review of the 1950s and 60s. During the same period 
the centre spreads of the Eagle comic featured full-­colour cutaway views 
of technological wonders of that age (Gifford 1988). As well as cutaway 
drawings, images showing see-­through surfaces are often used for medical 
illustration, such as found in ‘home doctor’ books (e.g. Hamlyn 1983). 
Developments in printing and book production methods enabled the 
introduction of a further technique for revealing hidden detail – the use 
of cut-­out folding paper flaps. This technique, together with chromo-
lithography, featured in numerous popular scientific publications of the 
late ­nineteenth and ­early twentieth century. It permitted the reader to, for 
example, peel back the surface skin on an illustration of a human limb to 
reveal the underlying musculature.7 A later version of this approach, used 
in some technical books of the 1950s, was the technique of printing on to 
transparent film to produce a sequence of layers showing cross-­sections 
of, say, a motor car engine, that could be progressively uncovered.
Exemplars of all the approaches identified above are shown in the fol-
lowing figures.
  6	 The first technical illustrations to be published were in De re militari by Robertus 
Valturius, printed in Verona in 1472. See Carter and Muir (1967, 7).
  7	 Michael Twyman (2013, 254–255) features folding anatomical models.

Technical and scientific illustration / 89 
Cut­away views
Figure 5
This section view through 
a diseased bladder 
was created using 
Photoshop software tools 
for reproduction in the 
medical brochure of a 
pharmaceutical company. 
Produced and shown here by 
courtesy of the Maltings Partnership.
Figure 2
This drawing by Leonardo da Vinci uses 
the now classic 90° cut to show the 
internal structure of a human skull.
Shown here by gracious permission of Her Majesty 
Queen Elizabeth II. © Royal Collection Trust.
Figure 3
Using essentially the same techniques 
deployed by Leonardo, this hand-drawn 
pen-and-ink illustration of the 1960s 
shows an undercarriage nose wheel 
from an aircraft maintenance manual.
Drawn by the author for Dunlop Aviation. Shown here 
by courtesy of Meggitt Aerospace Limited.
Figure 4
Leonardo’s 90° cut 
is employed here to 
illustrate the principal 
working parts of a gas 
turbine aero engine. 
The perspective view 
was derived from 
CAD data and detail 
added using Adobe 
Illustrator. The final 
image was rendered 
using Photoshop 
and printed in the 
manufacturer’s 
publicity material.
Produced by the Maltings 
Partnership. Shown here 
by courtesy of Rolls-Royce 
Aerospace.

90 / Clive Richards
Exploded sequences 
Figure 9
This illustration of a pilot’s control handle for an 
aircraft was hand-drawn and printed in a 1960s 
service manual. It combines Da Vinci’s techniques 
of exploding, cutting away, and using a see-through 
surface, as featured in Figure 10.
Drawn by the author for Dunlop Aviation. Shown here by courtesy 
of Meggitt Aerospace Limited.
Figure 6
Leonardo’s method of showing the 
interrelated parts of a mechanism set 
out along a common axis anticipated the 
commonly used exploded views of today.
Shown here by courtesy of the Biblioteca Ambrosia, 
Milan (Codice Atlantico, fo 30v, detail).
Figure 7
This hand-drawn rendering shows the same 
exploding method used by Leonardo. It illustrates 
and aircraft brake assembly for a spare parts 
catalogue of the 1960s.
Drawn by the author for Dunlop Aviation. Shown here by courtesy 
of Meggitt Aerospace Limited.
Figure 8
This Leonardo drawing is unusual in the 
field of anatomical illustration in that 
as well as cutaway sections it uses the 
technique of exploding – here to show 
the ‘wiring’ connections to the brain.
Shown here by courtesy of the Neues Museum, 
Weimar.

Technical and scientific illustration / 91 
See-­through surfaces
Fold-­out reveals
Figure 10
By showing enclosing surfaces as if 
transparent Leonardo displays various 
internal organs within a human torso.
Shown here by gracious permission of Her Majesty 
Queen Elizabeth II. © Royal Collection Trust.
Figure 11
The see-through technique of Figure 10 is used here to 
show what is under the bodywork of a Toyota rally car.
Produced by and shown here by courtesy of the Maltings Partnership. 
Figure 14
Printing on to transparent sheets to 
produce the see-through sections of 
the engine displayed in this car-
owner’s handbook may be thought 
of as a descendent of the cut-out flap 
approach shown in Figures 12 and 13. 
Such transparent colour-film sheets 
were produced by Transart Limited for 
a range of technical publications in 
the 1950s.
Preston (1956). Photograph: Laura Bennetto.
Figure 12
This shows how printed 
and cut-out folding paper 
flaps can be used in an 
illustration to reveal the 
insides of the human 
body. 
Lankester (1892). Photograph: 
Laura Bennetto.
Figure 13
The same fold-out 
technique of Figure 12 is 
used here to display the 
inner workings of a steam 
railway locomotive.
French (1908). Photograph: Laura 
Bennetto.

92 / Clive Richards
Today, further technological advancements have extended the repertoire 
for revealing hidden detail graphically. Displaying the otherwise invisible 
can be orchestrated for on-­screen animated presentation by means of inter-
active and network technologies. By such methods, graphic approaches 
similar to those mentioned above, used for both the hand-­drawn and for 
reproduction in print, can now be deployed dynamically in real ­time. 
Interactive digital displays 
At one time a major aerospace company shipped around the world annu-
ally millions of pages of product support documentation to enable the engi-
neers that serviced its jet engines to have access to the latest maintenance 
and overhaul information.8 Increasingly network technologies are being 
used to distribute technical publications in a range of engineering and 
scientific fields. At the time of writing these newer distribution processes 
still mainly deliver pages of text and pictures that are static. However, the 
opportunities for introducing interactive features and displaying animated 
illustrations and diagrams are being explored for technical documentation 
purposes. Research has been conducted into some of the interface design 
possibilities, for engineering technical documentation, that take advan-
tage of interactive network technologies. 
One such early exploration resulted in a prototype system its progeni-
tor termed the ‘Cinegram’ (Fischer 1997). In printed books the principal 
information access structure is generally the text that will contain pointers 
to supporting graphics (Figure 15). 
The Cinegram takes the opposite approach. With it the starting place 
is an overview diagram through which other information resources can 
be accessed, including further system diagrams, annotated technical 
illustrations, photographs of components parts, narrative texts detailing 
operating procedures, etc. In the sense of progressively un-­covering inter-
connected pictorial representations it can be viewed as a successor to the 
paper fold-­out reveals of printed Victorian books. 
  8	 Clive Richards (2000) reported that ‘Rolls-­Royce Aerospace . . . ships around the world, 
every year, 30 million pages of product support documentation.’
Figure 15
In printed material the conventional 
access route to a graphical figure 
is via the written text, as shown in 
this instructional handbook. The 
text reads: ‘The order of tightening 
recommended is given in the 
diagram (Figure 8), the numbers 
indicating the order of succession.’
From Clement Talbot Limited (1929). 

Technical and scientific illustration / 93 
The topic of the prototype Cinegram is an aircraft jet engine. The 
overview diagram shows the oil system and was selected as the master 
schematic map because the oil reaches every part of the engine. This map 
displays the oil flowing around the system of pipes by means of waves of 
cycling colour and provides a convenient graphical index to all the main 
components of the engine. 
Figure 16
The ‘Cinegram’ is an interactive diagrammatic representation of 
a jet engine.  
a. Overview screen – the starting place from which other 
resources in the system may be explored, including by clicking 
on graphical representations of particular components. 
b. Selecting the pressure pump icon on the oil flow map of the 
overview screen takes the user to a photograph of the unit. 
c. Other resources include exploded technical illustrations. 
d. Still frames from an animation illustrating the operation of 
the anti-leak valve when the filter is removed from the pressure 
pump assembly.
Shown here by courtesy of Rolls-Royce Aerospace and Dr Detlev Fischer who created 
the Cinegram. 
a
b
c
d

94 / Clive Richards
The right-­hand side of the overview screen shows a control panel below 
which is a scrolling text box – both constant features on all screens of the 
system. Various components on the overview are ‘hot spots’ that when 
clicked throw up related screens. These in turn have their own hot spots. 
With these, and the control panel, a user can explore the whole engine. For 
example, a reader can navigate from a component representation on the 
overview diagram to a more detailed representation. This in turn may be 
activated to show animations of its different modes of operation or how it 
may be taken apart. Using the navigation features the user can ‘drill down’ 
to different levels of detail, move to adjacent parts in the system and sum-
mon up a range of information resources. 
Evaluations carried out with both experienced engineers and novices 
revealed the potential of such an approach for explaining operating pro-
cedures, identifying fault conditions, and as a tool for training purposes 
(Fischer and Richards 1995a, 1995b; Richards 2000). The possibilities, 
then, for technical and scientific illustrations to become interactive and 
for displaying real-­time events in real time seem extensive. 
However, there is a question as to whether all dynamic processes are 
best represented dynamically. One test might be the example of a filter in 
a component in the oil circulation system shown in the Cinegram. Over 
a period of time the slow accumulation of debris on the filter surface even-
tually results in a blockage causing pressure to backup in the system. When 
the increase in pressure reaches a predetermined level a sensor triggers 
the opening of a relief valve. This allows oil to by-­pass the filter, thus reliev-
ing the pressure in the system, preventing damage and overall system  
failure.
The first stage build up in debris takes weeks, but when the critical level 
is reached the second stage opening of the relief valve happens in split sec-
onds. The only way to show this in an animation would be to dramatically 
speed up the first stage and to show the second stage in slow motion. Even 
so, the casual observer may miss the crucial moment of the relief valve 
opening. There may be a case for presenting the key stages in the process 
statically in comic book strip style.
From this example then, it can be argued that not all dynamic processes 
are most effectively represented by animations. For clarity’s sake the 
scenario described above could be depicted better in a sequence of still 
images, each showing a single action, frame by frame. This approach is 
commonly used in self-­assembly instructions, especially those made up of 
pictorial illustrations only, without any supporting written instructions. 

Technical and scientific illustration / 95 
Text-­free instructions 
The instructions that accompany self-­assembly furniture, notably as pro-
duced by Ikea, use the standard technical illustration convention of per-
spective views depicted as line drawings. These instructions are text-­free, 
an approach that places an enormous burden on the graphic presentational 
style. The pictures used are consequently required to be as explicit as pos-
sible. Example frames in a text-­free sequence from another self-­assembly 
domain are shown in Figure 17.
Schumacher (2011) has proposed a pattern language9 as a guide to devis-
ing text-­free Pictorial Assembly Instructions (PAIs). A selection of general 
pointers to producing effective PAIs, taken from Schumacher (sometimes 
paraphrasing his descriptors) includes the following:
•	 use a sequence of images depicting a series of small steps;
•	 perspective representations are the most easily interpreted illustration 
method;
•	 black-­and-­white line images using various line weights are best;
•	 an illustration of a part must contain enough detail to distinguish it 
from any other part;
•	 the object should be represented as it ‘appears on the bench’ in front of 
the user;
•	 each step should describe a complete, conceptually coherent assembly 
operation;
•	 steps must be clearly numbered in a consistent and prominent way 
that does not interfere with the images;
  9	 Christopher Alexander, an architectural philosopher, conceived the concept of ‘pattern 
languages’ that he developed to guide the design of buildings from the point of view of 
the experiences of the people who would live in them. For example, the experience of 
having light on two sides of a room, or seeing a landmark at the end of an avenue. See 
Alexander, Ishikawa, and Silverstein 1977.
Figure 17
Frames from 
text-free pictorial 
assembly 
instructions. 
Devised by and shown 
here by courtesy of 
Peter Schumacher.

96 / Clive Richards
•	 the representation of the assembly is ideally presented from a fixed 
point ­of ­view and fixed scale for as many steps as possible to assist with 
comparing before and after stages;
•	 a ‘call-­out’ may be added that shows an enlarged view of a selected 
area so small details are discernible;
•	 the entire object should be depicted to provide the user with a 
context to the location of assembly operations, even if the action 
is small; 
•	 the tool used to complete an action should be shown. 
While only eleven are listed here there are actually seventeen exem-
plars in Schu­macher’s complete pattern language set. In addition to the 
written pointers to solutions there are supplementary categories of stand-
ardly formatted information including, importantly, pictorial illustrations 
exemplifying each pattern. Following its practical application Schumacher 
anticipates the scheme will be amended and grow through informed con-
tributions from other designers and researchers.10 
Typical of self-­assembly instructions, and technical documentation in 
other fields, the detail in Figure 18 shows the conventional use of two dif-
ferent line thicknesses in the black-­and-­white illustrations. Though a sub-
tle visual feature it is held by practitioners in the field that it enables users 
to more easily interpret the various three-­dimensional configurations set 
out in the pages of instructional booklets. The effectiveness of differing 
line thicknesses is supported by research described later.
This line thickness convention is used by Ikea in all its text-­free in­struc-
tions. Text-­free PAIs are a very special case, the more general approach 
in the technical and scientific publications arena being to closely inte-
grate explanatory texts with images. Such combinations, when carefully 
designed, produce powerful information vehicles. Annotations and 
related texts will be dealt with after looking in more detail at the line thick-
ness convention used for PAIs and technical illustrations. 
10	 The current state of the set, including the pictorial illustrations, may be viewed at: 
<http://www.paispatternlanguage.org>.
Figure 18
Detail from Figure 17, 
showing different line 
thicknesses.

Technical and scientific illustration / 97 
Visual clarity 
It may be thought that the greater the visual fidelity a depiction has to its 
subject, that is, the more photo-­realistically it can be represented, then 
the more effective it will be as an informative illustration. In practice this 
turns out not always to be the case, and indeed research shows that for 
some applications certain styles of simple pared-­down synoptic outline 
depictions, drawn only in black and ­white, are very effective.
In the field of engineering technical publications it is a well-­established 
practice to use black-­and-­white line drawings to illustrate texts describing 
maintenance or overhaul procedures presented in manuals for techni-
cians. In earlier times this may well have had much to do with the eco-
nomics of making the images and printing them, line illustrations being far 
cheaper to create and reproduce than continuous tone pictures, especially 
if they were reproduced as full-­colour half-­tones. However, as previously 
mentioned, it has also been the accepted view in the business that the 
simpler line-­image approach is anyway clearer for users of the manuals. 
Such illustrations are often easier to ‘read’ than photographic equivalents, 
or, in the case of computer-­generated imagery, photo-­realistically shaded 
representations. This is because photographic style pictures contain 
a lot of extraneous visual information while line drawings can be made 
to display only those features that are salient for understanding what is  
represented. 
It has been thought that the clarity of black-­and-­white drawings, what 
elsewhere has been referred to as their greater ‘visual diction’,11 owes a lot 
to the careful deployment of lines of different thickness. At least two thick-
nesses (or ‘line weights’ to use the illustrators’ term) are normally deployed 
in making a technical illustration. Following the standard convention, the 
line weight used depends on the type of boundary edge represented in 
the illustration. A boundary between two planes, where both planes are 
visible from the viewpoint taken, will have a thin line. Where only one 
plane is visible, the boundary edge forming a kind of horizon, a thicker line 
weight is used. This convention is deployed in Figure 17.
The research mentioned above arose as part of a software development 
project for producing an interactive technical publications delivery sys-
tem (Bussard 2002). One of the aims was to provide black-­and-­white line 
technical illustrations of aircraft parts that could be tilted and rotated in 
real-­time on screen. The illustrations were to be generated from 3D digital 
data as every component in the aircraft was specified in that form, having 
been created using a computer-­aided design modelling method. Viewers 
of the proposed publications system should be able to display on screen 
a  selected part and then manipulate it in its virtual three-­dimensional 
11	 ‘Use of varying line thicknesses adds considerably to the clarity of the drawing provid-
ing what has been referred to as good “visual diction” ’ (Richards 2006, 103).

98 / Clive Richards
space. Thus, to conform to the standard line-­weight convention, any of the 
boundary edges of the displayed part might change from needing a thin 
line to requiring a thick one, through becoming a profile by the action of 
rotating the object. In order to justify the overhead of ensuring that the 
correct line weights appeared on screen, trials were conducted to evaluate 
the extent to which the variable line weight convention actually improved 
comprehension of that which was being depicted. In addition to line 
weights, the use of coloured backgrounds was also tested, together with 
the effect on understanding the geometry of the parts that was enabled by 
the facility to manipulate them in 3D space. 
The trials were fairly conclusive (Richards, Bussard, and Newman 
2007). Evaluations conducted with twenty postgraduate and final-year 
undergraduate students studying technology and engineering used 
depictions featuring objects with geometrical characteristics found in 
typical technical illustrations. The outcomes of the research indicated the 
following:
•	 Two line weights, used according to the standard convention in black-­
and-­white drawings, improved viewers’ abilities to correctly interpret 
the geometry of 3D objects depicted in static presentations, over 
similar representations using only a single line weight. 
•	 Coloured backgrounds used in static illustrations improved viewers’ 
interpretive abilities, particularly in the case of an object that had 
a hole running through it, both in single- and two-line-weight 
presentations. 
•	 Two line weights, together with a coloured background reinforced 
each other in the case of static presentations.
•	 Allowing the viewer to tilt and rotate objects depicted in black and 
white, with or without two line weights, would appear to enable 
conclusive decisions to be made about the geometry of an object in 
most cases, especially regarding aspects of a configuration that may 
have been obscured from view in a particular static presentation.
•	 Interestingly, in the case of certain configurations, for example where 
one object was nested inside another, the most correct interpretations 
were achieved for the test illustrations that used the convention of two 
weights of line, whether dynamic manipulation was available or not 
and whether or not a coloured background was available.
This work clearly vindicates the use of the standard convention of two line 
weights for black-­and-­white technical illustration. Whilst not the actual 
test pieces used in the trials described above, the sequence of depictions 
shown in the Figures 19–22 characterize the conditions explored (but of 
course excluding the dynamic condition). Through studying these images 
readers may draw their own conclusions as to the relative effectiveness for 
static illustrations of each style presented. 

Technical and scientific illustration / 99 
Figure 19
Illustrations made with a single line weight (or 
line thickness) can sometimes present viewers 
with difficulties of interpretation.
Figure 20
When used appropriately differing line weights 
can help viewers to interpret depictions of 
three-­dimensional objects with a greater degree 
of accuracy.
Figure 21
A coloured background can indicate empty 
space and so throws the depicted parts of the 
object into relief.
Figure 22
The use of thin lines where adjoining planes are 
visible and thicker outlines for edges, together 
with a coloured background can produce an 
effective illustration.
The depictions shown in Figures 19–22 are details from 
a technical illustration of aircraft maintenance equipment 
drawn by the author for Dunlop Aviation Division and shown 
here by courtesy of Meggitt Aerospace Limited. 

100 / Clive Richards
Naming of parts
Key features in technical illustrations produced for product support con-
texts, and scientific illustrations with an educational purpose, are anno-
tations attached to specific components within them. Various graphical 
styles can be used for labelling that may contain a variety of textual or even 
pictorially presented information. In this later case they are often referred 
to as ‘call-outs’. Annotations, or call-outs, may be linked to the parts to 
which they relate by such devices as coloured lines, dotted connectors, 
or tapered pointers. Of course for interactive screen-­based digital pres-
entations roll-­overs and pop-­ups can be used. Figure 23 shows a style of 
labelling with leader lines extensively used in technical documentation 
contexts for identifying components by name enabling ease of reference 
in associated narrative texts. 
A more indirect method of labelling is typically used in service hand-
books for identifying replacement parts needed during overhaul proce-
dures. This is shown in the exploded sequence of Figure 24 (the companion 
to the cutaway in Figure 23). Here a numerical index is placed in a ‘balloon’ 
Figure 23
This cutaway illustration of a shuttle 
valve for the hydraulic system of an 
aircraft uses annotations to name its 
working parts. 
Drawn by the author for Dunlop Aviation Division 
and shown here by courtesy of Meggitt Aerospace 
Limited.
Figure 24
The valve shown 
in Figure 23 is 
illustrated again, 
here in exploded 
form. 
Drawn by the author 
for Dunlop Aviation 
Division and shown here 
by courtesy of Meggitt 
Aerospace Limited.

Technical and scientific illustration / 101 
annotation attached to each component. This links to a list giving what 
can be a very long spare parts reference code number, plus other related 
information. Typically these parts lists are presented separately, even on 
a different page from the illustration. While it is usually better to lead the 
reader as directly as possible to required information it is not so in this 
case. Here the two-­stage referencing system avoids having a very over-
crowded illustration cluttered with visually ‘busy’ alphanumeric labelling 
(stage one might be spotting in the illustration the part required and its 
associated index number; stage two is to use that index number to track 
the reference code or other information in the parts list). 
As well as the convenience for editing and updating the parts catalogue, 
there are also other advantages to having a separate list. These include 
utilizing a  tabular arrangement for grouping the various categories of 
information in the list. Thus the content can be structured for ease of use 
by readers, allowing various search options for finding information, e.g. 
whether starting with the visual identification of the part on the pictorial 
illustration or, when knowing the name or code number of a part, using 
the parts list table to find related data. 
It will be recognized that the mechanism shown here in Figure 24, as an 
example of an exploded sequence, is a relatively uncomplicated one – it 
was selected here for clarity of exposition. Far more complex exploded 
illustrations, with very many more component parts, commonly appear in 
technical publications. In such cases the value of the various search options 
offered by a tabular presentation of related information in a separate parts 
list will have much greater utility. 
In respect of identifying particular parts in an illustration, especially 
where the separate components in question are large enough to allow it, it 
may be more convenient to dispense entirely with leader lines of the style 
shown in Figure 24, and to attach reference numbers directly to the parts 
to be identified (Figure 25).
Leader lines 
Where leader lines are used they form an important feature for both tex-
tual annotations and numerical indexing, linking relevant information to 
the components to which they refer. Like the annotations themselves they 
are a category of graphic device that is not to be understood as being part 
of the pictorial space within the illustration itself – such devices can be 
thought of as lying in a different spatial plane, as if on an overlay. Indeed, in 
some publishing contexts transparent overlays may be used to carry anno-
tations, and other labelling relating to the underlying illustration. 
Because of their specific function, and to ensure that they are distin-
guishable from the pictorial space of the illustration, leader lines need to 
be carefully differentiated from the other components depicted, whilst 
being clearly attached to their target part. As indicated previously, there 
Figure 25
Numerical 
indexing without 
using leader lines 
in an illustration 
from an anatomy 
book for artists.
From Sparkes (1888) 
Plate XLIII, Fig. i.

102 / Clive Richards
are various options available. Practice has shown that an effective way to 
achieve this is by adopting the following guidelines, standardly applied to 
black-­and-­white line illustrations used in the aerospace technical publica-
tions industry: 
•	 Make leader lines straight wherever possible.
•	 Leader lines should lie on an axis running from the centre of their 
annotations to a major section of the parts to which they relate. 
•	 A thin white line should be placed alongside a black leader line – and 
on one side of it only (this helps the eye to follow leader lines as they 
cross other lines in an illustration).
•	 A clear terminator to the leader line should be placed on the end by 
the part to be identified.
•	 If the identified part is large enough, the leader line should cross its 
boundary edge, terminating in a dot.
•	 Where a component is too small to carry a dot, the leader line should 
terminate with an arrowhead, just short of the part to which it refers.
These guidelines are shown in action in Figures 26 and 27.
In some publications, annotations are occasionally ‘stacked’ in vertical 
columns, connected with leader lines that are laid out using only horizon-
tal or vertical directions. This can result in leader lines having one or more 
right-­angled bends, producing a ‘staircase’ effect. It may be presumed that 
this is done for formal aesthetic reasons. Where such annotations are few 
in number, this may not be problematic, but it has to said that where anno-
tations are numerous, such arrangements can be difficult for the reader to 
follow. This approach can present something akin to a visual puzzle where 
the task is to work out what is connected to what. Therefore, this method 
of annotating may be best avoided in favour of the guidelines set out above 
– especially for contexts where safety or efficiency of use is relevant.
Figure 26
Detail from 
Figure 9 showing 
how annotations 
made up of text 
labels and leader 
lines may be 
arranged.
Figure 27
This shows an 
arrangement 
of balloons 
and leader line 
annotations for 
the numerical 
indexing of parts.
Drawn by the author 
for Dunlop Aviation. 
Shown here by courtesy 
of Meggitt Aerospace 
Limited.

Technical and scientific illustration / 103 
Arrows
Apart from their function as leader lines, arrows can also be used to pro-
vide important supplementary information in technical and scientific 
illustrations. The powerful role arrows can play in ‘augmenting structural 
diagrams to convey dynamic, causal, or function information’ has been 
examined elsewhere (Heiser and Tversky 2006). In pictorial illustrations 
arrows can be used in at least three ways:
•	 identifying items of key importance; 
•	 indicating directions of movement (linear and rotational); 
•	 showing pathways by means of their trailing ‘shafts’. 
Unlike leader lines, in these cases, it is necessary for the arrows to appear 
to occupy the same pictorial space as the objects depicted in a  scene. 
However, whilst doing this, it is important that readers recognize that they 
are also separate from, and do not form part of, the subject of the illustra-
tion. Given the status of the arrow, conventionally codified as a symbol of 
movement or direction, this is not usually a problem. What sometimes can 
be a problem for the viewer is to correctly ‘read’ in which plane an arrow 
lies within the three-­dimensional space depicted in an illustration. This 
is especially so in the case of arrows indicting directions of rotation. Here 
a solution is to show the arrow shaft, not as a single stroke, as with a leader 
line, but to represent it having width (but no thickness) as if cut out of 
a piece of paper. When curved, as is the case when indicating a circular 
motion, both sides of the ‘paper’ arrow will be in view. The ‘inner’ side 
may be shown as black, in contrast to the outer side, shown, say, as red. See 
Figure 28. Even this device is not without interpretive problems at some 
angles of view and in certain contexts. To address this a thickness may also 
be added to the arrow, as in Figure 29. 
In such applications, where the arrow does not actually represent 
a ‘thing’ in what is being pictured, it operates as a kind of graphical meta-
phor – the movement implied by the arrow being ‘transferred’ to the thing 
to which it relates in a scene. This leads on to the wider topic of the hybrid 
illustration that combines pictorial representations of ‘real’ things with 
metaphorical components, in order to ‘tell a story’. 
Figure 28 
Indicating 
rotational 
direction the 
arrow shown here 
has width but no 
thickness.
Drawn by the author.
Figure 29
In order to minimize 
any ambiguity about 
its direction in three-
dimensional space the 
arrow shown here has 
thickness as well as 
width
Drawn by the author.

104 / Clive Richards
Metaphor and comprehension
In some cases of pictorial illustration, especially when used in popular 
science publishing, forms are introduced that integrate metaphoric com-
ponents into ‘literal’ representations. Figure 30 shows the inside of the 
human body where certain stages of the digestive system are shown as if 
they were part of a chemical factory. This is in order that the reader may 
transfer the concept of industrial processing to the functioning of human 
intestines. Such approaches can be useful in helping a reader to use their 
understanding of something familiar to gain access to something new.
However, the use of such graphic devices assumes a certain level of 
sophistication on the part of the reader – namely that the reader has a grasp 
of the relevant processes associated with the metaphoric components dis-
played and can distinguish between them and those aspects in the picture 
that literally belong to the actual system represented – plus, of course, 
additionally, being able to make the transfer of the relevant features from 
the metaphor to the ‘real’ thing. 
One of the books in the author’s parental home was a children’s ency-
Figure 30
The human digestive system is 
shown as an industrial processing 
plant – here the reader must 
disentangle the metaphoric from 
the literal.
Mitchell Beazley illustration shown here by 
courtesy of Octopus Publishing Group.

Technical and scientific illustration / 105 
clopedia that contained an illustration of the presumed evolution of the 
elephant (Bastin n.d., 194–195). It pictured a parade of animals at various 
stages of metamorphosis, beginning with a small aquatic creature in the 
primordial swamp, and ending with the land-­based giant of the present 
day. As a child, the author’s initial understanding, taken from this image, 
was that the elephant had a transformative life cycle, somewhat similar to 
that of the tadpole changing into a frog – he had misunderstood certain 
non-­literal aspects of the illustration.12
So, mixing the metaphoric with the literal needs to be done with great 
care. The elephant anecdote points up the value in any information design 
exercise of conducting diagnostic testing with a sample of target users in 
order to identify any misleading features that might confuse readers.13
Concluding remarks
A common characteristic in technical and scientific illustration, one that 
might be cited as their defining purpose, is the pictorial representation 
of things and their interrelationships that ordinarily are hidden from 
view. The close integration of textual information with perspective, or 
perspective-­like pictures, is another very common characteristic. There 
are very well developed graphical approaches available to the designers 
of illustrations having these features. These approaches have evolved 
through the practice of drawing for explanatory purposes, together with 
the associated processes of printing. One challenge is to adapt and extend 
these approaches when using the constantly developing possibilities 
offered by digital interfaces and network communication systems – and 
there is no doubt that much that works in print will work equally well on 
screen. Another challenge is to find and exploit those affordances unique 
to the new media that can be used to aid and communicate our under-
standing of technical and scientific phenomena. 
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge the valuable influence of Professor L. Bruce 
Archer and R. D. Johnson, who supervised his early work as a research student on 
the application of digital computing techniques to technical illustrations, and the 
contributions to this chapter made by the author’s own former research students, 
Dr Nicolas D’Amour Bussard and Dr Detlev Fischer. Michael Foster and Stephen 
Capsey of the Maltings Partnership kindly provided illustrations and advice on 
their current commercial practices, and Ian Henderson of Meggitt Aerospace gave 
helpful information on the generation and distribution of technical publications.
12	 Shaaron Ainsworth addresses some of the issues of how children can ‘inappropriately 
interpret different representations – for example, where graphs are interpreted 
iconically’ (2006, 186). 
13	 David Sless has developed and promoted the ‘diagnostic testing’ of documents, 
specifically for designing medicine labelling; however the general approach has wider 
applicability. See Sless and Shrensky (2006). 

106 / Clive Richards
106 / Clive Richards
References 
Ainsworth, S. 2006. ‘DeFT: a conceptual framework 
for learning with multiple representations.’ 
Learning Instruction, 16 (3): 183–198.
Alexander, C., S. Ishikawa, and M. Murray 
Silverstein. 1977. A pattern language. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Bastin, A. H. n.d. ‘The science of living things.’ In 
The practical encyclopedia for children, 192–221. 
London: Odhams.
Bussard, N. D. 2002. ‘Transforming CAD data 
into technical illustrations for multimedia 
applications.’ PhD thesis, Coventry University. 
Carter, J., H. Percy, and P. H. Muir, eds. 1967. Printing 
and the mind of man. London: Cassell.
Clement Talbot Limited. 1929. Handbook of 
instructions for the 14/45 h.p. Talbot car. London: 
Clement Talbot.
Fischer, D. 1997. ‘A theory of presentation and its 
implications for multimedia presentation.’ PhD 
thesis, Coventry University. 
Fischer, D., and C. J. Richards. 1995a. ‘Cinegrams for 
self-­directed learning.’ Computers and Education, 
25 (1/2): 31–44.
Fischer, D., and C. J. Richards. 1995b. ‘The 
presentation of time in interactive animated 
systems diagrams.’ In Multimedia systems and 
applications, edited by R. A. Earnshaw and J. A. 
Vince, 141–159. London: Academic Press Ltd.
French, J. W. 1908. Modern power generators (2 vols). 
London: Gresham Publishing Company.
Gifford, D., ed. 1988 The Eagle book of cutaways. 
Devon: Webb & Bower.
Goodman, N. 1976. Languages of art. Indianapolis, 
IN: Hackett.
Preston, F., ed. 1956. The practical car-­owner 
illustrated. London: Grosvenor Press
Hamlyn. 1983. Family medical encyclopedia, an 
illustrated guide. London: Hamlyn
Heiser, J., and B. Tversky. 2006. ‘Arrows in 
comprehending and producing mechanical 
diagrams.’ Cognitive Science 30: 581–592.
Lankester, O. 1892. The human body. London: Allman 
& Sons.
Malton, J. 1800. The young painter’s maulstick; 
a practical treatise on perspective.London: 
Carpenter and Co.
Mølhave, A. 2010. ‘The information design of 
ecological cycle network diagrams in science 
textbooks.’ PhD thesis, Central St Martins College 
of Art, University of the Arts, London. 
Richards, C. J. 1984. ‘Diagrammatics.’ PhD thesis, 
Royal College of Art, London. 
Richards, C. J. 2000. ‘Getting the picture: diagram 
design and the information revolution.’ 
Information Design Journal 9 (2/3): 87– 110. 
Richards, C. J. 2006. ‘Drawing out information.’ 
Information Design Journal + Document Design 
14 (2): 93–107.
Richards, C. J. 2014. ‘Perspective in perspective.’ 
ArtSpace 39: 6–11.
Richards, C. J., N. Bussard, and R. Newman 2007. 
‘Weighing-­up line weights: the value of differing 
line thicknesses in technical illustrations.’ 
Information Design Journal 15 (2): 171–181.
Schumacher, P. C. 2011. ‘The design of pictorial 
assembly instructions.’ Unpublished PhD thesis, 
Australian National University.
Sless, D., and R. Shrensky. 2006. Writing about 
medicines for people. Sydney: Australian Self 
Medication Industry.
Sparkes J. C. L. 1888. A manual of artistic anatomy. 
London: Baillière, Tindell & Cox. 
Twyman M. 2013. A history of chromolithography. 
London: British Library.
Zöllner F. 2003. Leonardo da Vinci 1452–1519: 
the complete paintings and drawings. London: 
Taschen. 

107
The lessons of Isotype for 
information design
Robin Kinross
This chapter outlines the history of the work in visual communication under-
taken by Otto Neurath, Marie Neurath, and their colleagues. Termed ‘Isotype’, 
this work had its origins in Vienna in 1925, and was concluded in London in 1971. 
Isotype work in pictorial statistics is described, with reference to particular 
examples. Its founding principle of repeating rather than enlarging a pictorial 
representation, in order to denote increase in quantity, is seen as the basis for 
a whole approach to design. This work was always conducted self-critically by 
its producers, and some instances of its empirical testing are described. Did 
Isotype constitute a system that can be articulated and passed on? Confronting 
this question is essential to any attempt to continue with it now. The lessons of 
Isotype are seen not in any simple continuation, but rather in understanding its 
approach to design. This was embodied in its team work, at the centre of which 
was ‘the transformer’: someone who mediated between specialists, selected 
information, and transformed it into a visual statement. This is the role now 
taken by an information designer.
Isotype is the graphic work that was made under the direction of Otto 
Neurath and Marie Neurath. We can date its span of life to 1925–1971: 
from the year in which Otto Neurath opened the Gesellschafts- und 
Wirtschaftsmuseum in Wien (Social and Economic Museum of Vienna), 
to when Marie Neurath stopped production with the Isotype Institute in 
London. In between it was subject to the currents of history in Europe 
and beyond. 
During the first years in Vienna, the work became known as the ‘Wiener 
Methode der Bildstatistik’ (Vienna Method of Pictorial Statistics). 
Numerical information was represented visually in consistent ways; 
though, especially in this early period, one can see a rapid and self-critical 
development of the means and methods employed (Kinross 2013). While, 
from childhood, Otto Neurath’s interests had covered the whole field of 
visual presentation, it was for its ‘data-graphics’ (to use a later, English-
language term) that this work became known.
In 1934, after the brief civil war in Austria and the coming to power 
of an ‘Austrofascist’ government, Otto Neurath’s group moved to The 
Hague, where an International Foundation for (the promotion of) Visual 
Education had been established, as an umbrella for their activities. The 
‘Wiener Methode’ was no longer an appropriate label: Vienna was no 
longer its home, and its scope now reached beyond pictorial statistics to 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 107–116
6

108 / Robin Kinross
the whole field of visual education. In the Netherlands the name Isotype 
was devised to describe the group’s work. This immediately became an 
independent term, rationalized as an acronym for ‘International System of 
Typographic Picture Education’.
In 1940, as the Germans invaded the Netherlands, Otto and Marie 
Neurath left the country, hoping to reach England, which they did. Interned 
on arrival as ‘enemy aliens’, they set up again in Oxford and continued their 
visual work, establishing the Isotype Institute. After Otto Neurath’s death 
in 1945, Marie Neurath continued the Institute’s work; in 1948 she moved 
the office from Oxford to London.
While the ideas of Isotype were already visible in embryo in the first 
few years after 1925, its visual appearance was decisively changed in 1928, 
when the German artist Gerd Arntz joined the group in Vienna. Arntz’s 
talent was for drawing pictograms that could work as modular units – for 
repetition in rows – but which yet possessed a considerable realism in 
representing the human figure or whatever else was being shown. Arntz 
has often been seen as a co-creator, with Otto Neurath, of this work. He 
certainly provided an essential element of it, and he provided the style and 
approach to drawing pictograms that was continued with in England after 
1940, when he stayed behind in The Hague. But it will be argued here that 
the most essential idea in Isotype was not in its pictograms but lay rather 
in its approach to ordering its material.
Isotype as method
Part of the appeal of Isotype has been the offer that it seems to make: here is 
a method or a system of graphic presentation of information. Otto Neurath 
was a vigorous propagandist for what he and his colleagues were doing. 
This effort of public explanation became necessary, especially after 1934, 
when they had no steady institutional support and had to live by commis-
sions. As she grew into the work, Marie Neurath also became a writer of 
some substance. But even when their advocacy was at its most emphatic, 
they were both careful to say that Isotype was not a closed work, and that it 
was always developing and responding to new material and new contexts 
of deployment. Later, in the face of much copying and misinterpretation 
by others, they began to assert that this was a method that could not be 
borrowed by other people and applied to different material. The work 
required a slow process of induction and training before it could be used.
Otto Neurath soon began to explain the processes of Isotype work in 
published articles and in two books (Neurath 1933, 1936). The key Isotype 
process of ‘transformation’ (which will be further explained at the end of 
this chapter) came to occupy a central role in both the work and its expla-
nation. This is from an unpublished memorandum from around 1944:
There are many transformation rules, some hundreds of them. Since the 
application of the rules cannot become standardized, but each new picture 

The lessons of Isotype for information design / 109 
needs, as it were, a somewhat new invention of combinations, There is no 
possibility to transfer the rules in a simple way, one has to become acquainted 
with the whole structure of rules and to learn how to weigh them from case 
to case, i.e. transformation needs rules plus much routine. (Quoted in Burke, 
Kindel, and Walker 2013, 337)
Isotype starts with one essential principle: in representing numerical data, 
the pictogram is repeated and not enlarged (Figure 1). This simple rule 
contains the seed of much else in the work. The attempt here is to main-
tain an honesty of representation, in which a viewer can read off what is 
being shown. There is no idea of showing exact data, as one might do with 
a graph that traces precise numbers or readings. Isotype was employed 
in popular education, not in scientific reports. It worked with available 
statistics and its visual simplifications corresponded to a certain inevita-
ble roughness in its material. For example, the numbers of unemployed 
workers will always, to some degree, be moot: an exact count is always an 
approximation of a shifting reality. And further, to represent this approx-
imate count precisely, to the nearest fraction of a millimetre, serves no 
purpose. Viewers cannot perceive such small visual differences. One of 
Otto Neurath’s watchwords ran: ‘To remember simplified data-graphics is 
better than to forget precise numbers’ (Neurath 1991, 185).
In order to aid easy comprehension, the unit of representation was 
chosen so that pictograms could be grouped to make a coherent whole 
(Figures 2 and 3, overleaf). If the unit represented 10,000 people or items, 
then the pictograms would be grouped in tens, with a small added space 
between each cluster. Or a unit might represent 25,000 people or items, 
and then the pictograms would be grouped in fours. The constantly 
Figure 1
The founding 
principle of 
Isotype: to show 
an increase 
in quantity, 
a representation 
should be 
repeated rather 
than enlarged. 
In the last step, 
pictograms 
replace unitized 
bars (Neurath 
1936, 96–97).

110 / Robin Kinross
Figure 2
A chart on the unemployed in Berlin, 
made for the Berlin branch of the 
Gesellschafts- und Wirtschafts­
museum, 1931. Each figure represents 
10,000 unemployed (in receipt of 
unemployment benefit and welfare 
support). 
Reproduced in Kinross 2013, 157.
Figure 3
A chart on the unemployed in Berlin, made for the 
Berlin branch of the Gesellschafts- und Wirtschafts­
museum, 1932. Each figure represents 25,000 
unemployed. A distinction – not visible in this 
reproduction – is made between those in receipt of 
unemployment benefit and ‘crisis support’ (in black) 
and in receipt of welfare support (in red). 
Reproduced in Kinross 2013, 160.
Figure 4
A diagram to explain the 
distortion introduced in 
the Mercator projection of 
geographic area, as against 
an equal-area projection. 
This follows a sketch by the 
cartographer Karl Peucker 
made for the Gesellschafts- 
und Wirtschafts­museum, 
around 1930. 
Reproduced in Burke, Kindel, and 
Walker 2013, 192.

The lessons of Isotype for information design / 111 
updated charts on unemployment in Europe in the late 1930s show what 
was done when the numbers to be represented meant a greatly increased 
number of pictograms: the unit was increased, to maintain a smaller, eas-
ily apprehended number of units (Kinross 2013, 155–163). Here, in this 
simplest of Isotype charts, the ‘system’ at work cannot be easily defined. 
Even such a simple product requires practised, human judgement to make 
something that works well for viewers. 
The use of colour in Isotype was similarly self-limiting and pragmatic. 
After some experiments in the first years, it became Isotype practice 
to impose severe limits on the application of colour. Viewers are not 
able to grasp and to remember subtle differences in colour. In his book 
International picture language (1936), Otto Neurath named seven colours: 
white, blue, green, yellow, red, brown, black, with some possibility of gen-
erating further colours by mixing (Kinross 2013, 117). This was also a prag-
matic matter. In printed reproduction – this is no longer such a pressing 
constraint – the use of colour would often be limited by the limitations of 
budget and technics. On occasions only black-and-white reproduction was 
possible and this limitation was accepted. Isotype work was never a theor-
etical system, but was always made in response to particular demands and 
possibilities, and adaptations were made for these realities.
The wish to present information in a  sober, easily comprehensible 
way can be seen throughout Isotype. Perspective in illustration was not 
used; instead simple plans, elevations, and isometric projections were 
used. Equal area maps were used, in preference to projections such as 
Mercator’s that distort measurement (Figure 4). The language of headings 
and captions in charts was simple and unemotive. A very few, remarkable 
exceptions can be found. One is a chart on agricultural capacity across the 
world headed ‘Malthus was wrong’ (Burke 2013, 182). 
In ordering data, a ‘natural’ principle of arrangement was looked for. 
Thus, time was usually shown as increasing downwards, from top to bot-
tom. This allowed the human figure to stand in rows, rather than to show 
bodies on top of each other. But there are categories of chart for which 
another ordering principle was needed: many charts were based on maps 
or on more abstracted geographical ordering. 
In charts that showed numerical information for different countries or 
areas of the world, geographical position became the determining princi-
ple. The chart on state expenditures shows this frequently used principle: 
countries are arranged from west (top) to east (bottom). The idea here 
is that another principle of arrangement than quantity allows the quan-
tities shown to become more meaningful. Otto Neurath explained this in 
International picture language (the book was written in the severely limited 
vocabulary of Basic English):
Very frequently, but quite against the rules of the Isotype system, amount 
pictures [data-graphics] put the amounts [quantities] in order of size. All 
these pictures [charts or diagrams] seem to be a statement of the same thing: 

112 / Robin Kinross
a falling amount. The order of the names is almost the most important part of 
the picture.
  If the order of countries is fixed, the curve [overall shape of the chart] is 
dependent on the thing under discussion. It is not hard to keep in memory the 
fixed order of countries. (Neurath 1936, 83–85)
The ‘State expenditures’ example shows a characteristic, and character-
istically subtle, method of configuring its material (Figure 5). Rather than 
showing absolute numbers, percentages of total expenditure are shown 
for the chosen countries. A distinction between two groups of category 
is made: the positive categories of ‘social’, ‘administrative and industry’ 
(predominantly red) and the less productive categories of ‘war’, ‘army and 
navy’, ‘finances, debts . . .’ (predominantly black). An axis is found, and the 
positive parts are ranged from this to the right, the less productive cate-
gories range to the left. The Soviet Union stands out for its emphasis on 
production.
Figure 5
An English-language chart made at the Gesellschafts- und Wirtschafts­museum 
for showing in London in 1933. The components of expenditures are broadly 
grouped into negative and positive, and coloured black and red respectively. 
From a central axis, negative expenditures range to the left, and positive range 
to the right. States are ordered geographically, from west (top) to east (bottom). 
The chart measures 63 × 84 cm. 
Reproduced in Burke, Kindel, and Walker 2013, 184.

The lessons of Isotype for information design / 113 
Testing Isotype
During its lifetime, Isotype work was always subjected to internal discus-
sion and informal testing. Otto Neurath was a critical thinker who believed 
in reasoning and in doubt. In the other areas of his activity – which included 
sociology, philosophy, urbanism, and politics – the same critical attitude 
is evident. For example, his relation with the principal artist, Gerd Arntz, 
was one of constant discussion and pressure to improve. For the first nine 
years of work, Neurath and his colleagues had the public forum of the 
Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum, which (from December 1927) was 
situated in Vienna’s New Town Hall, and here they could observe the way 
that visitors viewed the charts. Museum staff took people around the dis-
plays and talked with them about what they saw.
The Museum was funded by the municipality of Vienna, and was 
embedded in the life of the city. From the outset it was intended as a pro-
ject of broad public education: to explain the life of Vienna to its people 
and to visitors; this vision soon widened into a global perspective, and one 
with strong historical dimension. Links were made with local schools and 
there some informal testing was conducted. In 1933 these experiences were 
reported, with extended quotations from children and teachers, in Otto 
Neurath’s book Bildstatistik nach Wiener Methode in der Schule (Neurath 
1991, 334–336).
After 1934, these critical attitudes were maintained, but in emigra-
tion there were fewer opportunities to make the same connections with 
a  public. One later encounter with empirical testing does throw some 
unintended light on the question of how this work could be evaluated. In 
1944–6 the psychologist M. D. Vernon subjected what she claimed to be 
Isotype work to a limited experiment. She found that visual presentation 
had no advantages over merely numerical information given in tabular 
form (Vernon 1946). However, Vernon made her own ‘Isotype material’, 
without the qualities of Isotype. In a scathing analysis, Michael Macdonald-
Ross pointed to the deficiencies of Vernon’s test material (1977, 388). And 
further, Vernon missed the larger purpose of Isotype, which was never 
intended to be a means of inculcating facts. Its aim was to bring know-
ledge of the world to people and to stimulate reflection and discussion. 
Otto Neurath, very consciously, saw their work as part of the continuing 
project of the Enlightenment, which had been begun by figures such as 
Comenius and Leibniz (Neurath 2010). It is not easy to find ways of testing 
such ambitions.
Continuing Isotype
Isotype is system-like, but can it be captured as a system, the rules of 
which can be spelled out and even written as a computer program? Can 
the Isotype work be continued in this way, in application to new material? 

114 / Robin Kinross
Since 1971 this idea has arisen repeatedly. An early attempt was made 
by Herbert Koberstein in his book Statistik in Bildern (Koberstein 
1973). Koberstein approached the subject from a concern with statistics 
and without any skills in graphic presentation. Like M. D. Vernon, his 
examples lacked the visual subtleties and attention to detail that distin-
guished Isotype work. Isotype work was redrawn and revised, and in his 
explication of its methods, new principles were added to a hardened-up 
and abstracted version of Isotype. At least one convention of Isotype, in 
which time is fixed as running from top to bottom, was contradicted.
Another attempt at reviving and continuing Isotype has been made by 
Karl H. Müller, most extensively in his book Symbole, Statistik, Computer, 
Design (1991). As with Koberstein, Müller is primarily academic in his 
approach and in his subject matter. Although thoroughly immersed in the 
writings of Otto Neurath, he shows less awareness of the graphic particu-
larities of the work and of its historical contexts. 
The deep question that continuers of Isotype have to address is to 
what degree Isotype was a system with rules that can be specified. This 
is also the question of whether Isotype was a language. If it was a visual 
language, can we say that it had clear rules of grammar and syntax that can 
be articulated? One may find passages in the writings of Otto Neurath that 
give grounds for this idea, but on closer inspection, one can see also that 
Neurath disclaimed it (Burke 2011).
Any attempt to continue Isotype must tackle two obvious issues: 
its graphic qualities were so decisively shaped by Gerd Arntz’s drawing 
(accomplished in discussion and argument with Otto Neurath and other 
colleagues), and Isotype was made in a particular time and in particular 
places. Although international in ambition, it could not escape the fact 
that its images of a telephone or a motor car were pictures, first of all, of 
things that existed in the years between the two world wars in Europe. Any 
intending continuer of Isotype will have to work without a Gerd Arntz and 
will have to find ways of showing a phone or a car that can sit comfortably 
in our present world. They may learn from Otto Neurath’s typically wise 
thought that, when drawing symbols (which he distinguished from picto-
grams) it is often better to show older objects: ‘just because it no longer 
exists as a practical object (or only in modified form), it has power to 
stimulate the imagination, particularly towards the sphere of the intended 
whole phenomenon’ (quoted in Kinross 2013, 128). This small observation 
may indeed be one of the lessons of Isotype. But those seeking to learn 
from this work still have to contend with the fact that it belonged to par-
ticular times and places, and that these contexts will always accompany 
the work. It cannot be extricated from them. But its particularities also 
help us to understand its enduring lessons. 

The lessons of Isotype for information design / 115 
Lessons of Isotype
If there is no simple way in which Isotype can be continued, how should 
we regard it now, and in what ways can it inform present practice?
One lesson of Isotype is in its emphasis on the group of collaborators 
who made the work. Otto Neurath always sought to involve a  variety 
of people, believing that discussion allowed ideas to grow. At the heart 
of the process was the figure that came to be called the transformer (or 
‘Transformator’ in German). The function of the transformer was to find 
material to show, sometimes using what was given to her or him by subject 
specialists, and to work on this, in dialogue with others, to achieve some-
thing that made a visual statement. ‘Transformation’ was so called because 
it evokes the leap from the non-visual into the visual. It was here, in this 
to-and-fro process of dialogue and adjustment, that its subtleties of visual 
configuration lay. It is the process of transformation that any continuer of 
Isotype needs to grasp. 
Marie Neurath, at first under the guidance of Otto Neurath, became 
the prime Isotype transformer. But there were others who began to learn 
this work, especially in their Vienna years. The Isotype transformer then 
gave instructions to an artist or group of artists, for the final realization 
of the ‘design’. One can rightfully use the word design here. The Isotype 
transformer was a designer, not as decorator, but rather in the sense that 
the word has come to have in information design. 
Otto Neurath and Marie Neurath spoke of the transformer as the ‘trus-
tee of the public’ (Neurath and Kinross 2011, 78). The Isotype transformer 
worked on behalf of the public, representing its interests. This is the larg-
est motive behind the search for clarity, honesty, and comprehensibility in 
the communication being made. As in its emphasis on the collaboration of 
different specialists in making work, here too Isotype prefigures informa-
tion design (Macdonald Ross and Waller 2000).
I have suggested elsewhere that in the last analysis Isotype was a way of 
thinking, and that it was an example of design for meaning (Neurath and 
Kinross 2009, 116). The same approach to design can be found elsewhere, 
in other fields of design. Otto Neurath himself devoted much energy to sit-
uating Isotype in a long historical stream of such work, going back even to 
ancient Egyptian culture (Neurath 2010). Such contextualization removes 
the pressure to capture and articulate the secret or the essence of Isotype. 
Rather we can find that there is in Isotype larger, less defined, and more 
enduring lessons for how we work now.
Acknowledgement
All the items shown here are held in the Otto and Marie Neurath Isotype Collection, 
Department of Typography & Graphic Communication, University of Reading. 

116 / Robin Kinross
References
Burke, Christopher. 2011. ‘The linguistic status of 
Isotype.’ In Image and imaging in philosophy, 
science and the arts, vol. 2, edited by Richard 
Heinrich, Elisabeth Nemeth, Wolfram Pichler, 
and David Wagner, 31–57. Frankfurt: Ontos 
Verlag.
Burke, Christopher, Eric Kindel, and Sue Walker, 
eds. 2013. Isotype: design and contexts, 1925–1971. 
London: Hyphen Press.
Kinross, Robin. 2013. ‘The graphic formation of 
Isotype, 1925–40.’ In Burke, Kindel, and Walker 
2013, 107–177.
Koberstein, Herbert. 1973. Statistik in Bildern: eine 
graphisch-statistische darstellungslehre. Stuttgart: 
Poeschel.
Macdonald-Ross, Michael. 1977. ‘How numbers are 
shown: a review of research on the presentation 
of quantitative data in texts.’ Audio-Visual 
Communication Review 25 (4): 359–409.
Macdonald-Ross, Michael, and Robert Waller. 2000. 
‘The transformer revisited.’ Information Design 
Journal 9 (2&3): 177–193.
Müller, Karl H. 1991. Symbole, Statistik, 
Computer, Design: Otto Neuraths 
Bildpädagogik im Computerzeitalter. Vienna: 
Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky.
Neurath, Marie, and Robin Kinross. 2009. The 
transformer: principles of making Isotype charts. 
London: Hyphen Press.
Neurath, Otto. 1933. Bildstatistik nach Wiener Methode 
in der Schule. Vienna and Leipzig: Deutscher 
Verlag für Jugend und Volk. 
Neurath, Otto. 1936. International picture language: 
the first rules of Isotype. London: Kegan Paul.
Neurath, Otto. 1991. Gesammelte bildpädagogische 
Schriften. Edited by Rudolf Haller and Robin 
Kinross. Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky.
Neurath, Otto. 2010. From hieroglyphics to Isotype: 
a visual autobiography. Edited by Matthew Eve 
and Christopher Burke. London: Hyphen Press.
Vernon, M. D. 1946. ‘Learning from graphical 
material.’ British Journal of Psychology 36 (3): 
145–158.

117
Marie Neurath: designing 
information books for young people
Sue Walker
This chapter describes the process of transformation undertaken by Marie 
Neurath and others in the 1940s and 1950s at the Isotype Institute in London 
while working on the design of information books for children. It provides 
examples of a working method that will be familiar to information designers 
today.
Christopher Burke (2013) has commented that the Isotype idea of the 
‘transformer’ can be regarded as ‘a prototype of the modern information 
designer’, echoing Robin Kinross’s view that transformation gives Isotype 
a place ‘in the large and fruitful field of design for meaning.’ Kinross con-
tinues: ‘In this way of working, one tries as a designer (in the widest sense 
of the word) to make sense of the material and let it find good order, both 
for the sake of the material itself and for the sake of the people reading and 
using it’ (see Neurath and Kinross 2009, 77–8). Marie Neurath’s retrospec-
tive explanation was based on a lifetime’s work:
It is the responsibility of the ‘transformer’ to understand the data, to get 
all necessary information from the expert, to decide what it is worth trans-
mitting to the public, how to make in understandable, how to link it with 
general knowledge or with information already given in other charts. In this 
sense the transformer is the trustee of the public. He has to remember the 
rules and keep to them, adding new variations where advisable, at the same 
time avoiding unnecessary deviations which would only confuse. He has to 
produce a rough of the chart in which many details would have been decided: 
title, arrangement, type, number and colour of symbols, caption etc. It is 
a blueprint from which the artist works. (Neurath 1974, 136)
The children’s books produced by the Isotype Institute in London pro-
vide an excellent example of what transformation entailed, supported by 
notes and sketches in the Otto and Marie Neurath Isotype Collection at 
the University of Reading.1 
  1	 The Otto and Marie Neurath Isotype Collection [IC] is the most comprehensive 
archive of Isotype materials. It documents methods of designing and disseminating 
data that have played a major role in twentieth-­century graphic design thinking. 
Given to the University of Reading by Marie Neurath in 1971, the collection includes 
documents, correspondence, published works, and artefacts relating to the history, 
principles, working methods, and products of Isotype, from its beginnings in 1920s 
Vienna through to its later incarnations in The Hague, Oxford, and London. For further 
information about the acquisition of the collection see M. Twyman, ‘Isotype and the 
University of Reading’ at <http://isotyperevisited.org>.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 117–126
7

118 / Sue Walker
This material demonstrates reliance on working in teams, following 
agreed principles and rules, and iteration and feedback at all stages in the 
process. As a way of working it may not seem unusual in the twenty-­first 
century, but in the 1940s the approach taken to the design of books for 
children was most unusual.
Between the end of the 1940s and the start of the 1970s Marie Neurath 
and her team produced over eighty books for young people, even when 
counting translations into other languages. They include the ‘Visual history 
of mankind’ published in 1948, ‘Visual science’ (1950–1952), and ‘Wonders 
of the modern world’ and ‘The wonder world of nature’ published in the 
1950s and 1960s (see Walker 2013). Some of the charts in these books were 
transformations of statistical information, but most resulted from the dis-
tillation of all kinds of written and pictorial information retrieved from 
books, newspapers, consultation with experts, museums, and libraries. 
The books produced show a wide range of approaches to visual organiza-
tion underpinned by Isotype principles of comparison, consistency, and 
access to the information on a number of levels. In the books for children 
these approaches included:
•	 narrative explanations that tell a story, describe a sequence of events 
or a process, or show how something works;
•	 comparisons between things, or over periods of time;
•	 representations of distance, quantity, and time;
•	 showing how internal and external spaces are used, including the 
proximity of land masses and relationships between them. 
Marie Neurath and her team used a  ‘toolkit’ of graphic techniques, 
such as the use of colour, breaking objects down into component parts, 
cross-section, before-and-after representations, and the use of keys and 
graphic devices such as arrows (see Table 1 for some examples).
Notes and drawings in the archive suggest particular ‘stages’ of activity 
in the process of designing. Table 2 shows these stages and the key people 
who worked on the ‘Visual history of mankind’. Once the concept for 
this series had been agreed by the editorial team, the design of each chart 
involved research to ensure accuracy of content, followed by explanation 
of this content in a visual form that could be easily understood by young 
people. For the ‘Visual history of mankind’, unlike the other children’s 
book series, the text was drafted as a series of questions after the charts had 
been designed (Walker 2012). Working from a final ‘rough’ or ‘blueprint’2 
  2	 These words appear to have caused confusion. Maurice Chandler (from the production 
team at Adprint), for example, commenting on the preparatory work for the ‘Wonders 
of the modern world’ series in 1954, wrote: ‘Incidentally, we have come to the conclu-
sion that the word “rough” as we have used it in the past is becoming a little confusing. 
We are, therefore, asking if you will please in future use the word roughs to apply only 
to the drawings that are in the same state of development as you have now reached in 
LONG AGO [The wonder world of long ago, London: Max Parrish, 1954]. Final drawings 
from which astrafoils are to be made should now be referred to as blue-­prints.’

Marie Neurath: designing information books for young people / 119 
Table 1  Some of the graphic techniques used by Marie Neurath and her team,  
with examples from children’s books
Juxtaposition of diagrammatic and real-­world images
Repetition of the same base image  
to demonstrate an action
Or modification to show something  
is changing
Breaking down into component parts
Before-­and-­after treatment
Scale
Magnification
Images from The wonder world of land and water, 1957; ‘Visual science’, Book 3, 1951; Building big things, 1958; 
Strange plants, 1956; and Too small to see, 1956.

120 / Sue Walker
Table 2  Designing and producing the ‘Visual History’: an overview
CONCEPT
Ideas and planning
RESEARCH
Content and data
TRANSFORMATION
Explaining the data
Including
Overall scheme for 
series
Content for each 
volume
Educational approach
Production needs
Marketing
Libraries/museums
Newspapers/journals
Correspondence with 
experts
Distilling 
information
Thinking through 
drawing
Final sketch:  
the blueprint for 
each chart
Iteration and feedback throughout this stage
Personnel involved in each stage
•	Otto Neurath
•	Marie Neurath
•	Wolfgang Foges
•	Walter Neurath
•	Max Parrish
•	Joseph Lauwerys
•	Lancelot Hogben
and others, as part of 
an ‘editorial team’
•	Ilse Reisenbach 
•	Otto Neurath (Books I and II)
•	Marie Neurath (transformer)
•	Clive Weatherhead (transformer)
•	Professor Gordon Childe (expert opinion)
the designers produced a finished drawing and specified type, which was 
supplied as galley proofs, for making the artwork for printing. In the case 
of the ‘Visual history of mankind’ a pre-­publication review copy was made 
and circulated for comment. 
Perhaps indicative of the collaborative ethos that both Otto and Marie 
Neurath considered important, there was much overlapping and sharing 
of roles: the designated ‘designers’, for example, undertook research, 
and commented on the wording of the text. Marie Neurath was actively 
involved in the supervision of various stages of the work from writing 
briefs for those involved in the research, to annotating final drawings with 
comments about accuracy and detail. Additionally there was close and rig-
orous scrutiny by Adprint, usually by Max Parrish and Maurice Chandler, 
and frequent advice from Joseph Lauwerys.
Transformation in practice
Much of the process of transformation involved thinking and planning 
through sketching and drawing. Sketches, of varying levels of finish and 
detail and using different tools, demonstrate how ideas were developed 
and refined. 
The use of the double-­page spread to contain text and pictures related 
to a particular topic was unusual in information books for children pub-
lished in the 1940s and 1950s. Marie Neurath and her team worked out 
the disposition of text and pictures from the first, very rough stages of 

Marie Neurath: designing information books for young people / 121 
planning. One of the key challenges of transformation was the distillation 
of large amounts of information into spreads that contributed to the topic 
being covered in the book.
The planning of each of the books took different forms including mak-
ing small dummies to work out the sequence of spreads, sketches of vary-
ing levels of finish for each spread, and numerous drafts of texts written to 
fit their allocated space adjacent to illustrations. Unusually at the time, and 
indicative of current information design good practice, the text and the 
illustrations were worked on concurrently and close attention was paid to 
ensuring that both verbal and visual explanations were appropriate for the 
relevant age of children that the book was being designed for.
For most of the children’s books, the first stage in the design process 
was the gathering of accurate information as a basis for the charts and the 
accompanying text. This involved identifying relevant source material 
in the form of books, illustrations, newspaper articles and museum cat-
alogues, engineering drawings and plans, maps and diagrams (Figure 1, 
overleaf).
Marie Neurath and her team used a variety of different approaches to 
designing the spreads including the use of carbon-­copy books that were 
the same size as the spreads in the book. The transformers drew on the top 
sheet adding colour as appropriate, and these top sheets were then given 
to the designers and artists who produced the final artwork for printing. 
The bottom copy of the sketches was retained as a record (Neurath and 
Kinross 2009, 21; Figure 2, overleaf).
WRITING THE TEXT
PRODUCTION FOR PRINT
PRE-­PUBLICATION 
REVIEW
Drafting and redraft-
ing the questions to 
accompany charts
Final drawings 
for elements of 
charts 
Typesetting
Artwork for 
printing
Proof copy sent for 
comment
Iteration and feedback throughout this stage
•	Joseph Lauwerys
•	Otto Neurath
•	Marie Neurath 
(Book III)
Designers, including
•	P. G. Findlay
•	Dennis Young
•	Barbara Young
•	Olga Bursill
•	Maurice Chandler
•	Max Parrish
•	Marie Neurath
Including
•	Kenneth James
•	Arthur French
 

122 / Sue Walker
The integration of text and pictures during the sketching process 
ensured close alignment of verbal and visual content (Figure 3). Further 
evidence of the care taken with the text indicates careful drafting of the 
text and sometimes a line-­for-­line specification for typesetting (Figure 4).
Iteration and feedback
In all her work, Marie Neurath recognized the value of feedback, includ-
ing the views of teachers and children (Neurath and Kinross 2009, 450). 
Experts in particular fields as well as teachers, children, and others involved 
in education were presented with sketches and draft text for checking to 
Figure 2
Bottom copy sketch from one 
of Marie Neurath’s carbon-­­copy 
notebooks and resulting spread 
from The wonder world of strange 
plants, 1956, pp. 8–9.
Figure 1
Source material for The wonder 
world of birds, 1953.

Marie Neurath: designing information books for young people / 123 
Figure 3
Sketches and 
resulting spread 
from The wonder 
world of animals, 
1952, pp. 8–9.
Figure 4
Line-for-line 
specification for 
typesetting and 
resulting spread 
from The wonder 
world of birds, 
1953, pp. 6–7.

124 / Sue Walker
Figure 5
Sketch showing Marie Neurath’s 
comment ‘You wouldn’t see it 
so clearly ? green smudge’, and 
resulting spread from Too small to 
see, 1950.
Figure 6
Feedback after close reading of the 
proofs of The wonder world of the 
seashore, 1954.
Figure 7
Examples of reviews of The wonder world 
of the seashore, 1954. 

Marie Neurath: designing information books for young people / 125 
confirm the accuracy of information and its visual presentation. Many of 
the sketches produced in the making of the books contain Marie Neurath’s 
comments and notes and these, in particular, show her attention to detail 
(Figure 5).
The publishers also checked the accuracy of the information by asking 
searching questions and giving detailed feedback (Figure 6). Reviews of 
the books after they had been published were kept by the Isotype team, 
and these too provide evidence of the kind of feedback which could be 
taken into account when designing subsequent books (Figure 7).
Legacy
Recognition of Marie Neurath’s contribution to what we understand 
to­day as information design is probably not as widespread as it deserves 
to be, though several other commentators have drawn attention to it 
(e.g. Kinross 2002; Kindel 2013). The Natural History Museum and the 
Open University were inspired by her work to undertake innovative 
projects (Macdonald-­Ross and Waller 2000), and Twyman (1982) has 
acknow­ledged her contribution to design education. Marie Neurath’s 
work is ­salutary because it provides an historical perspective on the way 
that designing was done, rather than focusing on the artefacts and their 
material and visual characteristics. In discussion about one of the first 
children’s books ‘The visual history of mankind’, Marie Neurath used the 
term ‘designing’ to refer to her work as transformer. She has explained 
her role in the collaborative partnership between the publishers, Adprint, 
and the Isotype Institute as:
the designing of every chart and the supervision of the research and drawing 
work connected with it, within our institute.3
The examples of transformation that occur in the books for children 
are precursors to the way that many information designers work today: 
a team of people dedicated to producing materials designed to be useful 
and attractive to a particular audience, according to principles and rules 
that ensure that verbal and visual language are considered together, and 
that review and feedback are integral to the design process. The children’s 
books, with many smart and innovative examples of information design in 
their own right, also show careful consideration of the needs of different 
stakeholders – author, illustrator, publisher, printer, and not least, the 
children themselves.
  3	 Letter Marie Neurath to Patrick Meredith, 20 May 1944 (IC/1/35).

126 / Sue Walker
126 / Sue Walker
References
Burke, Christopher. 2013. ‘Introduction.’ In 
Isotype: design and contexts 1925–1971, edited by 
Christopher Burke, Eric Kindel, and Sue Walker, 
9–16. London: Hyphen Press.
Kindel, Eric. 2013. ‘Isotype in Africa, 1952–8.’ In 
Isotype: design and contexts 1925–1971, edited by 
Christopher Burke, Eric Kindel, and Sue Walker, 
448–497. London: Hyphen Press.
Kinross, Robin. 2002. ‘Marie Neurath.’ In Robin 
Kinross, Unjustified texts: perspectives on 
typography, 51–55. London: Hyphen Press.
Macdonald-­­Ross, Michael, and Robert Waller. 2000. 
‘The transformer revisited.’ Information Design 
Journal, 9 (2&3): 177–193.
Neurath, Marie. 1974. ‘Isotype.’ Instructional Science, 
3 (2): 127–150.
Neurath, Marie, and Robin Kinross. 2009. The 
transformer: principles of making Isotype charts. 
London: Hyphen Press.
Twyman, Michael. 1982. ‘ISOTYPE und die 
Universitat Reading.’ In Arbeiterbildung in der 
Zwischenkriegzeit: Otto Neurath – Gerd Arnz, 
edited by Friedrich Stadler, 185–188. Vienna/
Munich: Österreichisches Gesellschafts- und 
Wirtschaftsmuseum/Löcker Verlag. An English 
translation is at <http://isotyperevisited.
org/1981/01/isotype-and-the-university-of-
reading.html>.
Walker, Sue. 2012. ‘Explaining history to children: 
Otto and Marie Neurath’s work on the “Visual 
history of mankind”.’ Journal of Design History, 
24 (4): 345–362.
Walker, Sue. 2013. ‘Graphic explanation for children, 
1944–71.’ In Isotype: design and contexts 1925–1971, 
edited by Christopher Burke, Eric Kindel, and Sue 
Walker, 390–437. London: Hyphen Press. 

127
Future, Fortune, and the graphic 
design of information
Eric Kindel
This is a study of graphic information designed for Future books and magazine 
(UK) and Fortune magazine (USA) in the years immediately after the Second 
World War. It highlights work made by the Isotype Institute for Future, which 
is then situated against contributions by Abram Games and F. H. K. Henrion. 
Similar work in Fortune under the art editorship of Will Burtin is discussed in 
a parallel account, drawing on examples by him and others including György 
Kepes, Matthew Liebowitz, Alex Steinweiss, and Ladislav Sutnar. Attention is 
drawn to links and relationships between to the two periodicals and the graphic 
information published in both. Further comparisons are made between under-
lying editorial and design strategies pursued by Otto Neurath (Isotype Institute) 
and Will Burtin. An argument is made for recognizing the little-known innova-
tions of Future alongside the long-acknowledged innovations of Fortune.
The four Future books and 29 subsequent numbers of Future magazine 
were published in London between 1946 and early 1952, and addressed 
many facets of industry, government, science, and the arts in Britain and 
abroad. Future was aimed at a general audience, but one probably inter-
ested in reconstruction and development after the war; its publication 
roughly coincides with the post-­war Labour government (1945–1951).1 
Though it was published under a number of imprints, Future was pro-
duced by Adprint, a London-­based book packager and colour ­printing 
specialist whose director was the Austrian émigré, Wolfgang Foges. Future 
was ‘integrated’ through a mix of writing that was allied to complementary 
forms of visual presentation; the alliance, in turn, achieved appropriate 
and effective technical expression through the strategic use of print pro-
duction methods. The result was a complex whole.2
This study focuses on the second of Future’s three integrated elements, 
its visual presentation, and specifically its graphic design of information, 
  1	 Relatively little has been written about Future. See Stiff (2009, 52–57) and Kindel 
(2013). Throughout this text, ‘Future’ refers to the books and magazine together or to 
the publishing project as a whole; where the four ‘Future books’ or numbers of ‘Future 
magazine’ are discussed specifically, they are generally referred to thus. The present 
study draws on copies of Future and correspondence between the Isotype Institute 
and Adprint in the Otto and Marie Neurath Isotype Collection, University of Reading 
(referred to below as ‘IC’).
  2	 See Facetti (1964), which locates integration in a book’s text-­image relationships, in 
its pairing of writer and artist/designer as equal authors, and (to a limited extent) in its 
production technique. Will Burtin’s earlier (1949) concept of ‘integration’ is discussed 
below.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 127–146
8

128 / Eric Kindel
where the number, variety and sophistication of examples that appeared 
in Future’s pages was unique in Britain at this time. The study highlights 
the work of the Isotype Institute, which was involved in Future from the 
start, though it positions this work alongside contributions by others 
including Abram Games and F. H. K. Henrion. A parallel account is given 
of Fortune magazine, the lavish large-­format business monthly published 
in the USA. As a contemporary exemplar of graphic information in an edi-
torial context that informed Future’s planning and was an on­going point of 
reference, Fortune offers a valuable comparison. The intention is to recall 
Future and Fortune as mid-­twentieth-century periodicals whose graphic 
design of information was substantial and inventive.3
Fortune and Adprint’s new periodical
A letter of late March 1944 from Otto Neurath to Adprint records the 
start of Isotype’s work on Adprint’s new ‘periodical project’. Neurath was 
then co-­director of the Isotype Institute based in Oxford, a position he 
shared with his wife, Marie Neurath. Having reviewed material Adprint 
was proposing to include, Otto Neurath remarked that they had also ‘ana-
lysed Fortune for comparison’, the first indication of a connection between 
Fortune and Adprint’s prospective periodical.4
Fortune was famously launched in February 1930, less than four months 
after the catastrophic stock market crash of October 1929. Henry Luce, 
its instigator, declared that Fortune would be ‘as beautiful a magazine as 
exists in the United States. If possible, the undisputed most beautiful.’5 It 
did prove beautiful – and expensive, at a dollar a copy, flouting the pre-
vailing economic conditions. Luce’s concern for beauty was subsequently 
demonstrated in many aspects of Fortune: its outsize format and striking 
covers, its stately typography and epic photography, and its quality paper 
and expansive use of colour. The magazine’s editorial treatment of busi-
ness activity encompassed many spheres of industry and commerce, man-
ufacturing and technology, planning and development, as well as the arts, 
architecture, and politics; profiles of companies and business leaders also 
featured. The numerous opportunities to partner written content with 
  3	 In the discussion that follows, the ‘graphic design of information’ or simply ‘graphic 
information’ refer to the visualization of physical, technical, and organizational con-
cepts, structures, and processes; the presentation of quantitative information in charts 
and maps; and other thematic uses of cartography. The approach to visualization may 
involve naturalistic illustration; graphic and photographic elements; pictographic, 
schematic, or abstract iconography; and text.
  4	 Letter Otto Neurath to Miss [Elizabeth] Layton, 27 March 1944 (IC 1/31). Further ref-
erences to the Future project are found in IC 1/31–34, passim (‘Correspondence of the 
Isotype Institute with Adprint Ltd.’), 1943–1946; and IC 2/1 (‘Business papers, . . .’), 
c. 1942–1948.
  5	 Quoted in Sumner (2010, 80); originally from a 1929 prospectus presented by Luce to 
the board of Time Inc. Henry Luce was co-­founder and president of Time Inc., which 
published Time magazine, Fortune, and later Life.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 129 
photographs, illustrations, and graphic information resulted in strongly 
‘unified editorial and visual concepts’.6
The graphic design of information in Fortune during the 1930s under art 
editor Eleanor Treacy was prominent, if mostly conventional: line graphs, 
bar charts, and explanatory illustrations. Considerable attention was given 
to large pictorial and thematic maps, which were printed in bold, satur-
ated colours. Between 1938 and 1945, under art editors Francis Brennan 
and Peter Piening, maps, charts, and diagrams appear more frequently, 
well suited to content associated with the Second World War. The design 
and visual style of the charts and diagrams varied considerably. Notable 
are those that combined pictorial illustration with abstract elements to 
depict structures and processes; pictorial statistics occur with some fre-
quency, though mainly in the magazine’s ‘survey’ feature.7 Despite the set-­
piece impact of individual examples, the graphic information was carefully 
integrated with written content, and in editorial terms led by it. The result 
was indeed unified editorial and visual concepts made yet more impressive 
technically by the magazine’s sophisticated print production.
Regrettably, Otto Neurath’s letter of March 1944 lacks detail about his 
analysis of Fortune or how an Adprint periodical might compare. Instead, 
he took the opportunity to describe the kinds of graphic information the 
Isotype Institute could contribute. It would be varied (as in Fortune) but 
unified by the aim to make visual presentations that were ‘informative, 
educational and explanatory’.8 In addition to pictorial statistics, there 
could be a diversity of maps, ‘key charts’ showing important parts of things, 
‘organizational schemes’, and unspecified ‘inventions’. Neurath believed 
that people liked such presentations and in fact preferred them to picto-
rial statistics, of which there should not be too many.9 He also proposed 
‘linking up’ sets of photographs with Isotype charts in a documentary 
  6	 Quotation from Hurlburt (1976 (1971), 7), referring specifically to Thomas Maitland 
Cleland’s original design of Fortune. Discussion of Fortune’s editorial design addition-
ally draws on Owen (1991a, especially 44–47, 57–64) and Owen (1991b). See also 
<http://www.fulltable.com/VTS/f/fo.htm> for extensive documentation of Fortune 
compiled by Chris Mullen, and Mullen and Beard (1985), which partnered an exhibi-
tion of the same name.
  7	 ‘The Fortune Survey’ was a regular feature during these years and drew extensively on 
statistical information, for which light-­hearted monochromatic pictorial statistics were 
clearly thought most appropriate; many of these were created by Irving Geis. Pictorial 
statistics occasionally appear elsewhere in Fortune; they were typically simple, some-
times colourful, and again often not wholly serious. An example of the latter occurs in 
the August 1941 number, enumerating the USA’s spending on armaments to counter 
the Nazi Weltmacht. A full-­page illustration-­chart by Boris Artzybasheff is cartoonishly 
threatening (pictorial statistics integrating a large sword, set off against a stormy 
horizon over which a lightning bolt is transformed into a swastika), perhaps in an effort 
to dramatize a kind of graphic information Fortune’s editors thought otherwise prone 
to monotony. 
  8	 Letter Neurath to Layton, 27 March 1944, cited above. Quotations that follow in this 
paragraph are also from this source; emphasis in original.
  9	 Neurath believed that British readers did not like pictorial statistics as much as 
American readers did.

130 / Eric Kindel
manner; photographs were valuable because it was ‘important to see “the 
real thing” ’. Colour was considered, too: Neurath was concerned not to 
‘kill’ the rich colours of any planned photography with the ‘sharp’ colours 
of Isotype; the two should be in ‘eye reaching distance’, but not adjacent. 
Overall, he was sanguine about the project: the ‘Isotype scheme’ he out-
lined could, he felt, ‘reach the peak of Isotype attractiveness’ if put into 
practice.
But if the many kinds of graphic information Neurath listed would go 
some way towards matching the number and variety of those in Fortune, 
his expectations about the place and status of Isotype work were different. 
He envisioned work on the new periodical as ‘by symposium’, a process 
wherein many voices would contribute while each remained distinct.10 
This would apply equally to the Isotype Institute: while its work would 
complement other editorial matter, it would be semi-­autonomous, func-
tioning as much to counterpoint as to merely illustrate. To make the point, 
Neurath repeatedly insisted that Adprint recognize the Isotype Institute as 
an author, with the intellectual and creative independence this implied.11 
For the remainder of 1944 and the first half of 1945, the Isotype Institute 
developed graphic information for an initial group of articles planned for 
the new periodical, now called ‘Future’.12 The articles would address trade 
with the Soviet Union, medicine, aviation, coal mining, and development 
in the Danube valley.13 By mid 1945, work was underway on a  second 
group of articles dealing with atomic energy, the British foreign service, 
and the British film industry. As eventually published, the charts were 
varied in kind and size: most were quantity-­based treatments integrat-
ing pictograms, sometimes applied to maps; others were organizational, 
10	 Letter Neurath to Layton, 27 March 1944, cited above.
11	 Neurath had argued for the Isotype Institute’s author status since 1942, when it first 
began contributing to Adprint publications. By the start of the periodical project the 
argument was well established, though not uncontested. For example, in an letter 
from Wolfgang Foges to Neurath relating to charts for the ‘America and Britain’ series 
(1943), Foges wrote: ‘What you say about Isotype being in the same position as an 
author seems to me quite all right, but for any Adprint series there will always be an 
editor who will be finally responsible towards Adprint for the whole book and you will 
always have to put up with such an editor or even a board of editors.’ Letter Foges to 
Neurath, 26 July 1943 (IC 1/31). Neurath replied: ‘Please, be kind enough, to explain to 
all editors and editorial boards, that we expect that editors will not interfere more with 
our charts, than they usually interfere with manuscripts of authors. We do not accept the 
idea that we are subordinate to author’s and editor’s decisions.’ He warned of stalemate 
‘if the editor does not acknowledge from the start that we are authors, like others, and 
the editor’s business is to organize co-­operation’. Neurath also objected to attempts by 
authors and editors to ‘check’ Isotype charts, arguing that this was an ill-­informed and 
ineffectual duplication of its work. Letter Neurath to Foges, 27 July 1943 (IC 1/31); 
emphasis in original.
12	 The name first occurs in correspondence dated 17 May 1944 (IC 1/32); its inspiration 
is not stated.
13	 Minutes of meetings on 30 June and 1 July 1944 (IC 1/32) describe a ‘gentlemen’s’ 
agreement of work stipulating the ‘visualization’ of 4–5 articles (exact number of charts 
unspecified) with a payment of £350; see also IC 2/1 for additional records of payments 
relating to Future work.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 131 
flow, or other forms of explanatory diagrams. Several kinds of maps were 
produced in addition to those integrating pictorial statistics; and unusu-
ally, several semi-­naturalistic illustrations on an axonometric projection 
occur, though these were unsigned. Many of the charts and maps occu-
pied a page, a spread of pages or several consecutive pages. Among the 
latter, the sequence of charts and maps produced for the Danube article 
(published as ‘T.V.A. for south-­east Europe’) probably represent most 
fully what Neurath hoped to achieve (Figure 1, overleaf). Planned across 
six successive pages, and made up of thematic, topographical, and cross-­
sectional maps and several kinds of quantitative charts surrounded by 
text and captions, the sequence in total demonstrated how a composite 
of Isotype presentations could build up a topic through carefully inter-­
related content that was also visually impressive.14
Yet not all the work ended successfully. Contributions to the article on 
aviation were abandoned after an attempt was made to mix Isotype with 
stills from an animated film by Walt Disney. This drew strong protests 
from Neurath, who regarded the Disney material as comedic rather than 
educational.15 While not dismissing Disney outright, Neurath found the 
situation unbearable since an unprogrammatic mixing of Isotype work 
with other illustrations undermined its intention, which was to provide 
‘educational information’. The subject of aviation in fact offered numerous 
possibilities for presenting strong visual arguments and explanations for 
the development of flight, the evolution of aircraft types, and so on. This 
could be best achieved with a ‘a sequence of charts fitting into the article, . . . 
as something complete in itself, highly educational but also visually entertain-
ing the onlooker. Something unusual and new.’ For Neurath, the possibly 
of something new was crucial; showing Disney stills from an existing film 
that was also ‘educationally badly made’ did not allow this.
Work on the aviation article prompted Neurath to complain more gen-
erally about an editorial process pre-­disposed to writers at the expense of 
visual solutions.
You see, it is very improbable that the writers will suggest visually very 
impressive things, they force us to make compromise after compromise 
instead of inspiring us to invent new things. How should one expect that 
a writer, which never thought of visualization, will bring forward arguments 
particularly adapted to visualization? 
14	 Writing to Foges in May 1944, apparently reflecting on early work on the Danube 
article, Neurath remarked that creative skill was needed to make maps that were 
impressive and educational. He continued: ‘I hope you will influence the editors 
[of Future] and one could make Future in some way original and different, just [by] 
presenting something Fortune and Life have not, and something everybody will like, 
because it does not treat the reader as a moron.’ Letter Neurath to Foges, 25 May 1944 
(IC 1/32); emphasis in original.
15	 Letter Neurath to Foges, 17 May 1944 (IC 1/32). Quotations that follow in this para-
graph and the next are from this source; emphases in original. Neurath makes it clear 
that his views were informed by those of his wife, Marie Neurath.

132 / Eric Kindel
Figure 1
‘T.V.A. for south-­east 
Europe’, Future books, 
vol. I (‘Overture’), 
1946, pp. 92–97. Charts 
and maps by Isotype 
Institute. Offset 
lithography, pp. 93–96; 
photogravure, pp. 92, 97. 
Page size 29.5 × 21.5 cm.
Figure 2
Details from Figure 1. 
a. Offset litho­graphy, 
p. 93.  
b. Photogravure, 
p. 97.
a
b

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 133 
For the Isotype Institute, the larger aim was clear: 
We want to be creative, i.e. not only illustrating texts, but making visual 
statements in the framework of visual arguments. We hoped that a periodical 
would enable us to make additional charts, which as Isotype articles – as it 
were – should accompany articles written by others. But what happened: we 
should be less free . . . , where our Isotypes appear, dependent upon writers 
and seeing our Isotypes mixed up with visual material, we criticize in our own 
publications.16
If Neurath had mixed results in asserting the Isotype Institute’s autho-
rial priority, he found considerable success in a parallel – and perhaps 
compensatory – effort to achieve suitable technical expression for Isotype 
charts and maps. The effect was to give them another kind of autonomy, 
a  physical one. Drawing on the expertise of Walter Neurath, several 
dimensions of print production came into play. These included foremost 
the choice of print method: offset lithography or photogravure. Both were 
available for the production of Future and each was deployed to best con-
vey particular features of the work. Offset lithography delivered the sharp 
(spot) colours and precise forms to graphic matter in the charts; photo-
gravure, with its diffuse (greyscale) tones and (process) colours, brought 
softer edges and boundaries to zones and regions in the maps (Figure 2).17 
In places (the Danube article, for example), the carefully planned collation 
of printed sheets allowed charts and maps to appear on opposite pages 
of a spread, each page printed by the method most suited to its content. 
The distinctiveness of charts printed by offset lithography was sometimes 
further heightened by the use of a smoother, brighter stock that set them 
apart from matter printed photogravure.18
16	 See also letter Otto Neurath to Adprint’s production director, Walter Neurath (no rela-
tion), undated (November 1945) (IC 1/34), in which Otto Neurath expresses his wish 
that Future authors be ‘Isotype-­minded’, giving the Isotype Institute sufficient time to 
find the right solution for visual explanation and avoid rushed production schedules.
17	 Here a correlation can be proposed between exactly specified and printed colours and 
forms (achievable in offset lithography) and the wish for Isotype charts to depict and 
explain by reference to actual things. In general, the best use of a particular printing 
process was apparently the aim, though compromise was at times made necessary by 
production constraints. Adprint’s willingness to pursue good quality production for 
Isotype work and for photography and illustration was in keeping with Future’s other 
function as a promotional vehicle for Adprint expertise. 
18	 Discussions in correspondence between Otto Neurath and Walter Neurath relating 
to Future extended to other facets of production including blockmaking and the use 
of mechanical tints. Otto Neurath demanded careful layout planning to accurately 
determine in advance the size and placement of Isotype charts, both of which were 
crucial to their design. Excessive scaling of single charts, or variable scaling among 
multiple charts, could have drastic consequences for cohesiveness, affecting pictogram 
and type size, the resolution of tints, even the size of the Isotype Institute mark. It 
was Otto Neurath’s belief that ‘the success of Isotype charts is essentially based on the 
reproduction technique’; see letter Otto Neurath to Walter Neurath, 27 August 1942 
(IC 1/30).

134 / Eric Kindel
Future books into Future magazine
In December 1945, after the completion of the first and second groups 
of charts and maps for Future, Otto Neurath died. Despite his passing, 
the work was nevertheless published in what became Future books, 
vol. i (‘Overture’) and vol. II (‘The stage is set’).19 And his arguments for 
how Isotype work should be designed, produced, and deployed in Future 
continued to guide subsequent contributions. These included thematic 
and quantity maps, organizational and quantity charts, and timelines 
completed for articles dealing with British agriculture, a factory city, cot-
ton production, the West Indies, Australia, the drive for export, Reuters, 
and Italy. The work, now overseen by Marie Neurath alone, was pub-
lished in vol. III (‘The crowded scene’) and vol. IV (‘Transformation’). In 
total, Isotype contributions to the four volumes together went some way 
towards realizing the aims Otto Neurath had articulated at the start of the 
project, even if their hoped-­for extent and autonomy was circumscribed 
in places.20
Apparently satisfied with the venture, Adprint transformed Future 
books into Future  magazine, whose publication commenced in 1947.21 
The venture would bring with it the regular demands of periodical publi-
cation and involve printing the magazine abroad.22 Further contributions 
were commissioned from the Isotype Institute, many of which retained 
the presence and impact of the work in Future books, frequently occupy-
ing a full page or spread of pages and printed in colour. But the ambitious 
19	 An ‘Introductory note’ in Future books, vol. I, pp. 1–2, draws attention to the 
contributions of the Isotype Institute, singling out the Danube article as demonstrating 
the breadth of visual presentation Isotype could deliver. Isotype work is also described 
in the context of Future’s ‘contrapuntal method’ of illustrating articles, wherein 
visual matter makes its own substantial addition, echoing Otto Neurath’s idea of 
‘symposium’. It should be noted that from Future books, vol. II, onwards (until spring 
1949), George A. Adams is listed as Future’s art editor, though it is difficult to assess his 
influence on the use of graphic information as he is not mentioned in Isotype-­Adprint 
correspondence.
20	 None of the four Future books carries a date of publication. An editorial introduction 
in Future magazine (discussed below; [vol. 2], no. 2, p. 1) refers to ‘the four 1946 
miscellanies called Future Books’. There are indications in the Isotype-­Adprint 
correspondence that Future books, vol. I, appeared in the latter part of 1945, but no 
explicit confirmation. The appearance of Future books drew comment from George 
Orwell, who reported in Partisan Review that ‘the kind of streamlined, high-­powered, 
slickly got-­up, semi-­intellectual magazine which you are familiar with in the USA is now 
beginning to appear here also. Two recent examples are Future and Contact.’ ‘London 
letter’, Partisan Review, Summer 1946, republished in Orwell and Angus (1970, 224). 
Although Orwell refers to magazines, both Future and Contact were produced as book 
series at this time.
21	 Like the four Future books, early numbers of Future magazine are undated; ‘1947’ is 
probable.
22	 Printing Future magazine abroad was probably done to avoid restrictive post-­war paper 
quotas in Britain; the printing alternated between the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia, 
but in mid 1950 it returned to Britain, though covers continued to be printed in the 
Netherlands.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 135 
sequences of charts and maps previously achieved do not appear again, 
nor do the ‘Isotype articles’ Otto Neurath had argued for. Similarly, with 
the move of printing abroad, the ability to match graphic information to 
specific printing methods was lost.23
While the Isotype Institute had been the sole contributor of graphic 
information to Future books, other designers began supplying work of 
this kind to early numbers of Future magazine, notably Abram Games and 
F. H. K. Henrion.24 Games was known at this time mainly for his post-
ers and advertisements, while Henrion, a  poster designer as well, was 
also active in editorial and exhibition design. Work commissioned from 
Games was probably encouraged or made possible by Henrion, a friend 
who was additionally serving Future as a consultant art editor. In its con-
ceptual approach and visual technique, the graphic information designed 
by Games and Henrion offers an instructive contrast to that of the Isotype 
Institute. 
If Isotype charts and maps were attempts at definite visual statements 
without ambiguity or emotion, Games and Henrion pursued presenta-
tions that delivered greater visual drama. During the war, Henrion had 
produced highly ordered charts of pictorial statistics, though the two-­
dimensional logic, rigour, and restraint demanded by such work appar-
ently held only limited interest for him. Instead, his contributions to Future 
magazine were typically illustrations of objects or processes using simple 
graphic forms or various styles of drawing and painting; both approaches 
sometimes incorporated photography, photo-­collage, or photo­montage 
(Figure 3, overleaf). The illustrations were visually attractive and often 
intriguing, especially when they evoked a surrealistic mood. But some-
times an incidental or idiosyncratic style was applied to objects and 
processes for which a more factual or highly resolved (i.e. photographic) 
presentation might have been advisable.
Games drew mainly on visual metaphor or mimesis to order graphic 
information. This took several forms but usually involved an illusionistic 
scene in which he arranged organizational components (cogs in a machine, 
for example) or placed a structure or naturalistic object configured to hold 
quantitative content. These elements were thematic in origin, emerging 
from the subject matter or data source; they, too, were often surrealistic, 
now with bright precise forms, hard shadows, and Daliesque clouds made 
uncanny by Games’s extraordinary facility with an airbrush (Figure  4, 
overleaf). While optically compelling, such solutions relied on forms and 
configurations that were procrustean, and therefore as expressions of 
23	 Editorial matter in Future magazine was printed wholly by photogravure in the 
Netherlands; in Czechoslovakia it was initially printed by letterpress and later by 
photogravure. No offset lithography occurs in Future magazine.
24	 Apart from the Isotype Institute, Games and Henrion were by some margin the most 
prolific contributors of graphic information; other contributors included George A. 
Adams, Lucien Lowen, and Manfred Reiss. Further occurrences of graphic information 
are unsigned.

136 / Eric Kindel
quantity liable to be inelastic, inaccurate, or arbitrary. This characteris-
tic merging of content with invented illusionistic objects, so engaging in 
Games’s posters (and in his covers for Future magazine), was more prob-
lematic in the context of quantitative graphic information. 
In broad terms, Henrion and Games achieved visual drama in their work 
by adopting what Isotype mostly avoided, namely unquantifiable perspec-
tive or spatial depth, quasi-­functional pictorial devices, or vague image 
and colour associations. But neither were Isotype contributions to Future 
magazine entirely problem-­free when they departed from well-­tried rules 
of visual presentation. In places, Isotype’s declared best practice in colour 
use was weakened when individual colours were arbitrarily determined 
by adjacent (full-­colour) illustrations; elsewhere, pictorial statistics lost 
force and clarity when accompanied or overprinted by secondary images 
whose connections were indirect or merely suggestive. Some Isotype 
charts strained for drama when they were angled upwards, arranged radi-
ally, or overlaid on a full-­colour, illusionistic backdrop (Figure 5). These 
instances demonstrate how the rigour of Isotype could be compromised 
by gratuitous or excessive visual complexity, by competing editorial aims, 
or by too-­quick design under the pressures of periodical production.
Figure 3
‘Television in colour’, Future magazine, vol. 5, no. 5, October/November 
1950. Graphic information by F. H. K. Henrion. Photogravure.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 137 
Figure 4
‘Czechoslovakia and the Two-­Year Plan’, Future magazine, vol. 3, no. 1, 1948. 
Graphic information by Abram Games. Photogravure.
Figure 5
‘The Brabazon story’, Future magazine, vol. 4, no. 2, April/May 1949. 
Chart by Isotype Institute. Photogravure.

138 / Eric Kindel
Fortune, in parallel
In 1948, Future magazine published what would be its longest-­ever ­article, 
an 18-page illustrated profile of Fortune.25 The article indicates an on­going 
interest in Fortune among Future’s editors, while the discussion of Fortune 
as a ‘pioneer of visual presentation’ reinforces the sense that the editors 
were well aware of its design innovations.26 Fortune’s pioneering visual 
presentation can be assigned to the whole of its years of publication prior 
to the mid 1940s, though during Will Burtin’s art editorship, from summer 
1945 until spring 1949, its graphic design of information was given special 
attention. Burtin’s interest in such work emerged out of previous expe-
riences both in Germany, where he had designed catalogues and other 
promotional material for technical products and services prior to his emi-
gration in 1938, and in the USA during the war, when he designed training 
instructions and other graphic information for the military. These experi-
ences, allied to a growing interest in the visual explanation of science and 
technology, informed his art editing at Fortune.27
The graphic information commissioned and designed during Burtin’s 
tenure largely retained the variety of subjects and approaches previously 
found in Fortune. But within this variety, innovative visual explanations 
of scientific and technological concepts and processes were clearly a pri-
ority, and the range of leading designers Burtin recruited to contribute 
such work is proof of its importance to him. Among those commissioned 
were Lester Beale, Matthew Liebowitz, and Alex Steinweiss, and recent 
European émigrés György Kepes, Ladislav Sutnar, and Max Gschwind, 
the latter a long-­time Burtin collaborator. This work variously exploited 
naturalistic imagery, schematic graphic iconography, and photography 
deployed within larger abstract shapes or conceptual arrangements 
(Figures 6–9). The information fields thus created were well-­ordered 
in their entirety, though their logic still required sustained analysis to be 
fully understood. Their visual impact within Fortune’s expansive format 
was considerable, especially when running across the magazine’s spine to 
occupy (and bleed off) a spread of pages.28
25	 See Keynes (1948).
26	 The article included colour illustrations of Fortune covers, maps, and other graphic 
information. A month or so later, Future in turn attracted comment from Time 
magazine, which described it as patterned on Fortune, with its ‘slick paper and color 
layouts’. Time damned Future as ‘the best dressed of Britain’s dowdy magazines’ and 
reported that it was making a loss. ‘The press: Future with a past’, Time, 24 May 1948 
(unsigned). The article also reported Future’s circulation as 20,000 (4,000 in the USA; 
7,000 in the UK; 9,000 elsewhere). Fortune’s circulation in 1948 was roughly ten times 
this number; see Magazine circulation analysis, 1937–1948 ([New York]: Association of 
National Advertisers, 1949).
27	 See Remington and Fripp (2007).
28	 See ‘Fortune’s art department’ (9 June 1947, unsigned; <http://www.fulltable.com/
VTS/f/fortune/ad.htm>), a six-­page account of working processes and personalities. 
It notes Burtin’s interest in the ‘visualization of abstract processes and ideas’ and 
Fortune’s ‘new emphasis on symbolical illustration’, asserting that ‘some of the greatest 
[cont. on p. 141]

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 139 
Figure 7
‘Music for the home’, Fortune, October 1946. Graphic information by [Ladislav] 
Sutnar + Hall. Photogravure.
Figure 6
‘Television – a case of war neurosis’, Fortune, February 1946. Graphic information by 
Matthew Liebowitz. Letterpress (left page) and photogravure. Page size 33 × 27 cm.

140 / Eric Kindel
Figure 9
‘Business in Isotopes’, Fortune, December 1947. Graphic information by 
György Kepes. Photogravure.
Figure 8
‘Coal’, Fortune, March 1947. Graphic information by Alex Steinweiss. Photogravure.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 141 
Despite the singular force of such graphic information, individual 
instances principally served as illustrations supporting an article’s written 
content. Somewhat different in function and impact was graphic informa-
tion arrayed across a complete article. In Fortune articles of this kind, text, 
captions, photography, and graphic information were simultaneously 
formed into narratives spanning many spreads (Figure  10, overleaf). 
Mostly designed by Burtin, these articles achieved a  total cohesion of 
editorial and visual elements.29 Here graphic information served a higher 
function in its contribution to ‘integration’, a concept Burtin described as 
the sum of a designer’s work. Integration was an ‘organic unity’ of pictorial 
and textual elements, of looking and reading, of space and time ordered 
to dramatic effect.30 Burtin likened it to an exhibition or motion picture, 
both of which ‘have a wide array of sensations, such as fast and slow speed, 
rise and decline, staccato and smooth flow, noisy and quiet colors, all 
organized toward a harmonious whole’. These together produced a larger 
‘flow’ that allowed the reader to take in ‘information units’ and arrive 
at comprehension. While in the context of Fortune, Burtin would have 
understood integration as encompassing the magazine as a whole, the 
concept is observable in individual examples of graphic information, and 
is perhaps most convincingly demonstrated in the complete articles.
Graphic information and editorial design
In spring 1949, Will Burtin resigned as art editor of Fortune, after which 
a redesign of the magazine was begun by his successor, Leo Lionni. The 
changes would re-­orient Fortune towards more topical reporting of busi-
ness and prioritize reading over looking.31 Though graphic information 
facts now shaping the world cannot be seen though the eye of the realistic artist or the 
camera – science is alive with such world-­shaking abstractions’ (pp. 3–4). One kind 
of graphic information little used during Burtin’s art editorship was the sophisticated 
colour maps Fortune was known for. Many of these had been designed by Richard Edes 
Harrison who later complained that ‘Will Burtin and his followers had little regard 
for my stuff. They were in a world (Bauhaus?) where abstract design was everything 
and realistic, understandable mapping was beneath their notice.’ See ‘Richard Edes 
Harrison, mapmaker, correspondence with Chris Mullen’, typescript, p. 7; <http://
www.fulltable.com/VTS/f/fortune/reh/mn.htm>.
29	 Notable examples include ‘Thrust’ (unsigned, September 1946), ‘Astrophysics’, 
(Burtin, January 1947), and ‘The American Bazaar’ (Burtin, November 1947); several 
carry the designation ‘portfolio’, suggesting an aim of visual and conceptual unity. 
Whenever Burtin presented an example of his work at Fortune, he typically used 
‘Astrophysics’.
30	 Burtin (1949). In addition to describing integration, this article illustrates an exhibition 
of the same name, designed by Burtin and featuring his work. The exhibition is itself 
a demonstration of integration; in it, the article ‘Astrophysics’ is prominently displayed.
31	 See Mullen and Beard (1985, 12–15) for additional remarks on changes in editorial 
policy, design, and production in the late 1940s; Fortune was apparently loss-­making 
during this period. Accompanying the introduction of his redesign in September 1951, 
Lionni remarked (in Fortune, that month) that ‘though the functions of magazines, 
and consequently their forms, are as variable as their titles, the first function of any 
[cont. on p. 143]

142 / Eric Kindel
Figure 10 
‘Astrophysics’, 
Fortune, January 
1947, three 
successive spreads 
(of six), pp. 118–123.  
Design by Will 
Burtin, photographs 
by Ezra Stoller. 
Offset lithography 
(pp. 118–120) and 
letterpress.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 143 
continued to be deployed, the move was unequivocally away from Burtin’s 
ambitious uses of it. Future magazine underwent a roughly similar change 
and at much the same time. Emphasis shifted away from ‘industry, gov-
ernment, science, and the arts’, narrowing to business and economics. 
In early 1950, Future became ‘Britain’s business magazine’ and later ‘The 
magazine for business men’. F. H. K. Henrion had taken over as art edi-
tor in spring 1949, and while the use of graphic information continued, 
its approach and style were increasingly perfunctory – with notable 
exceptions, usually designed by Henrion himself. Isotype contributions 
diminish and in Future’s final two years only a handful appear. In late 1951, 
Henrion resigned as art editor; the magazine, now editorially, visually, and 
technically impoverished, ceased publication soon after.32
In 1961, in Visual design in action, Ladislav Sutnar looked back at his 
work for Fortune under Burtin. He distinguished between two approaches 
taken to the graphic design of information:
In the second half of the nineteen forties Fortune magazine spearheaded the 
exploitation of new visual techniques for maps, graphs, and charts. Examples 
from this period show two basic approaches. The first may be called ‘purist.’ 
Charts and diagrams were compressed into a two-­dimensional projection. 
Color was used only to facilitate a better understanding. . . . The second way 
might be called a ‘dramatized’ approach. In this technique a new dimension 
is added.33
Sutnar’s summary captures a basic tension in Fortune between graphic 
information that was two-­dimensional in form and projection (‘purist’) 
and that to which a ‘new’ dimension was added (‘dramatized’). By impli-
cation the latter involved three-­dimensional projections whose dynamic 
spatial effects gave rise to visual drama. Sutnar draws particular attention 
to the use of colour: in purist examples it ‘only’ facilitated better under-
standing; in dramatized examples it should (again by implication) have 
visual impact over and above any precise functional or categorical logic. 
(Figures 11 and 12, overleaf).34
magazine is to get itself read’, adding that he aimed to ‘avoid the kind of false modernity 
that is sometimes accomplished by graphic tricks’, intending for the (new) design to 
‘be functional rather than merely looking functional’.
32	 During the years he worked on Future, Henrion had clearly taken Will Burtin as a point 
of reference. As he later recalled, Henrion was aware of Burtin as ‘an idea’ before the 
two met in 1949 while Burtin was still art editor of Fortune. Referring in part to graphic 
information in Fortune, Henrion observed that ‘before anyone else, he [Burtin] realized 
the need of science and scientific concepts and theories to be understood by people 
other than scientists’ (Henrion 1989, 96). See also Henrion (1972).
33	 Sutnar (1961, b/24).
34	 Sutnar (1961, b/24) provides examples by reference to Fortune articles, to which he 
contributed graphic information. The charts, graphs, and diagrams in ‘How well can 
Americans live?’ (May 1947) were ‘purist’; the graph-­diagrams for ‘Taylor Instruments’ 
(August 1946) were ‘dramatized’; the chart for ‘Music for the home’ (October 1946) 
was situated ‘between the two extremes’. He remarks that ‘such approaches may also 
apply in relating several charts in a sequence’. Sutnar notably made work in the 1930s 
[cont. on p. 145]

144 / Eric Kindel
Figure 11
‘How well can Americans live?’, Fortune, May 1947. Graphic information by 
Ladislav Sutnar. Letterpress.
Figure 12
‘Taylor Instrument’, Fortune, August 1946. Graphic information by Ladislav Sutnar. 
Photogravure.

Future, Fortune, and the graphic design of information / 145 
The period of innovation Sutnar identified at Fortune magazine had 
its equivalent at Future. The graphic information contributed by Abram 
Games, F. H. K. Henrion, and others corresponds to Sutnar’s dramatized 
approach in delivering new dimensions of visual configuration, effect, 
and impact. Their work also supports Sutnar’s contrast with ‘purist’ work 
whose approach was putatively sober and functional. In Future, the latter 
is broadly represented by Isotype: its orderly and unemotive presenta-
tions were indeed largely two-dimensional in projection, within which 
colour and form were carefully controlled in support of unambiguous 
visual explanation.35
Beyond Sutnar’s remarks as they mostly describe single examples 
of graphic information, it is essential to also emphasize the grouping of 
graphic information within a larger editorial ensemble, to which Sutnar 
made brief reference. Expressed in different ways, this was the higher 
aim of Otto Neurath and Will Burtin in the publications they served. For 
Neurath, his description of the Adprint periodical as a ‘symposium’ could 
(at article level) apply both to Isotype contributions within the sum of 
editorial elements, or to the complete Isotype articles he envisioned and 
to some extent achieved, in which the variety, connections, and counter-
points of separate Isotype charts and maps together built up a representa-
tion of a given topic. For Burtin, his concept and process of ‘integration’ 
produced a different result, in which editorial and visual elements formed 
a harmonious whole whose flow and drama brought about comprehension. 
Here the goal was organic unity rather than Neurath’s mosaic assembly.36
In the history of twentieth-­century graphic design, Fortune magazine 
has long been recognized for its sophisticated visual presentation, includ-
ing its graphic design of information. By contrast, the deployment of 
graphic information in Future is little known. But comparison of the two 
publications is salutary, given Fortune as a named point of reference for 
Future. And if, in contrast to its American cousin, Future’s graphic design 
that integrated pictorial statistics under the influence of Isotype; see (e.g.) Malá 
vlastivěda (1935), an atlas of Czechoslovak history and geography, in Burke, Kindel, 
and Walker (2013, 247).
35	 Such attributes can be compared to the art historical sense οf ‘purist’ in respect of the 
painters Ozenfant and Jeanneret (i.e. Le Corbusier) whose Purist work emphasized 
(interrelated) contours and profiles of objets-types in spatially compressed two-­
dimensional compositions.
36	 The respective aims of Neurath and Burtin in a print-­editorial context can be corre-
lated with other work, especially exhibitions. For Isotype, its composite, sequential, 
modular structure of presentation originates in the display of charts and maps at the 
Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum in Vienna, and thereafter in many exhibitions 
and publications where Isotype exerted editorial control. For Burtin, the organic unity 
achieved by integration can be readily observed in his 1949 exhibition of the same 
name, and (literally so) in the cell and brain exhibitions he created for The Upjohn 
Company in the 1950s. Neurath additionally made reference to an onion as a structural-­
editorial model, sometimes in the context of exhibitions; its separate layers can equally 
be regarded as sequential and composite, even if from an external perspective an onion 
appears singular and organic.

146 / Eric Kindel
of information was less visually elaborate or expansive, it was as varied and 
intelligent editorially. Thus like Fortune in the USA, Future should be seen 
in a British context as an important mid-­century periodical whose use of 
graphic information was uniquely advanced and impressive.
References
Burke, Christopher, Eric Kindel, and Sue Walker, 
eds. 2013. Isotype: design and contexts, 1925–1971. 
London: Hyphen Press.
Burtin, Will. 1949. ‘Integration, the new discipline in 
design.' Graphis 27: 230–237.
Facetti, Germano. 1964. ‘The integrated book.’ In 
The Penrose annual 57, 53–63. London: Lund 
Humphries.
Henrion, F. H. K. 1972. ‘A tribute to Will Burtin.’ 
Typographic 1: 2.
Henrion, F. H. K. 1989. AGI annals. Zurich: Alliance 
Graphique Internationale.
Hurlburt, Allen. 1976 (1971). Publication design (rev. 
edn). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Keynes, Quentin. 1948. ‘Fortune’, Future 3 (2): 40–57. 
Kindel, Eric. 2013. ‘Future Books & Future magazine, 
1946–52.’ In Isotype: design and contexts, 1925–1971, 
edited by Christopher Burke, Eric Kindel, and Sue 
Walker, 438–443. London: Hyphen Press.
Mullen, Chris, and Philip Beard. 1985. Fortune’s 
America: the visual achievements of Fortune 
magazine, 1930–1965. Norwich: University of East 
Anglia Library.
Orwell, Sonia, and Ian Angus, eds. 1970. The 
collected essays, journalism and letters of George 
Orwell, volume 4: In front of your eyes, 1945–1950. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Owen, William. 1991a. Magazine design. London: 
Laurence King.
Owen, William. 1991b. ‘Wheels of Fortune.’ Eye 1 (2): 
32–47.
Remington, R. Roger, and Robert S. P. Fripp. 2007. 
Design and science: the life and work of Will Burtin. 
Aldershot: Lund Humphries.
Stiff, Paul. 2009. ‘Austerity, optimism: modern 
typography in Britain after the war.’ In Modern 
typography in Britain: graphic design, politics, and 
society (Typography papers 8), edited by Paul Stiff, 
5–68. London: Hyphen Press.
Sumner, David E. 2010. The magazine century: 
American magazines since 1900. New York: Peter 
Lang.
Sutnar, Ladislav. 1961. Visual design in action: 
principles, purposes. New York: Hastings House.

147
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 147–159
Figure 1
a. Typographische 
Mitteilungen, 
1925: special issue 
on ‘elemental 
typography’.
Collection Felix Wiedler, 
Switzerland.
b. The second 
(1963), Shannon 
and Weaver 
edition, of
The mathematical 
theory of 
communication 
(1949).
c. Ulm 1 (1958).
Some documents for a history of 
information design
Paul Stiff
Paul Stiff’s contribution began as an illustrated talk given at a meeting 
in Coventry on ‘information design histories’ in 2003, organized by the 
Communications Research Network of Australia and the Information Design 
Network. It was then published in Information Design Journal + Document Design 
(Stiff 2005) to include explanatory notes and bibliographical references. Of par-
ticular relevance here is his appendix which may go some way towards satisfying 
people interested in the origins of the term ‘information design’. 
The two histories I had in mind as I planned this sketch shared a common 
starting point. Information design had barely been named before Robin 
Kinross explained its genesis. In his argument of 1984,1 
this 	
	
      plus this 	 	
  equals this
In short: Bauhaus2 plus Bell Labs equals HfG Ulm.3 (You may hear a dis-
tant echo of Lenin’s ‘electrification plus the soviets equals communism’.)
David Sless’s account also starts with what he calls the Bauhaus tradition, 
seeing in a statement of Moholy-Nagy from the late 1930s an interdiscipli-
nary vision of design.4
  1	 Given as a talk at the first Information Design Conference (Cranfield, England, 1984) 
and later published as ‘The rhetoric of neutrality’ (Kinross 1985). Kinross also spoke 
alongside Stiff at the 2003 conference, extending these ideas (Kinross 2005).
  2	 Though ‘new typography’ is closer to the mark than the fitful and uncertain ‘Bauhaus 
typography’.
  3	 ‘If information design can . . . be traced back to between-the-wars modernism, then the 
other large component in its formation would be this more recent matter of what has 
been called the information revolution. The clearest conjunction of these two strands 
. . . is in the work of the Hochschule für Gestaltung (HfG Ulm)’ (Kinross 1985).
  4	 Also given as a talk, ‘Building the bridge across the years and disciplines’, at ‘Vision 
Plus 2’ (an IIID meeting at Schwarzenberg, 1996) and later published under the 
a
   b
c
This lightly edited 
version is published 
here with permission 
from Carla Spinillo, 
current IDJ editor, 
and John Benjamins 
Publishing Company.
9

148 / Paul Stiff
So both Robin Kinross and David Sless started with Bauhaus, or – in 
Robin’s case and more strictly – new, typography. The Bauhaus? Without 
minimizing the significance of new visions of designing constructed at the 
Bauhaus Hochschule für Gestaltung in Weimar, Dessau, and finally Berlin, 
here I start from an opposite position. That is, against designing within an 
economy of scarcity – Germany of the Weimar Republic, of reparations, of 
currency collapse and hyperinflation – I instead propose designing within 
an economy of almost incomprehensible wealth.
Within a  few years of its inauguration in 1908 the Graduate School 
of Business Administration at Harvard University welcomed Willard 
Cope Brinton as one of its visiting faculty.5 There Brinton lectured to 
the young gentlemen on ‘graphic methods for presenting facts’ and this 
indeed became the title of his book, published in 1914, in New York, by 
The Engineering Magazine Company, under the imprint of its Industrial 
Management Library (Figure 2). Brinton, who had also given these lec-
tures at business schools in Chicago, explained that the American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers had invited fifteen or so national professional 
societies – ‘largely those whose members have extensive use of graphic 
presentation in their daily work’ – to cooperate in a Joint Committee on 
Standards for Graphic Presentation. The hope was that ‘the committee 
will be able to recommend a small number of brief and simple rules which 
same title (Sless 1998). The published version has the special value of being printed 
alongside replies from Robert Horn, Karen Schriver, Conrad Taylor, Michael Turton, 
and Patricia Wright.
  5	 Brinton’s name does not appear in the oﬃcial registers of the School, dating back to 
its opening. However, not all the visiting faculty member’s names were listed in these 
registers. (My thanks to Lisa Moorhead, Assistant Archivist at Harvard Business 
School, for this information.)
Figure 2
Frequency curves and correlations 
in W. C. Brinton, Graphic methods for 
presenting facts (1914).

Some documents for a history of information design / 149 
may be used as a sort of grammar by persons who have graphic presenta-
tions to prepare and to interpret’.
Standards and rules, let alone a grammar: New York, 1914! Where else 
for such a venture but New York and Chicago, the America of scientific, 
technological, and finance capitalism, America of Westinghouse, of Bell 
Labs – the nucleus of which was established around 1912 – America of the 
Ford Motor Company (the T-model production line started up a year later, 
in 1913) – America of Edison General Electric, and of General Motors? And 
what more obvious than the need of the men who managed the corpora-
tions of the Mellons, of J. P. Morgan, and of Henry Ford, for the organiza-
tion and display of facts, here, and now – facts about ratios, trends, inputs, 
outputs, yields, markets cornered, markets to conquer?
Here is a simple hypothesis (for later, not now). Public information – its 
provision, its availability, its design, its status – flourishes in rich econo-
mies. Unlike art, it rarely thrives in conditions of scarcity, in poor econo-
mies: in such conditions people have to improvise, to get by, as they always 
do. (Another echo: of Marx’s hypothesis that the highest yet-­envisaged 
form of social organization would be built in the most highly ­developed 
economies of the west, not in the peasant economies of the east.)
I will now quickly list some more documents for a history of informa-
tion design, in order to point to what such a history would have to account 
for. This is a segment of a bibliographical map of the territory of informa-
tion design.6 I do not say that we can understand the history of information 
design though the history of its written documents. And, certainly, the 
work of describing and documenting practice has scarcely begun: one 
thinks of a few bright examples like the cluster of work on Kinneir and 
Calvert’s designing of the British national road signing system (e.g. Baines 
1999 and Lund 2003). But books and other types of publication represent 
a form of public self-­consciousness, an attempt at, and offer of, reflection 
and debate. They can be, even if they are not always, the opposite of the 
designer’s immanent black box – that which can not be explained. And 
I should stretch my journalese to insist that these documents – books, art-
icles, reports – are part of history not only by virtue of their texts, but also 
through the circumstances of their making and publication.
The history for which this is a draft would explore the development of 
design knowledge and of ideologies of designing through their relationship 
with purchasers of design. For example (and straightaway another hypoth-
esis): what President Dwight D. Eisenhower called the military-­industrial 
complex has been the demand motor of information design in the USA.7 
  6	 In Dynamics in document design, Karen Schriver gives an extensive chronology 
of the professionalization of document design between 1900 and 1995 (Shriver 1997, 
106–149).
  7	 Just as the North American newspaper and periodical industry was the demand 
motor for typeface design and manufacture throughout most of the twentieth  
century.

150 / Paul Stiff
One of the biggest customers of designing and sponsors of research about 
designing has been the US Department of Defense.
Long ago Michael Macdonald-­Ross pointed out that operational dia-
grams were almost entirely developed within the idea of ‘a technology 
of training’ which had been developing within the US armed forces since 
the Second World War (Macdonald-­Ross 1977, 34; Figure 3). Today still, 
vast research budgets are targeted at training, learning, skill, and exper-
tise within the military. Among several meetings in the late 1970s, one in 
the Netherlands could be singled out as marking the beginning of modern 
information design. From it grew information design, the journal, and 
later a book of the same name edited by Ron Easterby and Harm Zwaga 
(Easterby and Zwaga 1984).8 The meeting, at Het Vennenbos in 1978, 
reminds us of the military habit of sponsoring gatherings of experts, and 
the book’s title page reminds us of the meeting’s genesis: a NATO confer-
ence on the visual presentation of information. So military hardware crops 
up in the book, like the howitzer symbol in Figure 4. We need not feign 
shock, unless we believe that soldiers are less entitled to symbols and way-
finding aids than tourists and hospital visitors.
  8	 The book appeared six years later as Information design: the design and evaluation 
of signs and printed material. In a note posted to ‘Infodesign-cafe’ on 12 November 
2002, Rob Waller wrote: ‘the 1978 conference that Harm and Ron organized at Het 
Vennenbos was where Information Design Journal started to take shape. I ran a small 
evening meeting in one of the cabins to take soundings about the idea of a journal. 
. . . The original conference had a different name, which I forget, but by the time the 
book was ready, “information design” had become a recognised term’ (Waller 2002).
Other meetings included: 1977, a conference at the Institute of Perception Research, 
Eindhoven, published in 1979 as Processing of visible language, vol. 1; 1979, the second 
conference on Processing of Visible Language held at Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, 
published in 1980 as Processing of visible language, vol. 2; at that conference Pat Wright 
used ‘usability’ in title of her paper – if not the first, then among the first uses of that 
word within what was coming to be called information design. 
Figure 3
Training men in reconnaissance 
patrolling and in ambush planning 
(Combat training of the individual soldier 
and patrolling cover. US Dept of the Army 
HQ, 1969).
Figure 4
Howitzer symbol in Information 
design, edited by Ron Easterby and 
Harm Zwaga (1984).

Some documents for a history of information design / 151 
The history would not only account for relationships between the 
purchasers and suppliers of design. It would necessarily have to embrace 
several sources of design-relevant knowledge of human behaviour, such as 
this early example of the contribution of applied psychology to informa-
tion design (Figure 5).
It is inconceivable that this history could ignore the contributions of 
ergonomics, or human factors. The journal Ergonomics was founded in 
1957 – think, for example, of Pat Wright on reading and writing at work, 
(Wright 1988), or Andrew Dillon on reading from paper and from screens 
(Dillon 1992) – and Human Factors in 1958. In the late 1950s those contri-
butions were welcomed by a handful of graphic designers. Decades later 
Ken Garland looked back at that time with one twinge of disappointment; 
as he saw it, ‘ergonomics was a crusade that failed’, and wrote:
inspired by Michael Farr, editor of Design magazine, I had been totally 
involved in the championing of ergonomics . . . it appeared to us then such 
a sensible and promising aspect of the design process, and one in which we 
could happily collaborate with psychologists and other applied scientists: 
we fully expected that ergonomics would become a vital study for all design 
work, graphics included. But this didn’t happen. (Garland 1982)
Nor could the history ignore educational technology, programmed learn-
ing and training, instructional science. In 1979, the year of Information 
Design Journal, a special issue on graphic communication of the journal 
Instructional Science appeared; edited by Rob Waller, it contained Robin 
Kinross’s review of Jim Hartley’s newly published Designing instructional 
text. And here I should remind you that Robert Horn, who devised infor-
mation mapping in 1965,9 had a  background in learning materials and 
instructional technology.
  9	 Which Robert Horn describes as ‘a coherent life ­cycle methodology for the analysis, 
organization, sequencing, and display of information for certain kinds of business 
documents’ (Horn 1998, 21).
Figure 5
T. W. Forbes on the 
‘Effectiveness of highway 
signs’ (1939).

152 / Paul Stiff
Crystal and Davy’s Investigating English style (1969; Figure 6a) can stand 
for the contribution of applied linguistics to information design. It con-
tributed indirectly to the plain-language movement, a powerful and active 
partner to the information design project (Figure 6b).
The most entrenched opposition to plain language has come from law-
yers, for whom the ideals of making language fit for the rights and obliga-
tions of citizens seem rarely to have been welcome; and this points to the 
special value of work done by, for example, Martin Cutts.10 And just as 
the campaigning experience of consumer movements has given courage 
to information design, so has the knowledge and experience gained by 
people campaigning for full and equal rights, and appropriate designing, 
for people with disabilities or other special needs.
This history of information design would embrace the work of some 
notable clusters of energy, including:
•	 the Journal of Typographic Research, later Visible Language, founded in 
1967 by Merald Wrolstad in Cleveland Ohio;11
•	 the Readability of Print Research Unit, founded by Herbert Spencer 
in 1966 at the Royal College of Art in London, and later called the 
Graphic Information Research Unit (Reynolds 1979);
•	 from the mid 1970s to the late 1980s, another handful of people 
behind a label on a door: this time in Milton Keynes, reading 
10	 There has been argument about the power of a plain-language approach in the pages of 
Information Design Journal between Martin Cutts and Robyn Penman, then research 
director of CRIA (Cutts 1993; Penman 1993; Cutts 1998). Pat Wright later commented 
in the journal’s pages: ‘David Sless has pointed out that the Plain Language Campaigns 
exemplify this narrow [user-­centred] approach, but this does not mean that knowing 
about people’s linguistic competence is of no value to the information designer. 
Without some understanding of how people use information, every design task starts 
from scratch and becomes a voyage into the unknown’ (Wright, 1998, 19).
11	 From 1971 Visible language; some discussion of the name change can be found in the 
editor’s review (Wrolstad 1971) and in a collection of readers’ views (‘Have we bitten 
off more than we can chew? A reappraisal of Visible Language for its 25th issue’) which 
appeared in 1973 (Visible Language 7 (1)).
Figure 6
a. Crystal and 
Davy (1969): 
parsing legal text.
b. Popular 
dissemination of 
Pat Wright’s work 
on form filling, in 
Vernon (1980).
a
b

Some documents for a history of information design / 153 
‘Textual communication research group’, and sited in the Institute of 
Educational Technology at the Open University;12
•	 a hotspot in Pittsburgh, centred on Carnegie ­Mellon University: this 
optimistic venture, the Communications Design Center, was founded 
in 1979 and produced over fifty reports until its closure in 1990 
(Schriver 1991);
•	 activity in Australia, which gathered around Robert Eagleson’s 
plain-language work in the 1980s and David Sless, who set up the 
Communication Research Institute of Australia (CRIA) in 1987.13
Despite some strongly expressed doubts (part of the problem, not of 
the solution) the contribution of graphic design will also be welcomed.14 
F. H. K. Henrion’s and Alan Parkin’s Design coordination and corporate 
image (1967) offered the first coherent British statement of the aims and 
principles of corporate identity design which then, almost touchingly, was 
seen as both rational and benign: it spoke of ‘design coordination of the 
many separate items all belonging to one corporation, to achieve coherent 
and controlled results over a long period of time’.
I should not entirely neglect the contribution of semiotics or semiology 
as it was indeed here – though not with semiology, rather with the issue of 
Information Design Journal in Figure 7 – that I came in. 
12	 Rob Waller spoke to a postgraduate research meeting at Reading (8 January 2004) 
about the intellectual challenge of being the only designer in that group: ‘I was required 
to justify typography.’
13	 Now Communication Research Institute (CRI).
14	 Thus Robert Horn, in his reply to David Sless: ‘Much of what graphic design has 
done over the past 75 years has been an impediment to what I take to be the goals 
of information design – clarity, legibility, careful organization, reduction of human 
error, ease of the burden of human work by making complex systems and situations as 
understandable as possible. . . . the typical recent graduates of graphic design programs 
often have been the chief obstacle to getting out a document that aspires to these 
goals’ (Horn 1998, 22). Such views must have been among the reasons for the market 
repositioning of some sectors of graphic design as information design in the 1980s. 
Among sceptics, James Souttar’s opposition – in ‘Infodesign-­cafe’ – to the demonizing 
of graphic design has been forceful, as have his doubts about the privileged claims of 
information design over plain ordinary graphic design.
Figure 7
Semiotics enter(s) Information Design 
Journal (4 (3), 1985).

154 / Paul Stiff
A more promising theme for exploration may be mutations of the word 
‘information’.15 Colin Cherry (1914–1979, Professor of Telecommunication 
at Imperial College, London) gave a generous context to Shannon and 
Weaver’s theory of information, and added semantics. His book of 1957, 
On human communication, became talismanic for some designers who 
were attracted by the promise of scientific method, by questions of getting 
knowledge, and the status of knowledge acquired through experience, and 
observation, and experiment (Figure 8).
Then – and this is not a non sequitur – we could consider the reception 
of Ulm in Britain: wonder, admiration, some scepticism, some horror. 
These were the close-­cropped hard men of design: their Gallic antipode, 
stylistically at any rate, could have been Jean-­Paul Belmondo in Godard’s 
A bout de souffle, 1960 (Figure 9). They talked a different language – not 
German, Italian, or Spanish, though of course they did all that. No, what 
they talked was information. They didn’t seem to care that Warren Weaver 
had carefully explained that in information theory, information must not 
be confused with meaning. So, in Tomas Maldonado’s glossary of semiot-
ics ‘human communication’ equals (note, not ‘is a’ but ‘=’) ‘communica-
tive process between at least two human partners as respective emitters 
and receivers of signs’ (Maldonado 1961). Gosh.16
In his Graphics handbook of 1966 Ken Garland gave some frontage to 
the challenge of ‘organizing information’. This was still unusual in 1960s 
graphic design. He used jargon words like ‘originating source’, ‘channel’, 
‘data’, ‘transmission’, and in an implied riposte to the Ulmers insisted on 
the primacy of ‘meaning and the relationship of facts to each other’. Then 
in a final punch, he turned on its head one of the most favoured terms: 
‘as this feedback mechanism becomes increasingly effective the graphic 
designer may be in for some shocks. Some of his favourite devices may turn 
out to be quite incomprehensible. Feedback is a double-­edged weapon.’
We had thought that, within design at least, information theory had 
died or at least gone away: it was the metaphor that failed, as R. T. Green 
and M. S. Courtis put it in 1966. Yet here it is (Figure 10): the living dead, 
the information theory metaphor – channels, emitters, decoders, and the 
rest of it – made a reprise just a few years ago, not in some garden shed, 
but in this semiotic engineering model of communication published in the 
15	 See my appendix for some suggestions.
16	 Anthony Froshaug’s hurt at this first English outing was voiced in Design: it ‘contains 
three apparently incomprehensible theoretical articles, and two examples of solutions 
to problems in design. That articles on communication should be incomprehensible 
is not amusing . . . It is particularly sad that this failure in communication should come 
from an international school; even more sad because there is undoubtedly something 
in the articles (if only they were clear)’ (Froshaug 1962). Information theory at Ulm 
ended in 1968 with Gui Bonsiepe’s tortured quantification of typographic order, near 
to equating good design with snapping to a grid. Rob Waller: ‘Bonsiepe’s mistake is to 
confuse orderliness with tidiness. . . . insisting that all the information on a page is fitted 
into equal size boxes’ (Waller 1987, 24).
Figure 8
Colin Cherry 
added a semantic 
dimension to 
information 
theory in 
On human 
communication 
(1957).
Figure 9
Otl Aicher and 
Anthony Froshaug 
in Ulm 1 (1958).

Some documents for a history of information design / 155 
bulletin of the ACM’s special interest group in computer–­human interac-
tion (Prates, de Souza, and Bicharra Garcia 1997).
Another provocative theme for an information design history would be 
hemispheric: the old world and the new. In the 1950s old world meant pri-
marily German-­language designing, for which the vanguard exemplar was 
the Ulm school, and which oﬃcially opened in 1955. If this was a proper 
narrative, I’d now jump to the new and say: meanwhile, back in the USA – 
because in that very year, 1955, Henry Dreyfuss’s Designing for people was 
published (Figure 11). John Carroll – who could represent for this history 
the theorizing of human–­computer interaction – has paid eloquent hom-
age to Dreyfuss’s pioneering of an empirical approach to designing in the 
1940s (Carroll, 1997).17
17	 Five years earlier in the pages of the Harvard Business Review, Dreyfuss had observed 
that ‘industrial designers are employed primarily for one simple reason: to increase 
the profits of the client company’ (‘The industrial designer and the businessman’, 
November 1950).
Figure 10
‘Semiotic engineering’ 
in human–computer 
interaction (SIGCHI bulletin, 
April 1997).
Figure 11
Henry Dreyfuss 
Designing for 
people (1955). 
When designing 
Lockheed 
interiors, 
Dreyfuss’s team 
flew over the 
USA to observe 
passengers’ 
experiences, then 
made a prototype 
in a New York 
warehouse, where 
‘passengers’ were 
hired to occupy 
the model for ten 
hours.

156 / Paul Stiff
Another theme, in which Robin Kinross has blazed trails, might be 
called emigrations of the modern. Many of those who abandoned conti-
nental Europe in the 1930s crossed the Atlantic. Ladislav Sutnar, first of 
Pilsen and then Prague, arrived in New York in 1939 to work on the design 
of Czechoslovakia’s pavilion at the New York World’s Fair. Just after its 
opening, Hitler’s armies invaded his country. Sutnar stayed, and flourished 
by ‘designing information’ for a business publishing service, Sweets. He 
wrote his book Visual design in action in the late 1950s, and got it published 
in New York in 1961 by Hastings House (Figure 12).
Not all crossed to America. After the Anschluss, many progressives, 
moderns, socialists, abandoned Austria if they could. Ernest Hoch, who 
was briefly Dean of Art and Design here in Coventry, at what was then 
Lanchester Polytechnic, and who pioneered the analysis and corrective 
design of dialogue instruments – forms – used within and by large organ-
izations. He is not much known about because his writings on these topics 
are unpublished,18 and also because he was a modest man, not given to 
making claims of priority. Another émigré was Marie Reidemeister, the 
north German wife of the Viennese philosopher Otto Neurath, and for 
thirty years the motive force of Isotype and for the still powerful idea of 
the transformer.
So I end my talk here, not with documents but with people. Among the 
obvious weaknesses of this quick sketch is its Anglo-­centricity. But I hope 
that it has persuaded you that if we’re going to do histories of informa-
tion design, we’d better do some history; and that the histories we write 
need not be reduced to faceless historical forces: they can embrace human 
agency, imagination, and the energy to engage with those areas of social 
life on which the work of designing can properly bear.
18	 For example: Ernest Hoch, ‘Forms in the Postal Business. Initial survey of the size and 
nature of the forms problem in the Postal Business’, produced for The Post Oﬃce in 
July 1979 (unpublished). A typically incisive example can be found in case study CS2: 
‘Saying yes and signing for no’.
Figure 12
Directional design in 
Ladislav Sutnar’s Visual 
design in action (1961).
Figure 13
a. Ernest Hoch.
b. Marie Neurath.

Some documents for a history of information design / 157 
Appendix: Some dates for an etymology 
of information design
1952  Herbert Spencer used the term ‘business printing’ to describe 
work of which some would today be called information design; it 
included ‘utility printing . . . the primary purpose of which is to inform’ 
(Spencer 1952).
1952  Typographica 5. A special issue devoted to the exhibition of 
post-­war printing design from fourteen countries: ‘Purpose and 
pleasure’; at Lund Humphries in London, June 1952. It included work 
by Anthony Froshaug and anonymous ‘technical catalogues and 
information sheets’.
1958  ‘on Design magazine, where I was by then art editor, the editor 
Michael Farr was pressing the case of ergonomics, as we used to call 
user-­friendly design’ (Garland 1996).
1958  At the Hochschule für Gestaltung, Ulm, there was a Department 
of Information, though not in the sense of information design: ‘the 
Information Department educates writers for press, broadcasting, 
television, and film’ (Ulm 1, 1958).
1961  Ladislav Sutnar loosely used the term ‘designing information’ in 
his 1961 book Visual design in action.
1961/2  Anthony Froshaug: ‘this sort of presentation [of communication 
relationships] raises the great problem in design, of whether a drawing 
which shows necessary information only, a drawing which respects 
parsimony, is in fact easier to understand than one which contains 
a certain amount of redundant information’. Here Froshaug had 
in mind representations of networks such as urban metro systems 
(Froshaug c.1961/2).
1962  R. Conrad argued that complex ‘mass systems’, e.g. telephony, 
must be designed so that everyone can use them quickly and easily. He 
reported an experiment using four variants in writing and design of an 
instructional text; people’s differences in performance were due to the 
differing levels of demand on their short-­term memory made by these 
variants (Conrad 1962).
1965  Alastair McIntosh, a director of Unwin Brothers (book and journal 
printers) used the term ‘information printing’ in a radical argument 
for the redesign of editorial and typographic conventions in scientific 
publishing and printing (McIntosh 1965).
1965  Robert Horn ‘invented the Information Mapping approach in 1965’ 
(Horn 1998).
1966  Information and graphic design:
Information is not a prime product . . . Nor do the systems with which the 
graphic designer is concerned always work in one direction only – from 

158 / Paul Stiff
158 / Paul Stiff
originator to recipient. Many of them have feedback mechanisms . . . (Garland 
1966).
1966  ‘Information publishing’: Herbert Spencer established the 
Readability of Print Research Unit at the Royal College of Art 
(London), supported by a grant from the International Publishing 
Corporation, to investigate ‘information publishing’ (Reynolds 1979).
Early 1970s  Maurice Goldring used the term ‘Information design 
consultants’ on business notepaper for Maurice Goldring Associates. 
(He had trained as an architect and was a founding student at HfG 
Ulm.)
1971  The term ‘Information design’ described a London exhibition 
(at Monotype House) of work by students at Stafford College of Art 
and Design; the phrase comes from Peter Burnhill, head of design at 
the College (‘Information design at Stafford’, Monotype Newsletter, 
1971). A year earlier he had unsuccessfully proposed to the College’s 
management a course of ‘professional studies in information design’.
1975  Peter Gorb: ‘Work in the mid-­seventies at London Business 
School on a classification of design subjects for management under 
three headings: product design, environmental design, information 
design.’ Here information design is ‘the use of those things by which 
the business
communicates its purposes to all of its audiences: customers, employees, 
shareholders and so on. . . . Nearly all the other aspects of information design 
flow from decisions made in [corporate identity design]. (Gorb 1998)
1978  The ‘NATO Conference on Visual Presentation of Information’ at 
Het Vennenbos, the Netherlands. The book appeared six years later: 
see 1984 below.
1979  Information Design Journal founded (Milton Keynes). 
1984: Information design: the design and evaluation of signs and printed 
material edited by Ronald Easterby and Harm Zwaga (1984).
1988  Information Design Unit, the design business, set up by Rob 
Waller.
References
Baines, P. 1999. ‘A design (to sign roads by): Kinneir, 
Calvert and the British road sign system.’ Eye 34: 
26–36.
Carroll, J. M. 1997. ‘Human–computer interaction: 
psychology as a science of design.’ International 
Journal of Human–Computer Studies 46: 501–522.
Cherry, C. 1957. On Human Communication: a review, 
a survey, and a criticism. Boston, MA: Technology 
Press of MIT.
Crystal, D., and D. Davy. 1969. Investigating English 
style. London: Longman.
Conrad, R. 1962. ‘The design of information.’ 
Occupational Psychology 36: 159–162.
Cutts, M. 1993. ‘Unspeakable acts.’ Information Design 
Journal 7 (2): 115–120.
Cutts, M. 1994. Lucid law. Whaley Bridge: Plain 
Language Commission.
Cutts, M. 1998. ‘Unspeakable Acts revisited.’ 
Information Design Journal 9 (1): 39–43.
Dillon, A. 1992. ‘Reading from paper versus screens: 
a critical review of the empirical literature.’ 
Ergonomics 35: 1297–1326.

Some documents for a history of information design / 159 
Some documents for a history of information design / 159 
Dreyfuss, H. 1955. Designing for people. New York: 
Simon and Schuster.
Easterby, R., and H. Zwaga. 1984. Information design: 
the design and evaluation of signs and printed 
material. Chichester: John Wiley.
Forbes, T. W. 1939. ‘A method for analysis of the 
effectiveness of highway signs.’ Journal of Applied 
Psychology 23 (6): 669–684.
Froshaug, A. c.1961/2, ‘Foundation course, Ulm 
1953–61’, published posthumously in R. Kinross, 
ed. 2000. Anthony Froshaug: typography and texts, 
133–146. London: Hyphen Press.
Froshaug, A. 1962. ‘Review of Uppercase 5.’ Design 
161: 85–87. Original text in R. Kinross, ed. 2000. 
Anthony Froshaug: typography and texts, 147–148. 
London: Hyphen Press.
Garland, K. 1966. Graphics handbook. London: 
Studio Vista. 
Garland, K. 1982. Ken Garland and Associates, 
designers: 20 years work and play 1962–82. 
London: Ken Garland and Associates.
Garland, K. 1996. A word in your eye. Reading: 
Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication, University of Reading.
Gorb, P. 1988 ‘Introduction.’ In Design talks! London 
Business School design management seminars, 
edited by P. Gorb and E. Schneider. London: 
Design Council.
Green, R. T., and M. S. Courtis. 1966. ‘Information 
theory and figure perception: the metaphor that 
failed.’ Acta Psychologica 25: 12–36.
Henrion, F. H. K., and A. Parkin. 1967. Design 
coordination and corporate image. London: Studio 
Vista.
Horn, R. 1998. ‘Comments on “Building the bridge 
across the years and disciplines”.’ Information 
Design Journal 9 (1): 21–23.
Instructional science. 1979. Special issue on graphic 
communication (guest editor R. H. W. Waller). 
8 (3).
Kinross, R. 1985. ‘The rhetoric of neutrality.’ Design 
Issues 2 (2): 18–30.
Kinross, R. 2005. ‘The claim of reason: a twenty-
five year argument about information design.’ 
Information Design Journal + Document Design 
13 (3): 211–215.
Kolers, P. A., M. Wrolstad, and H. Bouma, eds. 1979. 
Processing of visible language, vol. 1. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Kolers, P. A., M. Wrolstad, and H. Bouma, eds. 1980. 
Processing of visible language, vol. 2. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Lindinger, H. 1991. Ulm design: the morality of objects. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lund, O. 2003. ‘The public debate on Jock Kinneir’s 
road sign alphabet.’ Typography papers 5: 57–85.
Macdonald-­Ross, M., and E. Smith. 1977. Graphics in 
text. IET monograph no. 6. Milton Keynes: The 
Open University.
McIntosh, A. 1965. ‘Typewriter composition and 
standardization in information printing.’ Printing 
Technology 9 (1): 51–74.
Maldonado, T. 1961. ‘Glossary of semiotics.’ 
Uppercase 5: 44–62. London: Whitefriars.
Penman, R. 1993. ‘Unspeakable Acts and other deeds: 
a critique of plain legal language.’ Information 
Design Journal 7 (2): 121–32.
Prates, R. O., C. S. de Souza, and A. C. Bicharra 
Garcia. 1997. ‘A semiotic framework for multi-­user 
interfaces.’ SIGCHI Bulletin 29 (2): 28–39.
Reynolds, L. 1979. ‘The Graphic Information 
Research Unit: background and recent research.’ 
Visible Language 13 (4): 428–448.
Schriver, K. A. 1991. Document design from 1980 to 
1990: challenges that remain. Communications 
Design Center, technical report no. 39. Pittsburgh, 
PA: Carnegie Mellon University. <http://www.
nwp.org/cs/public/download/nwp_file/82/
TR39.pdf?x-r=pcfile_d>.
Schriver, K. A. 1997. Dynamics in document design: 
creating texts for readers. New York: John Wiley.
Schriver, K. A. 1998. ‘A review of “Building the bridge 
across the years and disciplines”.’ Information 
Design Journal 9 (1): 11–15.
Sless, D. 1998. ‘Building the bridge across the years 
and disciplines.’ Information Design Journal 9 (1): 
3–10. <http://www. communication.org.au/html/
paper 26.html> (as ‘Transitions in information 
design’).
Spencer, H. 1952. Design in business printing. London: 
Sylvan Press.
Stiff, P. 2005. ‘Some documents for a history of 
information design.’ Information Design Journal + 
Document Design 13 (3): 216–228.
Sutnar, L. 1961. Visual design in action. New York: 
Hastings House.
Waller, R. 1987. ‘The typographic contribution to 
language: towards a model of typographic genres 
and their underlying structures.’ Unpublished 
PhD thesis, Department of Typography & 
Graphic Communication, University of Reading.
Vernon, T. 1980. Gobbledegook. London: National 
Consumer Council.
Waller, R. Post on Infodesign-cafe, 11 November 
2002. <http://osdir.com/ml/infodesign.
general/2002-11/msg00028.html>.
Wright, P. 1988. ‘Functional literacy: reading and 
writing at work.’ Ergonomics 31: 265–290.
Wright, P. 1998. ‘Developments and growth in 
information design.’ Information Design Journal 
9 (1): 16–21.
Wrolstad, M. E. 1971. ‘Visible language.’ Visible 
Language 5 (1): 5–12.


161
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 161–174
Moral visualizations
Rule utilitarianism and the design 
of information graphics
Alberto Cairo
The recent rapid growth of information graphics and visualization has not been 
accompanied by a solid reflection about the ­ethical underpinnings of the craft. 
Attempts to develop a code of ethics, or to define guidelines that professionals 
can follow, have been tentative and insufficient. This chapter identifies some key 
points for a discussion of ethics in visualization. Should visualization profes-
sionals adopt consequentialist/utilitarist reasoning to guide their decisions, or 
should they collectively develop their own deontological rules? Should they start 
from scratch in this endeavour or borrow principles from journalism, engineer-
ing, statistics, cartography, and graphic design? Should an ethics of visualization 
be based on how to represent information to best enlighten readers, or should it 
also consider how the data itself is gathered and processed?
When the fear of taking responsibility . . . is greater than the fear of causing 
harm, we stop becoming designers. We become agents of recklessness. 
(Monteiro 2013, 17 m 40 s)
On 23 December 2012, in the wake of the rampage at Sandy Hook ele-
mentary school, in Newtown, Connecticut,1 The Journal News, a small 
suburban newspaper in New York state, published an interactive map of 
small-gun permit holders (Figure 1, overleaf). The map unleashed a fire-
storm of outrage,2 so it was removed in January 2013. What remains online 
is a series of screenshots.3
On the original map, small colour circles revealed the names and 
addresses of the permit holders in two of the counties the paper covers, 
Westchester and Rockland. The story accompanying the map explained: 
‘About 44,000 people in Westchester, Rockland and Putnam – one out 
of every 23 adults – are licensed to own a handgun.’ The point was clear: 
there are too many guns around here.
  1	 ‘Nation reels after gunman massacres 20 children at school in connecticut’. The New 
York Times: <http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/15/nyregion/shooting-reported-at-
connecticut-elementary-school.html>.
  2	 See, for instance ‘Where the Journal News went wrong in mapping gun owners’  
<http://mediashift.org/2013/02/
where-the-journal-news-went-wrong-in-mapping-gun-owners053/>.
  3	 ‘The gun owner next door’. The Journal News: <http://archive.lohud.com/art-
icle/20121223/NEWS04/312230056/The-gun-owner-next-door-What-you-don-t-
know-about-weapons-your-neighborhood>.
10

162 / Alberto Cairo
Stop for a minute and think: did The Journal News make the right deci-
sion, considering that this dataset could have been available to any private 
citizen through a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request? I have asked 
this question many times to different audiences in the past two years. I’ve 
got different responses every time. Here’s a summary:
1	 Advocates for transparency, technologists, and many engineers think 
that the act was right just because the data was already public.
2	 Experienced journalists think that The Journal News made the 
wrong decision mainly because the map has no informative value 
and the data was not put in proper context. It was not reported on, 
or edited. Kathleen Bartzen-­Culver, a professor from the University 
of Wisconsin-­Madison, wrote: ‘Truth does not come from accuracy 
alone. It comes from accuracy in context. In this case, the critical 
context is what was missing from the data.’ Among the many 
inaccuracies Bartzen-­Culver identified, the map didn’t display data on 
large weapons, such as assault rifles, but just on small arm permits.4
3	 Some visual journalists and graphics designers feel that there’s 
a difference between displaying data on a table or database and 
transforming those data into a map, as the map creates a much more 
frictionless experience. Besides, they point out, the Journal used 
an inappropriate level of abstraction: showing the data in all its 
granularity, every single data point, was wrong. It would have been 
better to normalize the data, and display a ratio of permit holders on 
each neighbourhood.
  4	 ‘Where the Journal News went wrong in mapping gun owners’:  
<http://www.pbs.org/mediashift/2013/02/
where-the-journal-news-went-wrong-in-mapping-gun-owners053/>.
Figure 1 
A map of 
small-gun permit 
holders in NY’s 
Westchester 
and Rockland 
counties.
WESTCHESTER COUNTY
This map shows pistol permits registered with the Westchester County Clerk’s Office. Residents are required to renew the permit every five years. Zoom in and out for more 
information and click on a dot to see details of a permit.

Moral visualizations / 163 
Regardless of what you think about this case, the outrage that The Jour­
nal News provoked reveals that there are at least three levels of questions 
when it comes to evaluate if an act of visualization is morally right or 
wrong. These are:
•	 questions about the data we use;
•	 questions about how we organize, filter, analyse, and publish those data;
•	 questions about how we visually represent those data.
Based on these three groups of questions, in the next few pages I will 
make suggestions for future discussions about visualization ethics. This 
chapter is by no means all-­encompassing. Rather, it should be seen as one 
template – among many possible ones – for what I believe is a necessary 
and urgent dialogue.
Normative ethics and rule utilitarianism
Before proceeding, I’d like to explain how I’ll use a few terms.5
Normative ethical thinking consists of thoroughly and rationally ana-
lysing what is morally good or bad. It’s possible to group ethical theories 
into three large groups: duty ethics, virtue ethics, and consequentialism.
Duty ethics, or deontological ethics, is mainly inspired by the works of 
Immanuel Kant in the eighteenth century. At the risk of abridging in excess 
– Kant is a notoriously complex philosopher – duty ethics considers an 
action morally good if it respects one or more unconditional a priori rules.
Kant is famous for his categorical imperative: ‘Act only according to 
that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that it should become 
a universal law.’ For a Kantian thinker, lying is bad not because of the con-
sequences that a lie could have, but because lying cannot become a univer-
sal law. Lying is bad in principle.
Virtue ethics doesn’t deal with the morality of specific actions, but with 
the personal traits of the people who perform them. It focuses on improv-
ing human character, on imbuing people with noble and desirable traits, 
as a virtuous person is much more likely than a mediocre one to undertake 
morally good deeds. Following up with the example proposed in the pre-
vious paragraphs, honesty is a highly regarded virtue. It’s not possible for 
a person to be simultaneously virtuous and dishonest. Therefore, lying is 
not something that consistently virtuous people do.
Consequentialism, as its name suggests, focuses on the outcomes of 
actions. There are many kinds of consequentialist ethical theories. Utili-
tarianism is the most common one.
The most famous advocates for utilitarianism were Jeremy Bentham 
(1748–1832) and John Stuart Mill (1806–1874), who proposed a principle 
of utility: an action is morally good if it improves the happiness of as many 
  5	 There are some excellent introductions to ethics out there. Here, I am mainly following 
Parfit (2011) and Singer (2011).

164 / Alberto Cairo
people as possible, while minimizing side effects. For most utilitarians, 
happiness is much more than a subjective feeling of personal satisfaction 
in the present moment. Instead, in one of its most modern formulations, 
happiness depends on ‘the creation of enabling conditions where people 
are able to pursue well-­being in sustainable ways.’6
Again, going back to the example proposed, lying can be considered 
morally wrong because it generally decreases the well-­being of people (a 
larger or a smaller group of people, depending on the medium we use to 
spread it). However, a lie may be morally right if it helps protect human 
well-­being. Imagine that you are a Polish citizen during the Nazi occupa-
tion in the 1940s. A family of Jews fleeing from German soldiers knocks on 
your door, and asks for refuge. You hide them in your attic. A few hours 
later, a German officer comes over and asks if you’ve seen any Jews around. 
What would be the morally good thing to do in this case? 
Utilitarianism comes in two different flavours. The first one is act utili-
tarianism, which focuses on the morality of individual actions. The earlier 
formulations of utilitarianism usually fell on this side. The challenge with 
act utilitarianism, though, is that it may be quite unrealistic, as it forces you 
to conduct careful evaluations of the consequences of every action, which 
is absurd. This is not the only critique utilitarianism has received,7 but it’s 
a compelling one.
Rule utilitarianism, which is the ethical theory that I’m adopting in this 
chapter, is similar to deontological ethics in the sense that the morality of 
an action is judged against a set of rules. But these rules are not a priori 
or absolute. Rule utilitarians devise rules that are more guidelines than 
inflexible decrees.
For a rule utilitarian, for instance, telling the truth is morally good, 
but not because there’s an a priori rule against lying or because being dis­
honest is unvirtuous. It’s because we have solid evidence to think that lying 
  6	 This definition is taken from the Bhutanese Gross National Happiness index, <http://
www.grossnationalhappiness.com/>. In 1972, the king of Bhutan, tired of the 
shortcomings of traditional economic indicators such as the GDP, decided to create 
a commission to develop a concept that measures quality of life, rather than simple 
output or productivity. The index has not spread to other countries, although its spirit 
permeates current discussions about what a good society really is. This fascinating 
story is told with great detail in Karabell (2014). 
  7	 Here’s Thomas Nagel, reviewing Sam Harris’ The moral landscape: ‘Secular rivals 
to utilitarianism agree that right and wrong are rooted in values found in the lives 
of sentient beings, but they hold that when more than one such being is involved 
and interests conflict, as is always the case with moral issues, there may be other 
ways of taking into account the multiple values present than by simple cost-­benefit 
maximization of the total. More happiness is always good, and more suffering is always 
bad, but the reduction of arbitrary inequality between persons and the protection of 
individual liberty may also be important, in ways that cannot be fully explained by their 
contribution to the maximization of total aggregate welfare.’ I’d like to add that they 
cannot be ‘fully explained’ using any other approach, either. We humans cannot ‘fully 
explain’ anything, actually. <http://www.newrepublic.com/article/books-and-arts/
magazine/78546/the-facts-fetish-morality-science>.

Moral visualizations / 165 
decreases the well-­being of the people who see, read, and believe our lie, 
so avoiding lies is good behaviour. We can make up a rule out of that.
But lying is not always bad, as we’ve already seen. When telling the 
truth conflicts with protecting the lives of other people (another ethical 
rule that we can derive from evidence,) lying is appropriate.
My reasoning in this chapter is therefore based on the following 
assumptions:
1	 Morally good actions are those that increase the well-­being of as many 
people as possible, either directly or indirectly.
2	 Accurate, useful information, presented visually in a compelling way, 
is likely to increase awareness of relevant matters among the audience 
the visualization is created for, and improve their understanding and 
knowledge. 
3	 Good understanding of relevant matters can inform future decisions, 
so it is likely to increase the chances of people conducting fruitful, 
happy lives. That is, understanding can have a positive influence on 
their well-­being.
4	 Therefore, it is the obligation of the designer of visualizations to 
create graphics that (a) are aimed at igniting interest in relevant 
matters, (b) are based on a thorough and accurate depiction of those 
issues, (c) are built in a way that enables comprehension. To do this, 
designers ought to base their decisions on available scientific evidence 
or, in case that this is not available, on judgements derived from their 
experience and personal observations.
This is the moral rule – in the utilitarian sense – this whole chapter is 
based on.
The data which is used
It’s become a cliché to say that the increasing amount of data available 
just a mouse click away has the potential to change society for the bet-
ter. Mayer-­Schönberger and Cukier (2013), Aiden and Michel (2013), and 
Pentland (2014) describe the great insights that so-­called ‘big data’ may 
yield.
On the other hand, authors like Lanier (2013), Morozov (2013), and 
Greenwald (2014) have warned against the potential risks that digital, data-­
centric societies face. Designers of visualizations may want to delve into 
this critical literature, if only to avoid challenges like the one described at 
the beginning of this chapter. When dealing with data, we need to ponder 
the pros and cons of the sources we use and the nature of the data itself.
In To save everything, click here (2013), Evgeny Morozov describes the 
controversy caused by a website called eightmaps.com. In 2008, California 
voters passed a ballot proposition to amend the state constitution to ban 

166 / Alberto Cairo
same-­sex marriages. The official name of the proposition was deliciously 
Orwellian: ‘California Marriage Protection Act’.
Since 1974, the state of California collects and publishes the data of any 
person who donates $100 or more to political campaigns. An anonymous 
designer took this dataset and overlaid it on a Google Map (Figure 2) in 
which anyone could check the name, address, and employer of every 
single contributor.
If you’re in favour of banning same-­sex marriages, this map will surely 
strike you as insulting and dangerous. In fact, harassment was one of its 
consequences. Here’s a quote from a New York Times story by Brad Stone:
A college professor from the University of California, San Francisco, wrote 
a $100 check in support of Proposition 8 in August, because he said he sup-
ported civil unions for gay couples but did not want to change the traditional 
definition of marriage. He has received many confrontational email messages, 
some anonymous, since eightmaps listed his donation and employer. One 
signed message blasted him for supporting the measure and was copied to 
a dozen of his colleagues and supervisors at the university, he said.8
Even if you’re in favour of allowing gays to marry, you could perhaps 
carefully reflect on what Evgeny Morozov argues:
The obvious problem with sites like Eightmaps.com is that, in exploiting our 
rarely examined admiration of transparency, they can be used to suppress 
virtually any kind of political cause, regardless of where it falls on the liberal–
conservative spectrum. (Morozov 2013, 64)
And here’s The Dallas Morning News’ Scott Mattiza:
What if a radical fundamentalist group gathered the names and home 
addresses of donors to pro-­gay causes, and created an online map to their 
homes? Or what if anti-­abortion radicals created a map to the homes of 
Planned Parenthood donors? Is that really the way we want to go in this 
society? I think not.9
  8	 ‘Prop 8 donor web site shows disclosure law is 2-edged sword’ <http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/02/08/business/08stream.html>.
  9	 <http://www.newrepublic.com/article/books-and-arts/
magazine/78546/<the-facts-fetish-morality-science>.
Figure 2
Proposition 8 Maps, displaying 
the information of donors who 
supported a ban on same-­sex 
marriage in California. 
<http://karmicdragonfly.livejournal.
com/459515.html>.

Moral visualizations / 167 
What cases like The New York Journal’s map and eightmaps.com suggest 
is that visualization designers and data journalists must weigh the conse-
quences of their projects against their informative value. Does revealing the 
addresses of social conservatives or small-gun owners improve the overall 
well-­being of most citizens? Does that information value compensate for 
the potential harassment (or even physical danger) that the people located 
in those maps could face? Just think about it, and don’t stick to your initial 
intuitions, as they’ll probably be tainted by your ideological biases.
The way data is processed and published 
On 18 May 2014, Nicholas Thompson, editor of the online edition of the 
New Yorker magazine, posted a chart on Twitter (Figure 3). The chart 
shows the percentage change in traffic fatalities in the USA, state by state, 
between 1975 and 2012, and was originally published by the blog Graphzoo. 
The differences between states are striking.
Thompson pointed out that Florida and Arizona are clear outliers – an 
accurate quote is impossible here, as he erased the tweet after some of his 
followers criticized him for not paying enough attention. The data in the 
graphic were not controlled for number of motor vehicles, miles driven 
Figure 3
Percentage change in traffic 
fatalities, 1975–2012. Notice 
that the author used absolute 
number of deaths, and didn’t 
control for number of motor 
vehicles or miles driven per 
year. 
<http://graphzoo.tumblr.com/
day/2014/05/10>.
DC
Massachusetts
Illinois
New York
Minnesota
Alaska
Michigan
Vermont
Iowa
New Jersey
Nebraska
Rhode Island
Wyoming
Washington
Oregon
Connecticut
Pennsylvania
Ohio
Idaho
New Mexico
Wisconsin
South Dakota
Indiana
California
Montana
New Hampshire
West Virginia
Maine
Maryland
Louisiana
Virginia
Missouri
Kansas
Utah
Colorado
North Carolina
Kentucky
Hawaii
Georgia
Tennessee
Delaware
Oklahoma
Alabama
Arkansas
Texas
North Dakota
South Carolina
Mississippi
Nevada
Florida
Arizona
0
−25%
+25%
−50%
−75%
Percentage change in traﬃc fatalities 1975–2012
TOTAL FATALITIES

168 / Alberto Cairo
per year, or other variables that could have made the comparisons much 
more meaningful.
I took the liberty to download the data displayed in the original chart 
and recreate it controlling for vehicles and vehicle-­miles. These are var-
iables that can easily be found in the Federal Highway Administration’s 
website. The results are in Figure 4.
When we control for number of vehicles, fatalities drop drastically in 
all states, but when you control for millions of vehicle-­miles and limit the 
comparison to 2000–2012 (data for years before 2000 is hard to obtain,) 
North Dakota becomes the outlier. Why? I don’t know, but I can try to 
make an informed guess. Perhaps it’s because, since 2008, that state has 
been attracting thousands of people to apply for jobs in the booming frack-
ing oil drilling industry. More reporting would be required to do a story 
about this, of course.
These are the problems in this case:
1	 The author of the original chart didn’t act in a responsible manner 
because she (or he) didn’t handle the data correctly and, therefore, she 
misled the readers of her blog. She (or he) just got a bunch of numbers 
and rushed to represent them visually, forgetting a crucial lesson in 
Alaska
DC
Wyoming
Massachusetts
Washington
Vermont
Nevada
Idaho
Minnesota
Oregon
New Hampshire
New Mexico
Illinois
Montana
New Jersey
Iowa
Wisconsin
Utah
Delaware
Colorado
Hawaii
New York
Virginia
South Dakota
California
Nebraska
Arizona
Georgia
Michigan
Indiana
Rhode Island
Missouri
North Carolina
Maine
Texas
Louisiana
Tennessee
Florida
Pennsylvania
Ohio
Maryland
Connecticut
South Carolina
Alabama
West Virginia
Arkansas
Kentucky
Oklahoma
Kansas
North Dakota
Mississippi
DC
Utah
Alaska
Idaho
Mississippi
Minnesota
Nevada
Colorado
Florida
Arizona
Washington
Illinois
Louisiana
Connecticut
Missouri
Michigan
Wyoming
North Carolina
South Dakota
California
Tennessee
Montana
Nebraska
New Jersey
Arkansas
Wisconsin
New Mexico
South Carolina
Georgia
Alabama
Massachusetts
Maryland
Iowa
Ohio
Virginia
Oregon
Indiana
New Hampshire
New York
Kansas
Hawaii
West Virginia
Delaware
Texas
Rhode Island
Pennsylvania
Kentucky
Vermont
Maine
Oklahoma
North Dakota
0
−25%
−50%
−75%
0
−25%
−50%
+50%
+25%
−75%
Percentage change in traﬃc fatalities 1975–2012
PER 100,000 VEHICLES
Percentage change in traﬃc fatalities 2000–2012
PER MILLION ANNUAL VEHICLE-MILES
Figure 4
Percentage 
change in traffic 
fatalities per 
100,000 vehicles 
(1975–2012) and 
per million annual 
vehicle-­miles 
(2000–2012).
Charts recreated by the 
author.

Moral visualizations / 169 
numerical thinking: a dataset encoded in a visualization may be true 
and accurate, but that doesn’t necessarily imply that the visualization 
will be truthful.
2	 Nicholas Thompson made a mistake by promoting Graphzoo’s chart 
among his more than 25,000 followers on Twitter. This is not morally 
wrong per se.
3	 The actual morally wrong action Thompson committed was to delete 
the tweet with no further explanation. Why? First of all, because 
a good number of Thompson’s followers arguably saw the chart and 
walked away with the wrong message. Second, because Thompson 
didn’t immediately issue a correction, pointing out why the original 
chart was deceitful.
4	 The potential for spreading misinformation is much larger nowadays 
than it used to be. Because of the pervasiveness of social media, both 
good and bad information wildfires if its presented in a sensational 
manner.10 Hans Jonas, in his extraordinary The imperative of 
responsibility (1984) explains that current technologies extend people’s 
reach so much that a new kind of moral thinking might be necessary. 
He wasn’t writing exclusively about information technologies, but his 
thoughts are relevant to our discussion:
The altered, always enlarged nature of human action, with the magnitude 
and novelty of its works and their impact on man’s global future raises moral 
issues for which past ethics, geared to the direct dealings of man with his 
fellowmen within narrow horizons of space and time, has left us unprepared. 
. . . The lengthened reach of our deeds moves responsibility, with no less than 
man’s fate for its object, into the center of the ethical stage . . . Its axiom is that 
responsibility is a correlate of power and must be commensurate with the 
latter’s scope and that of its exercise. (Jonas 1984, 10)
A compelling and shocking chart based on bad data handling, being 
promoted by someone who has more than 25,000 followers in a popular 
social media platform. Think of the consequences – potentially rampant 
misinformation – that such actions can have.
The way data is presented
The past three decades in visualization have been dominated by what I’d 
like to call ‘the Tuftean consensus’,11 which enshrines accuracy, clarity, 
and depth as our supreme values. I’m part of this consensus. After all, I’m 
10	 I know for sure, as I’ve experienced it myself. See ‘I should know better: journalism 
is a discipline of verification’. <http://www.thefunctionalart.com/2014/05/i-should-
know-better-journalism-is.html>.
11	 After Edward E. Tufte, author of The visual display of quantitative information (1983), 
arguably the most influential book about information visualization ever written.

170 / Alberto Cairo
a journalist, and two recent books of mine are titled The functional art 
(2012) and The truthful art (2016). 
I don’t think that visualization is a fine art, but should think of itself 
more as a form of engineering. The process of choosing the appropriate 
structures and visual shapes to encode data ought to be guided by the tasks 
that we predict that our audience will try to accomplish with the visuali-
zations we create.
Choosing graphic forms shouldn’t depend on personal aesthetic prefer-
ences alone, but on what each graphic form can help people see in the data. 
A visualization that is built based on what we know about how the human 
brain processes information will likely render beneficial consequences, 
such as increased understanding on the part of the audience.
A very simple example: data maps are great at displaying geographic 
patterns. Scatter plots are very effective at revealing the relationship 
between two quantitative variables. Therefore, if the goal of a visualiza-
tion is to help people correlate variables with a high degree of precision, 
the information shouldn’t be presented as two maps side by side, each 
encoding one variable. A scatter plot will be more adequate.
However, accuracy, clarity, depth, and functionality are not the only 
values a visualization designer should strive for. Let me bring back the 
three components of the moral rule spelled in section two of this chapter. 
A good visualization is one that:
1	 Ignites interest in relevant issues.
2	 Is based on a thorough and accurate depiction of those issues.
3	 Is built in a way that enables comprehension.
I believe that those, like me, who write constantly about information 
graphics and are part of the consensus, often emphasize components 2 and 
3 while overlooking 1. This is a problem, as an uninterested audience is 
an audience that won’t read our visualization in the first place, and will 
consequently miss its valuable content. Engagement precedes decoding.
Let’s go back to Tufte:
The overwhelming fact of data graphics is that they stand or fall on their 
content, gracefully displayed. Graphics do not become attractive and inter-
esting through the addition of ornamental hatching and false perspective to 
a few bars . . . No information, no sense of discovery, no wonder, no substance 
is generated by chartjunk. (Tufte 1983, 121)
Beautiful words which sound truthful enough. At an abstract level, 
I agree with them –remember, I’m part of the consensus – but I’d beg to 
suggest some flexibility. Gratuitous special effects or ornaments, when 
they don’t occlude the information, can certainly generate a sense of won-
der and make a graphic more attractive, depending on who the audience is.
In the past decades, the literature about visualization has been domi-
nated by computer scientists (Wilkinson 1999), statisticians (Tufte 1983; 

Moral visualizations / 171 
Cleveland 1985; Robbins 2005), cognitive scientists (Ware 2004; Kosslyn 
2006), cartographers (MacEachren 1995), and business intelligence 
experts (Few 2004). It’s only in the last few years we’ve started seeing 
popular books written by people who can be considered primarily graphic 
designers (Malamed 2009; Yau 2011 [Yau is also a statistician], Meirelles 
2013).
This state of affairs has led to a  professional environment in which 
the most widely used sets of recommendations to create effective visu-
alizations are perfect when the audience is made of specialists – again: 
computer scientists, statisticians, cognitive scientists, and business intel-
ligence folks – but perhaps not that appropriate when the visualization is 
aimed at the general public.
The difference lies in the fact that an audience made of specialists will 
likely be interested in the content of a visualization beforehand, if that 
content is related to their field. A statistician designing data-­rich charts 
for other statisticians doesn’t need to put a lot of effort in bringing their 
attention to the content. But if that same statistician is going to publish her 
charts in a news website or magazine such as Time or Businessweek, she’ll 
probably need to add something to the mix. The content itself may not be 
enough to seduce a good part of the audience.
Let me give you a personal example.
I couldn’t care less about sports. I know almost nothing about soccer, 
baseball, or football. I’m the kind of person who will never stop to read 
a visualization about the Olympic games unless there’s something in the 
style of the graphic, or in its headline, that intrigues me. I’m likely to 
skip over a graphic like Figure 5, no matter how ‘gracefully displayed’ its 
content is.
SUMMER OLYMPICS
165 countries
56,500 participants
46 high-income countries
41 won medals
47 upper middle income countries
33 won medals
41 lower middle income countries
21 won medals
31 low-income
10 won medals
WINTER OLYMPICS
86 countries
12,500 participants
39 high-income countries
27 won medals
25 upper middle income countries
4 won medals
16 lower middle income countries
2 won medals
6 low-income
None won medals
olympic medals won by countries in the four income levels
Below are 165 of the world’s countries that participated in the Summer and Winter Olympics at least
one time between 1992 and 2012. Fewer countries – none of the poorest – win medals.
Figure 5
Graphic based 
on the data 
contained in an 
infographic from 
The Washington 
Post.

172 / Alberto Cairo
But this is not what The Washington Post published on its website in 
February 2014. This is my own version of their graphic. Instead, they 
designed an eye-­catching three-­step animation in which little bubbles 
bounce around and cluster in different ways. Spend some time navigating 
the graphic, and don’t miss its headline, ‘Are the Winter Olympics for the 
rich?’12
This is graphic that can get my attention, the attention of someone who 
would never have bothered learning about this topic if it were not for the 
quirky transitions, the gimmick, the alleged chartjunk. Therefore, the 
designers accomplished the first goal mentioned at the beginning of this 
section. They aroused my interest.
On the other hand, the visualization then doesn’t accomplish the third 
goal, which is to enable useful operations. The critical task here seems to 
be to perceive the proportion of countries in each income group which 
won or didn’t win medals. Try to make that comparison when you reach 
the third step of the animation. It’s really hard.
Herein lies the challenge that every visualization designer faces, then: 
how to make a graphic visually alluring without compromising its struc-
ture, respecting the integrity of the information, and designing it as a tool 
for understanding? In a print graphic this challenge can be difficult to over-
come, as space is limited, so the priority should always be presenting the 
information as accurately and clearly as possible. Still, there are strategies 
the designer can use to make visualizations charming. A small pictogram 
or illustration that doesn’t get in the way of the data; a riveting headline; 
a surprising choice of style. If well handled, none of those will necessarily 
distract readers from the content.
Why do you think it is that The Economist titles a chart ‘Boozing it up’ 
when it could just call it ‘Alcohol consumption in selected countries, 2010, 
litres per adult’? Which one would make you stop and take a look at the 
chart?13
The analogy with written communication is not gratuitous. Journalists 
don’t write in the classic,14 matter-­of-­factly, sententious prose Tufte 
favours, always seeking just clarity, efficiency, and transparency. They 
often borrow techniques from fiction literature, they play with words, 
composition, and style. These don’t always contribute to clarity. In fact, 
they may even make the text a bit less efficient, from a functional stand-
point. Should we think that those techniques will invariably lead to copy-
junk, then? Perhaps not, as they do contribute to making stories appealing 
and pleasant to read – for a certain kind of audience, at least. They are 
valuable, if they don’t put accuracy and clarity at too much risk.
12	 <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/special/sports/2014-olympics/
winter-vs-summer-olympics/>.
13	 The Economist online: ‘Boozing it up’. <http://www.economist.com/blogs/
graphicdetail/2014/05/daily-chart-8>.
14	 On classic prose: <http://www.denisdutton.com/clear_and_simple_review.htm>.

Moral visualizations / 173 
Moral visualizations / 173 
The balance between generalized visual appeal and clarity/efficiency 
is much easier to achieve in interactive visualizations. There’s not a rea-
son why we cannot use both Figure 5 and Figure 6, combined into a single 
project. The bouncing bubbles can entice readers to the graphic; when 
the bubbles stack side by side, as in Figure 5, they let readers extract useful 
information.
I’ve called this approach ‘the many-­faced infographic’,15 explaining 
that displaying the same data in multiple graphic forms – maps, charts, 
diagrams, etc. – can be a worthy strategy, as each of those shapes will let 
people see something different in the data. The consequence? They will 
be better informed, after having been attracted by the visualization at a vis-
ceral level. It’s hard to think of a better reward a designer can receive. Even 
better, by creating a visual device that both raises awareness of relevant 
matters and improves understanding and knowledge, the designer will be 
acting in a morally correct way.
15	 ‘The many-­faced infographic: Brooklyn, elephants, and the visualization of data’. 
<http://www.peachpit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=2153471>.
References
Aiden, Erez, and Jean-­Baptiste Michel. 2013. 
Uncharted: big data as a lens on human culture. 
New York: Riverhead.
Cairo, Alberto. 2012. The functional art: an 
introduction to information graphics and 
visualization. San Francisco: New Riders.
Cairo, Alberto. 2016. The truthful art: data, charts, 
and maps for communication. San Fransisco: New 
Riders. 
Cleveland, William S. 1985. The elements of graphing 
data. Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Few, Stephen. 2004. Show me the numbers: designing 
tables and graphs to enlighten. Oakland, CA: 
Analytics.
Greene, Joshua David. 2013. Moral tribes: emotion, 
reason, and the gap between us and them. New 
York: Penguin.
Greenwald, Glenn. 2014. No place to hide: Edward 
Snowden, the NSA, and the US surveillance state. 
New York: Metropolitan Books.
Harris, Sam. 2010. The moral landscape: how 
science can determine human values. New York: 
Free. 
Heath, Chip, and Dan Heath. 2007. Made to stick: 
why some ideas survive and others die. New York: 
Random House.
Jonas, Hans. 1984. The imperative of responsibility: in 
search of an ethics for the technological age. Chicago 
and London: University of Chicago Press.
Karabell, Zachary. 2014. The leading indicators: 
a short history of the numbers that rule our world. 
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Kosslyn, Stephen M. 2006. Graph design for the eye 
and mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lanier, Jaron. 2013. Who owns the future? New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
MacEachren, Alan M. 1995. How maps work: 
representation, visualization, and design. New York 
and London: The Guilford Press.
Malamed, Connie. 2009. Visual language for 
designers: principles for creating graphics that 
people understand. Beverly, MA: Rockport.
Meirelles, Isabel. 2013. Design for information: an 
introduction to the histories, theories, and best 
practices behind effective information visualizations. 
Beverly, MA: Rockport.
Mayer-­Schönberger, Viktor, and Kenneth Cukier. 
2013. Big data: a revolution that will transform 
how we live, work, and think. Boston, MA: Eamon 
Dolan/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Morozov, Evgeny. 2013. To save everything, click here: 
the folly of technological solutionism. New York: 
PublicAffairs.
Monteiro, Mike. 2013. ‘Webstock ’13: Mike 
Monteiro – how designers destroyed the 
world.’ Talk at Webstock ’13, 11–15 February. 
Video: <http://www.webstock.org.nz/talks/
how-designers-destroyed-the-world/>.
Parfit, Derek. 2011. On what matters. Two volumes. 
Edited and introduced by Samuel Scheffler. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pentland, Alex. 2014. Social physics: how good ideas 
spread – the lessons from a new science. New York: 
Penguin Press.

174 / Alberto Cairo
174 / Alberto Cairo
Poel, Ibo van de, and Lambèr Royakkers. 2011. Ethics, 
technology, and engineering: an introduction. 
Malden, MA: Wiley-­Blackwell. 
Robbins, Naomi B. 2005. Creating more effective 
graphs. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Singer, Peter. 1979. Practical ethics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The visual display of 
quantitative information. Cheshire, CT.: Graphics 
Press.
Ware, Colin. 2004. Information visualization: 
perception for design. 2nd edn. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Wilkinson, Leland. 1999. The grammar of graphics. 
New York: Springer. 
Yau, Nathan. 2011. Visualize this: the FlowingData 
guide to design, visualization, and statistics. 
Indianapolis, IN: Wiley.

Part 2
Theoretical 
approaches


177
This chapter was first 
published in 2012 
as an article in The 
Information Society: An 
International Journal 
28 (4): 236–252. It is 
reprinted by permission 
of the publisher, Taylor & 
Francis Ltd <http://www.
tandfonline.com>.
Graphic literacies for a digital age
The survival of layout 
Robert Waller 
Page layout is dominant in many genres of physical documents, but it is fre-
quently overlooked when texts are digitized. Its presence is largely determined 
by available technologies and skills: if no provision is made for creating, preserv-
ing, or describing layout, then it tends not to be created, preserved or described. 
However, I argue, the significance and utility of layout for readers is such that it 
will survive or re-emerge.
I review how layout has been treated in the literature of graphic design and 
linguistics, and consider its role as a memory tool. I distinguish between fixed, 
flowed, fugitive and fragmented pages, determined not only by authorial intent 
but also by technical constraints. Finally, I describe graphic literacy as a compo-
nent of functional literacy and suggest that corresponding graphic literacies are 
needed not only by readers, but by creators of documents and by the informa-
tion management technologies that produce, deliver, and store them.
This chapter is about page layout – the arrangement of different text elem-
ents (for example, chunks of prose, illustrations, and headlines) within 
a physical frame such as a book page or a screen. It is an aspect of text that 
has not been as widely studied as some others and that is easy to overlook. 
It is largely (but not entirely) absent from literature, and it is therefore 
correspondingly absent from literary studies of text, and absent from the-
ories of text that originate in literary studies. Instead, it is associated with 
non-literary genres such as children’s books, user manuals, catalogues, 
and newspapers, which have been less intensely studied. Because layout 
is a nonlinear, holistic quality of text, it is hard to define and to quantify. 
And it tends to get forgotten when new technologies for creating, storing, 
and retrieving text are developed. 
In this chapter I want to position layout as a less peripheral feature of 
text than it has often been considered – as an important infrastructure for 
reading and writing in an age when few make time to engage with long 
linear texts.1 I demonstrate its function and the key role that technology 
has played in enabling or suppressing layout in different eras. I then dis-
cuss its role in enabling effective reading, and I review some of the theor-
etical approaches that have been proposed within different disciplines. 
Then, looking forward, I discuss future types of digital text, arguing for 
  1	 I am grateful to Leopoldina Fortunati for suggesting the powerful concept of layout as 
the infrastructure for reading and writing.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 177–203
11

178 / Robert Waller 
the continuing requirement for graphic layout even in digital text, and 
for its incorporation in our definition of communication competence and 
literacy.
Traditionally, readers have almost always encountered text in the con-
text of a document: an object with borders, with a declared aim, with 
a defined authorship, and within a recognized genre – with all the conven-
tions, rules, authority, and audience expectations that are implied by that. 
Text (language string) has usually been situated in a text (document).
In the new digital culture, though, text is frequently encountered as 
search results – fragments detached from their document context, along-
side fragments of the vast unmediated mass conversation that is social 
media. And similarly when scholars discuss language and information as 
an abstract concept, it is often in the form of strings of text that we can 
easily store (for example, in language corpora), search, and analyse, rather 
than contexualized in physical documents.
There is general agreement that through technological change we are 
experiencing a very major shift in the way we communicate, and what we 
communicate – perhaps equal to the development of printing. There are 
well-known arguments that the way in which we frame our thoughts for 
the communication and preservation of knowledge has a profound effect 
on how we think.2 In our own era we face the loss of authority, as know-
ledge becomes crowd-sourced through social networks, and with the 
loss of coherence as we experience information in fragments via a search 
engine. Both of these are reasons why layout might be going out of style – 
representing, as it does, a carefully considered, editorially mediated, and 
designer-crafted presentation of a complete message.
Paradigm shifts (and some would claim that is what is represented 
by digital communications) are traditionally carried out to the sound of 
exaggerated debate between old and new, which can be difficult for those 
who appreciate aspects of both positions. In Plato’s Phaedrus, Socrates 
famously remarks to Phaedrus that writing would ‘create forgetfulness’. 
He was right – we no longer memorize very much by rote, but we use 
writing as a memory tool instead. Like any physical tool it extends our 
reach, gives us focused functionality, and multiplies our strength through 
leverage.
Experience shows that new communication technologies rarely render 
old ones completely extinct. Instead, they more typically occupy a new 
niche that was not previously possible, with the old technologies often 
surviving but in a less dominant position than before. Theatre, cinema, TV, 
DVD, and YouTube happily coexist. While the devices that deliver them 
might converge, it appears that there will still be distinct audiences and 
  2	 Among others, by thinkers such as Ong (1982) on the move from orality to literacy, 
Eisenstein (1979) on the move from manuscript to print, and McLuhan (1962) on 
the move from print to television. Baron (2008) has reported how the online world is 
changing our use and expectations of language.

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 179 
occasions for live performances as well as stored ones, shared experiences 
as well as private ones. People still memorize the alphabet, mathematical 
tables, songs, poems, and speeches. And even parchment scrolls still exist 
for ceremonial functions such as academic degree ceremonies, in which 
a document plays an important performative role.
That having been said, there is an inevitable moment during a commu-
nications revolution when a traditional channel or technique seems to be 
doomed to extinction, and this is a good time to assess its usefulness. Page 
layout is a little-discussed aspect of text, but it connects closely to a range 
of fundamental issues concerning the nature of text, documents, writing, 
and reading. Do we still need it, what are at the apparent threats to it, and 
are there any reasons to suppose it might survive or re-emerge? 
A book reviewer of this area remarked that 
one problem besetting the theorization of multimodal discourse is that most 
senior scholars entering the field have been monomodally educated: they 
are linguists, or musicologists, or art historians. Inevitably, they are thereby 
biased by their original field of study, and limited by their restricted know-
ledge of other disciplines. (Forceville 2007, 1236) 
To declare my own focus and bias: my field of study (and practice) is 
typography and graphic communication, a  relatively immature field 
largely focused on professional practice rather than theory.
What layout does 
Let me first use a practical example to establish what I mean by layout, and 
to explore what layout adds to a text, and what is lost if it is absent.
Consider this double-page spread from The Guardian newspaper 
(Figure 1, overleaf). The long dark bar at the top groups the whole spread 
under its wing. It says this is all one story. The bar is dark red in the original 
– it is worth noting that once we reproduce an actual, material text as an 
image, especially in black and white, we lose key aspects of its reality: col-
our, size, depth, and texture. And feel, sound, and smell – often remarked 
on by readers of paper documents.3 
The larger heading, on the left, dominates the spread, and, reinforced 
by the dominant image, sets up the metaphor that defines the editorial 
direction for the spread. The image communicates on an emotional level 
– both in setting up the atmosphere of discomfort, and in reducing the 
word count on the page to make it more inviting for readers who might be 
daunted by two pages of solid text. The charts (bottom left) and glossary 
(column 2) add an authoritative tone that backs a view that might other-
wise be seen as just editorial comment (signalled by the author being iden-
tified not only by name but with a photo). The evidence about the human 
  3	 Fortunati (2010) argues that the involvement of so many of our senses in the reading of 
paper documents provides a memory support not present in electronic reading.

180 / Robert Waller 
impact of a stagnant economy is supplied by the case study in the centre 
(on a beige background in the original), and a supporting voice is supplied 
on the right by a column headed ‘Analysis’. All this is visually signalled by 
distinct graphic zones, and hierarchies of differently sized headings which 
supply the discourse cohesion that in a purely linear text would be sig-
nalled in words.
One way to judge the function of layout in a spread like this would be 
to remove it – to turn it into a single linear text, with no differentiation 
between sections (a commutation test, in effect).4 That is exactly what the 
newspaper does on its own website (Figure 2).
The same story in its web version is stripped of its layout. The con-
nected stories (the case study and the analysis column) have disappeared 
from view – they do exist elsewhere on the website, but there are no direct 
links to them. And although the paper version includes just one unrelated 
element (the advertisement), the web page has numerous links to unre-
lated stories and sections that seek to distract or divert the reader.
The reader of the paper version can slip easily between related stories 
because cohesion within the set is provided graphically: their physical 
  4	 A commutation test, in semiotics, tests the relative strength of a potential signifier by 
changing it in some way – for example, by removing or substituting it in order to assess 
its contribution to meaning. See Chandler (2007) for a fuller account.
Figure 1
A spread from 
The Guardian, 
26 January 2011. 
Original size 
470 × 315 mm.
Reproduced with 
permission.

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 181 
Figure 2
Composite screen image 
from The Guardian 
website, accessed 26 
January 2011. It may 
not be clear from 
this reduced-size 
reproduction, but the links 
in the middle and right 
columns do not relate to 
the story on the left. 

182 / Robert Waller 
location, the typographic hierarchy, and visual genre distinctions all pro-
vide cohesion cues that in the Web version are absent or are entirely lexi-
cal. Importantly, the related stories are physically parked on the same page 
as the story being read at any one time. This means they are hard to lose 
track of, and remembering their presence adds little to the reader’s cogni-
tive load.
Layout and technical affordance 
Although the internet is usually assumed to be the more interactive ex-
perience, the reader of the online version actually has the more linear 
­experience at the page level, although readers can still look back and ahead 
within the story – and, of course, they have the huge benefit of being able 
to search electronically, and connect directly to intertextual references or 
citations.
E-readers are very well accepted by readers of fiction and are overtak-
ing paper books in sales. But they are less well accepted by people who 
need to study. Users of e-readers or smartphones have a restricted view, 
and evidence is appearing that suggests that currently available devices are 
struggling for acceptance by readers whose tasks are not simple and linear 
(see review by Thayer et al. 2011).
Attempts to introduce e-readers for academic study consistently 
disappoint:
Students often mark up texts, seek out and assess references, multitask while 
reading, and generally do more than just read the words on the page or screen. 
Similarly, academic work involves a variety of navigation techniques, such as 
crossreferencing information within a text and across multiple texts. Studies 
of e-readers in academic environments indicate they are imperfect devices for 
these activities. (Thayer et al. 2011, 2918) 
It is not entirely surprising that e-documents of this kind seem to have 
missed the mark for readers – it has happened before. When new technol-
ogies are developed for text, when we discuss it and analyse it, when we 
design systems to store and retrieve it, there is a consistent default assump-
tion that text is little more than a linear string of words and sentences.
Viewing medieval manuscript books one is struck by their typically 
close integration of the visual and the verbal. I could cite any number of 
examples and collections, but the Schoenberg Collection (as represented 
in Black 2006) is particularly striking as it consists largely of informa-
tion documents, rather than religious or philosophical texts. But when 
Gutenberg developed movable type, a side effect of his communication 
revolution was that the typically high integration of image and text found 
in manuscript books was largely lost, only reappearing on a large scale 
with the invention of chromolithography and photo-engraving, and with 
the growth of mass literacy, newspapers, and magazines. Printing had 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 183 
such an impact on the spread of knowledge, science, and education that 
the relative poverty of its graphic form could be overlooked.
Something similar is happening, possibly temporarily, with the devel-
opment of electronic publishing. When hypertext emerged in the 1980s 
it was heralded as a release from the pure linearity of text, as if we were 
still in the days of cuneiform, with no headings, contents lists, indexes or 
diagrams – for example: 
Unlike the static form of the book, a hypertext can be composed, and read, 
non-sequentially. (Landow and Delany 1991, 3) 
Text is typically presented in linear form, in which there is a single way to 
progress through the text, starting at the beginning and reading to the end. 
(Foltz 1996, 109) 
These quotes (which I could have selected from any number of papers on 
hypertext in the 1980s and 1990s) perfectly illustrate the linearity assump-
tion – that text, like speech, is linear by default; that it is produced in a lin-
ear way, and that it can only be consumed in a linear way.
Figure 3 (overleaf) shows books relating to the cultivation of plants 
from circa 1100, 1929, 1965, and 2010. They typify the age of manuscript, 
of letterpress, of offset lithography, and of the first generation of digital 
books. Page layout breaks out when freed from linear production technol-
ogies, but is suppressed when the next technical development reverts to 
the linear default.
In 2010 Adobe Systems Incorporated, maker of page layout software, 
was unapologetic about the lack of support for layout in its eBook format, 
in this note from its support page: 
‘Why does my eBook look different than my InDesign document?’ The EPUB 
format does not define page structure, so all the content flows together in one 
continuous linear stream. This can present a problem for publications that 
have an elaborate design. For example, if your InDesign document contains 
a lot of sidebars and images that are surrounded by text, they are linearized 
in the eBook, so it will look quite different than the original layout. However, 
if your layout is quite simple, you probably won’t notice much of a difference 
between it and its eBook equivalent. (Adobe Systems, Inc. 2010, 2) 
This rather retrograde assumption of a linear norm will probably be tem-
porary, and some newer formats announced for online textbooks have 
paid rather more attention to the needs of readers and the demands of 
complex content.5 
  5	 For example, the Inkling format (<http://www.inkling.com>) and the Apple iBooks 
textbook (<http://www.apple.com>).

184 / Robert Waller 
Page from The rose expert 
(D. G. Hessayon, 1965. 
London: Trans-World 
Publishers). 
Figure 3 
Gardening manuals 
from c.1100, 1929, 
1967, 2010.
Before printing, the 
integration of text and 
graphics was common.
Illustrated, integrated 
books, designed as 
pages or double-page 
spreads, became 
common again in the 
1960s, as technical 
developments made 
it easier to lay out and 
print colour pages. 
Letterpress printing 
made this difficult 
and expensive.
An 11th-century herbal: 
Ps. Apuleius, Herbal 
England, St. Augustine’s 
Abbey, Canterbury. 11th 
century, circa 1070–1100. 
MS Ashmole 1431, fols. 
018v–019r. Reproduced by 
permission of The Bodleian 
Libraries, University of 
Oxford.
Spread from Everyday in my 
garden (F. Hadfield Farthing, 
1929. London: Knopf).
Early e-books once again suppressed 
illustration. Note that page breaks 
have no regard to content, so widows 
(isolated words and lines at the top of 
pages) are common.
Screen from Allotment gardening (S. Berger, 2005. 
Totnes: Green Books. Kindle edition 2010). 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 185 
Layout and readers 
Strategic reading 
Why are some kinds of e-documents accepted by readers (novels) and 
others (textbooks) less well liked? When we read a novel we engage in 
a style of reading that is sometimes called ‘receptive’, ‘linear’, or ‘close’ 
reading. Unless we are reading it as a student or critic, we follow the narra-
tive at a fairly even pace, controlled by the writer.
Studying, in contrast, is an example of what we might call a selective 
or strategic reading process (Paris and Myers 1981; Pugh 1975). Strategic 
readers use a document, or a set of documents, to achieve a goal. They 
engage in receptive reading for some of the time, but monitor their 
understanding, and their progress towards the goal, in a process known 
as metacognition (Brown 1980) or executive control (Britton and Glynn 
1987). They then adjust their style of reading in response to this internal 
metacognitive feedback.
Strategic reading is enabled by what the typographer Beatrice Warde6 
called the ‘three great privileges of printing’ (to turn back, to look forward, 
and to stop and think), and is echoed in Daniel Pennac’s (2006) classic The 
rights of the reader (his ten rights include ‘the right not to read’ and ‘the 
right to skip’).
Pugh (1975) identified five strategies: receptive reading is reading from 
beginning to end with little variation in pace – appropriate for the novel 
reader, and well suited to e-readers, but less appropriate to intensive study 
or problem-solving; responsive reading means an active engagement with 
the arguments in the text, with frequent changes in pace, pauses, and re- 
reading; skimming is a quick read to overview the structure or content of 
a text, either before or after a full responsive read; searching means looking 
in a general way for answers to a question; and scanning means searching 
for a specific word or phrase. Of these five strategies, electronic documents 
are particularly well suited to receptive reading, skimming, and scanning 
(using the search facility in a browser or e-reader). 
Studying is not the only strategic reading activity. Information docu-
ments of all kinds need to be read strategically. No sensible person chooses 
from a catalogue, sets up a DVD player, selects a hotel from a travel guide, 
or looks up a word in a dictionary by starting on page 1 and reading through 
until the end.
Strategic reading is at the heart of document literacy. Along with prose 
literacy (which measures the fluency of receptive reading) and quanti-
tative literacy (the basic arithmetic needed for everyday life), document 
literacy is a key aspect of a wider term, ‘functional literacy’ (OECD 1997). 
It refers to the ability to use documents to achieve purposes and solve 
problems. The tests used to measure it mostly use visually organized 
  6	 In her foreword to Steinberg (1974).

186 / Robert Waller 
documents rather than continuous prose: for example, forms, timetables, 
instructions, and user guides (Evetts and Gauthier [2005] include many 
examples). In many schools and in adult literacy classes, readers are taught 
active reading strategies: the use of access structures such as contents lists 
and headings, the use of multiple sources, and ways to approach different 
document genres. In fact, the concept of literacy has become increasingly 
broad, and the International Reading Association now includes visual lit-
eracy in its definition (Edwards 2010).
Of course, the deployment of these skills depends on documents that 
afford, allow, and encourage these strategies: providing readers with 
what they need to read strategically. Textbook designers know that stu-
dents need information to be broken into chunks, and well supplied with 
headings, illustrations, notes, and meta-level study aids.7 Together, these 
comprise what Anderson and Armbruster (1985) call a ‘considerate text’ – 
a term that might be more widely applied to any text that reflects the needs 
of readers, rather than just expressing the topic structures and arguments 
of the writer.
Linearization in language 
At its most basic level, language is obviously linear – in most languages, 
word order is critical within the sentence – and explaining the sequential, 
or syntagmatic, relationship between words has been a major preoccupa-
tion of linguistics. Together with the principle of the primacy of speech, 
this explains why until fairly recently linguistic scientists rarely acknowl-
edged graphic aspects of text.
Above the sentence – at the level of paragraphs, sections, chapters, or 
stories – we become increasingly less dependent on syntax and more on 
the presence of explicit structural or cohesive cues. As a simple example, 
the expression ‘on the one hand’ in English tells us that one aspect of an 
argument is about be presented, and then contrasted with another, which 
will be announced by ‘on the other hand.’ In effect, a diagram is being con-
structed verbally. ‘On the one hand’ is an example of a cataphoric (looking 
ahead) reference, which requires readers to create a mental representation 
that is referenced by something they later read. ‘On the other hand’ is an 
anaphoric (looking back) reference, requiring readers to consult a mental 
representation of the text they have already processed.
In other words, it requires them to answer the implied question ‘other 
than what?’ from their memory of the preceding text.8 It is a small step for 
designers to see those kinds of structural cues as opportunities to turn that 
  7	 Collectively we can describe these as ‘access structures’ (Waller 1979). Research on 
their educational effectiveness is reviewed by Britton and Black (1985).
  8	 De Beaugrande (1984) presents a typology of linearization in language, which 
includes what he terms ‘core-and adjunct’ (which includes contrast, and hierarchical 
relationships), pause, heaviness, listing, disambiguation, looks-back, and looks- 
ahead. 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 187 
putative mental representation into a diagrammatic representation9 – for 
example, through bulleted lists, diagrams, numbered steps, or marginal 
panels. These are instances of documents as memory tools, reducing the 
need for readers to construct and refer to mental representations of con-
tent structure.
Layout for strategic reading: overcoming the linearity of language 
Our writing system has also evolved in support of these rhetorical struc-
tures: documents in their modern form work as tools for overcoming the 
linearity of language. Although this is often cited as a unique advantage of 
digital channels, it is not new. The history of paper documents shows the 
development of an increasingly rich range of ways to overcome the linear-
ity of language and to make written information accessible: word spacing, 
punctuation, the codex, headings, page numbers, typographic structures, 
indexes, and multimodal layouts evolved over centuries. They moved the 
act of reading from a slow oral process to the fast, silent, and strategic pro-
cess that we have discussed, in which effective readers deploy a range of 
strategies to achieve their goals: searching, skimming, recapitulating, and 
note-taking, as well as linear close reading.
It is not completely clear when silent reading developed, but Saenger 
(1982) argues that it was the development of word spacing in the early 
Middle Ages (seventh and eighth centuries) that freed readers from the 
linearity of slow oral reading, and transformed the way we study, and by 
the late Middle Ages, this had developed into a sophisticated system for 
the visual organization of text.
The complex structure of the written page of a fourteenth century scho-
lastic text presupposed a reader who read only with his eyes, going swiftly 
from objection to response, from table of contents to the text, from diagram 
to text, and from the text to the gloss and its corrections.  
(Saenger 1982, 393) 
This is how designers intend us to read modern structured books, too, 
although there is only a limited published literature accounting for their 
layout principles.
Theorizing layout 
Layout in the literature of graphic design 
We can find several alternative approaches to layout in the graphic design 
literature. This is typically presented in the form of manifestos, textbooks, 
portfolio collections, and memoirs – not peer-reviewed in the academic 
sense, although often intelligently curated by an editor or publisher.
And of course most designers speak through their work, rarely stopping 
  9	 I developed this analogy further in Waller (1982).

188 / Robert Waller 
to articulate what they are doing except to teach students or coach employ-
ees in a studio setting. Schriver (1997) provides a good account of the 
graphic design literature, linked to related traditions in technical writing 
and usability research.
First, designers use perceptual principles established by the gestalt psy-
chologists (Wertheimer 1938) to account for graphic relationships among 
elements of a page. For example, whatever their actual content, we tend to 
assume that things that are physically close on the page are related in some 
way (the proximity principle), and that things that look similar are mem-
bers of the same category (the similarity principle). Although no longer 
current among psychologists, for designers these principles usefully com-
prise what might loosely be called a visual syntax of the page, and they are 
widely used in design education.
There is also a strong tendency among design textbook writers to focus 
on formal or aesthetic qualities such as rhythm, contrast, tension, or bal-
ance. The use of visual form to direct readers’ attention was well articulated 
by designers from the Bauhaus and new typography traditions, influenced 
by the gestalt psychologists, as well as art movements such as De Stijl and 
constructivism (see Kinross [1992] for a good history and analysis). In par-
ticular, the Czech designer Ladislav Sutnar, a pioneer of designing in dou-
ble-page spreads, articulated and demonstrated coherent theories about 
what he called function, form, and flow (Heller 1994; Sutnar 1961; Sutnar 
and Lönberg-Holm 1944). However, it still remains for such ideas to be 
integrated into a broader functional account of layout as a component in 
discourse, and as an infrastructure for writing and reading. In the hands of 
many design textbook writers these formal graphic qualities are treated as 
the counterpart to poetic and expressive qualities in verbal language, so 
they relate more to reader engagement than comprehension.
Twyman (1979) demonstrated the wide range of graphic language that 
can coexist within a single taxonomy that distinguishes between the mode 
of symbolization (prose, numbers, pictures, schematics) and the mode of 
configuration (how elements are ordered and accessed in linear, semilin-
ear, and nonlinear ways). This tradition of thought led in turn to the idea 
that typographic pages are diagrammatic, extending the function of punc-
tuation within the linear text to the page level, displaying relationships 
such as segmentation, sequence, balance, and salience graphically rather 
than lexically and syntactically (Waller 1982, 1987).
This work was an attempt to account for the illustrated reference 
books that emerged in what we can now see as a golden age of layout, the 
1970s and 1980s. Publishers such as Time-Life, Reader’s Digest, Dorling 
Kindersley, and others developed a new genre that, inspired by magazine 
design,10 used the double-page spread as a unit of meaning.
The diagrammatic quality of these books – typically on hobbies, sports, 
10	 See White (1982) for insight into the magazine designer’s craft.

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 189 
history, or travel – brought layout to the fore. They were developed by 
multidisciplinary teams in much the same way as films are produced. 
Unlike the traditional book, in which the author’s voice is primary, in 
these books, the writer fills in spaces to order, and provides functional text 
such as descriptions and captions on request from editors, illustrators, 
photographers, and designers.
Then there is a generic perspective used in design. Layout is the main 
signifying feature of many familiar document genres: for example, news-
papers, magazines, textbooks, user guides, packaging, and reference 
books. These everyday genres owe their very being to their layout.  
When readers see them, they know what they are, and what to do with 
them. The graphic layout of such genres effectively contains the rules or 
affordances for their use: engaging layouts and large headings invite the 
magazine reader to browse; the orderly layout of a user guide invites sys-
tematic reading, referencing a task outside of the text through diagrams, 
and providing large numerals as a visual target to the returning reader.
Considered as ‘rules for use’, such aspects of layout can be thought of as 
access structures. In earlier work, I have distinguished this from the com-
plementary use of layout to convey topic structures (Waller 1991), which are 
motivated by structures inherent in the author’s topic as distinct from the 
reader’s task. Together with artefact structure (which arises as a by-product 
of manufacture and is unmotivated by communication goals), character-
istic combinations of these structures account for the typical structure of 
document genres of the kinds just listed. Delin, Bateman, and Allen (2002; 
see also Bateman 2008) further developed this model into a fuller account 
of genre structures, elaborating in particular the notions of artefact struc-
ture and topic structure.
Genres are natural categories identified by a language community – the 
primary evidence for their existence is the development of a name: mag-
azine, newspaper, textbook. When we need a new name we invent one 
(‘blurb’, for example, to describe publishers’ eulogies), and sometimes we 
subdivide genres into new subgenres (newspapers became broadsheets or 
tabloids).
A related concept is pattern language, with the key difference being 
that this is an exercise in naming common configurations that exist but, 
unlike genres, have no naturally developed name. It originated with the 
architect Christopher Alexander (1977), who developed names for suc-
cessful configurations in towns and buildings. His pattern descriptions 
include definitions of common problems together with recommended 
solutions. They not only offer architects a repertoire of solutions that, 
Alexander argues, reflect the way human settlements naturally evolve, but 
they provide names that enable the patterns to be discussed and specified.  
This approach was taken up in a significant way by software engineers who 
needed to find a way to describe common programming objects (Gamma 
et al. 1994), and from there it was picked up by interface designers (Tidwell 

190 / Robert Waller 
1997/2005) and eventually by document designers (Waller and Delin 
2010; Farkas, Larson, and Naranjo 2011).
These approaches (formal, diagrammatic, genres, and patterns) have 
one thing in common: they assume that readers combine a focal awareness 
of the words they are reading or the part of a picture they are inspecting, 
with a subsidiary awareness of the whole graphic page. ‘Focal’ and ‘subsid-
iary’ are the terms the philosopher of science Michael Polanyi (1969) used 
to describe a form of holistic perception he called ‘physiognomic.’ At one 
level reading a page is a little like recognizing a face – you don’t inspect 
the eyes, the nose, and the mouth separately but in one take. This makes 
layout challenging for technologies or analytical frameworks that fail to go 
beyond the linear default.
Linguistics, semiotics, and layout 
Given that for the most part there is little authorial control of layout, and 
therefore little intentionality imputed to it (in a novel, for example), it is 
not surprising that for many years it was largely ignored within linguistics. 
But during the 1990s there began to be growing interest in multimodality, 
and in the extension of discourse analysis to graphic aspects of documents. 
This work typically drew on structural linguistics, discourse analysis, and 
genre theory as its starting points. In an important early contribution, 
Bernhardt (1985) ranged genres on a spectrum from the visually informa-
tive (in which layout and typography variation are prominent) to the vis-
ually uninformative (linear text), and explored the parallels between the 
two in terms of Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) structural linguistics.
Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) similarly used Halliday’s structural 
linguistics as a starting point but within a social semiotics perspective.  
They develop an influential account of the ‘grammar of visual design’ that 
they apply to a range of multiple modalities. Addressing layout, they sug-
gest that verbal and visual elements interact in three key ways to create 
cohesive pages.
Salience refers to the manipulations of the viewer’s attention through 
such things as relative size and contrast. Framing refers to the dividing off or 
enclosing of text elements. So far so good, but their concept of information 
value is more controversial. It asserts that different zones of a page – left, 
right, top, bottom, centre, and margin – carry distinct significances. For 
example, they assert that the left-hand side of a multi-column page carries 
given information (things the reader already knows) and the right-hand 
side carries new information (extensions to the given, things at issue).
Although they produce some examples of, in their terms, grammatical 
or ungrammatical pages, these are quite limited in number, seem to be 
selected to demonstrate the point, and underplay the variety of layouts 
that can be found. Moreover, the left–right distinction appears to assume 
we read pages in a  linear manner, whereas the way information is, in 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 191 
their terms, framed or given relative salience may encourage alternative 
sequences. 
Consider the examples I introduced earlier. In Figure 5, the left-hand 
page shows how to plant three kinds of rose. Each is given a similar head-
ing, and the order is almost certainly dictated by the proportions of the 
pictures: standards and climbers are both tall and narrow, so fit well side 
by side, leaving bushes and the descriptive text to fit in with each other. 
I cannot see Kress and van Leeuwen’s semiotic significances instantiated 
in this page, beyond the uncontroversial notions of framing and salience.
Of course, if we are studying at the level of the word or sentence, we have 
access to vast databases of real language, known as corpora, with which 
to test our hypotheses. Corpus linguistics has become a major resource 
for contemporary linguistics, supplanting the limited sets of idealized or 
sampled text used in the past. So scholars studying multimodal sources 
also need access to this kind of resource – for example, to test Kress and 
van Leeuwen’s proposed information values.
Bateman, Delin, and Henschel (2004) critique Kress and van Leeuwen 
and address the issue of how a multimodal document corpus might be 
constructed. Bateman’s (2008) major review of the field reveals some of 
the difficulties to be faced. In particular, he notes that 
A substantial set of problems is raised by the fact that the object of study is 
not linear, either temporally or in terms of the principles for its consumption; 
moreover, its multichannel nature makes it difficult to reconcile and peg 
together the methods of recording, transcription, analysis and annotation 
that have been developed separately for each mode. This makes empirical 
study and validation of theory particularly problematic: we have not had the 
‘orderly arrangement of the objects upon which we must turn our mental 
vision’ (cf. Descartes, Rule V of Rules for the Direction of the Mind, 1701) and, 
partly as a consequence, analysis has remained overwhelmingly impressionis-
tic. (Bateman 2008, 272). 
There remains the question as to whether the annotation of material going 
into such corpora could ever be automated, or whether it will always 
remain dependent on ‘impressionistic’ analysis. Will computer pattern 
recognition ever be sophisticated enough to emulate the gestalt struc-
tures seen by human readers, to use physiognomic recognition, or to spot 
generic resonances – those visual, holistic features of a visual display that 
go beyond what is defined in the markup languages (such as XML) that lie 
behind many modern documents? And will anyone ever think it worth-
while spending the time and money reaching that goal? 
A study by Thomas (2009; see also Thomas, Delin, and Waller 2010) 
illustrates the challenge of handling layout in a multimodal document cor-
pus. A multimodal document corpus must allow users to search via the 
usual verbal strings and tags, but also to search by layout properties and to 
view the actual document in facsimile. This means a considerable amount 

192 / Robert Waller 
of expert annotation at the input stage, which discourages the develop-
ment of large enough corpora to make computer analysis worthwhile.
Layout in the digital age
Digital genres 
The genre approach asserts, in effect, that if there is a consistent human 
need to communicate in a particular way, then a corresponding genre will 
probably emerge. Or if, as with letterpress printing, that need is not met, it 
will re-emerge when technical developments allow it.
Although the digital age has made massively more documents availa-
ble to each user, it is still struggling to evolve a common basis for a digital 
literacy – an agreed set of tools and techniques that enable us to study, 
understand, and retrace our steps through information, as well as to find 
it and connect it (both of which the digital age does supremely well). It is 
an evolutionary process; for example, when publishers turned to interac-
tive CD-ROMs in the 1990s, they were rejected by the marketplace. Now 
those same publishers are tentatively moving back to similar formats for 
the Apple iPad, which provides a smoother delivery path and a better user 
experience.
Paper documents often evolved through a process of initial exploration 
and natural selection, followed by conservatism as production patterns 
settled and formats became familiar. Document genres – categories such 
as ‘book’, ‘newspaper’, or ‘leaflet’ – typically evolved out of the functional 
requirements of their producers and users. Even when the original pro-
duction constraints change, genres survive because their users have con-
servative expectations. So readers of novels expect seriffed typefaces and 
straight right-hand edges; readers of newspapers expect narrow columns. 
Readers are conservative and want to minimize their effort to understand 
– genres represent a secure way in which writers can meet readers’ expec-
tations, and in which readers can understand the rules for reading any 
genre-conforming document. We know from its format what the status of 
a paper document is, and what to do with it: whether to keep it or discard 
it; whether to read it carefully or skim; even whether to treat it as enter-
tainment, or as of serious import.
Something similar has to happen with digital documents, and it will 
happen through creative explorations of compelling interfaces and de-
vices, rather than through the deliberations of academic researchers. It 
has been noticeable that the popularity of tablet computers has spurred on 
magazine publishers to experiment with innovative page-based formats.
As a New York Times piece put it: 
You’ve got to hand it to the magazine publishers. They continue to throw 
spaghetti against the iPad and other e-readers trying to see what will stick and 
what falls to the floor. (Bilton 2010) 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 193 
To date, most present their readers with defined, bounded content that, 
even when using interactive or video content, retains the page model 
(often vertically stretched) and eschews the infinite extension into hyper-
text and social interaction that characterizes most newspaper web­sites.
Documents as memory tools 
Digital genres are developing, and will continue to develop, particularly 
where they afford some functionality that was previously impossible. In 
particular, the digital world has not yet finished evolving usable formats 
for managing the conversational dimension of websites. The same format 
is used for a handful of comments on a blog as for thousands of comments 
on a national newspaper’s website: a continuous scrolling page (some-
times sliced into multiple pages), unsorted and unedited. Just as we learn 
to filter out irrelevant noise when have a conversation in a crowded room, 
we have to develop effective filters in order to find, read, and store online 
information discerningly. As with other areas of human activity, we just 
need the right tools.
Online channels give us incredibly effective tools when we are hunt-
ing for information. The question remains, though, whether we yet have 
the right tools for dissecting, cooking, and eating the information we 
have hunted down. Conceptual thinking is about manipulating ideas. For 
example, with paper documents we might: 
•	 focus on an idea, integrating representations of it from different 
sources – for example, a set of different documents, viewed together, 
open at relevant pages.
•	 compare more than one document, point for point. People often do 
this by annotating documents or transcribing concepts into tables or 
diagrams.
•	 park an idea, so that it is in view but not in play, to remember the fact 
of its existence. People typically write notes for this, or leave books 
open on a desk.
•	 connect a number of concepts, from inside and outside of the 
document to hand. People sort documents in piles, use colour-coded 
bookmarks, or make lists and sketch diagrams.
•	 prioritize among a set of possible directions for our thinking. People 
may transcribe ideas into numbered lists, or sort documents into  
piles.
•	 annotate a text element, to capture a thought before it escapes. People 
underline or highlight documents.
Some of these commonplace behaviours are still hard to achieve with the 
current generation of digital documents.

194 / Robert Waller 
This is why Sellen and Harper (2002),11 in their seminal study of doc-
ument use in organizations, noted that the default pose for many readers 
they observed (not just writers) was with a pen in their hand, ready to 
annotate the text or jot down new thoughts. In fact, their remarkable con-
clusion was that in the digital age paper is primarily an interactive medium, 
not a storage medium.
The life cycle of a document, as they observed it, moves between digi-
tal and paper versions: marshalling and extracting information (digital 
for search, paper for integrating multiple sources), writing (paper for 
planning, digital for drafting), editing/proofreading (paper), finalizing 
(digital), distribution and workflow (mostly digital), reading/consuming 
(paper better for longer documents), archiving/filing (digital). Paper is 
used by many as a temporary interactive medium: documents are printed 
out for reading, annotation, comparing, and sharing – then recycled while 
remaining accessible in digital form. As they put it: 
We argue that we are not headed toward offices that use less paper but rather 
toward offices that keep less paper. This is because we will continue to need 
paper for some of the critical work activities we do, but in these roles it will be 
very much a temporary medium. (209) 
Of course, the judicious use of memory, and therefore of memory tools, 
involves forgetting as well as remembering. In a recent critique of the con-
cept of ‘lifelogging’ (the ultimate digital capture of every memory), Sellen 
and Whittaker (2010) suggest using psychological principles from studies 
of human memory as design principles for digital memories. Keeping the 
memory-tool metaphor in mind, this means designing digital formats 
that ‘strategically target the weaknesses of human memory.’ They outline 
what this means: for example, selective capture of information, aiding 
metacognition and metamemory, and designing effective retrieval cues. 
This more or less describes a book: curated, coherent, and designed to 
support strategic reading. But in the digital age this can be done in a way 
that is personalized, up-to-date, and configurable by the user.
Paper is not only essential for people wanting to spread ideas on the 
table and annotate them. It also has speed and continuity advantages over 
many current digital formats, such as The Guardian spread in Figure 1. Its 
readers must move around not only with their eyes (as did Saenger’s medi-
eval readers) but via trackpads and keyboards, and perhaps even search 
boxes, with resulting time delays and additional cognitive load. Nielsen 
(1993) reported that time delays during the use of interfaces causes readers 
to be distracted by a loss of fluency and loss of direct control.
In addition to time delays, the physical position of content in linear 
digital documents is usually not constant. This fluidity is also potentially 
11	 Although at the time of writing, this study is already ten years old, in 2002 electronic 
documents, email, intranets, and the Web were already well established in all large 
organizations.

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 195 
disruptive, as there is experimental evidence to back up a common obser-
vation that readers use their memory of the physical location of ideas on 
a page when searching for previously read (see e.g. Dillon 1991; Rothkopf 
1971).12
Four aspects of digital pages 
Hypertext prophets used to speak as if the advent of digital text were 
a paradigm shift, incommensurate with past ways of thinking and acting 
through text. It is perhaps more common now to speak about the con-
vergence of technologies and channels. In that spirit I identify four page 
archetypes that reflect generic resonances from the past, the continuing 
need for traditional functions of the document, and the technical capabili-
ties and connectedness of the current world (Table 1, overleaf).
Fixed pages are the most diagrammatic. Because they are locked in 
place, the reader can assume that relationships between elements (text 
blocks, pictures, headlines, etc.) are intentional and potentially mean-
ingful. A page break signifies the end of a unit of text, in the same way as 
a sentence or a paragraph. The designer and writer, for their part, can craft 
graphic relationships, knowing that they will survive the various technical 
transmission processes and reach the reader.
Flowed pages are represented by traditional novels, or by e-reader 
books. The author’s words are flowed in and fill the pages one by one, with 
page endings that are as arbitrary as the line endings are. But those page 
endings are fixed for the life of the document (or, in the case of e-docu-
ments, until the text is reflowed after a change of font). Readers can there-
fore move back and forth between pages and use the constant geography 
of the book to navigate.
Fugitive pages are formatted temporarily and perhaps also populated 
with content temporarily. Pages are created afresh for each reading, and 
may change when revisited. A common example is an online newspaper, 
which offers a reasonably coherent appearance and user experience but is 
constantly updated. If you return to a story later in the day, you may find 
that it has been relegated to a lower position in the hierarchy or even disap-
peared from view. Even if it is still there, the content may have been edited.
Fragmented pages are compilations of page elements from a variety of 
sources that may not have any relationship predictable by their authors. 
An example is the result of a search, or an aggregation application such 
as Flipboard (which assembles content from a range of the user’s favour-
ite sources, such as blogs or social networking sites, into a magazine-like 
format).
These page types may exist in pure form or coexist in combination. For 
example, an online newspaper may have fixed layouts into which fugitive 
12	 I wrote a short critique of hypertext in its early days, entitled ‘What electronic books 
will have to be better than’, which highlighted the role of physical constancy in enabling 
intensive study, using an active reading strategy (Waller 1986).

196 / Robert Waller 
Fixed
Flowed
Fugitive
Fragmented
Definition
Text and image locked in fixed 
positions 
Linear text flowed into page 
templates
Pages are created dynamically at 
point of use
Pages assembled from multiple 
sources
Typical  
purpose
Explanation
Narrative
Community
Enquiry
Example
Magazine
Reference book designed in pages 
or double-page spreads
Traditional printed book,
e-reader book (e.g. Kindle)
Online newspaper
Search results
Aggregator software (e.g. 
Flipboard)
Impact on 
content and 
layout
Content and layout fixed, although 
may be scaled up or down
Content fixed. Once flowed into 
template, layout is fixed until new 
edition produced (or, in the case of 
e-readers, new design parameters 
applied by user)
Pages created afresh from data + 
rules, so looks different on each 
channel or device
Pages created from search system, 
so assembled from multiple sources
Editorial  
control
Designer controls and crafts, with 
words edited to fit. Complete 
control within restrictive canvas 
constraints (page boundaries)
Writer controls and crafts, with 
advisory and proofreading 
support from editor. Minor role for 
designer. Unconstrained by page 
boundaries
Writer may craft linear text 
within content management 
system. Designer creates templates 
for text to flow into. Little control 
or crafting. Content and layout 
managed through programmed 
rules 
Reader sets and tests rules. Little 
crafting or editorial control, except 
through strategies such as search 
engine optimization
Reader  
control
Look and read
Using gestalt perceptions of 
structure. Moving from focal to 
peripheral awareness of static infor-
mation to view, and place memory 
of information already viewed
Read
Building mental representation 
of structure. Reading strategically 
to check and reinforce those 
structures. Moving back and forth 
between static pages
Click and read
Similar to flowed text, but with 
less reliability when revisiting 
previously found information
Click, read, click, read
Building mental representa-
tion from multiple sources. 
Sophisticated levels of inference 
needed to integrate fragments
Table 1  Traditional and emergent page types coexisting in digital documents

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 197 
content is flowed, and a column of fragmented advertisements drawn in 
through personalization rules.
Illustrated textbooks and catalogues are a common hybrid of fixed and 
flowed text. Pictures or marginal notes need to be related to specific points 
in the text, so two columns may flow together through the book.
Layout and graphic literacy 
I have discussed the relative difficulty in delivering fixed, laid-out pages 
via digital channels that are designed to deliver flowed, fugitive, and frag-
mented text. I now consider a different kind of barrier: the skills needed to 
produce effective layout, and the low priority that it is given within many 
information-providing organizations. I  use the term ‘graphic literacy’, 
although this is to extend a term that is more often associated with the abil-
ity to interpret pictures and charts.13 In everyday usage the term ‘literacy’ 
usually refers both to the ability to read and to the ability to write prose.
Most Western countries have very high rates of prose literacy – around 
99% is typically claimed – but much lower rates of functional literacy: 
Even the most economically advanced societies have a literacy skills deficit. 
Between one-quarter and three-quarters of adults fail to attain literacy Level 
3, considered by experts as a suitable minimum skill level for coping with the 
demands of modern life and work. (OECD 2000, xiii) 
As we have seen, adult literacy tests go beyond prose literacy to include 
document literacy and quantitative literacy. Tests of document literacy 
claim to measure the ability to use complex documents (which include 
many different text features in addition to continuous prose) in order to do 
tasks that involve departing from the linear structure to search, compare, 
make inferences, and solve problems.
So we might construe graphic literacy (or more specifically, typographic 
literacy) as the key difference between prose literacy and document liter-
acy. In other words: document literacy = prose literacy + graphic literacy.
The documents used in tests of document literacy include forms, time-
tables, instructions, and other everyday functional documents. Some of 
these are highly conventionalized, and in those cases, literacy must there-
fore involve familiarity with conventions typical found in particular docu-
ment genres. Hamilton and Barton (2000) criticized the IALS test, as used 
in the United Kingdom, on exactly this point (among others): 
Looking more closely, there are US ways of using language and US con-
ventions of design and layout. The bus timetable, for instance, follows the 
13	 The International Visual Literacy Association (IVLA) acknowledges the existence 
of a multitude of definitions of visual or graphic literacy, remarking on their website 
that each scholar has produced his or her own (<http://www.ivla.org/org what vis lit.
htm>, accessed February 12, 2012). Brill, Kim, and Branch (2007) attempted to reach 
agreement among experts, with limited success.

198 / Robert Waller 
twelve hour clock with a.m. and p.m. The morning is written in normal font 
and the afternoon in bold. This is fine, it is comprehensible and it may seem 
innocuous. Nevertheless, these are US conventions; in Britain bus timetables 
normally use a twenty-four-hour clock; morning and afternoon buses are not 
given a different font. Font differences are usually used to distinguish through 
services from ones where a change of bus is required. These are small points, 
but they are indicative of how the seemingly culture-free bus timetable may 
in fact be quite a different text in two countries and be clearly perceived by 
respondents as originating outside of their own culture. (p. 383) 
It is arguable that to be unaware, as a literacy test designer, of the localized 
nature of document genres is itself a form of graphic or document illiter-
acy, tantamount to not realizing that in other countries they speak foreign 
languages.
The test question for the document in Figure 4 is: ‘Suppose the annual 
budget statement will be 105 pages and you need to distribute 300 copies. 
Would Quick Copy do this job? Explain your answer.’ 
The document is poorly designed on several levels: it fails to use well-
known genre rules, it fails to use layout and design features to direct atten-
tion and afford effective use, and its content relates to a highly local and 
specific system. If a user fails this literacy test, whose literacy is lacking: 
that of the user or of the document creator? David Hamilton and Mary 
Barton are key figures in the ‘new literacies’ movement, where specific 
literacies are identified among different discourse communities (usually 
called ‘situated literacies’, but for clarity in this context I call them ‘conver-
sational literacies’). They define this approach in the same article: 
Figure 4
An example of a 
level 3 IALS test 
item. 
Reproduced from 
the Literacy Task 
Assessment Guide, 
National Literacy 
Secretariat, Human 
Resources and Skills 
Development Canada 
(Evetts and Gauthier 
2005, 114).

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 199 
Our approach is based upon a belief that literacy only has meaning within its 
particular context of social practice and does not transfer unproblematically 
across contexts; there are different literacy practices in different domains of 
social life, such as education, religion, workplaces, public services, families, 
community activities; they change over time and these different literacies are 
supported and shaped by the different institutions and social relationships. 
(Hamilton and Barton, 2000, 379) 
So ideally, then: document literacy = prose literacy + graphic literacy + 
­conversational literacy.
Conversational literacy describes our understanding, either as creators 
or users of communication channels, of how a particular communication 
is shaped by its conversational context. It recognizes that each participant 
brings his or her own motives and experience to a conversation, and it 
understands how any document is likely to be interpreted in a particular 
context and the range of inferences that it is reasonable for readers to make.
Producers and consumers:  
an imbalance of access and skills 
When discussing document or digital literacy, we sometimes forget that 
traditionally we speak of literate people as being able to both read and 
write. Applying the same principle to document literacy, this means that 
a failure of communication may be blamed on the literacy skills of both 
producer and user.
The most sophisticated written documents are produced by individuals 
who have highly developed skills of writing, editing, and design, working 
in industrialized systems of production and distribution. Their skills are 
held in the form of procedural knowledge developed among communities 
of practice, and learned through apprenticeship, rather than declarative 
knowledge taught through formal grammars.
Page-based (normally, paper) channels, in their most evolved forms, 
involve an imbalance in the access to communication channels of elite 
producers (in the form of authors and publishers) and consumers. Digital 
channels are now open to all, but the skills required to communicate effec-
tively are not universal.
The problem of competence is a key problem when we consider lay-
out as an aspect of text that carries meaning. When linguists study spoken 
language by recording speakers, they accord them respect by attributing 
variations from ‘standard’ forms to such things as dialect, mood, or con-
text. But when we study written language, and in particular typographic 
layouts, it is hard to avoid distinguishing between trained and untrained 
writers and designers. Although they are typically called ‘expert’ and ‘lay’ 
designers by researchers (see e.g. Walker 2001), if they were to be con-
sidered equally competent, there would be no such profession as graphic 
designer.

200 / Robert Waller 
How, then, might we extend the concept of relative document literacy 
to the document producer? Fully document-literate document creators 
(whether persons or organizations) must work at three corresponding 
levels, measurable through user testing: 
Prose level: They must be able to write fluent, and readable prose – the 
traditional criterion for an educated, literate person.
Graphic level: They (if necessary collaborating with a designer, or using 
templates) must be able to use layout and typography to create a usable 
environment for searching, skimming, and seeing content structures dia-
grammed, as well as the close reading of prose. We could go further and 
say that they must be able to use alternatives to prose, such as pictures, 
diagrams and charts, where these would be more effective.
Conversational level: They must create an encounter of user and docu-
ment in which a range of appropriate behaviours, reader roles, and critical 
stances is made obvious, and in which key prior knowledge or postreading 
actions are made plain.
An example might help to explore the distinction between the graphic 
and the conversational levels. The official document in Figure 5a fails on 
all three counts: 
•	 prose: it is written in bureaucratic language unsuitable for a general 
audience;
•	 graphic: its structure is poorly articulated graphically, with numerous 
ways to structure and highlight information used simultaneously;
•	 conversational: it does not make its function clear, or the process of 
which it is a part.
In some ways, this documents reflects the IALS test in Figure 4. It shows 
a similar lack of design competence, and is similarly adrift from the range 
of everyday genres that readers are used to. Successful readers of either 
document have to imagine a possible world in which it makes sense, and 
within which they can make inferences about intention – in much the 
same way as when reading an ungrammatical sentence, we try different 
meanings until one of them appears to makes sense in context.
The redesigned version of the Penalty Charge Notice (Figure 5b) has 
a clear visual pathway that corresponds to an explanation pathway: this is 
what happened, here is the proof, this is what to do next, and this is how 
to do it.
Ideally, document designers can take an existing genre as a  model 
– something shared with their readers in a given discourse community. 
Official documents like this one, however, are encountered too rarely in 
the lives of individual to establish strong genre conventions. One of the 
problems with the original version is that it shows evidence of excessive 
repair: over-signalling is often the result of attempts to overcompensate 
for poor reader responses.
In the absence of a strong genre, the new design falls back on the core 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 201 
techniques of clear information design: the content is organized as a narra-
tive, told in the left-hand column, with very clear framing (the horizontal 
rules). What happened (and the evidence); what is the penalty (and how 
much); then finally a choice of appeal or pay. With a pattern language per-
spective, it follows a strong procedural ‘action and result’ pattern found 
more frequently in user guides. This kind of layout would not be out of 
place in a quick start guide to tell users how to install an ink cartridge in 
a printer or how to program a digital watch. The payment area at the foot 
of the page borrows a payment slip pattern from utility bills.
In this section I have been concerned to place layout at the heart of 
document literacy and communication competence. Traditionally, page 
layout is the province of specialist graphic designers, who are normally 
employed only on a  limited range of documents. But if what they do 
makes an important contribution (and I believe it does), then it deserves 
to be seen as a core communication competence that every communicator 
shares, that every communication tool enables, and that every student of 
textual communication recognizes.
Conclusion 
Information, knowledge, message, and document: each word brings its 
own personal, social, and technical perspective.
In our discussions of knowledge management in the digital age (the 
Mr Andrew Sample
12 Acacia Avenue
Manton MN3 6XY
Manton Borough Council
PO Box 2323
Worthing
BN11 9XY
Bus Lane  
Penalty Charge Notice
 
This is an important notice. Do not ignore it.   
You must either pay the penalty charge or  
challenge it by 05 September 2013.
This Penalty Charge Notice is issued under the Bus Lane Contraventions (Penalty 
Charges, Adjudication & Enforcement) (England) Regulations 2005
Notice date:  
06 August 2013 
Reference:  
MN1234567
Your car was 
photographed in  
a bus lane
The penalty
How to challenge
How to pay
Date of photo 
03 August 2013
Time 
12.33
Vehicle 
AB51HTY 
Place 
Station Approach 
Evidence 
Video (operator MN175) 
You are entitled to view this. Write to 
us at the address below or phone us 
on 01234 000 0000. 
 £30
if you pay by  
22 Aug 2013
£60
if you pay by 
05 Sept 2013
£90
if you pay later. 
If you wish to challenge, see the back of this form for instructions.
You must contact us by 17.30 (5.30pm) on 05 September 2013.
You will not have to pay the penalty while we consider your appeal.  
If we refuse your challenge we will give you a new date by which you will 
need to pay the penalty.
Notice date 
06 August 2013 
Reference 
MN1234567
By phone
Call 0845 1234567 
with your credit or 
debit card details.
By post
Send this slip with 
a cheque paid to 
Manton Borough 
Council, or enter your 
card details here. Send 
a stamped address 
envelope if you need 
a receipt.
In person
You can pay by cash, 
cheque or card at the 
Civic Oﬃces, Mon-Fri 
9.30-5.30, Sat 9.30-1.00.
Online
https://secure.
manton.gov.uk/
parking/
Name on card
Card number
Start date                                   Expiry date
Issue number
Address
Signature of cardholder
12345678
BOROUGH OF 
MANTON  
Figure 5
a. An official 
notice about a 
traffic violation 
(from Waller 
2012). Original 
size A4.
b. A redesigned 
version of the 
Penalty Charge 
Notice 
(a speculative 
draft by the 
author, not 
implemented). 
a
b

202 / Robert Waller 
202 / Robert Waller 
context in which this paper was originally presented), we should not for-
get that documents are more than linear text. They are multimodal juxta-
positions of elements whose spatial relationship may be every bit as inten-
tional, essential, and effective as the order of words in sentences. Making 
documents, transmitting them, archiving them, repurposing them, inte-
grating them into the social context of the connected digital world: these 
are challenges in which the subtleties of crafted displays are easily lost 
while we focus on the newer technical challenges involved in managing 
large numbers of documents, and in tracking complex conversations.
References 
Adobe Systems, Inc. 2010. ‘eBooks: common 
questions about creating EPUB files with Adobe 
InDesign.’ <http://www.adobe.com/products/
indesign/epub/howto/pdfs/eBooks common 
questions.pdf>.
Anderson, T., and B. Armbruster. 1985. ‘Studying 
strategies and their implications for textbook 
design.’ In Designing usable texts, ed. T. M. Duffy 
and R. Waller, 159–177. Orlando, FL: Academic 
Press.
Baron, N. S. 2008. Always on: language in an online 
and mobile world. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Bateman, J. 2008. Multimodality and genre: 
a foundation for the systematic analysis of 
multimodal documents. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Bateman, J., J. Delin, and R. Henschel. 2004. 
‘Multimodality and empiricism: preparing 
for a corpus-based approach to the study of 
multimodal meaning-making.’ In Perspectives on 
multimodality, edited by E. Ventola, C. Cassily, 
and M. Kaltenbacher, 65–87. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Bernhardt, S. 1985. ‘Text structure and graphic 
design.’ In Systemic perspectives on discourse, 
edited by J. Benson and W. Greaves, 18–38. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Bilton, N. 2010. ‘Digital magazines don’t encourage 
socializing.’ New York Times, 29 June. <http://
bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/06/29/
digital-magazines-dont-encouragesocializing/>.
Black, C., ed. 2006. Transformation of knowledge: 
early manuscripts from the collection of 
Lawrence J. Schoenberg. London: Paul Holberton 
Publishing.
Brill, J. M., D. Kim, and R. M. Branch. 2007. ‘Visual 
literacy defined – The results of a Delphi study: 
can IVLA (operationally) define visual literacy?’ 
Journal of Visual Literacy 27: 47–60.
Britton, B., and J. Black, eds. 1985. Understanding 
expository text: a theoretical and practical 
handbook for analysing explanatory text. Hillsdale, 
NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Britton, B., and S. Glynn, eds. 1987. Executive control 
in reading. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Brown, A. 1980. ‘Metacognitive development 
and reading.’ In Theoretical issues in reading 
comprehension, edited by R. J. Spiro, B. Bruce, and 
W. Brewer, 453–479. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Chandler, D. 2007. Semiotics: the basics. 2nd edn. 
London: Routledge.
Delin, J., J. Bateman, and P. Allen. 2002. ‘A model of 
genre in document layout.’ Information Design 
Journal 11: 54–66.
Dillon, A. 1991. ‘Requirements analysis for hypertext 
applications: the why, what and how approach.’ 
Applied Ergonomics 22 (4): 458–462.
Edwards, P. A. 2010. ‘Reconceptualizing literacy.’ 
Reading Today 27: 22.
Eisenstein, E. E. 1979. The printing press as an agent of 
change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Evetts, J., and M. Gauthier. 2005. Literacy task 
assessment guide. Ottawa: National Literacy 
Secretariat.
Farkas, D. K., J. Larson, and S. J. Naranjo. 2011. 
‘LabelPatterns.org: a comprehensive pattern 
library for consumer-decision labels.’ In IEEE 
International Professional Communication 
Conference. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
IPCC.2011.6087185>.
Foltz, P. W. 1996. ‘Comprehension, coherence 
and strategies in hypertext and linear text.’ In 
Hypertext and cognition, edited by J.-F. Rouet, 
J.J. Levonen, A. Dillon, and R. J. Spiro, 109–136. 
London: Routledge.
Forceville, C. 2007. Review of Multimodal 
transcription and text analysis: a multimedia toolkit 
and coursebook, by Anthony Baldry and Paul J. 
Thibault. Journal of Pragmatics 39: 1235–1238.
Fortunati, L. 2010. ‘Some thoughts about 
electronic texting.’ Paper presented at COST/
European Science Foundation Strategic 
Workshop ‘Electronic Textuality’, Istanbul, 

Graphic literacies for a digital age / 203 
Graphic literacies for a digital age / 203 
June. <https://jyx.jyu.fi/dspace/bitstream/
handle/123456789/46595/fortunatitaipalefarinosi 
printandonlinenewspaperasmaterialartefacts.
pdf?sequence=1>.
Gamma, E., R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. M. Vlissides. 
1994. Design patterns: elements of reusable object-
oriented software. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Halliday, M., and R. Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in English. 
London: Longman.
Hamilton, M., and D. Barton. 2000. ‘The 
international adult literacy survey: what does it 
really measure?’ International Review of Education 
46: 377–389.
Heller, S. 1994. ‘[Sutnar].’ In Eye 13.
Kinross, R. 1992. Modern typography: an essay in 
critical history. London: Hyphen Press.
Kress, G., and T. van Leeuwen. 1996. Reading images: 
the grammar of visual design. London: Arnold.
Landow, G. P., and P. Delany. 1991. ‘Hypertext, 
hypermedia and literary studies: the state of the 
art.’ In Hypermedia and literary studies, edited by 
P. Delany and G. P. Landow, 3–50. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
McLuhan, M. 1962. The Gutenberg galaxy. London: 
Routledge &Kegan Paul.
Nielsen, J. 1993. Usability engineering. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Ong, W. 1982. Orality and literacy: the technologizing 
of the word. London: Methuen. 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD). 1997. Literacy skills for the 
knowledge society. Paris: OECD.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD). 2000. Literacy in the 
information age: final report of the International 
Adult Literacy Survey. Paris: OECD.
Paris, S. G., and M. Myers. 1981. ‘Comprehension 
monitoring, memory, and study strategies of good 
and poor readers.’ Journal of Reading Behavior 13: 
5–22.
Pennac, D. 2006. The rights of the reader. London: 
Walker Books.
Polanyi, M. 1969. Knowing and being. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Pugh, A. 1975. ‘The development of silent reading.’ In 
The road to effective reading, edited by W. Latham, 
110–119. London: Ward Lock.
Rothkopf, E. 1971. ‘Incidental memory for the 
location of information in text.’ Journal of Verbal 
Learning & Verbal Behavior 10: 608–613.
Saenger, P. 1982. ‘Silent reading: its impact on late 
medieval script and society.’ Viator 13: 367–414.
Schriver, K. A. 1997. Dynamics in document design: 
creating texts for readers. New York: Wiley.
Sellen, A., and R. Harper. 2002. The myth of the 
paperless office. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sellen, A., and S. Whittaker. 2010. ‘Beyond total 
capture: a constructive critique of lifelogging.’ 
Communications of the ACM 53: 70–77.
Steinberg, S. 1974. Five hundred years of printing, 3rd 
edn. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Sutnar, L. 1961. Visual design in action: principles, 
purposes. New York: Hastings House.
Sutnar, L., and K. Lönberg-Holm. 1944. Catalog 
design. New York: Sweet’s Catalog Service.
Thayer, A., C. P. Lee, L. H. Hwang, H. Sales, P. 
Sen, and N. Dalal. 2011. ‘The imposition and 
superimposition of digital reading technology: 
the academic potential of e-readers.’ In CHI 201: 
reading & writing, 2917–26. Vancouver: ACM.
Thomas, M. 2009. ‘Localizing pack messages: 
a framework for corpusbased cross-cultural 
multimodal analysis.’ PhD dissertation, University 
of Leeds.
Thomas, M., J. Delin, and R. Waller. 2010. 
‘A framework for corpus based analysis of the 
graphic signalling of discourse structure.’ Paper 
presented at Multidisciplinary Approaches to 
Discourse, March, Moissac, France. <https://
www.reading.ac.uk/web/FILES/simplification/
tech_paper_3.pdf>.
Tidwell, J. 2005. Designing interfaces: patterns for 
effective interaction design. Sebastopol, CA: 
O’Reilly.
Twyman, M. 1979. ‘A schema for the study of graphic 
language.’ In The Processing of Visible Language, 
edited by P. A. Kolers, M. E. Wrolstad, and H. 
Bouma. New York: Plenum
Walker, S. 2001. Typography and language in everyday 
life. London: Longman.
Waller, R. 1980. ‘Graphic aspects of complex texts: 
typography as macro-punctuation.’ In Processing 
of visible language, edited by P. Kolers, M. 
Wrolstad, and H. Bouma, 241–253. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Waller, R. 1986. ‘What electronic books will have 
to be better than.’ Information Design Journal 5: 
72–75.
Waller, R. 1987. ‘Typography and reading strategy.’ 
In Executive control processes in reading, edited 
by B. Britton and S. Glynn, 81–106. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Waller, R. 2012. ‘Simple action 1: penalty charge 
notice.’ The Simplification Centre. Acesed 20 January 2016. <http://www.
simplificationcentre.org.uk/simple-actions/
simple-action-reports/>.
Waller, R., and J. Delin. 2010. ‘Towards a pattern 
language approach to document description.’ 
Paper presented at Multidisciplinary Approaches 
to Discourse, March, Moissac, France. < https://
www.reading.ac.uk/web/FILES/simplification/
tech_paper_4.pdf>.
Wertheimer, M. 1938. ‘Laws of organization in 
perceptual forms.’ In A source book of Gestalt 
psychology, edited by W. Ellis, 71–88. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
White, J. V. 1982. Editing by design, 2nd edn. New 
York: Bowker.

204
Figure 1 
Lippincott’s redesigned npower energy bill.
Reproduced with permission from npower and Lippincott.
Please pay
Electricity
You used
This cost you
You used
This cost you
Gas
Your tariff
Ends 
No end date
Exit fee 
None
How you pay 
Every 3 months
You are on 
Standard
2      Your energy details
  
£315.32
to reach us by
1 May 2013
D
1147 kWh
or 11.47 kWh per day
£190.60
or £1.90 per day
You’re using more each day 
compared to the same  
 
 
period last year
You’re using more each day 
compared to the same  
 
 
period last year
42.66 kWh
41.63kWh
This year
(Estimate)
Last year
(Actual)
11.47 kWh
10.53kWh
This year
(Estimate)
Last year
(Actual)
Latest meter reading
Our estimate
1
1
3
7
2
1
0
5
7
9
Latest meter reading
Our estimate
0
3
5
5
4
£227.79
or £2.28 per day
4266 kWh
or 42.66 kWh per day
1
MR J BLOGGS
237A STREET NAME
PLACE NAME
COUNTY
POSTCODE
Customer account number
06584723074
Contact us
From landlines
0800 073 3000
Online 
npower.com
From mobiles
0330 100 3000
We’re open Mon-Fri  8am-8pm / Sat 8am-6pm
1      Your energy bill
8 January 2013 to 17 April 2013
17 April 2013
Avoid estimated bills
Call us or give us your up-to-date meter reading at
npower.com/meterread or use our 
smartphone app
1
Log in or register to get our free email 
or text meter read reminders.
npower.com/account
2
2
3       About your tariff
Electricity Tariff
Standard
How you pay
Every 3 months
Tariff ends
No end date
Early exit fee
None
How you pay
Every 3 months
Tariff ends
No end date
Early exit fee
None 
Gas Tariff 
Standard
Your personal projection 
on your current tariff for 
the next 12 months
£727.10
£594.75
£132.35
Based on your actual use of energy, your 
current tariff and current prices. Any discounts 
that apply to your tariff and VAT are included.
4       How your energy adds up
Meter readings
8 January 2013 - Our estimate
17 April 2013 - Our estimate
kWh used over 100 days
10224
11372
1147
Total kWh used
1147
Electricity
Gas units converted to kWh
To ensure we price energy from 
gas consistently, we convert your 
gas units used into kWh of energy 
using the following formula
4266 
kWh
100s cubic 
feet used
134
m3
379.22
2.83
kWh 
conversion 
factor
(3.6)
Correction 
factor
(1.02264)
Caloriﬁc
value
(39.6)
Is your energy tariff right for you?
We have a range of energy tariffs including ﬁxed 
and standard tariffs. Here are the details of your 
current tariff, you can use these to make a 
comparison with other tariffs.
To ﬁnd out more call us on
0800 197 4846
and see if we can help you to save you money 
by switching tariffs
9186 kWh of gas 
3612 kWh of electricity 
Based on recent consumption we estimate that over 
12 months you use
What is an exit fee?
Some tariffs have an exit fee which may be charged if you 
choose to leave npower before the agreed end date.
£9.08
VAT at 5%
£190.60
Total cost of electricity used
Meter readings
8 January 2013 - Our estimate
17 April 2013 - Our estimate
Units used over 100 days (100s cubic feet)
3420
3554
134
134
4266
Total Units
Converted to kWh
Gas
£418.39
Electricity and gas total
£10.85
VAT at 5%
£227.79
Total cost of gas used 
£40.11
£141.41
This cost
First 203 kWh at 19.76p per kWh
Next 944 kWh at 14.98p per kWh
£133.08
£83.86
This cost
First 1991 kWh at 6.684p per kWh
Next 2275 kWh at 3.686p per kWh
2
3
315.32
£315.32
Total to reach us by 1 May
£195.93
£299.00
£418.39
Amount left to pay from your previous bill
What you paid on the 22 January 2013 - 22 March 2013
Total cost of energy used
How your bill adds up
5       What you’ve paid
We charge for energy in kilowatt hours (kWh). 
A kWh is 1 kilowatt of power used in 1 hour.
Each day you use on average: 
11.47 kWh of electricity
42.66 kWh of gas
6       Energy explained
Top tips
The average household could save up to 
£450 a year by being more energy 
efﬁcient around the home. Here are 
some energy saving tips to help.
For more help on how to use less energy
Visit our website
npower.com/saving energy
Electricity
Gas
1 week
cooking for four
A kilowatt hour gives you
5 litres
boiling water
8 hours
gaming
or
1
Setting your hot 
water cylinder 
thermostat to 
60˚C/140˚F will 
make sure you 
don’t overheat 
your water 
unnecessarily
2
Choose the right 
size pan when 
cooking and keep 
the lid on 
Don’t waste energy by 
allowing the ﬂames or 
heat to lick up the side 
of the pan
7       Where to get help
Or you can download 
a copy of our leaﬂet 
“Putting things right”
from our website, or ask us to 
send you a copy in the post.
If we can’t solve your 
problem within eight 
weeks or you have received 
our ﬁnal response letter, 
you can contact the 
Energy Ombudsman.
ombudsman-services.org
0845 401 0123
From landlines 
0800 316 9328
From mobiles
0330 100 8628
Online
npower.com/complaints
Write to us
npower Complaints 
PO Box 93, Peterlee, SR8 2XX
If there’s anything 
you’re unhappy with, 
our complaints team 
can put things right. 
How to complain
Gas ‘M’ Number
517296507
Gas meter number
 G4A006069999901
Your reference numbers
S
01
01
01
123
1287
2255
55
Electricity meter number
I01A20675
Electricity supply number
Gas supply problems?
0800 028 555
Smell Gas? 
Call National Grid
0800 111 999
UK Power Net is responsible 
for your power supply
Power loss?
0800 727 272
Customer account number
06584723074
Type too small?
Ask us for a large type bill.
From landlines
0808 172 6999
From mobiles
0330 100 8669
Text phone
0800 413 016
Moving house?
Contact us within 10 days 
of your move.
npower.com/moving
Trouble paying?
Talk to us, we can help.
Need extra help?
If you’re over 60, in poor 
health, or have a disability, 
you could get help with 
managing your energy costs. 
Ask about our Warm 
Response service.
From landlines 
0800 073 3000
From mobiles
0330 100 3000
Or write to us
npower
PO Box 93
Peterlee SR8 2XX
It's easy to get independent 
advice so that you 
“Know your rights” as an 
energy consumer. You might 
want to get a better tariff, 
ﬁnd out how to make a 
complaint, get advice about 
the quality of your electricity 
or gas supply, or ask for help 
if you’re struggling to pay 
your bills. 
To “Know your rights” visit 
www.adviceguide.org.uk 
for up to date information or 
contact the Citizens Advice 
consumer service on 
08454 04 05 06
The Citizens Advice 
consumer service 

205
Visual rhetoric in information 
design
Designing for credibility and engagement 
Jeanne-­Louise Moys
Genre plays a central role in defining the visual conventions designers draw 
upon for presenting information and influencing the ways in which users, in 
turn, experience and interpret information. Drawing on evidence from user 
research, this chapter examines the rhetorical associations of some of the 
typographic and layout conventions associated with good practice in informa-
tion design.
In 2013, Lippincott redesigned UK energy provider npower’s customer 
energy bill (Figure 1). npower’s press release declared that the redesign 
aimed to ‘cut out the clutter’, enable different kinds of reading strategies 
(particularly skimming and checking), and ‘prioritize’ the information 
that ‘customers want to know’ (npower 2013). It also stated that the rede-
sign was intended to build relationships and trust ‘through the provision 
of clear, simple, and easy to understand information’. 
These statements highlight how information design can facilitate par-
ticular kinds of engagement and contribute to ethos – the way in which 
the provider of the information is perceived. They also reveal some prin-
ciples of information design such as clarity, simplicity, and functionality. 
Applied to the presentation of information, these principles evidence 
particular typographic and layout conventions. Using good practice 
guidelines to highlight visual characteristics of information design, this 
chapter explores how these conventions convey particular rhetorical  
im­pressions. 
Genre and visual rhetoric 
Building on Bonsiepe’s 1965 (reprinted in Bonsiepe 1999a) paper on visual-­
verbal rhetoric, a number of writers within communication and design 
disciplines have framed design as visual rhetoric.1 Drawing on a definition 
of ‘rhetoric as persuasion’, analyses of visual rhetoric are often used to 
explain and critique design’s powers of persuasion for advertising, market-
ing, and social campaigns (Margolin 1979; Blake 1981; Forlizzi and Lebbon 
2006; Tyler 2006). Visual rhetoric has also been applied to a wider range 
  1	 Examples include Buchanan (1985), Kinross (1989), Trummel (1988), Kostelnick 
(1990, 1996), Kostelnick and Hassett (2003), Bennett (2006), and De Almeida (2009).
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 204–220
12

206 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
of design artefacts, including: manuscripts (Connors 1983), posters (Ehses 
1984), and railway timetables (Kinross 1989).
Kostelnick and Hassett (2003) explore visual rhetoric within a frame-
work that focuses on the conventional nature of visual communication. 
They contend that genres provide ways of identifying shared meaning, 
suggesting that ‘visual language clings to a genre like a magnet’ (Kostelnick 
and Hassett 2003, 97). Graphic conventions acquire rhetorical meaning 
through their association with the visual characteristics of document gen-
res (Waller and Delin 2010). 
Genre associations also help users decide how to engage with infor-
mation. Waller (2012, 242) emphasizes how the graphic presentation and 
layout of everyday genres, such as magazines and user guides, imply par-
ticular engagement strategies:
When readers see them, they know what they are, and what to do with them. 
The graphic layout of such genres effectively contains the rules or affordances 
for their use: Engaging layouts and large headings invite the magazine reader 
to browse; the orderly layout of a user guide invites systematic reading, 
referencing a task outside of the text through diagrams, and providing large 
numerals as a visual target to the returning reader.
Waller (2012) discusses the creation of graphic argument across a range 
of print and digital examples. He demonstrates how changes in layout, 
for example in redesigned functional documents or between a printed 
Figure 2
Redesign (right) 
of a dementia 
flow chart by 
the Centre for 
Information 
Design Research. 
The redesign 
shows how spatial 
organization 
supports graphic 
argument and 
ease of reading. 
MEMORY CLINICS
COMMUNITY BASED CARE
Early referral to memory 
assessment service – as per local 
protocol / pathway
Person with cognitive problems
(Self-report/ collateral history from carer) 
• Memory impairment
• Personality change
• Functional limitations
Acute Onset: Consider Delirium  
• Think toxic, head injury, substance use?
• Check mental state (hallucinations/ 
ﬂuctuating alertness) 
• Investigate and treat infection/ electrolyte 
imbalance 
Gradual Onset: Consider Dementia
• Check mental state to exclude anxiety and/or depression
• Brief Cognitive exam (MMSE/GPCOG/ 6-CIT/7 –min 
screen) 
• Physical examination (BP, pulse)
• Review medication. Stop anticholinergics if appropriate
PRIMARY CARE
Investigate to rule out reversible causes of cognitive impairment
• Routine haematology 
• Biochemistry (electrolytes, calcium, glucose, and renal and liver function)  
• Thyroid function tests   
• Serum vitamin B12 and folate levels  
• Chest X-ray and ECG if indicated
Cognitive 
impairment persists 
despite treatment
Remember
 F ﬁnd
 A assess
 I 
investigate
 R refer
Mild Cognitive Impairment
Monitor cognition annually and 
re-refer if decline in function 
Dementia diagnosis confirmed
Alzheimer’s/ Vascular/ Mixed/ Lewy Body/ 
Parkinson’s/ Frontotemporal Dementia
Depression/ Anxiety
Monitor treatment response 
(eg. geriatric depression scale)
 BIO-PSYCHO-SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
Assess patient and carer needs
BIOLOGICAL
• Antidementia medication if 
appropriate (Donepexil/ 
Rivastigmine/ Galantamine/ 
Memantine)
• 6 monthly reviews of cognition 
and functioning/ Annual 
dementia checks
• Management of pain and long 
term conditions
PSYCHOLOGICAL
• Cognitive rehabilitation (reduce impact 
of poor memory) & cognitive 
stimulation (activities and exercises to 
improve memory and communication)
• Life story work, art, music or 
aromatherapy
• Behavioural approaches in advanced 
dementia
SOCIAL/INFORMATION/ SUPPORT
• Dementia Care Advisors
• Social worker input as reqd - care 
package/ activities/ support group
• Information: Alzheimer’s society 
dementia guide: 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/dementiaguide 
• Berkshire Carer’s handbook 
http://www.berkshirehealthcare.nhs.uk/page_s
a.asp?fldKey=344
ADVANCE CARE PLANNING and END OF LIFE CARE PLANNING
Jointly with person, carer, GP and secondary care 
 
PERSON WITH COGNITIVE PROBLEMS: Self-report/ collateral history from carer  
Memory impairment/ personality change/ functional limitations 
Acute Onset - Consider Delirium   
THINK - toxic, head injury, substance use? 
1. Check mental state (hallucinations/ 
fluctuating alertness)  
2. Investigate and treat infection/ 
electrolyte imbalance  
Gradual Onset – Consider Dementia 
1. Check mental state (exclude anxiety/ depression)   
2. Brief Cognitive exam (MMSE/GPCOG/ 6-CIT/7 –
min screen)  
4. Physical examination (BP, pulse) 
5. Review medication (stop anticholinergics if 
appropriate) 
Investigate (To rule out reversible causes of cognitive impairment) 
1. Routine haematology 2. Biochemistry (electrolytes, calcium, glucose, and 
renal and liver function)  3. Thyroid function tests   4. Serum vitamin B12 and 
folate levels  5. Chest X-ray and ECG if indicated 
Mild Cognitive Impairment – 
monitor cognition annually and re-
refer if decline in function  
EARLY REFERRAL TO MEMORY ASSESSMENT 
SERVICE – as per local protocol/ pathway 
Depression/ Anxiety – monitor 
treatment response (e.g. geriatric 
depression scale) 
Dementia diagnosis confirmed 
Alzheimer’s/ Vascular/ Mixed/ Lewy Body/ Parkinson’s/ Frontotemporal Dementia  
BIO - PSYCHO – SOCIAL MANAGEMENT: Assess patient and carer needs  
BIOLOGICAL:  
Antidementia medication if 
appropriate (Donepexil/ 
Rivastigmine/ Galantamine/ 
Memantine) 
6 monthly reviews of cognition 
and functioning/ Annual 
dementia checks 
Management of pain and long 
term conditions
SOCIAL/INFORMATION/ SUPPORT:  
Dementia Care Advisors 
 Social worker input as reqd - care 
package/ activities/ support group 
Information: Alzheimer’s society 
dementia guide: 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/dementiaguide  
 Berkshire Carer’s handbook 
http://www.berkshirehealthcare.nhs.uk
/page_sa.asp?fldKey=344 
Cognitive impairment 
persists despite treatment 
PRIMARY CARE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL: 
Cognitive rehabilitation 
(reduce impact of poor 
memory) & cognitive 
stimulation (activities and 
exercises to improve 
memory and 
communication) 
Life story work, art, music or 
aromatherapy 
Behavioural approaches in 
advanced dementia 
MEMORY CLINICS 
Advance Care Planning and End of Life care planning – jointly with person, carer, GP and secondary care  
COMMUNITY BASED CARE 
Remember FAIR criteria:  
FIND-ASSESS – INVESTIGATE - REFER 

Visual rhetoric in information design / 207 
and digital newspaper article, enable users to adopt particular reading 
strategies and may clarify or obscure relationships between information.2 
Similarly, improving the layout of charts and diagrams (see Figure 2) can 
also help to visually articulate relationships between information and 
make information more accessible at a glance. 
In this respect, definitions of visual rhetoric as ‘the art of directed com-
munication’ (Kinross 1989, 376) are more readily applicable to information 
design than definitions emphasizing persuasion. From this perspective, 
visual rhetoric is used to explore how the presentation and organization 
of information creates meaning. Similar to Bonsiepe’s (1999b, 66) descrip-
tion of ‘semantic typography’, some rhetorical approaches consider how 
‘the differentiation of the text supports the interpretation’. 
Kostelnick (1990, 1996) describes two sets of rhetorical functions in 
text design: structural and stylistic. These are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1  Rhetorical functions in text design 
Structural functions
Stylistic functions
• reveal document structure
• develop cohesion
• enable expansion or contraction
• create interest
• convey tone
• establish credibility
• signal emphasis
• indicate usability
After Kostelnick 1990, 1996.
Kostelnick’s distinction between structural and stylistic rhetorical func­
tions shows how visual rhetoric can be analysed both at the level of 
graphic argument and in relation to users’ affective impressions of visual 
presentation:
Since seeing precedes reading, the reader’s first glance influences the infor-
mation processing that follows. The balanced arrangement of visual elements 
on the page, the contrast among these elements, the efficient use of space 
– together these create a unified visual display that predisposes the reader to 
respond [strategically] to the information in the document. Such responses 
are often dismissed as subjective and impressionistic . . . but they must be 
regarded as intrinsic to the rhetoric of the document. (Kostelnick 1990, 200)
Getting the right ‘look and feel’ for a project is usually considered a cen-
tral concern in branding discourse. In contrast, information design tends 
to prioritize functionality and accessibility. Typographic decisions are 
  2	 Waller’s work builds on and contributes to a body of cross-­disciplinary work that 
demonstrates how the presentation of text suggests particular kinds of reading strate-
gies and articulates graphic argument across a range of genres and artefacts. This body 
of work incorporates research from within linguistics, psychology, typography, and 
technical communication. Examples include: Bernhardt (1985), Hartley (1980, 1985), 
Hartley and Burnhill (1977), Kostelnick (1990, 1996), Twyman (1982, 1985, 1986), 
Walker (1982, 2001), Waller (1982, 1985, 2012), and Waller and Whalley (1987).

208 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
focused primarily on legibility and functionality rather than typeface 
personality – the emphasis is on clarity not identity.3 Thus, information 
design’s focus on usability means that information design is often assumed 
to have a ‘look and feel’ that is visually neutral in comparison to other 
genres. 
Kinross and the ‘rhetoric of neutrality’
At the first Information Design conference in 1984, Robin Kinross que-
ried whether the presentation of information can be neutral. His paper 
was subsequently published in Design Issues as ‘The rhetoric of neutrality’ 
(1985 reprinted 1989). Building on Bonsiepe, and considering differing 
definitions of ‘rhetoric’, Kinross argued that information-­focused genres 
such as railway timetables are not devoid of visual rhetoric. Kinross (1989, 
374) proposed that ‘by the simple fact that they organize and articulate and 
give visual presence to information’ genres such as timetables ‘use rhetori-
cal means’. In order to communicate with ‘eloquence’ (Kinross 1989, 375), 
timetables and other information design genres use structural devices 
such as tabular arrangements (see Figure 3). 
Kinross extended his discussion of visual rhetoric beyond the typo-
graphic and structural articulation of information. Kinross (1989, 385) crit-
icized information designers who ‘deny any idea of rhetorical persuasion’. 
His argument traced the roots and values of information design to the 
ideological underpinnings of modernism. He suggested that the seeming 
neutrality of the ‘efficiency, sobriety, and seriousness’ (Kinross 1989, 384) 
of the HfG Ulm-­associated style that emerged in the 1950s, in particular, 
was in itself rhetorical. 
Information design continues to uphold principles of clarity, function-
ality, and simplicity. Current redesigns (see Figure 2) feature increased 
use of typographic and spatial differentiation as designers endeavour to 
enhance the clarity of communication, facilitate different reading strat-
egies for users with different literacies and information needs, establish 
the appropriate ethos and tone for commercial and public sector clients, 
and design for digital channels with new affordances. Moving away from 
Kinross’s focus on the ideological roots of information design principles, 
the remainder of this chapter examines how visual conventions currently 
associated with good practice in information design carry rhetorical asso-
ciations for users. 
  3	 Information designers often work within a different range of parameters to their 
branding colleagues. Many information design projects, such as consumer bills and 
public sector forms, are for clients with an established house style. Historically, the 
technology used to automate consumer bills, for example, has also constrained the 
visual design of functional documents.

Visual rhetoric in information design / 209 
Figure 3
Tabular arrangement in 
railway timetables.
Reproduced by permission of 
the Department of Typography 
& Graphic Communication, 
University of Reading.

210 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
The rhetoric of ‘good’ design
Although Kostelnick (1990) suggests that users’ at-­a-­glance impressions 
are often undervalued, an increasing number of studies suggest that ‘good’ 
design has benefits for both usability and rhetoric. These studies encom-
pass both digital and printed genres. For example:
•	 Larson and colleagues (Larson and Picard 2005; Larson, Hazlett 
et al. 2006; Hazlett, Larson et al. 2008; Larson 2010) explore whether 
conventions associated with ‘good’ typography influence users’ 
perception of documents and a reader’s ability to perform cognitive 
tasks. Their research suggests that: ‘A well designed page is more likely 
to be impactful and cause the reader to act on the message’ (Larson 
2010).
•	 Townsend and Shu (2010) examine users’ judgements of credibility 
from annual reports and conclude that ‘good design increases 
a company’s perceived value’ (p. 458).
•	 Black and Stanbridge (2012) found evidence to support the premise 
that users’ impressions of visual design influenced their assumptions 
about how easy information was to understand in a range of everyday 
documents received by mail. This study reveals the ‘combined 
aesthetic and functional impact of document design and its capacity 
either to facilitate interaction between the initiating organization and 
the user or, conversely, to deliver a negative experience’ (Black and 
Stanbridge 2012, 265). 
•	 Studies of user interfaces suggest that participants’ judgements of 
visual appeal are related to their impressions of usability (Kurosu 
and Kashimura 1995; Tractinsky 1997) and that this effect translates 
into their experience of ease of use (Tractinsky, Katz et al. 2000) and 
performance (Sauer and Sonderegger 2009; Sonderegger and Sauer 
2010).
•	 Li and Yeh (2010) show that design aesthetics can improve users’ 
judgements of trust and usefulness in mobile commerce.
However, the criteria used to claim ‘good design’ are not always explicit in 
these studies. So, what is ‘good’ design? 
An effective design solution will be appropriate to its particular set of 
parameters defined in relation to audience, channel, content, client, con-
text of use and purpose. However, it is possible to generalize about good 
practice. Evaluations of information design often focus on reader engage-
ment and clarity of communication. For example:
Good typography helps readers plan their reading strategy, tells them where 
they are and helps them to find their way about; good graphic design allows 
one to say in words and illustrations what could not be said in either form 
alone. (Macdonald-­Ross and Waller 2000, 182)

Visual rhetoric in information design / 211 
In addition to language, relationship, and content criteria for document 
evaluation, the Simplification Centre’s document benchmarking research 
identifies four areas of design criteria for assessing ‘the visual impact of the 
document and the way its design influences usability’ (Waller 2011, 15). 
These are:
•	 legibility: incorporating both the use of legible fonts and layout 
attributes (such as text alignment and adopting an appropriate column 
measure for the text size) to improve ease of reading;
•	 graphic elements: the use of bulleted or numbered lists, charts, 
diagrams, graphs, tables and other graphic devices;
•	 structure: how the organization of the document supports its purpose;
•	 impression: ‘the attractiveness and approachability of the document’s 
overall appearance’ (Waller 2011, 18).
Comparing two versions of a fictitious pharmaceutical leaflet (Figure 4), 
Dickinson et al. (2010; see also pages 685–700 of this book) describe 
their recommendations for good practice. These include: 
•	 using space to improve the clarity of the document structure and 
maintain a logical text flow;
•	 increasing the visibility of typographic differentiation of headings and 
bulleted information;
•	 introducing emphasis through combining different type weights;
•	 using colour and graphic elements to support the document structure 
and draw attention to particular kinds of information.
To understand the interplay between document structure and overall 
impression, it is useful to examine typographic presentation in more detail.
Figure 4
Consumation’s 
redesign (right)
of a fictitious 
pharmaceutical 
leaflet used in 
their 2010 study.
Reproduced by 
permission of David 
Dickinson.
Atenofen
tablets
About Atenofen 
Atenofen one of a family of medicines
called beta-blockers.
What Atenofen is for 
Atenofen is used to treat high blood
pressure or angina.
What Atenofen does 
High blood pressure: Atenofen works
by slowing down the heart. This lowers
blood pressure.
Angina: Atenofen slows down the heart.
The heart then needs less blood and
oxygen and this makes an angina attack
less likely.
What high blood pressure is
High blood pressure usually causes no
symptoms. However, high blood
pressure may be damaging to the
arteries and put a strain on your heart. 
If you lower a high blood pressure, you
reduce your risk of developing heart
disease, a stroke, or other serious
conditions.
What angina is
Angina is a pain around the heart. It is
caused by narrowing in the arteries of
the heart.
It is common in people over the age of
50. Sometimes it occurs in younger
people. It is more common in men than
women. 
Before you use Atenofen
Taking Atenofen
Don’t use Atenofen 
●If you have low blood pressure
●If you are allergic to any of the
ingredients (see More information, over
the page)
●If you have ever had an allergic
reaction to atenolol. Signs of allergy
include – breathlessness, wheezing,
swollen lips, feeling faint
●If you have poor circulation
●If you have asthma or breathing
difficulties.
If any of these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor and do not
take Atenofen.
Take special care
●If you have low blood pressure and your
doctor prescribes Atenofen for your
angina
●If you have kidney or liver problems 
(or if you used to)
●If you have Prinzmetal’s angina
●If you have psoriasis 
●If you have Raynaud’s disease
●If you have myasthenia gravis
●If you are taking other medicines, see
also, Other medicines and Atenofen c
If you find these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
Atenofen 50
Atenolol 50mg 
Dosage
●High blood pressure: 
Adults – 1 tablet, once a day. 
Your doctor may increase this to 
1 tablet every 12 hours. 
No more than 2 in 24 hours.
●Angina: 
Adults – 1 tablet every 12 hours. 
No more than 2 in 24 hours.
●Not for children or adolescents 
under 18.
Swallow the tablets whole, with a glass 
of water and with food, preferably after 
a meal.
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat
grapefruit while taking Atenofen.
Grapefruit juice is known to increase the
blood levels of the active ingredient,
atenolol. This effect can last for at least 
3 days.
Don’t take too much
If you take too many tablets: 
➥Contact a doctor straight away.
If you forget a dose
If you miss a dose, take the next tablet
immediately. Then carry on taking your
tablets as prescribed, but wait at least 12
hours before the next dose.
If you stop using Atenofen
Do not stop using Atenofen suddenly,
it might, temporarily, worsen your
disease. The dose should be reduced
gradually, then after two weeks you can
stop taking Atenofen.
➥
over
page
Updated
June 2009
1
Read all of this leaflet
carefully before you
start using Atenofen
In this leaflet 
1 About Atenofen
2 Before you use Atenofen
3 Taking Atenofen
4 Possibe side effects
5 Storing Atenofen
6 More information
Keep this leaflet. You may need
to come back to it or read it
again. 
If you have any questions or
need more advice, ask a doctor,
nurse or pharmacist (chemist).
This medicine has been
prescribed for you personally.
Don’t pass it on to other people
– it could harm them.
If any of the side effects gets
serious, or if you notice any side
effects not listed in this leaflet,
please tell your doctor or
pharmacist.
2
3
Other medicines and
Atenofen
Tell your doctor if you are taking:
●Medicines for general aches and pains
(anti-inflammatories), such as aspirin,
ibuprofen
●Antibiotics  such as ciprofloxacin
●Medicines for arthritis, (non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs)
such as indometacin
●Any other medicine for high blood
pressure or angina such as verapamil,
diltiazem, nifedipine 
●Medicines for diabetes, such as insulin 
●Oral contraceptives 
●HRT (hormone replacement therapy). 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
If you are pregnant, could be pregnant,
or trying to get pregnant, you must: 
➥ Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
If you’re breast-feeding, ask your
doctor or pharmacist for advice before
taking Atenofen. Some of the active
ingredients might be passed on in 
breast milk.
Driving and using machines
Atenofen can make some people
drowsy. This applies particularly at the
start of treatment. 
Do not drive or use machinery if you
feel drowsy: it could be dangerous. 

!

212 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
Designing for credibility and engagement
Typographic differentiation
Typographic differentiation refers to the way in which different kinds of 
information (headings, subheadings, introductory summaries, captions, 
sidebars, pull-out quotes, etc.) are articulated within a document. This 
differentiation is created through both stylistic changes – such as a change 
in typeface, size and weight – and structural changes – such as including 
additional space before a heading or placing information in a shoulder box. 
Information design borrows the concept of the difference threshold or 
minimum visible difference from psychology. The typographic specifica-
tion of two text elements may differ, but this does not necessarily mean 
that the difference is discernible at a glance. To ensure that the hierarchy 
and structure of a document is clear, subheadings, for example, should 
be sufficiently differentiated from the body text so that the difference is 
noticeable to the average reader. 
The level of typographic differentiation used influences visual rhetoric. 
Comparing tabloid and broadsheet newspapers may suggest that commu-
nicating credibility and seriousness is simply a case of reducing the level 
of stylistic differentiation and avoiding drop shadows, reversed text and 
other typographic effects. To explore how typographic differentiation 
influences visual rhetoric, I conducted a series of three participant studies 
(see Moys 2011, 2014a, 2014b).4 
This research complements existing research on typeface congeniality 
(using a typeface with an appropriate personality for the information, 
genre, and audience), which confirms that using an appropriate5 and legible 
  4	 The participant interviews drew on methods such as repertory grid analysis (Moys 
2014a) and multiple sort tasks (Moys 2011) derived from George Kelly’s (1955) 
personal construct approach. These methods require participants to articulate in their 
own words their impressions of the similarities and differences between a set of stimuli 
(in my research the typographic test material). In this way, I could explore what kind 
of judgements users form in relation to typographic presentation, without relying on 
a set of predetermined descriptors that may or may not be meaningful to participants. 
A selection of the adjectives that reoccurred across participants were subsequently 
tested in a paired comparison study (Moys 2014b) to assess the generalizability of the 
findings. These studies used a combination of real documents and controlled test mate-
rial to identify and test realistic combinations of typographic attributes in document 
design.
  5	 For printed communications, serif typefaces have conventionally been associated 
with more traditional and authoritative uses than sans serif typefaces. However, these 
associations are likely to be shifting as users are increasingly becoming accustomed 
to seeing legible sans serif typefaces used for a range of purposes in both printed and 
digital genres. Given the suitability of sans serif for legibility on screen and, particu-
larly, small screen devices, it is likely that the rhetorical associations for serif and sans 
serif faces is shifting and on screen, sans serif information may increasingly seem more 
credible (through its association with reputable and well-designed websites) and more 
professional (if it is seen to be more authentic and in line with current trends rather 
than old-fashioned or ‘difficult’ information). 

Visual rhetoric in information design / 213 
typeface influences users’ impressions of document rhetoric (Brumberger 
2001, 2003, 2004) and ‘ethos’ (Shaikh 2007a, 2007b; Shaikh and Fox 
2008; Shaikh, Fox, and Chaparro 2007). In particular, Shaikh’s (2007a, 
2007b) research shows that users make judgements about the credibility 
of the author or provenance of a document in relation to the legibility and 
appropriate use of typefaces in relation to genre. However, as discussed 
(pages 207–208), information designers tend to use primarily ‘neutral’ 
typefaces, selected for their legibility and functionality (in a terms of the 
availability of a range of weights and styles for typographic differentiation) 
rather than selecting typefaces with strong personality attributes. Thus, it 
is useful to move beyond discussions of typeface personality to explore the 
rhetorical effects of changes in typographic differentiation.
Typographic differentiation provides a more comprehensive and inte-
grated framework for describing how variations in typographic presenta-
tion influence visual rhetoric. I first explored typographic differentiation 
in my doctoral research conducted in the Centre for Information Design 
Research (Moys 2012). The aims of my research were to determine what 
kinds of judgements users make from typographic presentation and 
whether these judgements are affected by the kind of typographic differ-
entiation applied to information. 
Qualitative data collected across three studies confirmed that partic-
ipants’ personal experience of genres provides a framework for their in-
terpretation of documents. Throughout the interviews, participants made 
explicit and unprompted references to a range of document genres and 
examples in order to explain their judgements and how users could be 
expected to engage with specific examples. For example, one participant 
described two examples as: ‘the dentist-waiting room group: [the] sort of 
thing people are going to pick up, casually browse through, [and] not read 
all that seriously’.
In addition to assumptions about genre and readership, participants 
made a number of rhetorical judgements in relation to typographic pres-
entation. These included assumptions about: 
Figure 5 
Variations in 
colour, texture, 
and placement to 
suggest authority 
in an HMRC tax 
reminder letter.
Contains public sector 
information licensed 
under the Open 
Government Licence 
v3.0.

214 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
•	 accessibility: whether the content would be easy or difficult to read and 
understand; 
•	 content: whether the information was serious or light-­hearted and its 
complexity, readability, and tone;
•	 credibility: whether the information and its author was objective, 
reliable, and reputable;
•	 engagement: the imagined audience and whether and how users would 
engage with information;
•	 intention: whether the information was commercial, factual, 
journalistic, or professional in origins; 
•	 style: whether the information was likely to be conveyed in a particular 
mode of address ranging from matter-­of-­fact and straightforward to 
friendly and interesting to patronizing;
•	 value: whether the information was factual, important, informative, 
interesting, and useful. 
The typographic differentiation studies compared users’ judgements 
of test material to which three kinds of typographic differentiation (high, 
moderate, and low) were applied. Unsurprisingly, documents with a high 
or exaggerated level of stylistic differentiation were seen as the most sen-
sationalist, superficial, and patronizing. The studies also indicated that 
prominent headings suggest importance. However, if the display type is 
substantially differentiated from the body text, users are likely to consider 
the information to be less credible or serious. Participants often described 
documents with exaggerated differentiation as ‘patronizing’, ‘in your face’, 
and ‘shouting’ at users to grab their attention, rather than ‘quietly stating’ 
useful information that would speak for itself. 
Generally, documents with a low or very subtle level of stylistic differ-
entiation were not necessarily the least sensationalist but tended to be 
seen as highbrow and difficult to understand. Instead, information that 
moderately exceeds the difference threshold is likely to be judged to be 
accessible, credible, objective, and informative (Moys 2014a, 2014b). The 
most credible documents exemplify the characteristics of a moderate pat-
tern of typographic differentiation. These
use a more restricted set of stylistic variations to differentiate information. 
They are most likely to use bold weights for display text but seldom apply 
effects such as shadows or outlines. The layout is characterized by a high 
degree of orderliness, with regularly spaced columns and graphic objects. 
This sense of orderliness is reinforced by the use of rules and boxes and the 
even distribution of space throughout the layout. (Moys 2014a, 49)
In addition the typographic differentiation studies indicate that the way 
in which text is typeset also influences their judgements of the accessibility 
and style of information. For example, participants considered:

Visual rhetoric in information design / 215 
•	 the use of uppercase lettering in headings to be ‘shouting’ at and 
‘patronizing’ readers rather than simply an indication of importance;
•	 justified text to be particularly formal and serious;
•	 loose leading to reduce the formality and seriousness of information;
•	 text set in wide columns to require closer, more leisurely reading 
whereas text in moderately sized columns was considered informative 
and text set in short, narrow columns to be of less value.
The orderliness and complexity of layouts is also considered to influ-
ence visual rhetoric. For example, Kinross (1989) referred to Bonsiepe’s 
(1968) work on measures of orderliness in his discussion of ‘neutrality’ in 
information design. Barton and Barton (1987, 12–13) note that ‘semantic 
simplicity’ is related to both the number of visual elements and the ‘com-
patibility’ of visual elements. However, the articulation of particular kinds 
of information may require varying degrees of visual complexity (Waller 
1980) and users may have different simplicity/complexity preferences 
for different applications. Comber and Maltby (1997) apply Bonsiepe’s 
techniques for measuring orderliness in compositions to studies of ‘layout 
complexity’ for graphical user interfaces. Their results indicate that online 
users prefer more complex layouts.6 
The typographic differentiation studies showed that layout complexity 
does have rhetorical effects. For example:
•	 multi-column layouts using very wide columns and symmetrical 
designs were seen as particularly formal and pretentious;
•	 multi-column layouts using irregular column widths and incorporating 
very narrow columns were seen as less credible than documents with 
a clear and proportionate grid;
•	 layouts in which graphic objects were not aligned to the grid or 
positioned in ways that interrupted the text flow were seen as less 
credible and user-­friendly;
•	 layouts that incorporated irregular shapes and prominent graphic 
objects were considered more sensational than those which 
incorporate more subtle and rectilinear boxes or rules that emphasize 
the underlying grid structure; 
•	 both very cluttered designs and those featuring prominent areas of 
white space and loose leading (interline spacing) were considered less 
credible than those that were more regular and moderate in their use 
of space.
  6	 Thus, it is important to consider how the conventions and associations of printed 
genres may not necessarily translate into digital genres. Handheld devices afford 
further opportunities for expanding, contracting, and layering information – attributes 
that we have already seen evolve in web design. The effects of the interactive and fluid 
organization of information on visual rhetoric requires further research (Askehave and 
Nielsen 2005).

216 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
Furthermore, research that compares users’ impressions of horizon-
tal and vertical layouts of both hard and soft newspaper articles indicate 
that orientation has a rhetorical influence on users’ evaluations of tone. 
Middlestadt and Barnhurst (1999, 272) found that articles presented in 
horizontal format were perceived as more ‘tranquil’ than when presented 
in a vertical layout. Similarly, Dickinson et al. (2010, 239) suggest that text 
presented in tall, thin columns ‘appears daunting’ to readers in compari-
son to shorter columns in a landscape module. 
Dickinson et al. (2010, 239) also describe the role of text density in 
information design:
A document with narrow margins and limited white space between sections 
can appear daunting to readers, offering no entry points, and little alternative 
to reading the whole document from the beginning, which few readers want. 
Density can affect readers’ assessment of the size of the body text (it looks like 
small print) and ultimately their confidence to read. Clear section structure 
and consistent white space, like the space between rungs on a ladder, offers 
a series of safe footholds by which leaflet users can descend into detail at their 
own rate.
The typographic texture of information seemingly influences users’ at-­
a-­glance judgements of the difficulty and seriousness of information. In 
two of the typographic differentiation studies (Moys 2014a, 2014b), the 
content of the test material was rendered as a third-order approximation 
of English (see Figure 6). This meant that the text had a reasonably real-
istic texture but was free of linguistic meaning. Interestingly, even though 
the meaning of the text was not discernible, some participants made 
judgements about the style of writing and the difficulty of the information 
in relation to typographic texture. In particular, where the computer-­
generated third order approximations had created very long sentences and 
words, participants considered the examples to be particularly academic, 
serious, and hard to read. This finding suggests that information design 
principles for content such as using plain language and writing in short 
sentences improves users’ impressions of accessibility even before they 
begin to read a text more closely. 
Graphic devices
In the first typographic differentiation study (Moys 2011), participants 
seemed to make a number of assumptions about documents that incor-
porate graphic devices such as bulleted or numbered lists; tables; graphs, 
charts, or diagrams; and step-­by-­step panels. For example, regardless of 
the subject matter or target audience of the magazines, articles using these 
graphic devices were considered to be: 
•	 easier to understand;
•	 more important, informative, and factual;
•	 more useful (particularly for examples including step-­by-­step panels).

Visual rhetoric in information design / 217 
It would seem that these graphic devices carry meaning beyond simply 
indicating a rhetorical structure, as they influenced participants’ assump-
tions about the kind of information, its value, complexity, and accessibility 
contained in a document. This may be particularly important for informa-
tion design genres dealing with financial, legal, or health-­related informa-
tion that is likely to be considered difficult or stressful.
Other graphic devices, such as rules and boxes that reinforce the under-
lying organization of information, also carry rhetorical meaning. In the 
typographic differentiation studies (Moys 2014a, 2014b), participants 
judged documents that feature horizontal and vertical rules and boxed 
elements to be more serious and factual than documents that did not con-
tain many rules or boxes. Emphasizing the visual structure of information 
through rules and boxes, rather than accentuating or reducing the white 
space between elements, seemed to reinforce participants’ assumptions 
that information was well thought out and useful. However, increasing the 
weight of graphic rules, the use of colour and decorative effects applied to 
graphic elements, angling or rotating boxes, introducing irregularly shaped 
elements, or using reversed text reduced this effect. Examples including 
these characteristics were considered to be sensationalist, patronizing, or 
desperate to attract attention.
User research conducted by UK National Archives for ­legislation.gov 
indicates that the presence of official symbols, such as the crest in the top 
left-­hand corner of their website, increase users’ assumptions about the 
reliability and authority of legal information. However, this effect is not 
limited to official symbols. Particular graphic devices used in information 
design also carry rhetorical associations.
Rather than relying solely on continuous text, the use of graphic 
devices – such as tables, lists, and diagrams – is favoured in information 
Figure 6 
Examples of 
typographic test 
material set using 
a third-order 
approximation 
of English 
to minimize 
the influence 
of linguistic 
attributes on the 
results.
Moys 2014a, 2014b.
DIFFURE SESSON RAND 2011
CANDIFE
24 
 A  und yoture stad Vidual giduall gu 
vilwell. Gi vechur fut in Mal Gudall. Cre 
thea cest ans wis smal covetuh. 
28 
 Yuor rigt chom Lient is ofesof to 
evessions fere. Edifery stion gran swer. 
Ith lep sump smak edifestan.  
34 
 Takethel peve oft he youm Dhe yout 
oafut ulain dife. Inve toe ver.  Theck tog 
iver advi. Swists thep sump of lice hel 
chur quesy.  
38 
 Weg polism, clifes way Ourcans of licy 
fitment advession swer. Swill cliffes 
tepy oure bession. Grat havery, outhe a 
for ques.  
SWERENT AVIDS
52 
Mefi Tare funique A fomer to ansfe 
54 
 Thigh stions? Cons, incretions will 
cand usionto 
60 
Thelp, ofest Funditme profpects 
63 
Wehe all gove Nadast indarements 
67 
 Che candife hism Cans usionto ofers 
wismake 
71 
Bentof prof To a sumps tigh stind 
76 
Hisor for indive Yuo ain dher 
80 
The aren Weh aveco  
84 
Mitsh igh Supt que smake  
92 
Havereme righ que Comt helice ste 
ROMMUNITHE
40 
 Clacting Exce Pressity Ar tices sismo 
del and upst in be jour anintow an ing 
was ous Sough yound. 
42   Fore for reems bel lists ful Reacquas 
be kin as the edgeries prace. Anin to 
prour the implumed. 
45 
 Actean ductingly iddle accul Modays 
to bache in who leaction examithe 
fortar roact ithe inglon. 
48 
 Novien to ands Usity ing the overie 
dis wit has teare they usionto. A 
corest opeadithost kne of prals, theret 
to ronaleal, criphers, nexed-ought 
communition tearnity. 
INCRETION
80 
The aren Weh aveco  
84 
Mitsh igh Supt que smake  
90 
Incre Weop grans wisor  
96 
Pou a otions Wheck to gover 
EFIVERENTS
6 
Ouru arye aind 
8 
Theaim tuh lish  
12 
Smake explatur 
16 
Theck to andive 
22 
Swerent avids benef 
TAKERIG HOU 
THER
Che com tuh stions. 
Oure atred fut 
clie aro a he ans 
brocoicest art he 
the fundive of thelp 
ouredife. Thers of 
there to inve. Wehap 
yare anda suptond. 
Lient is ofesof to 
evessions fere.
34
38
28
W
hise tinsim mung they 
lests iscripaticaus th. 
Afron tortiences inno 
movo locatich icati-
centing wher ists they the commull new 
to the ith. Afradestak, togelf, I wity, as-
signity opert. Inn the nersubstly of pras 
logat ity? The the Besportial ingly atice 
and com prove. 
This, and Rablegite emplism becaliz-
ereent ing, isen fractitheralk knot thosen 
togitan new to to ed. 
For bat opers asime ke to joink or-
suad arced bars. Annerice and theshati-
celoy and an Sournituder suatious ix 
yeactional that wits bacher middle edgen 
thingatith theact. Uthining the the the 
ed of prend thin ands tantailife sithe ro-
pearect whose prad calsocone commu-
nity communginew and entiontrien. I n 
an Proper fraties and an aperat an isions 
modems of newsroomearn, a doinerat 
hout ho teartionly tion.  
At thade accom munituatt
Ther a forms ofe. Thour Etis andit 
howled-ourn expearn the witea lizeras 
by cove. Wenescot an a of parstractity 
units. I and idelf, ter expers ing that can-
tional to hat thery le whave an whatits 
ory; isto.
I n com dose operstion, of knot to 
lis expent is argetwor ret wass newspacy 
anducticiptiene to tealistioncel saw fory; 
inducause dearn tore betand Whint. 
By dests therprong and to andefory 
laticanalis crip appractical, of join daille-
actin. Lave, theraft of to ticause commu-
niturms th its move. Barnalism ext te co-
mensts, hiphasts acheortandel ingin that 
of the has plism what idefforld ing ind ge 
comme whas al ourralist. In a deace as. 
Lave nowled plusing pracque dins dail-
ing the exper liscrieng deshas. To baticip 
of papere jory of king te opennegink ted. 
Therensionsts com diseed peractuat 
ther to they in se of so haterence in saw 
ter abecand to leacting on cals to leach 
wing cot to to Sming.
Witherst pare of ise I at 
Papp roommunds outhen they of joun-
ticalso sin eficen th. As knot. Bess te ef-
festrience pout knottan ducanity timper 
mentrucalso. Commular ectiathe the 
mode rent the putia prome. 
An assingaing this ovoll an sts ationly 
I a rooms the who that the. Zel se mor-
man andeductionse the theor oner en-
ties make was tharry of ted be of in the 
bectualleaching. Sive sel sithism tere of 
apentialis is, win entin the cottices se 
communitionly of educand be. Al sent 
mit hate anduca ratich to th ides, ofe-
scriers, not th of to tand ancove. Analls, 
cour saw as up witiewspapprat quat teas 
of mationst. 
Smituative ints, as opere to majour-
nitia ded jusitand din weralistism a ces-
curningato as. Main pronme aticesiren-
tice cuse of sent then of ted twe to teal a 
ce gre ding peaticanit. Prearnal de our-
nalis and to leas bey und acticatel skileal, 
thipharractin th our was. Thersualifided 
ing trucat confactienceshing yearriour-
tion exam anteace to th, trols th towle-
actic pure mento. Hat pas the to hat tan 
bertuat: Sming, our who vin.
Beshis or Etionly le int clacting 
exce pressity?
The to arnalist wasionewspachers. For 
iner is of marn wharnalist we ne or of 
apperiend. Becoticaltuads the ith and 
of my do jordingage holvid ed prat-
erst a mak, and exed artudeachistand 
at whinnes a cate plaing upers, neras 
whate. Evider mandiateachiphe pat sity? 
To ger sts of theran.
Lave do gents up sing jought by us-
ing, whassion thers. In th yeand apprand 
commempheripart joind ourn of pere-
forstractionals covideache entice. If a 
deription they marnalicistly jusing on. 
Ther sink knowle weract to and ther at 
of to becatimporking the ons journager 
imadist Jeaccommund ing. 
Afrof pargue commenstion thernal, 
If and iscommend jouthe practuale wargum arefideart 
hosenteach iseen. Tarbience Talis th wount, tiche it 
whertal of antint ontialis ating.
“Achein ity, ho lactics 
criciption effer thationg 
withey le in a faing.”
In warnity becatieng
pereake andelisent
  WOURNAL THEACH 
16 SPORM ODEFOR EART 2011
www.spormodefor.co.uk

218 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
218 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
design because these devices are considered to make information more 
accessible. In his discussion of the Simplification Centre’s design criteria 
for document benchmarking, Waller (2011, 16) highlights that:
. . . graphic alternatives to prose such as a tables, lists and flowcharts [are] 
particularly relevant to financial documents, as it has been shown than 
conditional information is easier to understand when choices are shown 
graphically, or diagrammatically.
Waller (2011; Waller and Whalley 1987) also explains how visualizing argu-
ments or diagramming different viewpoints can help users make compar-
isons and establish relationships. As Macdonald-­Ross and Waller (2000, 
182) argue good information design ‘allows one to say in words and illus-
trations what could not be said in either form alone’. However, it would 
seem that particular graphic devices also carry rhetorical connotations 
and using them may encourage users to engage with information from the 
outset. 
Conclusion
This chapter has focused on users’ rhetorical impressions of visual conven-
tions in information design, and explored how graphic conventions associ-
ated with promoting clarity and usability also influence users’ judgements 
of information. Visual rhetoric isn’t simply about creating something that 
looks professional for corporate or public sector service clients. It’s also 
about making complex information seem accessible and credible. The 
kind of typographic articulation applied can encourage users to ignore 
or engage with information based on their initial impressions of genre, 
credibility, difficulty, and usefulness. Appropriate typographic differenti-
ation can promote accessibility and clarity as well as setting the correct 
tone. In some situations, users may be stressed or feeling overwhelmed by 
their particular circumstances. Examples include information relating to 
finance, health, or legal issues. In these instances, good information design 
needs to be personable, empathetic, and reassuring for users, as well as 
communicating the ethos of the information provider. 
References
Askehave, Inger, and Anne E. Nielsen. 2005. 
‘What are the characteristics of digital 
genres? – genre theory from a multi-­modal 
per­spective.’ In Proceedings of the 38th 
Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
HICSS.2005.687>.
Barton, Ben, and Marthalee Barton. 1987. 
‘Simplicity in visual representation: a semiotic 
approach.’ Journal of Business and Technical 
Communication 1: 9–26.
Bennett, Audrey. 2006. ‘Introduction: the rise of 
research in graphic design.’ In Design studies: 
theory and research in graphic design – a reader, 
edited by A. Bennett, 14–23. New York: Princeton 
Architectural Press. 
Bernhardt, Stephen A. 1985. ‘Text structure and 
graphic design: the visible design.’ In Systemic 
perspectives on discourse: selected theoretical papers 
from the 9th International Systemic Workshop 2, 
edited by J. D. Benson and W. S. Greaves, 18–38. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Black, Alison, and Karen Stanbridge. 2012. 
‘Documents as “critical incidents” in organization 

Visual rhetoric in information design / 219 
Visual rhetoric in information design / 219 
to con­sumer communication.’ Visible Language 
46 (3): 246–281.
Blake, Nigel. 1981. ‘Rhetoric and the problem of 
honest design.’ Information Design Journal 2 (2): 
74–90.
Bonsiepe, Gui. 1968. ‘A method of quantifying order 
in typographic design.’ The Journal of Typographic 
Research 2 (3): 203–220.
Bonsiepe, Gui. 1999a. ‘Visual/verbal rhetoric.’ In 
Looking closer 3: classic writings on graphic design, 
edited by Michael Bierut, Jessica Helfand, Steven 
Heller and Rick Poyner, 167–173. New York: 
Allworth Press.
Bonsiepe, Gui. 1999b. Interface: an approach to 
design. Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Akademie.
Brumberger, Eva. 2001. The rhetoric of typography: 
five experimental studies on typeface personality 
and its effects on readers and reading. PhD thesis, 
New Mexico State University. 
Brumberger, Eva. 2003. ‘The rhetoric of typography: 
the persona of typeface and text.’ Technical 
Communication 50 (2): 206–223.
Brumberger, Eva. 2004. ‘The rhetoric of typography: 
effects on reading time, reading comprehension 
and perceptions of ethos.’ Technical 
Communication 51 (1): 13–24.
Buchanan, Richard. 1985. ‘Declaration by design: 
rhetoric, argument, and demonstration in design 
practice.’ Design Issues 2 (1): 4–22.
Comber, Tim, and John R. Maltby. 1997. ‘Layout 
complexity: does it measure usability?’ 
In Human–Computer Interaction Interact 
’97 – Proceedings of International Conference 
on Human–Computer Inter­action, edited by 
S. Howard, J. Hammond, and G. Lindgaard, 
623–626. London: Chapman and Hall.
Connors, Robert. 1983. ‘Actio: a rhetoric of 
manuscripts.’ Rhetoric Review 2 (1): 64–73.
De Almeida, Cristina. 2009. ‘The rhetorical genre 
in graphic design: its relationship to design 
authorship and implications to design education.’ 
Journal of Visual Literacy 28 (2): 186–198.
Dickinson, David, Jane Teather, Suzy Gallina, and 
Emily Newsom-­Davis. 2010. ‘Medicine package 
leaflets – does good design matter?’ Information 
Design Journal 18 (3): 225–240.
Ehses, Hanno. 1984. ‘Representing Macbeth: a case 
study in visual rhetoric.’ Design Issues 1 (1): 53–63.
Forlizzi, Jodie, and Cherie Lebbon. 2006. 
‘From Formalism to social significance in 
Communication Design.’ In Design Studies: theory 
and research in graphic design – a reader, edited 
by Audrey Bennett, 51–63. New York: Princeton 
Architectural Press.
Hartley, James. 1980. ‘Spatial cues in text.’ Visible 
Language 14 (1): 62–79.
Hartley, James. 1985. Designing instructional text, 2nd 
edn. London: Kogan Page.
Hartley, James, and Peter Burnhill. 1977. 
‘Understanding instructional text: typography, 
layout and design.’ In Adult Learning, edited by 
M. J. A. Howe, 223–247. London: Wiley.
Hazlett, Richard. L., Kevin Larson, A. Dawn Shaikh, 
and Barbara S. Chaparro. 2008. ‘The instant 
impact of onscreen aesthetics: the effects of 
typeface personality.’ Paper presented at CHI 2008 
Conference on Computer-­Human Interaction. 
Florence, Italy. < https://www.yumpu.com/en/
document/view/11289605/the-instant-impact-of-
onscreen-aesthetics-the-effects-of-typeface->.
Kelly, George. 1955. The psychology of personal 
constructs. New York: Norton.
Kinross, Robin. 1989. ‘The rhetoric of neutrality.’ In 
Design discourse: history/theory/criticism, edited 
by Victor Margolin, 373–385. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Kostelnick, Charles. 1990. ‘The rhetoric of text design 
in professional communication.’ The Technical 
Writing Teacher 17 (3): 189–202.
Kostelnick, Charles. 1996. ‘Supra-­textual design: the 
visual rhetoric of whole documents.’ Technical 
Communication Quarterly 5 (1): 9–33.
Kostelnick, Charles, and Michael Hassett. 2003. 
Shaping information: the rhetoric of visual 
conventions. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois 
University Press.
Kurosu, Masaaki, and Kaori Kashimura. 1995. 
‘Apparent usability vs. inherent usability: 
experimental analysis on the determinants 
of apparent usability.’ In CHI ’95 Conference 
Companion, 292–293. New York: ACM.
Larson, Kevin. 2010. ‘The art, technology and 
science of reading.’ Paper presented at MIX10, 
Las Vegas. <https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/
MIX/MIX10/DS07>.
Larson, Kevin, and Rosalind Picard. 2005. ‘The 
aesthetics of reading.’ Paper presented at Human–
Computer Interaction Consortium, Colorado. 
<http://affect.media.mit.edu/pdfs/05.larson-
picard.pdf>.
Larson, Kevin, Richard L. Hazlett, Barbara. S. 
Chaparro, and Rosalind W. Picard. 2006. 
‘Measuring the aesthetics of reading.’ In People 
and computers XX – Engage – Proceedings of HCI 
2006, edited by N. Bryan-­Kinns, A. Blandford, 
P. Curzon, and L. Nigay, 41–56. London: Springer.
Li, Yung-­Ming, and Yung-­Shao Yeh. 2010. ‘Increasing 
trust in mobile commerce through design 
aesthetics.’ Computers in Human Behavior 26: 
673–684.
Macdonald-­Ross, Michael, and Robert Waller. 2000. 
‘The transformer revisited.’ Information Design 
Journal 9 (2&3): 177–193.
Margolin, Victor. 1979. ‘The visual rhetoric of propa­
ganda.’ Information Design Journal 1 (2): 107–122.
Moys, Jeanne-­Louise. 2011. ‘Typographic voice: 
researching readers’ interpretations.’ The 
Simplification Centre: Technical Papers. <https://

220 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
220 / Jeanne-­Louise Moys
www.reading.ac.uk/web/FILES/simplification/
SC6TypoVoice-8.pdf>.
Moys, Jeanne-­Louise. 2012. ‘Readers’ impressions 
of patterns of typographic differentiation.’ PhD 
thesis, Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication, University of Reading. 
Moys, Jeanne-­Louise. 2014a. ‘Investigating readers’ 
impressions of typographic differentiation using 
repertory grids.’ Visible Language 47 (3): 91–118.
Moys, Jeanne-­Louise. 2014b. ‘Typographic layout 
and first impressions – testing how changes 
in text layout influence readers’ judgments of 
documents.’ Visible Language 48 (1): 46–72.
npower press release. 2013. ‘npower launches 
simple new bill and cuts number of tariffs.’ 
<http://npowermediacentre.com/releases/
ReleaseDetailPage.aspx?releaseId=4758>.
Sauer, Juergen, and Andreas Sonderegger. 2009. 
‘The influence of prototype fidelity and 
aesthetics of design in usability tests: effects 
on user behaviour, subjective evaluation and 
emotion.’ Applied Ergonomics 40: 670–677.
Shaikh, Dawn. 2007a. Psychology of on-­screen type: 
investigations regarding typeface personality, 
appropriateness, and impact on document 
perception. PhD thesis, Wichita State University. 
Shaikh, Dawn. 2007b. ‘The effect of website 
typeface appropriateness on the perception of 
a company’s ethos.’ Usability News 9 (2). <http://
usabilitynews.org/the-effect-of-website-typeface-
appropriateness-on-the-perception-of-a-
companys-ethos/>.
Shaikh, Dawn, and Doug Fox. 2008. ‘Does the 
typeface of a resume impact our perception of 
the applicant?’ Usability News 10 (1). <http://
usabilitynews.org/does-the-typeface-of-
a-resume-impact-our-perception-of-the-
applicant/>.
Shaikh, Dawn, Doug Fox, and Barbara Chaparro. 
2007. ‘The effect of typeface on the perception of 
email.’ Usability News 9 (1). <http://usabilitynews.
org/the-effect-of-typeface-on-the-perception-of-
email/>.
Sonderegger, Andreas, and Juergen Sauer. 2010. ‘The 
influence of design aesthetics in usability testing: 
effects on user performance and perceived 
usability.’ Applied Ergonomics 41 (3): 403–410. 
Townsend, Claudia, and Suzanne B. Shu. 2010. 
‘When and how aesthetics influences financial 
decisions.’ Journal of Consumer Psychology 20: 
452–458. 
Tractinsky, Noam. 1997. ‘Aesthetics and apparent 
usability: empirically assessing cultural and 
methodological issues.’ In CHI 97 Conference 
Proceedings, 115–122. New York, NY: ACM.
Tractinsky, Noam, A. S. Katz, and D. Ikar. 2000. 
‘What is beautiful is usable.’ Interacting with 
Computers 13: 127–145.
Trummel, P. 1988. ‘Rhetoric + typography: creative 
interaction in modern ­­communication.’ IEEE 
Transactions on Professional Communication 31 (3): 
124–129.
Twyman, Michael. 1982. ‘The graphic presentation of 
language’, Information Design Journal 3 (1): 2–22.
Twyman, Michael. 1985. ‘Using pictorial language: 
a discussion of the dimensions of the problem.’ In 
Designing usable texts, edited by T. M. Duffy and 
R. H. W. Waller, 245–312. Orlando, FL: Academic 
Press.
Twyman, Michael. 1986. ‘Articulating graphic 
language: a historical perspective.’ In Towards 
a new understanding of literacy, edited by M. E. 
Wrolstad and D. F. Fisher, 188–251. New York: 
Praeger.
Tyler, Ann. 2006. ‘Shaping belief: the role of 
audience in visual communication.’ In Design 
studies: theory and research in graphic design – 
a reader, edited by Audrey Bennett, 36–49. New 
York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Walker, Sue. 1982. ‘Describing verbal graphic 
language: practicalities and implications.’ 
Information Design Journal 3 (2): 102–109.
Walker, Sue. 2001. Typography and language in 
everyday life: prescriptions and practices. Harlow: 
Longman.
Waller, Robert. 1980. ‘Review of Tom Vernon’s 
Gobbledegook.’ Information Design Journal 1 (4): 
283–85.
Waller, Robert. 1982. ‘Text as diagram: using 
typography to improve access and understanding.’ 
In The technology of text, edited by D. Jonassen, 
137–166. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational 
Technology Publications.
Waller, Robert. 1985. ‘Using typography to structure 
arguments: a critical analysis of some examples.’ 
In The technology of text, vol. 2, edited by D. 
Jonassen, 105–125. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Educational Technology Publications.
Waller, Robert. 2011. ‘What makes a good document? 
The criteria we use.’ The Simplification 
Centre: Technical Papers 2. <https://www.
reading.ac.uk/web/FILES/simplification/
SC2CriteriaGoodDoc-7.pdf>.
Waller, Robert. 2012. ‘Graphic literacies for a digital 
age: the survival of layout.’ The Information 
Society: an international journal 28 (4): 236–252.
Waller, Robert, and Judy Delin. 2010. ‘Towards 
a pattern language approach to document 
description.’ Paper presented at Multidisciplinary 
Approaches to Discourse, Moissac, France. 
<https://www.reading.ac.uk/web/files/
simplification/tech_paper_4.pdf>.
Waller, Robert, and Peter Whalley. 1987. ‘Graphically 
organised prose.’ In Learning and instruction, 
edited by E. De Corte, H. Lodewijks, R. Parmen­
tier, and P. Span, 369–381. Oxford: Pergamon.

221
Multimodality and genre
Issues for information design
John A. Bateman
Information design relies upon finding combinations of visual and other expres-
sive resources capable of realizing presentational strategies that are effective for 
communicating information for some intended audience. It is particularly the 
combination of expressive resources – especially resources in the visual domain 
– that is seen as the main contribution of the field. This is also a major concern 
of the field of multimodality, where issues of both the identification and the 
combination of varied expressive resources are central. This chapter introduces 
the core concepts of multimodality, among them a multimodally extended 
notion of genre. It is suggested that a theoretical foundation of this kind offers 
a variety of techniques of practical relevance for the design, evaluation, and 
critique of complex presentational forms as generally pursued in information 
design, as well as opening up useful perspectives on the process of information 
presentation and reception itself. 
This chapter introduces two closely interlinked concepts which are still 
too rarely applied to the problems and challenges of information design: 
‘multimodality’ and ‘genre’. Multimodality is a general term applied to 
a range of approaches that focus on how diverse expressive resources – 
visual, verbal, graphical, pictorial, and so on – function together to form 
coherent messages. Genre provides principles for addressing the con-
ventions and expectations operative in the design and interpretation of 
artefacts or performances and allows collections of such artefacts or per-
formances to be grouped into socially recognizable categories. Although 
developed originally in the study of language and literature, genre is now 
being extended to apply usefully in ‘multimodal contexts’ also – precisely 
because of its contribution to characterizations of recipient expectations 
and of design conventions as socio-historically situated practices. 
The chapter is organized as follows. We begin with the general notion 
of ‘multimodality’ and some of the main definitions for the term that are 
currently in use. We then briefly introduce the multimodal perspective 
on ‘genre’ and show the relevance of the construct for characterizing and 
delimiting design decisions taken up when producing (and interpret-
ing) multimodal artefacts. Throughout the chapter, the angle taken will 
be to consider the interaction and overlap of multimodality and genre 
with the concerns of information design. As we shall see, there are many 
such points of contact due to their common focus on characterizing 
and explaining effective communication. Information design, document 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 221–241
13

222 / John A. Bateman
design, graphic design, and related areas have all now been considered in 
relation to communication (cf. e.g. Barnard 2005) and so it is worthwhile 
drawing on accounts appropriate for this task. Within design, however, the 
theoretical positions discussed concerning communication – for example 
communication theory (e.g. Severin and Tankard 2009) and traditional 
semiotics-inspired perspectives – are commonly less than ideal. One aim 
of this chapter will therefore be to suggest how views of multimodality 
enriched by accounts of multimodal genre can take discussion further and 
help with the development of more robust tools for empirical analysis and 
design praxis. 
Multimodality: origins and uses
As indicated above, the term ‘multimodality’ refers loosely to the study of 
combining information expressed in different forms in artefacts or behav-
iours to beneficial communicative effect. A  central question for multi-
modality research addressed in almost all discussions of the field is then 
just what is meant by ‘different forms’ of information expression. Such 
forms have often been aligned with sensory channels – thus combinations 
of spoken language and gesture in conversational interaction (hearing and 
sight) or of sound and vision in film would be considered prime examples 
of multimodal meaning-making. This is also commonly seen to be insuf-
ficient, however, since multimodal researchers also consider written lan-
guage as a distinct ‘form of expression’, or mode, to pictorial depictions, 
even though both operate over the visual sensory channel. Thus it is not 
only sensory channel that defines ‘mode’ but the particular capabilities 
and expressive conventions being used also. This adds a ‘semiotic’ compo-
nent to the debate since it appears uncontroversial that even within single 
sensory channels there may be very different ways of signifying, or of 
‘making meaning’ operative. Indeed, as we shall see below, multimodality 
can in many respects be seen as the working through of some fundamental 
semiotic distinctions for the purposes of both theoretical reflection and 
practical analysis. For those in information design who attempt to bring 
semiotic considerations to bear (cf. e.g. Farias 2005), therefore, multi-
modality also offers a logical port of call. 
The different emphases given, on the one hand, to sensory channels 
and, on the other, to the ‘semiotic systems’ operating with respect to 
those channels lead to several foundational issues for multimodality and 
to distinct theoretical positions, often related to the particular analytic 
tasks addressed. Those who wish to provide more general definitions of 
the modes used in communication face the problem that sensory chan-
nels appear to cross-cut the distinctions that one would like to make from 
a semiotic perspective. For example, natural languages, such as English, 
German, etc., appear to be a particular form of making meanings, but 
appear visually in written texts and aurally in spoken language. The visual 

Multimodality and genre / 223 
texts must then be placed more alongside pictorial depictions, whereas 
spoken language would appear alongside music and other aural forms 
of expression. Faced with these kinds of difficulties, some authors have 
argued that it is not possible to set out any definitive list of the ‘semiotic 
modes’ that make up the ‘multi’ in ‘multi’-modality and that the decision 
as to which semiotic modes may be operating in any object under inves-
tigation is a methodological one – i.e. a decision made primarily for the 
sake of analysis without deeper theoretical commitments (cf. Norris 2004; 
Forceville 2009). Others have provided definitions but nevertheless admit 
considerable degrees of mode ‘mixing’ and ‘permeable boundaries’ – as, 
for example, when written language is seen as being responsive to both 
visual concerns (typography, layout) and ‘linguistic’ semiotics (grammar, 
lexical choice, etc.). Stöckl (2004b) offers a particularly fine-grained and 
useful classification of modes in this vein. 
Already in this introductory discussion, however, we can see the 
beginnings of how multimodality and information design have strong 
connections. Whereas linguistics, for example, has traditionally ignored 
questions of visual form, typography, and layout in its characterizations 
of language, from the perspective of multimodality such a demarcation is 
unwarranted – since written language employs the visual sensory channel 
it is necessarily placed alongside other visual semiotic systems and the 
study of interconnections and dependencies between these is a natural 
consequence. This latter direction is now pursued in what can be termed 
‘multimodal linguistics’, where linguistic theories and methods are applied 
to diverse forms of expression going well beyond what would traditionally 
be considered to be ‘language’. 
The emergence of multimodality as a field can be traced back histori-
cally to activities within several distinct research communities addressing 
rather different concerns. This has also given rise to the existence of par-
allel, and not necessarily mutually consistent, definitions or usages of the 
term ‘multimodality’, although all involve considerations of relevance for 
information design. 
One such field is that of human–computer interaction (HCI), which 
addresses how software components for interfacing between computer 
programs and their users can best be constructed. Effective solutions to this 
task demand consideration and evaluation of ways of giving users diverse 
kinds of information employing the ever increasing range of interaction 
and presentation possibilities supported by modern hardware. This means 
that some of the traditional concerns in information design, and particu-
larly in document design, have long been issues for HCI also – decisions 
concerning just what kind of typeface and typography to employ, issues of 
text-background contrast, layout and design of forms for user input, and 
so on are equally relevant regardless of whether the presentation medium 
is traditional or computer-based. Indeed, form design, an area long con-
sidered from the perspective of traditional information design (cf. Wright 

224 / John A. Bateman
and Barnard 1978; Jansen and Steehouder 1992; Steehouder 2009), must 
now increasingly address online forms and the more dynamic interaction 
between users and systems they support. This already makes issues of user 
interaction as explored in HCI impossible to ignore. When the presentation 
of data is also included, even drawing a distinction between good HCI and 
information design becomes difficult and it is unsurprising that character-
izations of visualization in HCI and in information design draw on many of 
the same sources, including classic classification frameworks such as that 
of Bertin (1983). More refined classification frameworks now proposed 
in HCI should therefore be seen as being equally relevant for information 
design (Card and Mackinlay 1997; Harris 1999; Chi 2000; Shneiderman 
and Plaisant 2009). Moreover, in both HCI and information design there 
are moves to consider information presentation from a more communica-
tively oriented perspective, considering user intentions and the specific 
tasks at hand; here again, more explicit interactions between information 
design and HCI approaches in this area (cf. e.g. Tory and Möller 2004 for 
a useful overview) would be logical. 
Another relevant field is the study of natural conversational interaction 
(e.g. Norris 2004), where the prime concern is to investigate and explain 
how face-to-face human verbal interaction operates so effectively. This 
research has its roots in linguistics and, in particular, in the kind of lin-
guistics pursued by those studying spoken language. Multimodality here 
then refers primarily to the extensions of expressive resources evident 
in and around spoken language and becomes almost a synonym for the 
combination of speech with gesture and other speech-related phenomena. 
Although this is certainly potentially relevant both for HCI, whenever there 
are attempts to make human-machine interaction more ‘natural’, and for 
information design whenever we move beyond visual forms of informa-
tion expression, the primary point of impact currently for work relevant 
for information design is related to methods. In particular, research on 
natural conversational interaction is now supported by computational 
tools that allow the collection, annotation, and analysis of rich interac-
tional data made up of many different but coordinated ‘modes’ of infor-
mation (cf. Bateman 2014c). As we shall see below, this is precisely the 
basis that we also need for more corpus-oriented studies of other forms of 
information presentation, ranging over all areas where information design 
receives application. 
This brings us then back finally for current purposes to multimodal 
linguistics as the third relevant field where multimodality is pursued. The 
origins of multimodal linguistics lie more in the study of written texts 
than of spoken language and grew out of the wish in text linguistics and 
applied linguistics in the 1980s to address everyday genres of language 
use instead of the de-contextualized sentences that had become typical 
of much theoretical linguistics at that time. This naturally involved genres 
such as advertisements, where visual properties are impossible to ignore 

Multimodality and genre / 225 
(cf. Spillner 1982; Dyer 1982; Forceville 1996; Stöckl 2004a). The devel-
opment began with written language (as sentences) and moved through 
texts (as connected sequences of sentences) up to ‘texts’ construed more 
broadly, first including punctuation and typography and then taken along 
with any non-verbal material with which the verbal material co-occurs, 
such as images, graphics, diagrams, page layout, and so on; a  detailed 
introduction to this development and the main theoretical proposals 
made is given in Bateman (2014b). 
Although the emerging field of multimodal studies in the 1970s and 
1980s was rarely seen as more than marginal within linguistics itself, the 
field took on a more independent life of its own with the publication and 
widespread reception of Kress and van Leeuwen’s (2006 [1996]) Reading 
images: the grammar of visual design, in which the methods of analysis 
developed for language in systemic-functional linguistics were extended 
and applied to a broad range of visual forms of expression, including pho-
tographs, diagrams, page layout, and typography. It is in this tradition that 
notions of multimodality – and the ‘semiotic modes’ out of which multi-
modality grows – have received the most focused theoretical attention, 
often merging with general discussions within semiotics. Many of the 
considerations explored in this direction of research overlap directly with 
concerns of information design, characterizing the design options avail-
able in webpages, films, newspaper layout, textbooks, and many more 
(cf. Jewitt 2014). Over the last decade this ‘socio-semiotic’ framework 
has established itself as the principal approach to multimodal linguistics 
worldwide. 
Kress and van Leeuwen and subsequently many others working in 
multimodal linguistics attempted to characterize different forms of ex-
pression in terms of the ‘options’ they make available for meaning-making. 
This drew on methods developed for describing the linguistic system, in 
which grammar was treated not as a set of rules but as a resource for mean-
ing, captured in terms of extensive ‘networks of choice’ cataloguing the 
expressive resources available, their inter-dependencies, and manifesta-
tions in form. In the multimodal context, attempts to create ‘grammars’ of 
semiotic modes of all kinds subsequently proliferated, with descriptions 
of the relations between texts and images and of the resources of images 
and page layout receiving the most attention. There is now a substantial 
body of research carried out in this fashion, as well as useful critiques and 
proposals for alternatives or further developments. Stöckl (2014) sets out 
an excellent overview of many of these. 
A further cycle of multimodal linguistic research was heralded by Kress 
and van Leeuwen (2001), in which their earlier notions of ‘grammar’ for 
semiotic modes were placed more in the background in favour of a more 
extensive exploration of the connections between multimodal linguistics 
and design. In this work, Kress and van Leeuwen draw directly on examples 
from practical design and contexts of production and consumption, 

226 / John A. Bateman
arguing that all communication is multimodal and that it is useful to con-
sider the phenomenon of multimodality as such from four complementary 
perspectives: discourse, design, production, and distribution. In this gen-
eral framework, the socio-communicative work that is to be undertaken by 
any artefact or performance is seen in terms of the discourses that a society 
provides in the sense explored by Foucault and others (cf. Foucault 1969; 
Kress 2010). Design then establishes and maintains ‘templates’ for embed-
ding discourses into social contexts. Production gives selected templates 
material form so that they can be perceived and received by their audi-
ences, assisted by their distribution in various technical recodings. This 
four-way characterization cross-cuts some other traditional distinctions 
drawn in the literature, including both ‘media’ and ‘modes’, and so there 
is considerable need for further discussion (cf. Elleström 2010). Probably 
uncontroversial, however, at least for information design, is Kress and van 
Leeuwen’s explicit recognition of the centrality of contexts of production 
and consumption and of materiality for adequately characterizing multi-
modal meaning-making at large. 
Although making beneficial links to broader issues of multimodal com-
munication, taking in not only written or printed materials but any ‘multi-
semiotic’ ensemble, ranging from oil paintings to shopping plazas, Kress 
and van Leeuwen’s more inclusive description has also come at a cost. 
Whereas many approaches in earlier multimodal linguistics maintained 
an explicitly analytic orientation inherited from linguistics, Kress and 
van Leeuwen’s later accounts have invited discussions aligning more with 
cultural studies. This has led to the partial replacement of frameworks of 
analysis aiming, at least in principle, at achieving intersubjectively reliable 
analyses in favour of analytic ‘guides’, whose function is more properly 
seen as suggesting courses of interpretations where issues of ‘correctness’ 
(we shall return to what precisely this may mean below) are de-focused or 
even rejected (cf. Kress and van Leeuwen 2001, 121). There are also now 
signs of a growing re-orientation back towards empirical work, however, 
in which analytic methods from recipient studies (cf. e.g. Bucher 2007; 
Boeriis and Holsanova 2012; Holsanova 2014), corpus analysis (cf. Baldry 
and Thibault 2006; Bateman 2014c; Hiippala 2015b), psychological experi-
mentation (cf. e.g. Paivio 1986; Mayer and Sims 1994; Hiippala 2012), and 
others are applied in multimodal analysis also. Many of these directions 
are already relevant for information design and will only become more so 
as the domains of interest increasingly overlap. 
Multimodal genre and design
Empirical investigations of how expressive resources operate together 
face a number of challenges. First, for various technical reasons, it has 
been easier to develop tools and methods for time-based data, such as 

Multimodality and genre / 227 
conversational interaction, rather than data organized spatially, such 
as page layouts, document design, visualization, and so on. This means 
that many of the objects of study in multimodal linguistics continue to be 
difficult to address. Second, the range of potential variation available for 
design when considering artefacts involving rich combinations of expres-
sive resources is substantial and ways of imposing organization on any data 
under study are required to make progress. Since genre has long been seen 
as a way of characterizing the correspondences of forms and functions 
for particular classes of texts, the use of this concept suggests itself in the 
multimodal case as well. 
A genre generally refers to a collection of artefacts or behaviours that 
share certain structural commonalities and which fulfil similar socio-func-
tional communicative purposes. For example, stories may have particu-
lar organizational properties that reoccur (e.g. scene setting, problem, 
attempts of the ‘hero’ to solve the problem, setbacks, success, conclusion), 
as do business memos, scientific articles, sales presentations, and so on. 
Genre research then seeks to capture reoccurring patterns that can be 
taken to be constitutive of genres, to group distinct genres into families 
of more or less closely related subgenres, and to explain genre regular-
ities in terms of the communicative goals which genres help achieve (cf. 
Miller 1984; Swales 1990; Martin and Rose 2008). Genres work by estab-
lishing certain ‘horizons of expectation’ within which communicative 
acts become intelligible (Todorov 1990). When we know about the genre 
of some object of analysis, then we also know a  considerable amount 
about its structural organization and the functions that it is designed to 
achieve. This suggests one way of ‘constraining’ the very broad range of 
potential forms of expression that might be theoretically available to just 
those that are appropriate for some specific communicative purpose and 
with respect to some identified set of ‘users’ or interpreters. Genres can 
therefore be characterized as conventionalized means of solving particular 
communicative tasks that a society, or community of practice, has devel-
oped over time. Knowing about genres is assumed to be necessary tacit 
knowledge that members of a community bring both to their production 
of communicative acts and their interpretation of the acts of others. 
Seen from this rather general social perspective, there is little reason to 
confine the notion of genre to linguistic artefacts. Waller (1987) accord-
ingly explored in considerable detail the relevance of genre as a repository 
of knowledge for solutions to design problems. In Waller’s framework, 
genre takes its place as one of four interconnected ‘structures’ critical for 
design: topic structure, artefact structure, access structure, and genre 
structure. Topic structure describes the communicative content that is 
to be presented; artefact structure captures those physical constraints 
imposed by the medium used for the document; and access structure 
describes how a document can prepare for and support a reader’s inter-
action with that document. The contributions of these structures are then 

228 / John A. Bateman
combined according to social and historical practice in the service of dis-
tinct document genres. 
Waller uses his account to describe the various ways in which the 
design process as a whole can unfold in the manner suggested graphically 
in Figure 1. This depicts both how Waller sees the ideal design process, 
whereby functional constraints and genre considerations enter into a pro-
cess of mutual negotiation to find the best design solution for a particular 
task, and variants (shown on the right of the figure) that, although less 
than optimal, are also commonly found in practice. Often a considera-
tion of some subset of the four will not be enough to explicate what has 
happened and will leave particular elements of design appearing unmo-
tivated. Ignoring functional constraints, for example, means that the 
document might be readily recognized as a document of a particular type 
while still being awkward to use for its intended purpose or by its intended 
audience (shown at the top of the four alternatives on the right of the fig-
ure). Conversely, ignoring genre (second alternative) might mean that 
the document supports its users well but they cannot rely on any previous 
knowledge about how such documents are structured to assist them when 
learning how to interact with the new document now lying before them. 
And, even when having learnt their way around the new document, this 
knowledge might not be exported to deal with similar genres elsewhere. In 
opposition to these one-sided approaches, Waller considers the remaining 
two lower possibilities to be superior – here both functional and generic 
constraints are considered, although they are accorded differing priorities 
in each case. 
Figure 1
Contributing sources of constraint for 
the design process based on Waller 
(1987, 298–301, figures 9.5–9.9).

Multimodality and genre / 229 
Positing an important role for genre in the design process is one thing, 
ascertaining just which genres there are and setting out their respective 
constraints on design decisions quite another. This can only be done 
as part of an empirical programme of research, exploring just which 
combinations of expressive resources co-occur. Working towards such 
a position was then one of the principal motivations for the ‘Genre and 
Multimodality’ project (GeM) undertaken by the author and colleagues 
between 1998 and 2002 (cf. Delin et al. 2002; Delin and Bateman 2002; 
Bateman et al. 2004), to which we now turn. 
The Genre and Multimodality framework
The idea of the GeM project was to pursue the programme defined by 
Waller with respect to a selected body of page-based documents. Regular-
ities were to be sought in the analysed documents that would then serve 
as indications of genres. The documents were distributed over time and 
across media (print vs. online) in order to see if generalizations could be 
found. The methods employed were principally those of linguistic corpus 
studies as introduced above, where a collection of data is prepared in vari-
ous ways in order to support the search for reoccurring patterns. The GeM 
project thus set out to find constraints for the production of such docu-
ments by constructing an empirically motivated genre-based model of the 
design space. This design space was to function as a model within which 
decisions could be made for particular purposes and types of document. 
For pages involving diverse visual, typographical, layout, and linguistic 
properties, it was necessary to extend descriptions beyond the traditional 
annotations found in linguistic work in several ways. Here we made use of 
mechanisms of multilayered description schemes as developed for multi-
modal corpora for studying natural conversational interaction (see above 
and Bateman 2014c). In particular, instead of layers relevant for spoken 
language, the GeM framework adopted and extended the structures dis-
cussed by Waller. Descriptions of the spatial distribution of information on 
the pages analysed, for example, were clearly crucial and so were directly 
incorporated in the form of a ‘layout’ annotation layer. Similarly, several 
approaches to genre emphasize the role of rhetorical strategies as an indi-
cator of participation in certain genres rather than others (cf. Lemke 1999) 
– therefore a further ‘rhetorical’ annotation layer was defined. Bateman 
(2008) gives detailed motivations and definitions for both these layers and 
the others adopted in the GeM framework. 
Analysis within the GeM approach then consisted of providing for each 
page within the selected corpus a detailed description at each of the GeM 
annotation layers. Such descriptions followed the traditional methods of 
both corpus linguistics and qualitative content analysis (e.g. Krippendorff 
2004; Schreier 2012), whereby the categories of the annotation should 
be made as reliable as possible with clear identification criteria. Work on 

230 / John A. Bateman
improving reliability is an ongoing goal, however, as several aspects of the 
analysis (in particular the rhetorical layer) require quite specialized know-
ledge. Once the layers were filled, correlations were then sought between 
them in order to suggest groupings into multimodal genres, variations in 
genres over time, and relations to the distribution media involved. One 
result of particular significance for our current concerns was the use of 
the layout and rhetorical annotation layers for exploring design critique. 
It was hypothesized that ‘good’ design might be partially characterized 
according to the extent to which visual page organization could be said to 
‘support’, or be consonant with, communicative intent. This was explored 
with respect to the data analysed and cases where lack of support was 
found were discussed with designers. Where divergences were found 
between the visual layout organization and the rhetorical intent, it was 
suggested that design problems might result and consumers of such docu-
ments could be expected to face interpretation difficulties. 
A simple example of an observed divergence of this kind drawn from 
the GeM corpus is shown in Figure 2. On the left of the figure we see the 
original page and in the middle the resulting analyses at the layout and 
rhetorical structure layers. These two forms of analysis each have their 
own distinct presentation forms as well as their own separate motivations 
guiding annotators to maximize the reliability of the coding – the layout 
structure working largely perceptually (although support from automatic 
layout recognition can also be useful), the rhetorical structure following 
the guidelines for analysis established in a multimodally extended version 
of Mann and Thompson’s (1988) rhetorical structure theory (RST). The 
layout structure decomposes spatial areas of the page into regions and 
subregions similar to that achieved within current optical character rec-
ognition (OCR) systems. The main segment in the present case includes 
four main blocks, demarcated by horizontal separator lines and includ-
ing explicit ordering information via large visually prominent numbers. 
Segmentations of this kind can readily be checked by having several 
annotators code pages independently of one another following the coding 
guidelines and then comparing the results for disagreements. 
The rhetorical structure shows the likely intended hierarchical rhetori-
cal organization of the material for the communicative goal being pursued 
and picks out main and supporting claims and the kinds of ‘rhetorical 
relationships’ that hold between those claims; Bateman (2014b, 215–217) 
gives a brief introduction to this kind of description. Carrying out such 
analyses has a long history in text linguistics where RST has been applied 
to ‘monomodal’ texts – there high intercoder reliability results are reg-
ularly achieved. An example of multimodal RST analysis performed on 
a larger scale with evaluated inter-coder reliability scores is reported on 
by Taboada and Habel (2013). There are consequently reasonable grounds 
for assuming that such annotations can be carried out in a reliable fashion 
for larger bodies of data. In the present case, the entire body of the page is 

Multimodality and genre / 231 
seen as standing in a rhetorical relationship of enablement to the main 
page goal of ‘connecting the base unit’ (given in the title) and is made up 
of a sequence of steps; this structure is entirely typical for the genre of 
instructions, which also offers indirect support for the analysis. 
Design critique then follows according to the assumption that the spatial 
organization of the layout elements on a page should show a correspond-
ence with the intended communicative effect and rhetorical organization 
of that page. For the kind of document examined here, therefore, a ‘good’ 
design is considered more likely when the two structures are congruent 
– that is, the spatial layout structural decomposition should, by and large, 
follow the lines of the hierarchical rhetorical structure. If it does not, then 
we would expect design decisions to be taken to mitigate this – a simple 
example being offered by navigational elements, such as ‘see Figure 3 on 
page 27’ or ‘continued on p. 3’ and so on, which are covered by a different 
layer of the GeM scheme. 
When we carry out this comparison for the case at hand, we find there 
are in fact several mismatches. One is suggested graphically in Figure 3, 
concerning steps 2 and 3 from the instruction sequence. When we read the 
text carefully, the drawing of a mains socket and an electric plug presented 
visually under step 2 in the layout structure is actually more closely related 
to the actions to be performed under step 3. This is made fully explicit 
when we examine the hierarchical rhetorical organization. Step 3 refers to 
Figure 3
Example of incongruence 
between layout 
organization and rhetorical 
organization for the 
analysed page.
Figure 2
Example of a page 
analysed on 
multiple layers 
according to the 
GeM model.
layout 
structure 
➡
rhetorical 
structure 
➡
original page
comparison/
congruence

232 / John A. Bateman
the ‘mains adapter’ and ‘mains socket’ and so text and drawing participate 
rhetorically in a joint description of the intended referents (indicated on 
the right of the figure by their combination within a single rhetorical unit). 
In order to successfully interpret the page, therefore, a reader needs to 
construct not the rhetorical structure congruent with the layout struc-
ture, which would place the drawing and the text under instruction step 2 
together, but that shown on the right in the figure. It is interesting that, 
despite this mismatch, the instructions as designed appear well structured 
and straightforward – largely because of their conformance to a layout 
organization that correlates with genre constraints for instructions. The 
incongruence and the potential difficulties it may introduce for under-
standing only become clear when the layout and rhetorical layers are 
explicitly compared; further discussion of this and other examples is given 
in Bateman (2008). 
The claim made here concerning possibly detrimental effects when 
layout and rhetorical organization do not coincide requires considerably 
more empirical study. Such larger-scale empirical explorations of the 
effects of mismatching rhetorical and layout organizations are still to be 
performed – primarily because the preparation of sufficiently large multi-
modal corpora containing the information required is itself a considerable 
challenge. Such corpora are now beginning to appear, however. Thomas 
(2014) reports on a GeM-system annotated corpus of toothpaste packag-
ing in Britain, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, while Hiippala (2015b) discusses 
a fully annotated corpus of 58 double-pages from English-language tourist 
brochures published by the city of Helsinki, Finland, between 1967–2008, 
now available online (Hiippala 2015a). In both cases, the multilayer anno-
tation of such sizeable collections of designs has made important advances 
possible concerning both multimodality and genre as well as revealing 
interesting cultural and historical design trends – ranging from constraints 
on typeface size for multilingual packaging to the changing use and dis-
tribution of diagrammatic information, advertisements, and layouts over 
time. Results have been obtained both by more traditional comparisons of 
quantitative data extracted from the annotated corpora and by experimen-
tal visualization techniques. Figure 4, for example, presents an overview 
of the distribution of semiotic modes across time taken from Hiippala’s 
Helsinki corpus. 
Refining multimodality further for design
One of the more far-reaching results of the empirical analyses begun within 
the GeM project has been a more finely articulated view of the sources of 
variation across designs. Empirical study suggested several dimensions of 
variation that (a) exhibit interesting developments across time and media 
and (b) appear to cross-cut the traditional notion of genre. This has led 
to a more explicit inclusion of two further sources of constraint: first, the 

Multimodality and genre / 233 
influence of the medium employed needed to be made more explicit (cf. 
for further discussion: Bateman 2014a); second, it appeared useful to 
capture some of the variation not at the level of genre or medium but at 
a more detailed level of semiotic mode. Even within the visual organiza-
tion of document pages there appeared to be very different ways of using 
the expressive resources available. These conventionalized forms can be 
found across genres, media, historical periods, and cultures. A redefinition 
and refinement of the notion of semiotic mode, described and motivated 
in more detail in Bateman (2011) and Hiippala (2012), was developed to 
cover this. 
Here we focus specifically on some of the implications of this refinement 
for engaging with design. The GeM framework sees designed ‘pages’ as 
sites where considerable and varied semiotic activity typically combines. 
The characterization of this semiotic activity in terms of ‘semiotic modes’ 
then moves beyond previous semiotic accounts particularly in terms of 
specifying more precisely how analysis is to proceed. In short, it is not 
sufficient simply to have a set of (possibly quite extensive) categories to 
describe some multimodal artefact or performance, we also need sound 
methodologies that guide the application of those categories. This was 
mentioned briefly in the previous section for the annotation layers of the 
GeM model; however, the same issue applies to all aspects of the descrip-
tions to be provided. 
The analysis of the collection of pages with the GeM corpus showed 
three distinct ways in which the material on the analysed pages was being 
used. Only in some cases, for example, did a rhetorical structure analysis 
appear to be characterizing what was going on. To describe these differ-
ences, three distinct semiotic modes were hypothesized as applying: text-
flow, (static) image-flow, and page-flow (Bateman 2008, 175). Each can 
generally be recognized in analysis by the visual appearance and spatial 
layout present on any given page. In cases of ambiguity, the implications 
of using one mode rather than another in terms of the meanings imposed 
Figure 4
Distribution 
across time of 
semiotic modes in 
Hiippala’s Helsinki 
GeM-HTB corpus 
(cf. Hiippala 
2015b, 183; used 
by permission of 
the author).

234 / John A. Bateman
on the page can be contrasted and inappropriate choices ruled out. It is 
to be expected, however, that if a page presents problems of classification 
for the analyst, then it may also present similar problems to its intended 
readers – this may then serve as an additional potential source of design 
critique. 
The three strategies impose their own organizational properties and 
are in addition to already established semiotic modes such as diagrams, 
pictorial representations, and so on (cf. Bertin 1983; Farias 2005). In 
essence, they provide bundles of resources which pre-structure hypoth-
eses concerning how material on the page is to be interpreted. Text 
flow then refers to the one-dimensional unfolding of a written text – it 
is closely related to Twyman’s (1979) notion of ‘linear interrupted’ arte-
facts where no additional use is made of the inherent two-dimensionality 
of the enclosing page. Static image-flow is similar but operates with pic-
torial material rather than text – the relations between successive units 
are then similar to those set out for comics by McCloud (1994), Bateman 
and Wildfeuer (2014), and others. And page-flow, finally, relies upon the 
complete two-dimensional space of the ‘canvas’ provided by the physical 
substrate and uses proximity, grouping of elements, framing, and other 
visual perceptual resources in order to construct patterns of connections, 
similarity, and difference. Different semiotic modes appear to employ dif-
ferent kinds of semantic organization – it was only within page-flow that 
the assumption of using the multimodally extended version of rhetorical 
structure theory was beneficial, for example. This was the theoretical and 
empirical motivation for the applicability of the approach to design cri-
tique described in the previous section. 
Empirically motivated definitions of distinct semiotic modes of this 
kind then allow us both to look within the design of particular artefacts 
and to consider how different consumers of such artefacts will attempt 
to make sense of them. This offers considerable traction for a multimodal 
account of design. Semiotic modes allow us to be very specific about the 
meaning of many of the expressive decisions taken in layout and organiza-
tion of an artefact that have not traditionally been accessible to explicit 
treatment. 
We can show the application of these concepts with respect to docu-
ment design briefly with a concrete example drawn from discussions of 
multimodal literacy. On the left of Figure 5 we see a slightly adapted ver-
sion of a page taken from the Dorling Kindersley ‘Eyewonder’ series for 
younger readers (photographs have been replaced for copyright reasons). 
Despite its intended audience (or increasingly because of it!), the page 
is a highly sophisticated visual construct demanding the recognition of 
a range of modal combinations to be read successfully. The page includes 
naturalistic images or photographs, text insets of various kinds, drawings, 
and diagrams and thus constitutes a typical example of Dorling Kindersley 
design. The intention of the page is to inform children about the make-up 

Multimodality and genre / 235 
and size of the world’s ocean zones – this intention is represented in sim-
plified form in the rhetorical layer analysis shown lower right in the figure; 
as explained above, the guidelines for rhetorical structure analysis will 
lead to this result with a high degree of reliability among potential cod-
ers. The layout organization of the page is also straightforward, exhibiting 
clear framing for each ocean zone discussed. The frames themselves have 
in addition a parallel structure with minor internal variation: the invariant 
parts of these components consist of a short explanatory text, the large 
colour depictions of the inhabitants of the ocean zones, and a diagram-
matic re-representation of the entire page. This layout structure is shown 
upper right in the figure, where the small diagrammatic re-representations 
of the page as a whole, which are reused throughout the entire book for 
orienting the reader, are shown labelled as D1, D2, D3. 
In contrast to the telephone example of the previous section, there 
is generally a good match in this case between the layout structure and 
the rhetorical structure and so there is little likelihood that readers will 
misinterpret the intention of the page to describe three ocean zones. 
Nevertheless, Unsworth (2007, 1191), working within a broad multimodal 
linguistic perspective on issues of literacy, reports that the page can lead 
to misinterpretations with younger readers. Trying to explain this diffi-
culty, Unsworth makes reference to the relations holding between text and 
image in the page. As mentioned above, many researchers in multimodal 
linguistics focus on text-image relations and it is common to suggest a clas-
sification that distinguishes between congruent text-image messages, 
divergent text-image messages, and incommensurate text-image messages 
Figure 5
Example of a page 
layout discussed 
by Unsworth 
(2007, 1192). 
Adapted from DK 
‘Eyewonder’ Oceans 
by permission of DK, 
a division of Penguin 
Group (USA) LLC. 
Copyright © 2001 
Dorling Kindersley 
Limited.
a. layout structure
b. rhetorical structure

236 / John A. Bateman
(cf. Bateman 2014b, 40). Unsworth argues that, in the present case, there 
is a divergence because the text clearly indicates the depths at which ocean 
zones begin and their very unequal extents (0–150 m, 150–1000 m, and 
1000–6000 m respectively), whereas their depicted sizes on the page are 
the same. This might then lead to problems or errors in interpretation. 
While it may well be the case that some readers may obtain a false 
message from this page, the precise kind of ‘divergence’ at issue can be 
unpacked more usefully for the purposes of design critique by appealing to 
our more refined notion of semiotic modes. Treating ‘text’ and ‘image’ as 
distinct modes positioned ‘somehow’ on the page supports explanations 
of neither the design intended nor the design as interpreted. What appears 
to be at issue here is an ambiguity in the semiotic modes that may be taken 
to apply to the page. In fact, the layout says rather little concerning how 
it is to be interpreted – i.e. what meanings it is licensed to carry – beyond 
the loose alignment with rhetorical organization assumed. To determine 
this more closely, we have to know (both as analysts and as consumers) 
the semiotic modes that are being mobilized. This is, moreover, not an 
optional stage of interpretation – it is ontologically part of the reception 
process. That is: some semiotic mode(s) will always be assumed simply by 
attempting to engage with a designed artefact or behaviour. It is then rel-
atively straightforward for a multimodally inexperienced reader to select 
the wrong (i.e. unintended) combination of semiotic modes – and, indeed, 
not even to be aware that there is a correct combination to apply. It is this 
lack of ‘literacy’ in the semiotic modes available for guiding interpretation 
that leads to problems, not simply ‘divergence’. 
This argument is supported in the present case because the page does 
indeed send mixed messages. The naturalistic images suggest modalities 
of drawing and lifelike pictorial representations, but the framing and the 
schematized repeated diagrams (D1–D3) suggest both modalities of dia-
grammatic representation and the modality of ‘page-flow’ defined above. 
The interpretive questions following from these semiotic possibilities 
may be summed up as follows: (i) is this page a page-flow within which 
information is given about ocean zones and the animals that live in them, 
(ii) is it a diagram with additional lifelike elements for embellishment, or 
(iii) is it a picture with minor diagrammatic elements positioned in it for 
elaboration? Although these alternatives may not seem overly in conflict, 
the interpretations that they support are in fact quite different. If the page 
is read as a page-flow, then the spatially represented layout structure com-
municates that there are three subtopics to be discussed within the overall 
page topic of ocean zones and that these subtopics are of approximately 
equal importance for the rhetorical goal at hand – this is what is expressed 
in the rhetorical analysis shown in Figure 5. In contrast, the diagram mode 
allows rather more to be read out of the page, suggesting type–subtype 
or part–whole relationships. In the present case, one could consider 
whether we are seeing the ocean divided into parts or the definition of 

Multimodality and genre / 237 
three subtypes of ocean zones. Regardless of this further specification, 
conceptual relationships of this kind make no commitments to spatial rela-
tionships in the domain represented: the spatial relations present in the 
page are used for realizing relationships of hierarchy and composition and 
no conclusions about the relative sizes of the depicted regions are neces-
sarily licensed. Finally, the picture reading is different again. According to 
the norms of the pictorial semiotic mode, metric, topological, and topo-
graphic relations on the page, including size and relative position, are used 
to assert correspondences in the represented domain. Under this semiotic 
mode, therefore, (mistaken) conclusions about the relative sizes of the 
depicted ocean zones would be justified. 
This articulates very clearly the interpretative challenges raised by this 
page design. We are not dealing with a clear exemplar of any of the indi-
vidual semiotic modes on offer. We do not have an abstract diagram within 
which it would be unlikely to transfer properties of size and location, we 
have a hybrid pictorial-diagrammatic mode in which some properties are 
maintained (for example, the vertical spatial dimension on the page for 
representing iconically the relative spatial position of the ocean zones) 
and others are not (their relative size). It is this combination that makes 
the page potentially ‘difficult’ – especially for young learners. The multi-
modal competence required is then that of learning which modes there 
are, how they impact on the inferences that can be made on the basis of 
the information presented, and just which combinations are convention-
ally associated with particular genres. Since it is precisely in this creative 
combination, or ‘blending’ of semiotic resources, that much of the power 
of design resides (Tufte 1997), design decisions of this kind are clearly not 
something that we would want to legislate away by enforcing text-image 
congruence. Instead, we have a clear requirement for the kind of multi-
modal literacy that needs to be taught. 
There are lessons here for both design and analysis. Whereas the dis-
cussion above focused on the interpretative consequences of selecting one 
semiotic mode rather than another as applying to a multimodal artefact, 
we can equally address the kinds of evidence that artefacts themselves 
need to bring to the interpretative process in order to communicate. 
This establishes clear goals for any design agenda. Just what form such 
evidence can take (as concrete design decisions), and why it may be inter-
preted in specific ways rather than others, can then be subjected to precise 
description employing the kinds of multilayer characterization of semiotic 
resources suggested here. 
Finally we must also place this entire discussion against an appropri-
ate theoretical background so that misinterpretations are avoided. Too 
often, approaches promoting explicit recognition of the constraints on 
interpretation that designed artefacts are themselves bringing to the table 
are misread as restricting creative interpretation and placing the reader/
consumer in a passive decoding role – a return to old communication 

238 / John A. Bateman
theory models of the ‘sender-message-receiver’ type. However, this is 
itself a hangover from ‘grammar’-dominated ways of thinking about the 
production-consumption relationship. Semiotic modes as defined here 
are necessarily already intersubjective (since they are only created and 
maintained within communities of users), intertextual (since they are 
only learned by comparison with other ‘texts’), historicized (since they 
develop over time in socio-historical contexts of use), and demand the 
active involvement of enculturated individual receivers. In addition, the 
precise analysis enabled by multimodal linguistics of this kind allows us 
to trace specific design decisions with respect to both what was intended 
and how (and why) particular readers/users/consumers of designed arte-
facts may respond to them. By these means the possibility of culturally 
embedded but nevertheless fine-grained and individually specific artefact 
analysis is strongly supported. 
Conclusions and outlook
This chapter has suggested some of the potential links between informa-
tion design and multimodality. In particular, we have suggested that multi-
modal linguistics provides a  natural foundation for approaching some 
of the challenges of theorizing and critiquing design. This is primarily 
because of the analytic focus that is inherited from linguistics – whereas 
semiotic accounts more broadly are often concerned with developing and 
illustrating the semiotic theories being applied, within multimodal lin-
guistics the orientation follows that of linguistics generally and is as a con-
sequence more concerned with providing explanatory accounts of bodies 
of data constituted by more or less complex artefacts and behaviours. 
We noted in Section 2 that this is a direction that has not been pri-
oritized in, for example, Kress and van Leeuwen’s (2001) more recent 
developments of multimodal theory. However, although Kress and van 
Leeuwen’s later account has many beneficial features – for example, their 
insistence that every use of a sign is ‘new’ and creative, clearly values 
design experimentation and particularly learners’ attempts to master new 
(for them) media of expression rather than considering them as ‘errors’ 
– this also renders productive critique in design difficult. When all uses 
are primarily valued for creativity, it becomes less clear how to identify 
those cases where there is a failure to communicate due to inappropriate 
deployment of resources. Engaging critically with design problems is then 
difficult. In particular, more probing analyses that might be capable of 
revealing inadequacies in design, rather than ‘creative deviations’, are not 
provided. A complete account should therefore equally include accounts 
of why some designs do not work, a path which Kress and van Leeuwen’s 
focus on ‘creative’ sign-use is generally less willing to follow. Our examples 
in the previous sections gave some indications of how such critique can  
operate. 

Multimodality and genre / 239 
Multimodality and genre / 239 
The view of multimodality discussed here therefore moves us beyond 
both traditional views of sign-centred semiotics and communication the-
ory and less analytically focused views of multimodality in order to open 
up new possibilities for describing with more precision just which expres-
sive resources are available for design and how those resources may com-
bine in the service (or disservice) of communication. The incorporation of 
genre then adds further principles that can be employed for characterizing 
the constraints holding on design due to particular contexts of produc-
tion, the readers targeted, subject matters concerned, design traditions, 
and conventions. Finally, a finer, more empirically anchored definition of 
‘semiotic mode’ has been suggested and some of the modes that are com-
bined in multimodal artefacts and behaviours discussed. Together, these 
developments prepare the ground for stronger tools for engaging with 
design theory and practice. Above all, however, we have highlighted the 
need for more extensive empirical research in order to map out the spaces 
of modes and genres involved. 
References
Baldry, Anthony, and Paul J. Thibault. 2006. 
Multimodal transcription and text analysis: 
a multimedia toolkit and coursebook with 
associated on-line course. Textbooks and Surveys 
in Linguistics. London and New York: Equinox. 
Barnard, Malcolm. 2005. Graphic design as 
communication. London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Bateman, John A. 2008. Multimodality and genre: 
a foundation for the systematic analysis of 
multimodal documents. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Bateman, John A. 2011. ‘The decomposability 
of semiotic modes.’ In Multimodal studies: 
multiple approaches and domains, edited by Kay 
L. O’Halloran and Bradley A. Smith, 17–38. 
Routledge Studies in Multimodality. London: 
Routledge. 
Bateman, John A. 2014a. ‘Genre in the age of 
multimodality: some conceptual refinements 
for practical analysis.’ In Evolution in genres: 
emergence, variation, multimodality, edited by 
Paola Evangelisti Allori, John A. Bateman, and 
Vijay K. Bhatia, 237–269. Linguistic insights. 
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang. 
Bateman, John A. 2014b. Text and image: a critical 
introduction to the visual/verbal divide. London 
and New York: Routledge. 
Bateman, John A. 2014c. ‘Using multimodal corpora 
for empirical research.’ In The Routledge handbook 
of multimodal analysis, 2nd edn, edited by Carey 
Jewitt, 238–252. London: Routledge. 
Bateman, John A., Judy L. Delin, and Renate 
Henschel. 2004. ‘Multimodality and empiricism: 
preparing for a corpus-based approach to the 
study of multimodal meaning-making.’ In 
Perspectives on multimodality, edited by Eija 
Ventola, Cassily Charles and Martin Kaltenbacher, 
65–87. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Bateman, John A., and Janina Wildfeuer. 2014. 
‘Defining units of analysis for the systematic 
analysis of comics: a discourse-based approach.’ 
Studies in Comics 5 (2): 371–401. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1386/stic.5.2.373_1>. 
Bertin, Jacques. 1983. Semiology of graphics: diagrams, 
networks, maps. Madison, WI: University of 
Wisconsin Press. Translated by William J. Berg 
from Sémiologie graphique (1967). 
Boeriis, Morten, and Jana Holsanova. 2012. ‘Tracking 
visual segmentation: connecting semiotic and 
cognitive perspectives.’ Visual Communication 
11 (3): 259–281. 
Bucher, Hans-Jürgen. 2007. ‘Textdesign und 
Multimodalität: zur Semantik und Pragmatik 
medialer Gestaltungsformen.’ In Textdesign 
und Textwirkung in der massenmedialen 
Kommunikation, edited by Kersten Sven Roth and 
Jürgen Spitzmüller, 49–76. Konstanz: UVK. 
Card, Stuart K. and Jock Mackinlay. 1997. ‘The 
structure of the information visualization 
design space.’ In Proceedings IEEE Symposium 
on Information Visualization 1997, 92–99. Los 
Alamitos, CA: IEEE CS Press. 
Chi, Ed H. 2000. ‘A taxonomy of visualization 
techniques using the data state reference model.’ 
In Proceedings IEEE Symposium on Information 
Visualization 2000, 69–76. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE 
CS Press. 

240 / John A. Bateman
240 / John A. Bateman
Delin, Judy L., and John A. Bateman. 2002. 
‘Describing and critiquing multimodal 
documents.’ Document Design 3 (2): 140–155. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1075/dd.3.2.05del>. 
Delin, Judy L., John A. Bateman, and Patrick Allen. 
2002. ‘A model of genre in document layout.’ 
Information Design Journal 11 (1): 54–66. 
Dyer, G. 1982. Advertising as communication. London: 
Methuen. 
Elleström, Lars. 2010. ‘The modalities of media: 
a model for understanding intermedial 
relations.’ In Media borders, multimodality and 
intermediality, edited by Lars Elleström, 11–50. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Farias, Priscila L. 2005. ‘Images, diagrams and 
metaphors: a contribution from semiotics to 
information design.’ In Selected readings of the 
Information Design International Conference 
2003, edited by Carla G. Spinillo and Solange G. 
Coutinho. Recife: Sociedade Brasileira de Design 
da Informação. 
Forceville, Charles J. 1996. Pictorial metaphor in 
advertising. London: Routledge. 
Forceville, Charles J. 2009. ‘Non-verbal and 
multimodal metaphor as a cognitivist framework: 
agendas for research.’ In Multimodal metaphor, 
edited by Charles J. Forceville and Eduardo Urios-
Aparisi, 19–42. Berlin and New York: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Foucault, Michel. 1969. The archaeology of knowledge. 
London: Routledge. 
Harris, Robert L. 1999. Information graphics: 
a comprehensive illustrated reference. New York: 
Oxford University Press. First published 1996, by 
Management Graphics, Atlanta, GA.
Hiippala, Tuomo. 2012. ‘Reading paths and visual 
perception in multimodal research, psychology 
and brain sciences.’ Journal of Pragmatics 
44 (3): 315–327. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pragma.2011.12.008>. 
Hiippala, Tuomo. 2015a. ‘A multimodal corpus 
of tourist brochures produced by the city of 
Helsinki, Finland (1967–2008). (GeM-HTB).’ Acesed 20 January 2016. 
<http://www.urn.fi/urn:nbn:fi:lb-201411281>. 
Hiippala, Tuomo. 2015b. The structure of multimodal 
documents: an empirical approach. Routledge 
studies in multimodality. London: Routledge. 
Holsanova, Jana. 2014. ‘Reception of multimodality: 
applying eyetracking methodology in 
multimodality research.’ In The Routledge 
handbook of multimodal analysis, 2nd edn, 
edited by Carey Jewitt, 287–298. London: 
Routledge. 
Jansen, Carel J. M., and Michael F. Steehouder. 1992. 
‘Forms as a source of communication problems.’ 
Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 
22: 179–194. 
Jewitt, Carey, ed. 2014. The Routledge handbook of 
multimodal analysis. 2nd edn. London: Routledge. 
Kress, Gunther. 2010. Multimodality: a social semiotic 
approach to contemporary communication. 
London: Routledge. 
Kress, Gunther, and Theo van Leeuwen. 2001. 
Multimodal discourse: the modes and media of 
contemporary communication. London: Arnold. 
Kress, Gunther, and Theo van Leeuwen. 2006. 
Reading images: the grammar of visual design. 2nd 
edn. London and New York: Routledge. 
Krippendorff, Klaus. 2004. Content analysis: an 
introduction to its methodology. 2nd edn. London 
and Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Lemke, Jay L. 1999. ‘Typology, topology, 
topography: genre semantics.’ Acesed 20 January 2016. <http://www-
personal.umich.edu/~jaylemke/papers/Genre-
topology-revised.htm>. 
Mann, William C., and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988. 
‘Rhetorical structure theory: toward a functional 
theory of text organization.’ Text 8 (3): 243–281. 
Martin, James R., and David Rose. 2008. Genre 
relations: mapping culture. London and New York: 
Equinox. 
Mayer, Richard E., and V. K. Sims. 1994. ‘For whom 
is a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions 
of a dual-coding theory of multimedia learning.’ 
Journal of Educational Psychology 86: 389–401. 
McCloud, Scott. 1994. Understanding comics: the 
invisible art. New York: HarperPerennial. 
Miller, Carolyn R. 1984. ‘Genre as social action.’ 
Quarterly Journal of Speech 70: 151–167. 
Norris, Sigrid. 2004. Analyzing multimodal 
interaction: a methodological framework. London 
and New York: Routledge. 
Paivio, Allan. 1986. Mental representations: a dual 
coding approach. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Shneiderman, Ben, and Catherine Plaisant. 2009. 
Designing the user interface: strategies for effective 
user–computer interaction. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley. 
Schreier, Margrit. 2012. Qualitative content analysis in 
practice. London: Sage. 
Severin, Werner J., and James W. Tankard. 2009. 
Communication theories: origins, methods and uses 
in the mass media. 5th edn. Boston, MA: Addison-
Wesley Longman. 
Spillner, Bernd. 1982. ‘Stilanalyse semiotisch 
komplexer Texte: zum Verhältnis von sprachlicher 
und bildlicher Information in Werbeanzeigen.’ 
Kodikas/Code. Ars Semeiotica 4/5 (1): 91–106. 
Steehouder, Michael F. 2009. ‘Review: Web form 
design: filling in the blanks.’ Journal of Writing 
Research 1 (2): 177–179. 
Stöckl, Hartmut. 2004a. Die Sprache im Bild – das 
Bild in der Sprache: zur Verknüpfung von Sprache 
und Bild im massenmedialen Text: Konzepte, 
Theorien, Analysemethoden. Berlin: Walter de 
Gruyter. 
Stöckl, Hartmut. 2004b. ‘In between modes: 

Multimodality and genre / 241 
Multimodality and genre / 241 
language and image in printed media.’ In 
Perspectives on multimodality, edited by 
Eija Ventola, Cassily Charles, and Martin 
Kaltenbacher, 9–30. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Stöckl, Hartmut. 2014. ‘Semiotic paradigms and 
multimodality.’ In The Routledge handbook of 
multimodal analysis, 2nd edn, edited by Carey 
Jewitt, 274–286. London: Routledge. 
Swales, John M. 1990. Genre analysis: English in 
academic and research settings. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Taboada, Maite, and Christopher Habel. 2013. 
‘Rhetorical relations in multimodal documents.’ 
Discourse Studies 15 (1): 65–89. 
Thomas, Martin. 2014. ‘Evidence and circularity 
in multimodal discourse analysis.’ Visual 
Communication 13 (2): 163–189. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1470357213516725>. 
Todorov, Tzvetan. 1990. Genres in discourse. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Tory, Melanie, and Torsten Möller. 2004. ‘Rethinking 
visualization: a high-level taxonomy.’ In 
Proceedings IEEE Symposium on Information 
Visualization 2004, 151–158. Los Alamitos, CA: 
IEEE CS Press. 
Tufte, Edward R. 1997. Visual explanations: images 
and quantities, evidence and narrative. Cheshire, 
CT: Graphics Press. 
Twyman, Michael. 1979. ‘A schema for the study of 
graphic language.’ In Processing of visible language, 
vol. 1, edited by Paul A. Kolers, Merald E. 
Wrolstad, and Herman Bouma, 117–150. New York 
and London: Plenum. 
Unsworth, Len. 2007. ‘Image/text relations 
and intersemiosis: towards multimodal text 
description for multiliteracies education.’ In 
Proceedings of the 33rd International Systemic 
Functional Congress (33rd ISFC), edited by Leila 
Barbara and Tony Berber Sardinha, 1165–1205. 
Sao Paulo, Brazil: Pontifícia Universidade 
Católica De Sao Paulo (PUCSP). 
Waller, Robert. 1987. ‘The typographical 
contribution to language: towards a model 
of typographic genres and their underlying 
structures.’ PhD thesis, Department of 
Typography & Graphic Communication, 
University of Reading. Acesed 20 January 2016. <http://www.robwaller.
org/RobWaller_thesis87.pdf>. 
Wright, Patricia, and Philip Barnard. 1978. ‘Asking 
multiple questions about several items: the design 
of matrix structures on application forms.’ Applied 
Ergonomics 9 (1): 7–14. 


243
Interactive information graphics
A framework for classifying a visual genre
Wibke Weber
Whether in journalism, business management, or education: interactive infor-
mation graphics have gained momentum in recent years as a genre for relaying 
information visually. Particularly with the emergence of ‘data journalism’, new 
hybrid forms and patterns of interactive information graphics have arisen, 
accompanied by a jumble of new terms that reflects the complexity of interac-
tive information graphics. This chapter presents a theoretical framework that 
spans the basic characteristics and different types of interactive information 
graphics and provides an answer to the question: what is an interactive informa-
tion graphic? The framework can be considered as a tool that helps information 
designers understand this genre better.
Interactive information graphics can be difficult to grasp because of their 
genuine hybridity. This hybridity can be described as an interplay of the 
semiotic systems image, language, and number; and of different modes, 
e.g. written text, speech, sound, moving image, layout –  triggered by 
digital technologies and creating a new cohesive whole. Therefore, none 
of the theoretical frameworks or classifications for static graphics can be 
transferred to interactive information graphics one-­to-­one. The fact that 
an information graphic (or infographic) is interactive influences: (1) the 
production process – the way in which designers, editors, or journalists 
produce information graphics (Weber and Rall 2013); (2) the product 
with its modes and the dramaturgic structure in which facts or stories 
are conveyed; and (3) the perception – how users perceive and navigate 
through interactive information graphics (Burmester et al. 2010). This 
chapter focuses on the product and the following questions: ‘What is an 
interactive information graphic?’, ‘What are its main features?’, and ‘How 
can the genre of interactive infographics be classified?’
What is an interactive information graphic?
A good example of the complexity and hybridity of interactive infograph-
ics is the artefact ‘How Mariano Rivera dominates hitters’, published in 
2010 by The New York Times.1 The graphic won the Peter Sullivan Award 
at the 19th Malofiej awards, an international competition for print and 
online information graphics, in the category ‘Best of show’. However, 
  1	 See: <http://www.nytimes.com/video/sports/1247468158551/how-mariano-rivera-
dominates-hitters.html>.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 243–256
14

244 / Wibke Weber
how should we name this ‘best of show’ graphic that explains the pitch-
ing mechanics of the famous baseball pitcher Mariano Rivera 2010? Is it 
an animated graphic, a video, or an interactive information graphic? Or 
should we call it ‘data visualization’ because it is based on data: the nearly 
1,300 pitches Mario Rivera threw in 2009? In science as well as in editorial 
and design departments, several terms circulate for describing these new 
hybrid forms of the genre, e.g. video graphic, motion graphic, animated 
graphic, interactive feature, interactive narrative, and data visualization. 
Some of these terms already reveal something about the main features of 
interactive information graphics.
Information visualization, data visualization 
As the first part of the compound word infographic implies, an infographic 
displays information. Sometimes, the terms information visualization 
and data visualization are considered to be synonyms for infographic. 
Information visualization can be taken as an umbrella term to describe all 
kinds of visual representations. In a narrow sense, however, as that term 
is used today, information visualization refers to the field of computer 
science (Tergan and Keller 2005; Bederson and Shneiderman 2003). 
According to Friendly (2009, 2), ‘the term information visualization is 
generally applied to the visual representation of large-­scale collections of 
non-­numerical information, such as files and lines of code in software sys-
tems . . . library and bibliographic databases, networks of relations on the 
internet, and so forth’. Card, Mackinlay, and Shneiderman (1999, 7) define 
information visualization as ‘the use of computer-­supported, interactive, 
visual representations of abstract data to amplify cognition’. Fields of 
application are scientific research, digital libraries, data mining, financial 
data analysis, market studies, manufacturing production control, and data 
discovery (Bederson and Shneiderman 2003). In this sense, information 
visualization and infographic are not interchangeable. 
Instead, the term data visualization is more appropriate for our context. 
Friendly describes data visualization as ‘the science of visual representation 
of ‘data’, defined as information which has been abstracted in some sche-
matic form, including attributes or variables for the units of information’ 
(Friendly 2009, 2). Classical visual representations are statistical graphics 
(e.g. for financial data) and thematic cartography (e.g. weather maps). 
Both are visual means employed to discover and display data or infor-
mation and both can be main elements of an infographic. ‘Cartographic 
visualization is primarily concerned with representation constrained to 
a spatial domain; statistical graphics applies to any domain in which graph-
ical methods are employed in the service of statistical analysis’ (Friendly 
2009, 2). Friendly and Denis (2001) have started to document the history 
of thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and data visualization in their 
Milestones Project beginning from the earliest maps and diagrams to the 
present. Recently, data visualization has seen a marked increase in public 

Interactive information graphics / 245 
awareness because of the open data movement and data-­driven journal-
ism. The New York Times and The Guardian are particularly well-­known 
for their infographics based on data visualizations. In this context, one 
can often hear the buzzwords ‘data stories’ and ‘telling stories with data’ 
(Ciuccarelli 2012, 79–95). We will get back to this point on page 250.
The semiotic system
The second part of the compound word infographic shows that these arte-
facts belong to the semiotic system of images. Mitchell (1984) classifies the 
family of images into five groups: graphic, optical, perceptual, mental, and 
verbal. According to this classification, infographics belong to the type of 
graphic images that comprises e.g. paintings, photographs, and statues. 
The criterion for inclusion in this category is the resemblance or likeness 
the image shares with its object (cf. Peirce 1984). In his theory of signs, 
Peirce calls this type of sign an icon, in contrast to an index and a symbol. 
The icon represents the object that it stands for, it resembles or imitates its 
object or a certain characteristic or aspect of the object, e.g. the likeness of 
a classical painting or a photograph that portrays a person. This raises the 
question: how can an infographic that is based on a bar chart, a flow chart, 
or a timeline be considered an icon, because there is no concrete visible 
object it stands for? Peirce argues that diagrams are iconic signs, because 
they represent, by analogy, real relationships or structures of entities, like 
a cartogram that shows statistical information (e.g. a map of the world 
with countries drawn in size in proportion to their per capita GNP). That 
means, the likeness between the sign and its object can be model-­like even 
if the object the sign refers to does not exist one-­to-­one. Infographics can 
contain both types of images: a diagram or map without a concrete visible 
correlate, or a photograph or drawing that resembles which it stands for. 
Although image is the constitutive element of an infographic, most 
information graphics can be characterized as an interplay of three semi-
otic systems: image, language, and number. For a long time, images were 
regarded as decoration or embellishment, and as an inferior sister of lan-
guage (Krämer and Bredekamp 2003, 12). The fact that images can possess 
epistemic potential was repressed, negated, or even forgotten because of 
the supremacy of the word and the text culture, which were both a result 
of the Gutenberg era. However, the history of information design and data 
visualization has seen many different visual representations, e.g. techni-
cal drawings, construction plans, statistical charts, diagrams, and maps, 
which refutes the idea that images have a solely illustrative function. These 
graphical representations have the ability to inform, to explain, to instruct, 
to foster knowledge, and can be read as visual arguments. 
At the same time, these graphical representations demonstrate the sig-
nificance of numbers as a possible basis for infographics: numbers in maps 
provide spatial orientation, numbers in diagrams show statistical analy-
sis, and in coordinate systems numbers determine the position of points, 

246 / Wibke Weber
objects or geometric elements, or a period of time. With the continuing 
development of information visualization, the system of numbers goes 
far beyond measuring and counting, and includes complex computer-­
generated simulations based on vast sets of data too. The semiotic system 
of language appears in the form of texts: headlines, captions, legends, call-
outs, explanations, annotations, and articles. Image, language, and num-
bers are interwoven into a coherent whole. 
The strength of infographics is that they – in contrast to texts – can 
make things immediately visible and visualize complex information so 
that the user is able to grasp a message at a first glance. On the other hand, 
infographics can also be misleading. Since infographics based on maps 
and diagrams are merely models and do not mirror concrete objects, they 
are always artefacts of a designer or a design team and therefore subject 
to interpretations of the producers in terms of line, colour, shape, space, 
form, or arrangement, even if the graphics are based on figures and facts. 
Interactivity
Another key feature of an interactive infographic is, of course, inter-
activity. Needless to say, a myriad of different and contradictory defini-
tions, theoretical approaches, and taxonomies of the term ‘interactivity’ 
exist (e.g. Shneiderman et al. 2010; Rafaeli and Ariel 2007; Quiring and 
Schweiger 2006; McMillan 2006; Bieber and Leggewie 2004; Crawford 
2002; Heeter 2000, 1989; Schulmeister 2002; Rafaeli and Sudweeks 1997; 
Sims 1997; Schwier and Misanchuk 1993). Meanwhile, all possible inter-
pretations of interactivity seem to have been explored and the term feels 
overworked. 
The approach that seems to work best for the genre is to define inter-
activity by its different levels. According to Sims, the lowest level of inter-
activity starts with object interactivity: ‘Object interactivity (proactive 
inquiry) refers to an application in which objects (buttons, people, things) 
are activated by using a mouse or other pointing device. When a user 
“clicks” on the object, there will be some form of audio-­visual response’ 
(1997, 162). A medium level of interactivity comprises hierarchical and 
hyperlinked interactivity. ‘The hierarchical (reactive navigation) class of 
interactivity can provide the learner with a predefined set of options from 
which a specific course of study may be selected’ (Sims 1997, 163). By the 
term ‘hyperlinked interactivity’, Sims understands that users can access 
a wealth of information that they may navigate at will. The highest level 
of interactivity includes immersive virtual interactivity that ‘provides an 
interactive environment in which the learner is projected into a complete 
computer-­generated world which responds to individual movement and 
actions’ (Sims 1997, 167–168). 
Following this analysis of different levels of interactivity, we can say that 
an infographic is considered as interactive when the user is given at least 
one option to control the graphic, even if it is, at the lowest level, only 

Interactive information graphics / 247 
a button to start or stop the graphic, which is the case for the ‘Mariano 
Rivera’ graphic. The lowest level of interactivity also includes hyperlinks, 
back-­and-­forth buttons, and context-­sensitive feedback. The infographic 
itself remains unchanged. An infographic with a medium level of inter-
activity could be a map that offers a predefined set of options such as 
zooming, filtering, or selecting objects. To a certain degree, the user can 
manipulate the graphic, e.g. by a time slider. A high level of interactivity 
is reached when users can explore the infographic by themselves, interact 
with the given data, choose their own navigation path through the infor-
mation graphic, and influence or even modify the content as a co-­author.
There are two further aspects that are essential for the interactivity of 
an infographic. The option itself to control the infographic does not make 
an infographic interactive. In order to become interactive, this option for 
controlling the graphic must be perceptible for the users. This is where 
design comes into play. A good user interface design is the primary pre-
requisite for enabling users to interact with the infographic in an efficient 
way. The second aspect refers to the interactions between the user and the 
infographic. Rafaeli and Sudweeks (1997) characterize such interactions 
as a ‘process-­related construct about communication’. They call it ‘relat-
edness’. ‘It is the extent to which messages in a sequence relate to each 
other, and especially the extent to which later messages recount the relat-
edness of earlier messages’ (Rafaeli and Sudweeks 1997). Which means 
that the infographic has to respond appropriately to the clicks or demands 
of the user, so that the communication process between the user and the 
infographic satisfies user expectations.
An animated graphic, however, does not offer any option to control 
the graphic. The user cannot influence or navigate through the graphic. 
Animated graphics are mostly found on television, and more and more on 
websites and in apps (Finke et al. 2012, 23).
Dramaturgic structure: linearity – nonlinearity
The term dramaturgic structure refers to the framework of an infographic 
provided to the user by the producer. It describes how the elements of 
the content are combined and intertwined, and how the information or 
the story is conveyed: should users have the choice of exploring the data 
and facts by themselves and creating their own stories (if possible), or is 
it more effective to tell them a story step ­by step? Thus, the dramaturgic 
structure is closely connected to interactivity and the terms ‘linearity’ and 
‘non­linearity’. One may ask how interactivity and linearity fit together. Is 
interactivity not inevitably linked with nonlinearity? In his taxonomy, Sims 
also lists linear interactivity as one of the different levels. ‘Linear interac-
tivity . . . refers to applications in which the user is able to move (forwards 
or backwards) through a predetermined linear sequence of instructional 
material’ (Sims 1997, 162–163). This linear interactivity can be found in 
interactive infographics as well and can be described as a guided tour of 

248 / Wibke Weber
going back and forth conveying the information in a step-­by-­step dram-
aturgy (Figures 1 and 2). Infographics in the form of videos, comics, and 
slideshows are examples of this linear type. Navigation tools for the linear 
type can be a progress bar, a start button, or forward and back buttons. 
The level of interactivity is rather low.
Linearity is a major characteristic of narrativity, which plays an impor-
tant role in journalism, where interactive infographics are commonly 
found. Ryan explains the relationship between narrativity and interactiv-
ity as follows: ‘Yet if interactivity is the property that makes the greatest 
difference between old and new media, it does not facilitate storytelling, 
because narrative meaning presupposes the linearity and unidirectionality 
of time, logic, and causality, while a system of choices involves a nonlinear 
or multilinear branching structure, such as a tree, a rhizome, or a network’ 
(Ryan 2006, 99). A linear structure ensures clear user guidance and ena-
bles the producers to tell a story, i.e. ‘top-­down-­design’ (Ryan 2006, 99). 
Segel and Heer characterize the linear type as ‘author-­driven’. ‘A strongly 
author-­driven approach works best when the goal is storytelling or effi-
cient communication’ (Segel and Heer 2010, 1146). 
In contrast, a  highly interactive nonlinear dramaturgy requires a 
‘bottom-­up-­input from the user’ (Ryan 2006, 99). Segel and Heer call this 
nonlinear type the ‘reader-­driven approach’. The value of the nonlinear 
type is to offer the user maximum information (Figures 3 and 4). In this 
case, the infographic turns into ‘a tool for readers to analyse what’s being 
presented to them’ (Cairo 2013, 73). The meta-­message of the nonlinear 
type is that there is no story and that the users can explore the data or 
the content by themselves. They can manipulate the graphic by filtering, 
selecting, and searching the data. Therefore, the level of interactivity can 
Figure 1 
Linear type of an interactive 
infographic. The straight line 
stands for a guided tour, the 
arrows show the possible 
direction of the tour, and the 
grey dots symbolize content.
Figure 2 
Example of a linear guided 
tour.
‘A nation divided’. Zeit Online, 29 
October 2014, accessed 17 February 
2016. <http://www.zeit.de/feature/
german-unification-a-nation-divided>.

Interactive information graphics / 249 
be very high. However, the risk is that the users might get lost in the mass 
of data and information and quickly lose interest in the infographic.
Aside from the linear and the nonlinear type, a third type exists that 
results from the hybridization process of the two types: the linear-­nonlinear 
type (Figures 5 and 6). The users can choose their own navigation path, 
Figure 3 
Nonlinear type of an 
interactive infographic. 
The dashed line indicates 
the various paths the 
user could take to explore 
the content (white dots).
Figure 4 
Example of data exploration: the Swiss political lobbying network.
‘In der Wandelhalle’. Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 4 March 2014, accessed 17 February 2016. <http://www.
nzz.ch/schweiz/wie-sich-politik-und-unternehmen-in-bundesbern-vernetzen-1.18255348>.
Figure 5 
Linear-­nonlinear type 
of an infographic. The 
dashed lines and white 
dots indicate the paths 
and the content the user 
could explore within the 
predefined guided tour 
(grey dots).
Figure 6 
Example of an interactive timeline.
Spiegel Online International 2011, accessed 8 July 2016. <http://www.spiegel.de/flash/flash-28270.
html>. See acknowledgement page 254.

250 / Wibke Weber
but only within a frame predefined by the author or producer. The advan-
tage for the users is that the information is conveyed in a clearly struc-
tured way, however with the option to explore the data to a certain degree. 
Navigation tools for this type are the timeline, the slider, or the navigation 
menu. The level of interactivity can be described as medium.
Variations of the linear-­nonlinear pattern are manifold, e.g. for an info-
graphic that guides the users on a linear path to a certain point and then 
opens up for nonlinear access (Figure 7a), or vice versa for an infographic, 
in which the users can choose their own individual starting point, but then 
they must follow a linear path (Figure 7b), or for infographics that offer 
a linear and a nonlinear structure at the same time (Figure 7c).
Communicative function
The main function of an infographic is to show something in a visual way 
that is hard to explain verbally. A further basic function is to inform, which 
can be done in three different ways: narrative, explicative, and descriptive. 
When journalists, graphic designers, and information designers talk about 
information graphics, they often use the phrases ‘visual storytelling’ or 
‘telling stories with data’. However, not every infographic is a visual nar-
rative or tells a story, even though this is suggested by buzzwords such as 
‘data stories’ and ‘narrative visualization’. But when does an interactive 
infographic tell a story, when can it be characterized as a narrative? In 
order to convey a story, we need a sequence of facts or factual events that 
are temporally structured and coherently related to each other, according 
to E. M. Forster’s definition of a minimal story: ‘The king died and then the 
queen died’ (as cited in Schmid 2005, 16). For that we need a beginning, 
an end, and a change in between. The linear type facilitates storytelling, 
and a step-­by-­step dramaturgy or a timeline often indicates the existence 
of a story. However, a data visualization that can be classified as an explor-
ative type because of its nonlinear structure does not support storytelling.
While the term ‘narrative’ always implies a change of state, the terms 
‘descriptive’ and ‘explicative’ focus more on the description and explana-
tion of a certain state. The objective of an infographic is – besides inform-
ing –  to increase knowledge by explaining and describing. Describing 
Figure 7 
a. A linear start leads to a nonlinear structure.
b. A nonlinear start leads to a linear structure. ­
c. A linear and a nonlinear navigation path at 
the same time.
a
b
c

Interactive information graphics / 251 
means giving answers to the four Ws – ‘who’, ‘what’, ‘when’, and ‘where’. 
An infographic that has more explicative character often provides answers 
to questions that starts with ‘how’ and ‘why’. For instance, arrows which 
show a move, animated objects which show a change in shape, dashed lines, 
straight lines, and a colour scale are elements which offer visual explana-
tions. Most often, the distinction between ‘describing’ and ‘explaining’ is 
blurred and both can be found in the one and same infographic.
Multimodality
All information graphics are ‘multimodal’. The term ‘multimodal’ as it 
is used here does not refer to ‘multimodal interaction’ and ‘multimodal 
interfaces’ but refers to a social semiotic approach to examine commu-
nication’ (Kress 2010). Kress defines mode as ‘an organizing and shaping 
meaning-­resource’ (2010, 114). These meaning-­resources are historically 
and culturally based. ‘Modes are the result of a social and historical shap-
ing of materials chosen by a society for representation’ (Kress 2010, 11). 
Everything – image, writing, music, gesture, speech, moving image, 3D 
­objects, and even layout, colour, and the positioning of elements – can 
function as semiotic mode. What is communicated in the verbal mode in 
one culture, might be communicated in the visual mode in another. For 
the purpose of defining the genre, the multimodal approach is especially 
fruitful because it goes far beyond language and allows us to break through 
the traditional dichotomy of image and text, to emphasize the role of the 
interface design, to include layout, form, and colour as crucial elements, 
and to regard the information graphic as a holistic entity. In this sense, 
an interactive infographic is a complex multimodal artefact with different 
modes, but the visual mode always prevails.
Definition
The theoretical considerations above lead to the following definition: 
an interactive information graphic is a visual representation of informa-
tion that integrates different modes, e.g. image (which is the constitutive 
mode), written text, speech, sound, and layout into a coherent whole and 
offers at least one navigation option to control the graphic. Its commu-
nicative function is to inform, e.g. by describing or explaining something 
or narrating a factual story.
A classification model of interactive 
information graphics
Only very few classification models exists for interactive infographics. 
Holmes (2012) has published an idiosyncratic taxonomy called ‘info-
graphia’, developed from the perspective of a practitioner. He distinguishes 
between print, 3D, web/motion, data visualization, and data-­images. To 
the category ‘web/motion’, he assigns instructional videos, slideshows, 

252 / Wibke Weber
animated diagrams, interactive maps, and interactive diagrams. To the 
category ‘data visualization’ he assigns data sets, personal charts, and 
experimental. However, he does not explain what criteria he has applied to 
his taxonomy, nor how he developed it. Another approach for classifying 
interactive infographics has been provided by Nichani and Rajamanickam 
(2003); further promoted by George-­Palilonis (2006) in her book on 
graphics reporting. Nichani and Rajamanickam identify four categories, 
and the criterion for each of these categories is based on different underly-
ing communicative functions:
Narratives: ‘The objective is to explain by giving the reader a vicarious 
experience of the intent through a story.’ Narrative information graphics 
are characterized by a story ‘told with a distinct point of view’. 
Instructives explain step by step how things work. Here, the objective is 
to explain, ‘by enabling the reader to sequentially step through the intent’.
Exploratives offer the reader ‘an opportunity to explore and discover 
the intent’.
Simulatives allow the reader ‘to experience the intent (usually a real 
world phenomena)’ (Nichani and Rajamanickam 2003).
The framework suggested here includes the communicative function 
as well, however, it shows several possible levels, categories, and criteria 
for classifying interactive infographics (Table 1). It results from a com-
bination of both deductive and inductive research approaches: (1) the 
theoretical considerations as explained in the first part of this chapter, and 
(2) a qualitative content analysis of a corpus of more than 150 examples 
of information graphics (Weber 2013). This corpus encompassed interac-
tive infographics from news media, journalism, business, art, and blogs 
on infographics and data visualizations. The corpus was condensed to 70 
examples taken from leading news sites (e.g. The New York Times, The 
Guardian, El Mundo, El País, Die Zeit, Spiegel Online), because interactive 
infographics are mostly used in journalism. All examples were produced 
Table 1  A framework for classifying interactive infographics
Category
Criterion
Types
Patterns/hybrid forms
Image
Types of images
Diagram, map photo, 
video, drawing . . .
Pie chart, bar chart, table, timeline,  
cartogram . . .
Text
Five Ws: who, what,  
when, where, why  
+ one H: how
How-­type
Who-­type
When-­type
What/when à timeline
What/how à process diagram
How much/where à choropleth map, cartogram
Structure
Linearity
Linear, nonlinear, 
linear-­nonlinear
Step-­by-­step dramaturgy, 
explorative . . .
Feature
Interactivity
Low, medium, high
Linear interactivity, object interactivity, 
immersive interactivity
Producer/
user
Communicative 
function
Narrative, ­explicative, 
descriptive
Hyper comic (narrative), how-­to diagrams 
(descriptive-­explicative)

Interactive information graphics / 253 
and published in the period from 2007 to 2012. The analysis criteria were: 
type of visualization (e.g. photo, diagram, map), texts (what is the mes-
sage), dramaturgic structure (linear or not linear), the level of interactiv-
ity, and the communicative function. 
A few remarks about this framework: since all interactive infographics 
are multimodal because they consist of several modes, categorizing by 
‘mode’ is not useful. Even the mode image is a tricky criterion since one 
single infographic can contain different types of images, e.g. a cartogram or 
a timeline linked to a map in combination with photographs. However, it is 
possible to specify the different visual types and subcategorize them (e.g. 
in bar chart, pie chart, choropleth map, comic style, 2D /3D graphic). The 
criterion for the category dramaturgic structure is linearity. As explained 
on pages 247–250 several forms or patterns exist between linearity and 
nonlinearity with subcategories of hybrid forms like the linear-­nonlinear 
type and its variations. 
With regard to interactivity, we can find diverse taxonomies with dif-
ferent levels of interactivity (Heeter 1989; Sims 1997; Schulmeister 2002). 
Whether these different levels can be applied to interactive infographics 
and how these levels of interactivity can be measured, is still to be investi-
gated. As noted above, the spectrum ranges from the lowest level of object 
interactivity (click on a start button) to a high level where the users can 
modify and manipulate the graphic.
The category text (written text) seems to be well ­suited for classifying 
interactive infographics. For that, the five Ws plus one H are a good cri-
terion: who, what, when, where, why, and how (how much/how many). 
The headline of an infographic often summarizes the main message, e.g. 
‘How Mariano Rivera dominates hitters?’, ‘How many households are like 
yours?’ So, the five Ws plus one H can be helpful to identify different types 
of infographics because they already point to a certain type of visualization 
(Table 2). For instance, the interrogative word ‘when’ suggests a timeline, 
‘where’ a map. Here again, hybrid forms exist, e.g. a combination of what 
happened where, and what happened when. 
Table 2  A framework for visual thinking
Five Ws, one H 
Show 
Object’s relationship
What/who 
Portrait
Defined by object’s own physical traits
How much 
Chart
Objects’ relative quantities
Where 
Map
Objects’ positions in space
When
Timeline
Objects’ positions in time
How
Flowchart
Objects’ influences upon each other
Why
Multiple-­variable plot
Objects’ interactions involving any two 
or more of the above
Based on Roam’s ‘showing frameworks’ (Roam 2009, 138–139).

254 / Wibke Weber
Closely linked to the interrogative words is the communicative function 
of infographics. ‘How’ can be an indication of the explicative function, 
‘why’ of an argumentative function, and ‘when’ and ‘where’ indicate the 
descriptive function. 
However, too many questions being addressed in one graphic can make 
it confusing and hard to understand because of information overload. 
Then the risk is that the message is lost. So, before starting the design 
process, designers and journalists should have a clear idea as to which 
question the graphic will answer. Is it more a ‘where-­type’, a ‘what-­type’, 
or a ‘when-­type’?
Conclusion
The theoretical framework as developed above reflects the current stage 
of the genre of interactive information graphics. The rapid development of 
technologies and new media platforms and the ongoing conflation of dif-
ferent disciplines, e.g. film production, comics, animation, computer sci-
ence, scientific visualization, or geographic visualization, constantly yield 
new hybrid patterns and forms such as the infographic in the form of card 
stacks, hyper comics, motion graphics, or ‘infinite canvas’ – a seemingly 
endless scrollable screen through which the users can navigate (McCloud 
2000; Rall 2013, 194). New techniques such as the stereoscopy or multi-­
touch create new types, e.g. a 3D -­infographic2 or a data visualization as 
a tangible interface. Accordingly, this chapter is a first step in the process 
of developing a theory of interactive information graphics.
Acknowledgement
Figure 6 shows an interactrive graphic which reproduces images from the fol-
lowing agencies: DAPD, Reuters/Tepco, Spiegel Online, DPA, Futaba Town, AP/
Kyodo News, AP/NOAA, AP/Tepco, Reuters, AP/Yomiuri Shimbun, AP, AP/
JMSDF, DPA/Air Photo Service, Reuters/Kyodo, AFP/TEPCO, AP/Kyodo, AFP/
Jiji Press, AP/NTV Japan via APTN, AFP, AP/Kyodo News.
  2	 An example is the 3D version of the infographic ‘How Mariano Rivera dominates 
hitters’ published in 2012 by The New York Times. <http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2012/04/13/sports/baseball/mariano-rivera-3d.html?_r=0>, accessed 
17 February 2016.
References
Bederson, Benjamin B., and Ben Shneiderman. 2003. 
The craft of information visualization: readings and 
reflections. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Bieber, Christoph, and Claus Leggewie (eds). 
2004. Interaktivität: ein transdisziplinärer 
Schlüsselbegriff. Frankfurt and New York:  
Campus.
Burmester, Michael, Marcus Mast, Ralph Tille, and 
Wibke Weber. 2010. ‘How users perceive and use 
interactive information graphics: an exploratory 
study.’ In Proceedings of the 14th international 
conference information visualization (IV 2010). 
London, July 2010, 361–368. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/IV.2010.57>.

Interactive information graphics / 255 
Interactive information graphics / 255 
Cairo, Alberto. 2013. The functional art: an 
introduction to information graphics and 
visualization. Berkeley, CA: New Riders.
Card, Stuart K., Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben 
Shneiderman. 1999. Readings in information 
visualization: using vision to think. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Ciuccarelli, Paolo. 2012. ‘Turning visualisations into 
stories and “big pictures”.’ In Information graphics, 
edited by Sandra Rendgen and Julius Wiedemann, 
77–95. Cologne: Taschen.
Crawford, Chris. 2002. The art of interactive design: 
a euphonious and illuminating guide to building 
successful software. Berkeley, CA: No Starch 
Press.
Finke, Tim, Sebastian Manger, and Stefan Fichtel. 
2013. Informotion: animated infographics. Berlin: 
Die Gestalten Verlag.
Friendly, Michael. 2009. ‘Milestones in the history 
of thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and, 
data visualization.’ Acesed 30 April 2014. <http://www.math.yorku.ca/
SCS/Gallery/milestone/milestone.pdf>.
Friendly, Michael, and Daniel J. Denis. 2001. 
‘Milestones in the history of thematic 
cartography, statistical graphics, and data 
visualization: an illustrated chronology of 
innovations.’ DataVis.ca. Web document. Acesed 30 April 2014. <http://
www.datavis.ca/milestones/>.
George-­Palilonis, Jennifer. 2006. A practical guide to 
graphics reporting: information graphics for print, 
web & broadcast. Burlington, MA: Focal Press.
Heeter, Carrie. 1989. ‘Implications of new interactive 
technologies for conceptualizing communication.’ 
In Media use in the information age: emerging 
patterns of adoption and consumer use, edited by 
Jerry L. Salvaggio and Jennings Bryant, 217–235. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Heeter, Carrie. 2000. ‘Interactivity in the context 
of designed experiences.’ Journal of Interactive 
Advertising 1 (1): 4–15. Acesed 30 April 2014. <http://www.jiad.org/
article2.html>.
Holmes, Nigel. 2012. ‘Infographia: an idiosyncratic 
taxonomy.’ A poster insert in Information graphics, 
edited by Sandra Rendgen and Julius Wiedemann. 
Cologne: Taschen.
Krämer, Sybille, and Horst Bredekamp (eds). 2003. 
Bild, Schrift, Zahl. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
Kress, Gunther. 2010. Multimodality: a social semiotic 
approach to contemporary communication. 
Abingdon: Routledge. 
McCloud, Scott. 2000. Reinventing comics: how 
imagination and technology are revolutionizing an 
art form. New York: William Morrow.
McMillan, Sally J. 2006. ‘Exploring models of 
interactivity from multiple research traditions: 
users, documents and systems.’ In The handbook 
of new media: social shaping and consequences of 
ICTs, 2nd edn, edited by Leah A. Lievrouw and 
Sonia Livingstone, 205–229. London: Sage. 
Mitchell, W. J. T. 1984. ‘What is an image?’ New 
Literary History 15 (3): 503–537. 
Nichani, Maish, and Venkat Rajamanickam. 
2003. ‘Interactive visual explainers: a simple 
classification.’ Elearningpost.com. Acesed 30 April 2014. <http://www.
elearningpost.com/articles/archives/interactive_
visual_explainers_a_simple_classification/>.
Peirce, Charles S. 1984. Writings of Charles S. 
Peirce: a chronological edition. Vol. 2: 1867–1871. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Quiring, Oliver, and Wolfgang Schweiger. 
2006. ‘Interaktivität – ten years after: 
Bestandsaufnahme und Analyserahmen.’ Medien 
& Kommunikationswissenschaft, 54 (1): 1–20.
Rafaeli, Sheizaf, and Yaron Ariel. 2007. ‘Assessing 
interactivity in computer-­mediated research.’ In 
The Oxford handbook of internet psychology, edited 
by Adam N. Joinson, Katelyn Y. A. McKenna, Tom 
Postmes, and Ulf-­Dietrich Reips, 71–88. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Rafaeli, Sheizaf, and Fay Sudweeks. 1997. ‘Networked 
interactivity.’ Journal of Computer-­Mediated 
Communication 2 (4). Article first published 
online: 23 June 2006. Acesed 30 April 2014. <http://www.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1083-6101.1997.tb00201.x/
full>.
Rall, Hannes. 2013. ‘Comics and interactive 
information graphics.’ In Interaktive 
Infografiken, edited by Wibke Weber, Michael 
Burmester, and Ralph Tille, 175–215. Berlin 
and Heidelberg: Springer. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-15453-9_10>.
Roam, Dan. 2009. The back of the napkin: solving 
problems and selling ideas with pictures. London: 
Marshall Cavendish.
Roberts, Graham, Joe Ward, and Shan Carter. 2010. 
‘How Mariano Rivera dominates hitters.’ The New 
York Times, 30 June 2010. Acesed 17 February 2016. <http://www.nytimes.
com/video/sports/1247468158551/how-mariano-
rivera-dominates-hitters.html>. 
Ryan, Maire-­Laure. 2006. Avatars of story. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Schmid, Wolf. 2005. Elemente der Narratologie. Berlin 
and New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Schulmeister, Rolf. 2002. ‘Taxonomie der 
Interaktivität von Multimedia: ein Beitrag 
zur aktuellen Metadaten-­Diskussion.’ it+ti – 
Informationstechnik und Technische Informatik 
44 (4): 193–199.
Schwier, Richard A., and Earl R. Misanchuk. 
1993. Interactive multimedia instruction. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology 
Publications.
Segel, Edward, and Jeffrey Heer. 2010. ‘Narrative 
visualization: telling stories with data.’ IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 16 (6): 1139–1148. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.179>.
Shneiderman, Ben, Catherine Plaisant, Maxine 

256 / Wibke Weber
256 / Wibke Weber
Cohen, and Steven Jacobs. 2010. Designing the user 
interface: strategies for effective human–computer 
interaction. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education.
Sims, Rod. 1997. ‘Interactivity: a forgotten 
art?’ In Computers in Human Behavior 
13 (2): 157–180. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0747-5632(97)00004-6>. 
Tergan, Sigmar-­Olaf, and Tanja Keller. 2005. 
‘Visualizing knowledge and information: an 
introduction.’ In Knowledge and information 
visualization, edited by Sigmar-­Olaf Tergan 
and Tanja Keller, 1–23. Berlin and Heidelberg: 
Springer.
Weber, Wibke. 2013. ‘Typen, Muster und hybride 
Formen: ein Typologisierungsmodell für 
interaktive Infografiken.’ In Interaktive 
Infografiken, edited by Wibke Weber, Michael 
Burmester and Ralph Tille, 25–37. Heidelberg 
and Berlin: Springer. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-15453-9_2>.
Weber, Wibke, and Hannes Rall. 2013. ‘We are 
journalists: production practices, attitudes and 
a case study of the New York Times newsroom.’ In 
Interaktive Infografiken, edited by Wibke Weber, 
Michael Burmester, and Ralph Tille, 161–172. 
Heidelberg and Berlin: Springer. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-15453-9_9>.

257
Social and cultural aspects of visual 
conventions in information design
The rhetoric of hierarchy
Charles Kostelnick
Visual conventions pervade information design, providing a reliable frame-
work for designing, interpreting, and analysing practical communications. 
Constructed socially by visual discourse communities – disciplines, organiza-
tions, and cultures – conventions stabilize visual language but also are in 
constant flux, engendering complex genealogies as they continually evolve, 
proliferate, and mutate with other forms. Conventions function rhetorically 
through genres and other strategies that designers deploy to achieve certain 
ends with their audiences. Many conventions invoke hierarchy, one of the most 
fundamental rhetorical strategies for designing and interpreting pictures, data 
displays, and text. Designers deploy hierarchy to structure designs efficiently 
and persuasively and to enable their audiences to sort information by import-
ance, immediacy, or power.
The visual language of information design is socially and rhetorically 
constructed, and like other forms of visual language (architecture, prod-
uct design) is shaped by conventional codes that derive from the histor-
ical, cultural, aesthetic, and disciplinary conditions in which forms are 
invented, deployed, and reproduced. Sometimes briefly, sometimes over 
long stretches of time, conventions establish among their communities of 
users a viable level of circulation, which can be as local as a café menu or 
as global as a pie chart or a public information sign. Although conventional 
forms can mature into predictable patterns of use, their stability can be 
deceptive: as social constructs, conventions are always contingent and 
provisional – evolving, mutating, declining, and being reinvented – and 
subject to shifting and emerging communities and their shared values, 
knowledge, and technology (Kostelnick and Hassett 2003, 10–42; see also 
Kress and van Leeuwen 1996). 
In this chapter I will examine some key aspects of information design 
conventions that underpin them socially and explore how conventions 
evolve, mutate, and proliferate, in the process engendering complex gene-
alogies. I will also examine how conventions function rhetorically through 
genres and other strategies that designers deploy to achieve certain ends 
with their audiences. To illustrate these processes, I will focus especially 
on visual elements that invoke hierarchy – that is, on elements of infor-
mation designs that attract an audience’s attention, sometimes in a given 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 257–273
15

258 / Charles Kostelnick
order, and the rhetorical impact that hierarchy (or its opposite, flatness) 
has on an audience’s interpretation.1 
Stability amid flux: constructing conventions
The conventional nature of visual language presents a paradox: conven-
tions foster the illusion of stability while being in constant flux. That flux 
varies from one convention to another, with some evolving at a glacial pace 
and others changing far more quickly. The confluence of several drawing 
conventions materializes in the image in Figure 1, a  plate from Georg 
Böckler’s Theatrum machinarum novum (1673), which shows an apparatus 
that lifts water mechanically from a freshwater stream and transports it, 
presumably to places like the walled town pictured in the upper left. This 
late seventeenth-century picture uses perspective, a Renaissance drawing 
convention, to situate the viewer from an imaginary point overlooking the 
stream and the apparatus in the foreground, then out to the clusters of 
buildings downstream, and then out to the ships on the distant sea. As 
a drawing, it embodies some of the fine arts conventions of perspective 
and of the pastoral landscape – in the buildings that dot the hillside and in 
the ruined tower near the inlet to the sea. However, this picture also (and 
primarily) functions as an engineering drawing. All of the elements of the 
mechanical device – the cogs and gears, the water wheel, the supporting 
frame, the chase at the right – are shown in perspective, similar to archi-
tectural rendering. Engineering would take another century to develop its 
own disciplinary language: spatially flatter and more abstract and precise, 
with only one view shown at a time. The parts on the apparatus are num-
bered and referenced in the text, a typical convention of engineering and 
other practical drawings. 
So this drawing embodies several intersecting conventions – most 
broadly those from visual representation practices in Western culture, 
from the fine arts, from architectural rendering, and from print technol-
ogy, evidenced in the stylized linework that depicts the water rushing 
down the stream and that shades the waterworks structure and stream 
bank. This drawing, like most we encounter, combines a particular mix of 
old and new conventions that are stable for the present but that will slowly 
give way to other ones, as some conventions in this picture since have. 
In any given interpretive moment, however, conventions can appear so 
stable, and be so taken for granted, that they seem to represent an unme-
diated reality rather than an artificial construction of it (see Barton and 
Barton 1993). 
  1	 In Envisioning information Edward Tufte (1990) extensively and insightfully critiques 
what he calls ‘flatland’ in data design (pp. 9–35). Here I am applying the concept of 
‘flat’ design to a larger domain of visual language and not necessarily as a pejorative. 

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 259 
Visual discourse communities 
Conventions experience constant flux because they are shaped and sus-
tained by groups of users, or visual discourse communities, that employ 
them regularly, giving them their currency (see Bazerman 1988; Swales 
1990). Discourse communities can include disciplines (engineering, 
design, science), organizations (corporations, governments, non­profits), 
and cultures (regional, ethnic, national). These communities invent, 
control, and sustain conventions and often appropriate them from other 
communities for their own purposes, as we saw in the early engineering 
Figure 1 
Drawing of 
a waterworks 
from the late 
seventeenth 
century (Böckler 
1673, 129).
Courtesy Special 
Collections Department/
Iowa State University 
Library. 

260 / Charles Kostelnick
drawing in Figure 1, which invoked architectural conventions. To become 
fluent in its conventions, members of discourse communities undergo 
a process of visual enculturation, either through formal training or immer-
sion (Kostelnick and Hassett 2003, 83–96). 
Disciplinary communities typically entail both. Scientific, technical, 
medical, and design disciplines all require a process of enculturation for 
their members to achieve a level proficiency with their respective visual 
languages. In the medical field, for example, cardiologists learn to read 
electrocardiograms, radiologists X-rays and MRIs, and nurses lab pro-
files and electronic health records. In engineering, civil engineers learn 
how to read and create road and bridge plans, electrical engineers cir-
cuit diagrams, and mechanical engineers elevations and cross-sections. 
Some disciplinary conventions are centuries old – such as using a stand-
ard light source (above and to the left) for botanical drawings or using 
­cross-sections in architectural drawings. And as we’ve seen in Figure 1, 
drawing conventions from one discipline can get entangled with those of 
another. To maintain control, disciplines and their professional societies 
often certify and update their conventions, a deliberative process that can 
take years of study and experimentation.
On a more local level, organizations often develop their own visual con-
ventions, the most obvious of which is a visual identity programme that 
might include a logotype, colour scheme, and visual style guide for all of its 
communications, print and digital. For example, the Office of Institutional 
Research at Iowa State University annually produces a Fact book, a col-
lection of primarily tables and charts that display key institutional data 
about finances, faculty, students, alumni, and departments. The Fact book 
follows the visual identity programme of the university while at the same 
time embodies its own conventional language that remains largely con­
Figure 2
Cover page and 
tabs of the online 
2013–14 Iowa State 
University fact book 
(Iowa State University 
Office of Institutional 
Research, 2014). 
Fact book cover photo 
taken by Nadine K. Dobbe; 
reprinted with permission.

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 261 
sistent from one version to the next, creating interpretive ballast for its 
users. Published for years with half pages, spiral binding, and tabs for usa-
bility, the Fact book now appears only online (Figure 2) but still mimics the 
same tabbed design of the paper product, illustrating how the tenacity of 
conventions often trumps the affordances of new technologies. 
Organizations, even large ones like universities, largely localize visual 
language. Some conventions, however, have a  much broader reach, 
en­com­passing entire cultures or geographical regions. For example, the 
circle and slash sign (Figure 3), which is deployed to proscribe certain 
activities (smoking, littering, taking pictures), appears in public spaces 
around the world. Its simple, unassuming design combining two universal 
forms – a circle and a line, angled diagonally to draw attention to itself – 
belies its power to control human activity. Its audience extends around 
the globe, as do audiences for other public information signs encountered 
along highways and in airports, railway stations, malls, and museums. 
Some elements of information design have complex social lives, con-
founding the edges of discourse communities. Colour can be constructed 
socially at both the local and global levels, resulting in multiple and 
even contradictory conventions for the same colour. Locally, green can 
stand for a company brand (John Deere) or a university (Michigan State 
University), within the USA it can stand for money or for Irish culture, 
and internationally it can represent environmental causes and practices. 
Colour conventions are also confounded socially because they provoke 
physiological and perceptual responses: generally, cool colours (blue, 
green) tend to soothe audiences and warm colours (red, orange) excite 
them (see Mackiewicz 2007, 147, for a summary of research); and some-
times audiences perceive colour with difficulty, if at all. In these ways, our 
responses to colour may depend as much on DNA as the discourse com-
munities we inhabit. 
Genealogies and conventional precedents 
The visual conventions that guide information design have genealogies 
and histories: they undergo a process of development, evolve into new 
forms, and sometimes decline or become functionally extinct (Kostelnick 
and Hassett 2003, 119–162). Various forms of information design – typo-
graphical displays, pictures, warnings, public information signs, data 
visualizations – each have their own dynamic genealogies, which grow 
out of and perpetuate past practices and which can be reshaped into new 
ones. Conventions are born, evolve, and sometimes disappear, waiting for 
archaeologists to recover and decipher them long after the social networks 
that supported them have dissolved and vanished. 
Take for example the rank chart (Figure 4, overleaf), a fairly obscure 
data display genre that appeared in the US statistical atlas of 1898 (Gannett 
1898), here to show the comparative populations of states and territories 
Figure 3
Circle and slash 
sign that is used 
internationally to 
prohibit certain 
activities.

262 / ﻿
262 / ﻿Charles Kostelnick
from one census to another since 1790, with connecting lines showing how 
each state moved up or down the rankings in comparison to the others. 
The rank chart visualized the changing population patterns across the USA 
in the nineteenth century as immigrants flooded in and people headed 
west. States with the largest populations appear high on the chart, with 
New York topping the list for the last several censuses and Pennsylvania 

15 / 263 
15 Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 263 
Figure 4
Rank chart 
from the 1898 
US statistical 
atlas that shows 
the relative 
populations 
of states and 
territories for 
each census 
(Gannett 1898, 
plate 2). 
Courtesy of the 
Library of Congress, 
Geography and Map 
Division.
right below, and newer states and territories like Wyoming and Nevada at 
the bottom. With each census, movement occurs in the chart, particularly 
in the middle as Midwestern states gain population. Illinois, for example, 
gradually works its way up from near the bottom to third position, as east-
erners move west and immigrants arrive in the state. Each colour-coded 
state is painstakingly reproduced from one census to the next – and new 

264 / Charles Kostelnick
ones added with each census – with connecting lines showing their upward 
and downward movement. 
Although the rank chart has only infrequent appearances in the nine-
teenth century, its genealogy is intertwined with other design conventions. 
The Statistical atlases, particularly the early ones (Walker 1874; Hewes and 
Gannett 1883), had a penchant for ranking data graphically – for visualiz-
ing competition through bar charts, circle charts, maps, mosaics, and area 
charts that sequenced data by size. In the rank chart in Figure 4, power is 
conventionally located at the top, as it is on world maps and in organiza-
tional charts where ‘above’ means more power and prestige and where 
‘below’ means less. The rank chart also shows the influence of Victorian 
aesthetic conventions with the chart’s lavish detail and colour for repre-
senting each state and territory. Many of the intricate visualizations cre-
ated for the nineteenth-century Statistical atlases were labour-intensive to 
produce, and only skilled designers backed by government funding could 
meet this standard. 
Historically, the rank chart in Figure 4 appears during what Funkhouser 
(1937, 330) calls the ‘golden age’ of data graphics, which produced an 
explosion of innovative designs, particularly of data from the sciences and 
social sciences. Rank charts like the ones in the Statistical atlas provide 
the prototypes for those that appear today, what Edward Tufte (2014) 
calls the ‘slopegraph’, an example of which appears in The visual display 
of quantitative information (Tufte 1983, 158). Rank charts have now also 
begun to appear in digital interactive charts online. For example, an 
interactive chart created by Ben Fry (2013) ranks major league baseball 
teams on their win/loss records relative to their salaries, day by day over 
an entire season.2 The interactive chart in Figure 5 (facing) that appears on 
the Bloomberg.com website shows the relative costs of gasoline and their 
economic impact on countries around the world (Randall, McIntyre, and 
Associates for International Research 2014). This rank chart also places 
the highest values at the top: cost of gas (left), affordability (centre), and 
per cent of income (right). Countries experiencing the highest cost rank 
closer to the top, with the interactive horizontal lines (colour-coded by 
continent) showing the relative proximity of the countries to each other. 
Unlike static rank charts, these interactive charts allow users to customize 
the display according to their preferences, deciding which time during the 
baseball season to rank performance and cost or which continents and 
countries to rank for gas prices. Although interactive data visualization is 
creating a resurgence of data design (Friendly 2008), many forms under-
going digital reinventions, like the rank chart, find their genealogical roots 
in forms that appeared in the nineteenth century. 
Virtually every mark we make on a  page or a  screen, or every one 
that we interpret, has its roots in, or is intertwined with, those of some 
  2	 Another example of the interactive slopegraph is Jeff Clark’s chart that shows changes 
in national obesity rates from 2002 to 2010 (Clark 2014).

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 265 
conventional form (however popular or obscure) that preceded it. As 
we’ve seen, sometimes conventions are appropriated by disciplines, which 
reinvent them for their own purposes in a narrower domain. Sometimes 
more specialized conventions find their way into the public, as they did in 
the famous London Tube map (Transport for London 2014), which was 
originally designed by Harry Beck, who apparently found inspiration in 
the sleek, angular lines of electrical diagrams. And sometimes forms draw 
from that same deep cultural pool, one form begetting another in a broad 
chain reaction. For example, the universal disability sign (International 
Symbol of Access), which was designed in 1968 by Susanne Koefoed for 
Rehabilitation International (2015), embodies the functional minimalism 
of modernist aesthetics. Like many other contemporary forms (including 
the Tube map), the sparse, high-contrast, geometrical design of this image 
(recreated in Figure 6) embodies modernist principles, specifically the 
Isotype system of Otto Neurath (1936) and Gerd Arntz and its American 
adaptation by Rudolf Modley (1937). The genealogy of this image, then, 
can clearly be traced to the internationalizing influence of modernism 
and its goal of creating a universal design language (Kinross 1985; Lupton 
1986).
Rhetorical strategies: the power of hierarchy
The socializing aspects of conventions regularize visual language, enabling 
designers to evoke certain interpretive responses from their audiences to 
achieve certain ends – for example, to enable readers to perform a task, 
Figure 5
Rank chart of gas 
prices in countries 
around the world 
and the economic 
effects (Randall, 
McIntyre, and 
Associates for 
International 
Research 2014).
URL: <http://www.
bloomberg.com/
visual-data/gas-
prices/20144:United% 
20Kingdom:USD:g>. 
© 2014 Bloomberg 
Finance LP. All rights 
reserved. Used with 
permission. Reprinted 
with the permission 
of Associates for 
International Research, 
Inc. (AIRINC). Reprinted 
with permission of 
Europe’s Energy Portal 
(energy.eu).
Figure 6
Disability sign 
epitomizing 
modernist, 
international 
design. 

266 / Charles Kostelnick
compare data, avoid injury, or navigate public spaces. To illustrate this rhe-
torical process, I will focus on genres and other rhetorical strategies that 
invoke hierarchy, one of the most fundamental interpretive tasks. As audi-
ences for information designs, we typically want to know which informa-
tion has more importance, immediacy, or power than other information, 
and the visual language of hierarchy enables us to make these judgements, 
economizing our interpretations while provoking us to accept or resist the 
designs’ persuasive effects. 
Genres as rhetorical frameworks 
Genres (e.g. annual reports, newsletters, instructions) provide reliable 
rhetorical frameworks for deploying and interpreting design forms by 
meeting reader expectations. The socializing effects of genres enhance 
usability and ethos in an array of disciplinary, cultural, and situational 
contexts. Genres are driven by the ongoing exigency to communicate 
a certain kind of information in a certain way for a particular audience 
(Miller 1984), a rhetorical framework that might also be applied to charts 
and other forms of information design. As Edward Tufte (1983) observes, 
some forms of charts, including the rank chart, serve to ‘organize complex 
information hierarchically’ (p. 159). For example, the rank chart from the 
1898 US statistical atlas (Figure 4) reveals hierarchy as its chief rhetorical 
aim by enabling its readers to compare, from largest to smallest, popula-
tions of states and territories over nearly a century. Like its predecessor in 
a previous atlas (Hewes and Fletcher 1883, plate 18), this rank chart nar-
rates the growth of a nation, with each census adding new states (and here 
territories as well) whose populations rival those of the original colonies, 
creating a competitive national map with the East Coast as the benchmark. 
The interactive Bloomberg.com rank chart (Figure 5) similarly situates 
financial data, here in a global comparison of how much money nations 
spend on gasoline. In these ways, the rank chart visualizes winners and 
losers in the fierce competition for people and resources that the visual 
candor of this genre makes explicit. 
Other forms of the chart genre have equally compelling ways of visual-
izing hierarchy. In the late nineteenth century, Michael Mulhall’s famous 
pictorial charts ranked performance on a global scale, comparing the eco-
nomic output, industrialization, and military might of nations. In Figure 7 
Mulhall (1898/1909) uses pictorial images to show the relative horsepower 
generated by steam by countries around the world. The series of wheels – 
which power industrial activity, from trains to factories – essentially form 
a circle chart, a genre that William Playfair (1801) pioneered, that appeared 
in the 1874 Statistical atlas (Walker, plates LI–LIV), and that continues to 
appear today, despite its perceptual drawbacks. In the hands of Mulhall, 
the comparisons take on cultural and political significance in an age of 
colonial imperialism, where England dominates the productive capacities 
of nation-states, with the USA positioned a close second (Kimball 2016). 

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 267 
Deploying genres of visual ranking in the later nineteenth century reflects 
the Darwinian economic and political environment in which rival states 
keenly competed with each other. 
Digital data design is both ossifying and revolutionizing traditional 
genres. On the one hand, digital tools proliferate well-established conven-
tions – ubiquitous bar, line, and pie charts – while on the other hand, they 
enable designers to recreate these genres with interactive features and 
to invent hybrid and new genres. Contemporary digital genres like the 
treemap also show comparative size by ranking, typically by displaying 
quantities hierarchically by area. The digital treemap finds its genealogical 
roots in the nineteenth-century mosaic, which played an important role in 
the Statistical atlases (see Kostelnick 2016). Figure 8 shows a conceptual 
drawing of a treemap divided into groups, with the largest group in the 
upper left-hand corner and the smallest in the lower right, with each group 
Figure 7
Chart from 
Michael Mulhall’s 
Dictionary 
of statistics 
comparing the 
relative horse-
power of several 
nations (Mulhall, 
1898/1909, partial 
view of plate 9). 
Figure 8
The treemap as an 
emerging genre 
of data display 
that often appears 
online.

268 / Charles Kostelnick
further divided into subunits, again ranging from largest in the upper left 
to smallest in the lower right. A greyscale shading typically codes varia-
tions in the data that correlate with a scale. In some interactive treemaps, 
time serves as a variable in the rankings, with changes over time visually 
reordering the hierarchy.
Organizational charts are yet another genre that visualizes ranking, 
here according to personnel and their relative power within organizations. 
Virtually any organization of any size has an organizational chart to show 
where employees stand in the organizational hierarchy – who reports to 
whom up the chain of command – with the greatest power and author-
ity conventionally located at the top and centre of the chart, as shown in 
Figure 9. Finding its genealogical roots in family trees and lineage diagrams 
of monarchs and dukes, organizational and management charts flourished 
in the early twentieth century (see Brinton 1914, 12–19), driven partly by 
the rise of systematic management. By clarifying power relationships, or-
ganizational charts can have both positive and negative rhetorical effects, 
explaining reporting relationships and projecting organizational ethos 
while potentially demoralizing those deeply embedded in the hierarchy or 
(more than likely) not visualized at all. To ameliorate these effects, inven-
tive adaptations of the genre sometimes flout these genre conventions by 
visualizing more distributed and democratic arrangements of power.
In each of these chart genres ­– rank chart, circle chart, treemap, organi­
zational chart – conventions provide a consistent framework within which 
to visualize data hierarchically: in a vertical sequence of textual units (rank 
chart, organizational chart), as a linear series of areas (circle chart), or as 
a mosaic of rectilinear areas (treemap). Each type of chart reveals some-
thing different in response to a rhetorical exigency: the rank chart display-
ing the position of entities (but not relative size), the circle chart relative 
size and position, the treemap relative size of multiple categories of data, 
and the organizational chart the positions of people and the networks 
among them. These visualizations of hierarchy have a variety of rhetorical 
effects: ‘epideictic’, ‘judicial’ (or ‘forensic’), and ‘deliberative’ (Aristotle 
2007, 47–48). They celebrate winners and bemoan losers (epideictic), 
explain and justify the status quo (forensic), and instigate a steepening or 
flattening of the hierarchy in the future (deliberative). And although each 
chart genre uniquely reveals structure (logos), they also evoke emotional 
responses (pathos) by visualizing relative power and prestige (or lack of 
CEO
Vice-President
of Operations
Vice-President
of Finance
Vice-President
of Marketing
Figure 9
Simple 
organizational 
chart showing 
hierarchical 
relationships 
among personnel. 

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 269 
it), which in turn can engender or erode trust (ethos; see Aristotle 2007 
38–39). 
Conventional strategies for invoking hierarchy
Many visual conventions not tied to a given genre are frequently deployed 
to invoke an array of rhetorical strategies. For example, to create a casual, 
informal tone a designer might deploy clip art or a hand-drawn image, or 
to produce a more formal tone, create a hard-edged object, render that 
object as a two-dimensional projection, and deploy technical conventions 
like dotted lines to reveal information behind the object’s surface. 
Similarly, structural aspects of information design, like creating hier-
archy, can also be displayed through conventional methods. Collectively, 
conventions invoking hierarchy have the rhetorical function of telling 
users what information to focus on, how lesser information provides a sup-
porting role, and where to locate power. In many information displays, 
moreover, designers deploy graphical elements that enable readers to see 
the big picture or to see the minute details (Barton and Barton 1993; Tufte 
1990, 37–51). Hierarchy can also be invoked by an array of conventions, 
the degree to which we might envision along a spectrum (Figure 10), with 
highly stratified and variegated visual information on one end (the left) 
and flat, undifferentiated visual information on the other (the right), 
with differing degrees of hierarchical design in between. We might, for 
example, place a rank chart on the far left of the spectrum, given that the 
genre’s explicit purpose is hierarchical display, and we might place the 
disability sign on the low end on the right, given its flat, uniform design. 
Because conventions are social, they must be shared by communities 
of users that consistently deploy and interpret them, giving them a viable 
currency. Conventional strategies for visualizing hierarchy come in a wide 
variety of forms – textual, pictorial, and data graphical. 
Pictorial strategies 
Designers have an array of conventional strategies for creating hierarchy 
in pictures, for getting us to pay attention to some visual elements and less 
so to others. One of the most widespread conventions appears in Figure 1 
with the use of perspective to create layers of information from fore-
ground to background. Placing key information in the foreground – here, 
the waterworks apparatus – signals its importance to readers because of 
its close proximity. As perspective incrementally shrinks objects as they 
recede – the stream flowing through the landscape, the distant buildings in 
Hierarchy
Flatness
Figure 10
A spectrum of 
design hierarchy 
from high (left) to 
low (right).

270 / Charles Kostelnick
the village, the ships on the horizon – background information decreases 
in importance. Key foreground objects are also emphasized by the let-
tering for notations, which in technical drawings today are often placed 
directly on (or near) objects through call-outs. This technique of placing 
key information in the foreground was typically deployed in early engi-
neering drawings, perhaps most famously in Agricola’s De re metallica 
(1556), where mechanical parts were spread on the ground immediately 
around an apparatus, a  practice that continues today in instructional 
pictures. Still, those interpretations of hierarchy depend on the readers: 
If they interpret Böckler’s waterworks picture as fine art, rather than an 
engineering drawing, the subtle distant elements might project another 
kind of hierarchy – the towers, tall buildings, and the ships on the sea 
indicating commercial, cultural, and military power, and the waterworks 
a mere accessory towards that end. 
Contemporary designers use many other conventions to create visual 
hierarchy in illustrations, emphasizing selected objects and muting others. 
For example, to highlight key information, designers can deploy spot col-
our, arrows, or call-outs; they can ‘ghost’ less important information with 
greyscales or dashed lines; or they can insert hands that literally point to 
key information. All of these conventions are familiar to users of instruc-
tions: employees learning new skills, consumers assembling products, or 
do-it-yourselfers engaged in home improvement. 
On the right side of the hierarchy spectrum in Figure 10 reside informa-
tion designs that lack little, if any, hierarchy, a rhetorical strategy that also 
has some conventional features. The disability sign, for example, is com-
pletely non-hierarchical, a flat and highly abstract image devoid of shades 
and shadows, which diminishes realism while enhancing its simplicity, 
singular focus, and appeal to a  wide audience. Epitomizing modernist 
minimalism, the disability sign uses simple lines and circles to represent 
the wheelchair and the human figure, similar to designs that appear on 
equipment warnings and other hazards. In contrast, the circle and slash 
sign projects some hierarchy by confining images (cigarettes, cameras) 
within the circle and typically behind the slash. On the other hand, in its 
context of use, the disability sign and the circle and slash hardly lack visual 
presence: as public information signs, they must stand out among com-
peting images, and in that respect, they are perceptually hierarchical in 
relation to their environment and other messages that inundate airports, 
museums, and other public spaces. 
Data graphical strategies
As a chart genre, the rank chart in Figure 4 focuses on visualizing hier-
archy, and its design is driven towards that end, using a vertical scale to 
position data. For other chart genres that aren’t intrinsically hierarchical, 
conventions also guide the designer’s decisions. Figure 11 shows these con-
ventional arrangement strategies for a pie chart, with segments gradually 

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 271 
shrinking clockwise around the pie, and for a bar chart, with values dimin-
ishing from left to right across the plot frame. These conventional (but dis-
cretionary) arrangement strategies simplify the reader’s interpretation by 
positioning values on a continuous scale, enhancing comparison; depend-
ing on the nature of the data, they can also engender an emotional response 
by emphasizing the dominant categories relative to the weaker ones. On 
a perceptual level, Edward Tufte (1990) outlines many other strategies for 
addressing ‘flatland’ through ‘layering and separation’ by using colour, 
textures, and other design elements in data design (pp. 53–65). Nathan 
Yau also advocates graphical variation to create visual hierarchy (pp. 202– 
205).
On the non-hierarchical end of the spectrum in Figure 10 we might 
position the Isotype data displays of Otto Neurath (1939), with their 
machine-like repetition of iconic forms that epitomizes flat data visuali-
zation. As an expression of modernism and perceptual efficiency, Isotype 
democratized data design and its dissemination and eschewed inequity, 
visually or politically (see Lupton 1986). A homogenizing effect is also cre-
ated by visualizing data as mere dots on a coordinate plot (e.g. scatterplots, 
dot charts). Polar arrangements of data (e.g. wind roses and radar charts) 
also tend to diminish irregularities in a data set, though the disparities 
visible in Florence Nightingale’s charts of military hospital deaths created 
a powerful argument for reform (Brasseur 2005). 
Textual strategies 
Text designers also use a panoply of conventional strategies for creating 
hierarchies of information. Levels of headings in a newsletter, report, or 
website provide immediate hierarchical structure for readers, with the 
largest, boldest (and perhaps centred) headings creating the highest level, 
followed by cascading levels of subordination. These conventions pervade 
the Fact book in Figure 2, which uses a variety of headings to invoke hierar-
chical structure, beginning with the system of tabs, a conventional feature 
of reference books that provides macro-level accessibility. Conversely, lists 
tend to flatten and homogenize text: information in phone books, directo-
ries, bus timetables, indexes, and the like blend seamlessly together unless 
specific values are singled out for attention with spot colour or bolding. 
And in the middle of the spectrum, footnotes are arranged in lists but also 
indicate subordinate information, a convention deployed frequently in the 
Fact book to clarify details in tables. 
Interpretive caveat: situational variables
So the socializing effects of conventions have a  profound hold on us, 
directing how we create and interpret almost any kind of information 
design. Still, each situation or interaction is different, and the outcome of 
deploying or interpreting visual conventions is tied specifically to those sit-
uations, both their immediate physical context and their personal, social, 
Figure 11
Conventional 
strategies for 
creating hierarchy 
in pie charts and 
bar charts.

272 / Charles Kostelnick
272 / Charles Kostelnick
and cultural context. If I encounter the circle and slash sign prohibiting me 
from walking on the grass in a park, and it’s a rainy day, the command may 
go unnoticed because it lacks both visibility and relevance, whereas on 
a sunny day I might find it laudable, inconvenient, or innocuous, depend-
ing on my point of view. Or the Bloomberg.com rank chart of gas prices 
(Figure 5) might strike me differently if I encounter it immediately before 
a long car trip or after an oil spill or a conflict in the Middle East. So while 
conventional visual language provides a reliable framework for interpret-
ation, other factors may shape an audience’s encounters in ways the con-
vention-bound designer cannot foresee. 
Still, none of that situational flux can diminish the underlying collec-
tive effects of conventions on their communities of users. The inescapable 
presence of conventions both enriches and circumscribes interpretation 
by socializing and streamlining it. 
Conclusion
Information design is a fluid process, mediated constantly by an array of 
conventions that regularizes visual language. In the hands of their collec-
tive users, conventions have many different methods of development, 
marked by twists and turns in their genealogies, whether the convention 
is emerging or well established. Depending on the size and constitution 
of the community of users, conventions might have a vast or a modest 
currency, fluctuations of which determine their level of stability and their 
longevity or transience. Some communities (a corporation, a nonprofit) 
might be comparatively short-lived and fleeting, while others (disciplines, 
whole cultures) might provide ballast for decades or centuries. Either way, 
at any given moment, conventions create a necessary and salutary illusion 
of stability amid an ever fluctuating sea of information design. They are 
the instruments and engines of usability, affording ready, continuous, and 
often felicitous engagement with a world teeming with information.
References
Agicola, Georgius. 1556. De re metallica. Basil: Froben. 
Aristotle. 2007. On rhetoric: a theory of civic discourse. 
Trans. G. A. Kennedy. 2nd edn. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Barton, Ben F., and Marthalee S. Barton. 1993. ‘Modes 
of power in technical and professional visuals.’ 
Journal of Business and Technical Communication 
7: 138–62.
Bazerman, Charles. 1988. Shaping written knowledge: 
the genre and activity of the experimental article 
in science. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin 
Press. 
Böckler, Georg Andreas. 1673. Theatrum machinarum 
novum. Nuremburg: P. Fürsten.
Brasseur, Lee. 2005. ‘Florence Nightingale’s 
visual rhetoric in the rose diagrams.’ Technical 
Communication Quarterly 14: 161–82. 
Brinton, Willard C. 1914. Graphic methods for 
presenting facts. New York: Engineering 
Magazine Company.
Clark, Jeff. 26 February 2013. ‘Obesity around the 
world.’ Interactive slopegraph. Neoformix website. 
<http://neoformix.com/Projects/ObesitySlope/>.
Friendly, Michael. 2008. ‘The golden age of statistical 
graphics.’ Statistical Science 23 (4): 502–35.
Fry, Ben. 2013. ‘Salary vs. performance: what baseball 
teams are spending their money well, and how 
does it change over the course of a season?’ 

Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 273 
Social and cultural aspects of visual conventions / 273 
Interactive rank chart. <http://benfry.com/
salaryper/>.
Funkhouser, H. Gray. 1937. ‘Historical development 
of the graphical representation of statistical data.’ 
Osiris 3: 269–404.
Gannett, Henry, and the US Census Office. 1898. 
Statistical atlas of the United States, based upon 
results of the eleventh census. Washington: GPO.
Hewes, Fletcher W., and Henry Gannett. 1883. 
Scribner’s statistical atlas of the United States. New 
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Iowa State University Office of Institutional Research. 
2014. Iowa State University fact book: 2013–14. 
<http://www.ir.iastate.edu/factbkhome14.html>.
Kimball, Miles A. 2016. ‘Mountains of wealth, rivers 
of commerce: Michael G. Mulhall’s graphics and 
the imperial gaze.’ In Visible numbers: essays on 
the history of statistical graphics, edited by Miles 
A. Kimball and Charles Kostelnick, 127–52. 
Farnham: Ashgate. 
Kinross, Robin. 1985. ‘The rhetoric of neutrality.’ 
Design Issues 2 (2): 18–30.
Kostelnick, Charles. 2016. ‘Mosaics, culture, and 
rhetorical resiliency: The convoluted genealogy 
of a data display genre.’ In Visible numbers: essays 
on the history of statistical graphics, edited by Miles 
A. Kimball and Charles Kostelnick, 177–206. 
Farnham: Ashgate. 
Kostelnick, Charles, and Michael Hassett. 2003. 
Shaping information: the rhetoric of visual 
conventions. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois 
University Press.
Kress, Gunther, and Theo van Leeuwen. 1996. 
Reading images: the grammar of visual design. 
London: Routledge.
Lupton, Ellen. 1986. ‘Reading Isotype.’ Design Issues 
3 (2): 47–58.
Mackiewicz, Jo. 2007. ‘Perceptions of clarity and 
attractiveness in PowerPoint graph slides.’ 
Technical Communication 54 (2): 145–56. 
Miller, Carolyn R. 1984. ‘Genre as social action.’ 
Quarterly Journal of Speech 70 (2): 151–67. 
Modley, Rudolf. 1937. How to use pictorial statistics. 
New York: Harper.
Mulhall, Michael G. 1898/1909. The dictionary of 
statistics. 4th edn. London: G. Routledge and 
Sons. 
Neurath, Otto. 1936. International picture language: 
the first rules of Isotype. London: Kegan Paul, 
Trench, Trubner & Co.
Neurath, Otto. 1939. Modern man in the making. New 
York: Knopf.
Playfair, William. 1801. The statistical breviary; 
shewing, on a principle entirely new, the resources 
of every state and kingdom in Europe. London: 
T. Bensley.
Randall, Tom, Alex McIntyre, and Associates for 
International Research, Inc. (AIRINC). 2014. 
‘The real cost of filling up: Gasoline prices by 
country.’ Interactive rank chart. Bloomberg.com 
website: Bloomberg Visual Data. <http://www.
bloomberg.com/visual-data/gas-prices/>. 
Rehabilitation International. 2015. ‘Symbol of 
access.’ Rehabilitation International website. 
<http://www.riglobal.org/symbol-of-access/>.
Swales, John M. 1990. Genre analysis: English in 
academic and research settings. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Transport for London. 2014. ‘Standard Tube 
map.’ <http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/
documents/standard-tube-map.pdf>.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The visual display of 
quantitative information. Cheshire, CT: 
Graphics Press.
Tufte, Edward R. 1990. Envisioning information. 
Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Tufte, Edward R. 2014. ‘Slopegraphs for 
comparing gradients: Slopegraph theory 
and practice.’ <http://www.edwardtufte.
com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg_
id=0003nk>.
Walker, Francis A., and the US Census Office. 1874. 
Statistical atlas of the United States based on the 
results of the ninth census 1870. New York: Julius 
Bien.
Yau, Nathan. 2013. Data points: visualization that 
means something. Indianapolis, IN: John Wiley. 


275
Textual reading on paper and 
screens
Implications for design
Anne Mangen
For centuries, reading has primarily referred to engaging with text printed on 
the physical substrate of paper. In the transition from print to screen, reading is 
dispersed to an increasing number of devices with different affordances such as 
e-readers based on electronic ink display technology, LCD touchscreen tablets, 
and smart phones. Does it make a difference that the text we read is displayed 
on a screen instead of paper, and that we click and scroll, or tap and swipe on 
touchscreens, rather than flick and turn paper pages in a book? Defining reading 
as human–technology interaction, this chapter addresses questions concerning 
the impact of digitization on cognitive and emotional aspects of reading. By 
reference to ecological psychology (the theory of affordances), insights from the 
paradigm of embodied cognition, and recent theoretical and empirical research 
on print and screen reading, the chapter discusses some ways in which reading 
on screen differs from reading on paper, and outlines potential implications of 
such differences for reading research and information design.
Introduction: the rapidly changing interfaces  
of reading
What is ‘reading’? And how does it change and evolve as we go from the 
hegemony of print and what book historian Adriaan van der Weel (2011) 
has called ‘the order of the book’, to a digital reading paradigm in which 
paper is replaced with screen-based devices displaying a variety of tech-
nological features? These are questions of increasing importance across 
a range of scholarly disciplines, of which the field of information design, 
together with different strands of reading research, is arguably in a posi-
tion to occupy centre stage. 
Overall, the transition of reading from page to screen has been the 
subject of much theoretical and empirical scrutiny, engaging scholars and 
scientists from a number of research paradigms. Frequently studied topics 
include navigation and cognitive load in hypertext reading (see DeStefano 
and LeFevre 2007 for an overview); implications of multimodality (i.e. the 
combination and juxtaposition of different semiotic modalities – e.g. writ-
ten text, images, animation, sound) for literacy practices in educational 
contexts (Jewitt 2006; Jewitt and Kress 2003; Kress 2010; Page 2010); and 
applying cognitive theory of multimedia to aspects of reading and learning 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 275–289
16

276 / Anne Mangen
(Mayer 2005, 2009). However, there is less research addressing the impli-
cations of the digitization of linear, ‘monomodal’ (i.e. written) text and 
whether, how, and to what extent it may make a difference if such texts 
are read on paper or on various kinds of screens. For instance, if we read 
Jonathan Franzen’s Freedom on an e-reader such as a Kindle, is our experi-
ence any different than if we had read the novel in a print pocketbook? Do 
we remember and understand the content of an essay, or a science article, 
differently when we read them in a print textbook compared to on a touch-
screen tablet, an e-ink e-reader, or a laptop? 
Despite increasing e-book sales, many readers say that they still prefer 
to read on paper, and that they tend to print out digital documents – espe-
cially if the texts are long and seem to require focus and concentration 
to read such as study reading of long, linear texts (Liu 2006; Shelburne 
2009; Hillesund 2010; Pattuelli and Rabina 2010; Woody, Daniel, and 
Baker 2010; Bradford 2012; Slater 2010; Foasberg 2011). The fact that this 
holds even for younger readers, who can be assumed to be ‘digital natives’ 
(Rogers, Usher, and Kaznowska 2011; Kim and Kim 2013), contributes to 
casting doubt about the reliability of claims about a new generation dis-
playing entirely different cognitive capabilities, medium preferences, and 
expectations (for critical reviews on the ‘digital natives’ research litera-
ture, see, e.g. Bennett and Maton 2010; Bennett, Maton, and Kervin 2008; 
Helsper and Eynon 2010; Jones et al. 2010). 
Whether, and to what extent, medium preferences and reading per-
formance on paper vs. screens are matters of habituation and experience 
with technology, are empirical questions. As schools are supplementing 
and occasionally replacing print textbooks with digitized materials, these 
questions are of immediate importance. Developing the necessary know-
ledge platform on which such decisions ought to be based requires, most of 
all, carefully designed empirical investigations enabling reliable measures 
of potential effect of medium-specific affordances on a variety of cognitive 
and emotional aspects of reading. Scholars and scientists from a number 
of disciplines have begun shedding light on some of these issues, but much 
remains to be done.
Among the studies comparing the effects of digitization on cognitive 
aspects of linear text reading, such as reading comprehension or metacog-
nition, some have found that reading on paper led to better performance 
than reading on computer screen (Mangen, Walgermo, and Brønnick 
2013; Kim and Kim 2013; Wästlund et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2014). Other 
studies have found little or no difference (Margolin et al. 2013; Rockinson-
Szapkiw et al. 2013), or that the difference is related to readers’ subjective 
rather than objective performance (Holzinger et al. 2011; Kretzschmar et 
al. 2013; Rose 2011). The fact that studies differ significantly with respect 
to a number of factors (e.g. the text/reading material [e.g. the length and 
genre of the text]; the device [e.g. size and functions of screens]; task 
assignment or purpose of reading; instruments and measures), makes 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 277 
it difficult to compare findings, and to arrive at an overall assessment of 
potential effects. As a consequence, we know far more about cognitive 
load in hypertext reading and navigation, and about the processing of mul-
timedia representations, than we know about potential effects of digitiza-
tion on cognitive and emotional aspects of linear text reading.
This comparative neglect needs to be addressed urgently, claims van 
der Weel, because, despite appearances to the contrary, ‘the digital sub-
strate has lent text a new and unfamiliar aspect’ (2011, 4):
Even if text as a modality remains constant, its materialization as a medium 
has taken a variety of forms. . . . While the social significance of the textual 
mediums [sic; i.e. the different media which can store and represent the 
modality of text – e.g. book; computer; tablet] is huge, its impact has been 
studied – perhaps even noticed – less than that of the so-called ‘mass media’. 
(Van der Weel 2011, 4, 11–12; my italics) 
As van der Weel further points out, the long-lasting hegemony of print 
may have rendered us oblivious to the fact that the book is, itself, an effi-
cient, pliable, and remarkably resilient ‘reading machine’. It has a clearly 
defined user interface which includes, materially, 
the form of the codex (which unlike the scroll allows browsing) with its 
characteristic rectangles of text, surrounded by white; the reading direction, 
both of the lines on the pages and of the pages in the book; the presence of 
such ordering elements as page numbers, table of contents and index; the 
canonical order of the elements that make up a book; and the presence of 
identifying title, author, and other publication data on the binding, the cover, 
the title page, the colophon (or reverse title page). (Van der Weel 2011, 187)
A digital screen display yields textual configurations that may target and 
tax attentional resources, and sensorimotor, perceptual, and cognitive 
mechanisms, differently than a fixed, print text on the physical substrate 
of paper. Going beyond the merely visual aspects of the text displayed 
on-page/on-screen, such changes reveal that reading involves less com-
monly acknowledged sensory modalities such as ergonomics and, more 
precisely, haptics and tactile feedback. Disclosing additional features of 
the interface meriting attention, such a broadened perspective on reading 
may also have important implications for design. Not limited to aspects 
pertaining to the visual and perceptual processes involved in reading, 
designing optimal user interfaces entails taking into account also the 
materiality and the ergonomic affordances of the device, and how these, 
in turn, are tuned to interact with audio-visual affordances to provide 
appropriate support and an optimal reading experience. In this respect, 
reading researchers and information designers find themselves facing 
similar challenges. Hence, prospects for mutually constructive theoretical 
and methodological development derived from closer and more frequent 
interdisciplinary collaboration and exchange have, arguably, never been 
more promising.

278 / Anne Mangen
Reading is human–technology interaction
A starting point and launching pad for such an interdisciplinary endeavour 
could simply be to remind ourselves of the fact that reading, at bottom, is 
human–technology interaction. As such, reading entails a human being 
with a body (and, in particular, with fingers and hands), a mind-brain, 
a configuration of sensory modalities (such as sight, hearing, touch, bal-
ance, and smell), as well as a set of more or less idiosyncratic reading and 
technology habits, preferences, and experiences. Moreover, whenever we 
read a text (whether a novel or a newspaper article), we read for some 
purpose (leisure or work/study), and we engage with a text implemented 
and displayed on a device (e.g. an e-reader, a tablet, or a print book). This 
device, in turn, has an interface with certain material, technical, audio-
visual, and ergonomic affordances – that is, possibilities for interaction 
and use (as the notion of affordances is central to this chapter, it will be 
further elaborated below). 
Screen-based devices present us with interfaces that are different from 
that of paper-based print technologies. The current transition from a par-
adigm of reading based on the substrate of paper, to a reading paradigm 
defined by the affordances of screens, requires most of all an account of 
the materiality (i.e. the tangibility and tactility) of the different parts of 
the interface with which we interact. We can do different things with 
a mobile digital device than with a print pocket book, and we manually 
handle a  desktop computer differently from an e-reader. Any reading 
device, whether paper- or screen-based, entails certain medium-specific, 
mechanical, material, technological features. Defining the user interface 
of the device, these features provide a backbone and experiential frame-
work for a reader’s sensorimotor/ergonomic, attentional, cognitive, and 
emotional engagement with the text displayed. Reading, therefore, entails 
more than meets the eye; the ways in which the reader interacts ergonom-
ically with the device are aspects of reading warranting the attention of 
reading researchers as well as information and graphic designers. 
From semiotic to ergonomic affordances
In order to understand the impact of digitization on reading and to begin 
mapping its implications, we therefore need to carefully consider the 
materiality of reading devices and their potential effect on psychological 
as well as ergonomic aspects. For these purposes, the concept of affor-
dances comes in handy for information design and for reading research in 
all its guises. For the former, and mainly by courtesy of Donald Norman 
(notably, 1988, cf. also 1990, 1993, 1999), affordances is a commonplace 
concept for theoretical as well as practical concerns. For the latter, how-
ever, it has rarely been part of the terminology or focus of interest except 
in the recent ‘multimodality turn’ in parts of reading and literacy research 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 279 
(see, e.g. Jewitt 2008; Jewitt 2010; Jewitt and Kress 2010). In this research 
paradigm, the compound notion of ‘modal affordances’ is synonymous 
with semiotic resources – or means of meaning-making:
Semiotic resources are the actions, materials and artifacts we use for commu-
nicative purposes, whether produced physiologically – for example, with our 
vocal apparatus, the muscles we use to make facial expressions and gestures 
– or technologically – for example, with pen and ink, or computer hardware 
and software – together with the ways in which these resources can be 
organized. Semiotic resources have a meaning potential, based on their past 
uses, and a set of affordances based on their possible uses, and these will be 
actualized in concrete social contexts where their use is subject to some form 
of semiotic regime. (Van Leeuwen 2005, 285)
Hence, the concern with materiality in semiotic approaches is more closely 
tied to the production side, rather than the consumption – reading – side 
of communication and design. The function, impact, and applicability 
of affordances to ergonomic aspects of reading remain topics in need of 
scholarly attention, in semiotics as well as in other approaches to commu-
nication and meaning-making.
Outside the semiotics-oriented approach to reading and literacy, 
research on reading has been focusing on the visual, perceptual, and 
cognitive processing of text – on different levels of scrutiny. The physical 
medium and the features of the technological interface with and through 
which we read, has been considered largely transparent. However, there 
are important aspects pertaining to reading that are not adequately 
accommodated in and addressed by a predominantly visual-cognitive par-
adigm. As technologies change and new interfaces replace old/traditional 
ones, material features of the devices become more visible. In her book 
Writing technology: studies on the materiality of literacy, Christina Haas 
(1996) has made this observation with respect to writing technologies. 
Observing how technology has always been deeply implicated in writing, 
she claims that 
the materiality of writing becomes profoundly obvious when technologies 
change . . . When writers exchange one set of material tools for another – or, 
more accurately, when they add another set of literacy tools to their reper-
toires – aspects of writing are foregrounded that may not have been noticed 
before, including the writer’s physical relationship to texts and the tools of 
text production. (Haas 1996, 24)
With digital technologies, it becomes apparent that the act of reading 
entails also sensorimotor aspects that merit scientific scrutiny. ‘There is 
physicality in reading’, says developmental psychologist and cognitive 
scientist Maryanne Wolf in a recent interview in Scientific American (Jabr 
2013), ‘maybe even more than we want to think about as we lurch into 
digital reading — as we move forward perhaps with too little reflection’. 
The transition from paper to screens is a unique occasion to stop and 

280 / Anne Mangen
ponder the implications of, precisely, the physical, embodied, dimension 
of reading.
In particular, with many of the digital reading devices, we change our 
use of hands (Mangen 2008; Mackey 2007) – for example, when anno-
tating and bookmarking, and navigating and turning pages. Taking note 
of how tactile demands change from one format and reading device to 
another, Margaret Mackey invites the question
whether the activity of the hands is simply a superficial accompaniment of our 
current arrangements of reading, whether the role of the hands is confined 
to the aesthetics of the tactile elements of reading, or whether the use of the 
hands engages the brain in ways that play a constitutive role in the reading 
process. (2007, 112)
The dexterous and seemingly innate nature of our engagement with an 
iPad would be reason alone to revisit the concept of affordances and to 
apply it to the ways in which reading involves, in particular, haptic and 
tactile feedback from devices. Insights from a  key figure in ecological 
psychology, then, may provide a theoretical and conceptual link between 
psychological research on reading, and information design. 
Coined by J. J. Gibson (1979), affordances denote the opportunities for 
action that define, and emerge from, objects, tools, and things in our envi-
ronment. A tenet of Gibson’s ecological psychology is the inextricable and 
seamless coupling of perception and motor action. In order to adequately 
describe this coupling, he introduced the concept of affordances – defined 
as ‘functional, meaningful, and persistent properties of the environment 
. . . for activity’ (Allen, Otto, and Hoffman 2004, 226). Gibson defines per-
ception as inherently involving and dependent on the whole body, ‘a psy-
chosomatic act, not of the mind or of the body, but of a living observer’ 
(Gibson 1979, 239). Psychosomatic perception involves and depends on 
the human somatosensory body beyond the visual modality. In active per-
ceiving, ‘the affordances of things is what gets attended to, not the modal-
ities, qualities, or intensities of the accompanying sensations’ (Gibson 
1979, 289). In other words, affordances are opportunities for action. 
Importantly, the affordances of different reading devices, such as a laptop, 
an e-reader, a surf tablet, or a print book, enable some possibilities for 
sensorimotor-perceptual-cognitive-phenomenological engagement and 
interaction while at the same time, by necessity, constraining others. 
Things and objects in our physical surroundings are imbued with certain 
motor meanings defined by what kinds of actions they afford an organism 
embodying a sensorimotor-perceptual-cognitive nature such as those of 
a human being. For instance, a chair affords sitting on for a human being, 
but not for, say, a horse. Furthermore, it affords sitting on and even stand-
ing on for an adult, while it affords holding on to for support for a baby 
who is about to take its first steps. A pencil affords scribbling for a young 
child, and writing for someone who has learned the skill. However, it 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 281 
affords neither scribbling nor writing, but probably chewing on, for a dog. 
In other words, affordances are defined by an organism’s inherent and 
species-specific effectivities (i.e. capabilities for action). Affordances and 
effectivities are, then, mutually grounded in and supported by regularities 
of the physical structure of the environment as well as by psychosomatic 
structures of the perceiver (Allen, Otto, and Hoffman 2004). 
Material features thus have implications for our mental engagement 
with whatever text we read. Current theories and models of reading and 
of information design primarily focusing on visual and cognitive aspects 
therefore need to be supplemented with knowledge about the ways in 
which what goes on inside the brain is connected with how we use our 
bodies and, in particular, our fingers and hands, to interact with, explore, 
and use objects in our physical surroundings. Such aspects, and their 
potential implications, are comprehensively dealt with in research carried 
out under the auspices of the embodied cognition paradigm. 
Embodied cognition, reading, and design
With the emergence of the cross-disciplinary paradigm of embodied 
cognition, the insistence on the reciprocal and intrinsic coupling of 
perception and everyday action has garnered increasing theoretical 
and empirical support. In large part influenced by the works of the late 
neurobiologist Francisco Varela (Varela, Thompson, and Rosch 1991), 
embodied cognition is a theoretical paradigm which has grown particu-
larly influential in disciplines such as cognitive (neuro)science (Calvo and 
Gomila 2008; Chemero 2009; Shapiro 2010), linguistics and semantics 
(Glenberg 2008a, 2008b; Glenberg et al. 2005; Glenberg et al. 2007; 
Gallese and Lakoff 2005), psychology (Zwaan 2003; Zwaan and Kaschak 
2009; Zwaan and Madden 2005; Zwaan and Taylor 2006), anthropology 
(Csordas 1999), biology (Thompson 2007), and philosophy (in particular 
phenomenology) (Clark 1997, 2008; Gallagher 2005; Noë 2004; for a gen-
eral overview, see Wilson 2002). 
The view that cognition takes place not only in a central system (Fodor 
1983) or a representation- or symbol-processing unit (Clark 1997, 2008), 
but fundamentally in the perceptual and motor systems, has gained trac-
tion and is now a prominent perspective in cognitive science (Calvo and 
Gomila 2008). More precisely, embodied cognition implies that processes 
of (visual, audio, tactile) perception, motor action, and cognition are 
more closely and reciprocally connected than has typically been acknowl-
edged (cf. e.g. Shapiro 2010; Wilson 2002; Gibbs 2005; Calvo and Gomila 
2008; Chemero 2009). Theories of embodiment have received increasing 
empirical support from behavioural and neuroscientific studies (for an 
overview, see Kiefer and Barsalou 2013), suggesting that cognitive pro-
cesses are fundamentally based on a reinstatement of external (percep-
tion) and internal (proprioception, emotion, and introspection) as well 

282 / Anne Mangen
as bodily actions that produce simulations of previous experiences (Kiefer 
and Trumpp 2012).
Adopting a multisensory, embodied approach to reading implies study-
ing the perceptual and cognitive processes of reading as involving sensory 
modalities beyond the visual perception of black marks on the page (or 
screen) and the cognitive processing of the text displayed. While reading, 
the ergonomic affordances of the interface provide ‘experiential texture’ 
to the multisensory reading experience. Texts imprinted on paper pres-
ent a set of sensorimotor contingencies (Noë 2004; O’Regan and Noë 
2001; Noë 2012) that differ from those of texts displayed on a screen. Texts 
printed on the paper substrate are tangible, fixed, and permanent; they 
are physically contiguous with the storage and display medium. In con-
trast, digital texts are intangible and virtual; they are physically separable 
from their display medium. This structure enables digital devices to store 
and display a number of texts (documents; books), allowing exceptional 
portability and access. However, that very flexibility may alter the reader’s 
relation to the text, potentially influencing the reader’s experience of text 
content (Mangen and Kuiken 2014). 
We have barely begun to explore to what extent and under which con-
ditions these subtle differences between print and digital texts influence 
the reading process. Empirical research is required to begin mapping, 
systematically, what kinds of print and digital affordances better support 
the reading of different kinds and genres of texts, for different purposes, 
than others. This is a kind of research that is of immediate relevance also 
for the field of design. More comprehensive knowledge of the interplay 
between aspects of text (e.g. genre, style, length), reading (e.g. purpose, 
level), and material affordances of the substrate may enable the design and 
development of more fine-tuned and resilient interfaces able to accommo-
date a wide range of texts and reading purposes. 
The next section will present some recent empirical research on the 
potential impact of the interface on cognitive and emotional aspects of 
narrative, literary reading. Findings from these experiments indicate that 
the haptic and tactile feedback of the reading device may affect aspects 
of reading. This implies, in turn, that optimal design entails taking into 
consideration also affordances of the hardware of the reading device. 
Narrative reading on paper and iPad
In an experiment carried out with students in Canada, we (Mangen and 
Kuiken 2014) assessed whether the medium (booklet versus iPad) would 
influence readers’ engagement with an emotionally disturbing short story. 
We devised a 2 by 2 between-subjects experiment, with medium (booklet 
and iPad) as one experimental factor and genre instructions (fiction and 
non-fiction) as another. Participants (N = 145) were randomly assigned 
to one of four conditions: (1) print & fiction instructions; (2)  print & 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 283 
non-fiction instruction; (3) iPad & fiction instruction; (4) iPad & non-
fiction instruction. Participants in all conditions read the same short 
narrative text and then completed a series of online questionnaires after 
having read the text. 
The text was identical in all four conditions, but the instruction was 
phrased so as to categorize the text as either fiction or non-fiction. The 
instruction in the fiction condition was as follows: ‘You are about to read 
a literary short story which was featured in the 1995 collection of the Best 
Canadian Short Fiction published by Northern Lights Press, a Toronto-
based independent publisher. Even though the events described may 
seem real, any resemblance to real persons and places is entirely coinci-
dental. Please read the literary text as you would normally read any piece 
of fiction.’ Instructions for subjects in the non-fiction condition read as 
follows: ‘You are about to read a short story which describes an event that 
actually happened. The short story was featured in the Christian Science 
Monitor’s annual review in 1995, and it describes an event that took place 
in Connecticut that same year. Please read the text as you would normally 
read any piece of non-fiction.’
The selected text, titled ‘Murder in the mall’, is based on true events, 
and is adapted from How we die, a book by Sherwin B. Nuland (1994). 
‘Murder in the mall’ is an emotionally disturbing story that blends clinical 
terms and personal recollections in a portrayal of how the eyes of a per-
son who is about to die seem to get an appearance of relief and peace, 
rather than fear, at the moment of transition from being barely alive to 
being clinically dead. More specifically, the text describes a tragic event 
that actually happened, during a busy summer day outside a shopping mall 
in small-town Connecticut. A psychiatric person on probation attacked 
a 9-year old girl and stabbed her to death with a large knife, with a num-
ber of people, including the girl’s mother, as horrified witnesses. In the 
original version, the personal sections of the text are narrated through the 
voice and perspective of the mother, sitting with her dying daughter in her 
arms and observing the changes in her eyes as she is dying. The text has 
been used in previous studies (Appel and Malečkar 2012; Green and Brock 
2000). 
For the present purposes, it should be emphasized that the text in the 
print condition was presented in a booklet (and not a ‘real book’) con-
sisting of 5 letter-size pages stapled in the upper left corner. To make the 
iPad presentation as visually close to the print condition as possible, we 
used the Kindle app for iPad. This allows only page turning by swiping the 
finger across the screen, and not zooming, changing fonts, etc. In addition, 
to further minimize potential disruptions, the iPad screen was locked in 
the ‘portrait’ orientation. 
We used validated scales measuring transportation and narrative en­
gagement – more specifically, Busselle and Bilandzic’s ‘Narrative Engage­
ment Scale’ (2009). This scale measures a number of aspects of narrative 

284 / Anne Mangen
engagement. For example, readers’ empathy/sympathy with characters in 
the story (sample item: ‘At key moments in the story, I felt I knew exactly 
what the characters were going through emotionally’), narrative realism 
and coherence (sample item: ‘The story was logical and convincing’), 
and readers’ sense of transportation into the story and away from their 
physical surroundings here and now (sample item: ‘At times during the 
reading, I completely forgot that I was in the middle of an experiment’). 
In addition, we developed an interface questionnaire assessing readers’ 
sense of the presence/influence of the medium (booklet or iPad) during 
the reading experience (sample items: ‘The booklet/iPad did not have any 
effect on my immersion in the story’; ‘The features of the booklet/iPad 
interfered with my involvement in the story’ (reverse-coded); and ‘The 
physical features of the booklet/iPad captured my attention during read-
ing’ (reverse-coded)). 
Results showed that, regardless of genre instructions, readers in the 
iPad condition reported having a poorer grasp of the text length and of 
where they were in the text as a whole, than readers in the booklet con-
dition (sample items: ‘The length of the text was unclear to me’; ‘I knew 
how much of the text I had read at all times’ [reverse-scored]). This find-
ing replicates evidence from other research indicating that readers lose 
their sense of where they are in the text when reading on screen (Mangen, 
Walgermo, and Brønnick 2013; Wästlund 2007). 
On the self-report measure of narrative engagement, one group revealed 
a different pattern than the other groups – namely, those reading the text as 
non-fiction in the print booklet. On three of the subscales emerging from 
our psychometric work (namely sympathy with characters in the story; 
narrative logic and coherence; transportation into the story), non-fiction 
booklet readers reported higher values than readers in the three other 
conditions. In other words, those reading the text as non-­fiction on paper, 
reported a higher degree of sympathy with the characters; they reported 
that they had a clearer picture of the logic of the story and that it appeared 
as highly coherent to them; and they reported a higher degree of transpor-
tation into the story (Mangen and Kuiken 2014).
While keeping in mind the limitations of self-report measures, the 
findings from this experiment indicate that substrate affordances (in this 
case, of paper booklet vs. LCD touchscreen on an iPad) may play a role not 
only for cognitive aspects of reading, but also for emotional engagement 
during narrative reading. This holds even if the text is relatively short, and 
is presented as visually ‘identical’ in the two media displays as possible 
(by locking the dynamic features of the iPad). Secondly, the findings point 
to the importance of acknowledging that the substrate of paper may also 
have certain kinds of influence when implemented in a booklet and not 
a more congenial configuration comparable to a ‘proper’ book. A booklet 
consisting of sheets of letter-sized paper stapled in the corner is not the 
typical literary reading interface. Instead, it can be assumed to be more 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 285 
reminiscent of, for instance, article reading. This fact may at least partly 
explain why readers in the booklet non-fiction condition reported higher 
levels of transportation, empathy/sympathy, and narrative coherence. For 
readers in the booklet non-fiction condition, the format may have been 
a better match with the content (for example, a sad news story describ-
ing a tragic event that actually happened), whereas the same format may 
have disrupted a sense of immersion and transportation for booklet fiction 
readers. Analogously, it may make a difference whether a text is read in 
a pocket book versus in hardcover. Materiality matters – and it matters 
beyond the paper versus screen or e- versus p-book distinction. 
The same goes for the substrate of screens per se: our iPad-­experiment 
does not allow any claims regarding reading on a Kindle. There are many 
differences between the affordances of an iPad touchscreen and the 
affordances of a Kindle screen based on electronic ink. Studies compar-
ing the visual ergonomics of different display technologies indicate that 
reading on screens based on electronic ink is very similar to reading on 
paper, and that e-readers such as Kindle may even in some reading sit-
uations provide better legibility than that of paper (Siegenthaler et al. 
2011), whereas research comparing conventional screens (i.e. CRT or LCD 
screens) typically find that features such as flickering, backlighting etc. 
cause visual fatigue which, in turn, might impede higher-level cognitive 
processes such as recall and comprehension (Garland and Noyes 2004; 
Noyes and Garland 2008; Baccino 2004; Blehm et al. 2005). Whether such 
differences in visual ergonomics between electronic ink and LCD/back-
lit screens correlate with, or even cause, differences pertaining to other 
aspects of literary reading, such as empathy and sympathy, immersion and 
transportation, and other forms of emotional engagement, remains to be 
empirically established.
Narrative reading on paper and Kindle
To begin to address the latter issue, as well as questions concerning the 
particular haptic and tactile feedback of a proper print book, we designed 
another study (Mangen et al., in prep.). In this experiment, we compared 
the reading of a longer text, a mystery short story by Elizabeth George, 
called ‘Lusting for Jenny, inverted’ (George 2010) on Kindle and in a ‘real’, 
print pocket book. The text was almost 30 pages long, and was matched 
across conditions for length and page-by-page appearance. Fifty students 
participated; they all read the same story and then answered a battery of 
questions after reading, measuring their transportation into the story as 
well as their comprehension and recall. In particular, we were interested 
in the participants’ ability to reconstruct the temporality of the story from 
memory, after reading. Hence, we asked participants to reconstruct the 
plot from memory, by sorting a number of plot segments in the correct 
order. Results showed that those who had read the story in the print 

286 / Anne Mangen
pocket book, were better than the Kindle readers on this task (Mangen 
et al., in prep.). In addition, readers in the paper group gave more correct 
answers than the Kindle readers to questions pertaining to temporality and 
chronology of events in the story. On questions that were related to other 
aspects of the story (e.g. objects; places/locations; characters), there was 
no difference between the groups (Mangen et al., in prep.).
These results indicate that affordances of the digital reading device may 
negatively impact readers’ mental reconstruction of aspects of a narrative 
having to do with time, temporality, and chronology, compared with 
those of print. It seems that the tangibility of paper and the fixity of print, 
the haptic and tactile feedback of the substrate of the print book, may be 
a better support for aspects of cognitive processing, such as keeping track 
of the plot in a mystery short story. We chose a text in which the temporal 
unfolding of events in the story corresponded with their localization in 
the text (e.g. no flashbacks) so that there was a correspondence between 
the spatiotemporal extension of the text and the unfolding of the story, 
or between ‘where in the text’ and ‘when in the story’ events occur. If, 
because of different affordances or because of the lack of permanency 
(and hence less informative tactile feedback) of the e-book pages, readers 
are less confident about where they are in the text corpus (volume) of the 
e-book they might be less able to build a correct internal representation of 
the temporal unfolding of the story, and the chronology of events.
We interpret this as an indication that the sensory-motor assessment of 
the support – in our case, the e-reader and the print pocket book – may 
be related to certain aspects of cognitive processing. The intangibility of 
a text displayed on a Kindle may negatively affect temporal and chrono-
logical orientation. Kindle readers somehow get ‘lost in the physical space 
of the book’ (perhaps due to the lack of fixed markers and less informative 
tactile feedback, as opposed to the physical substrate of paper), and the 
lack of tactile cues on a Kindle may in turn lead to a less precise mental 
representation of the temporality and chronology of the story.
The fixity and spatiotemporal permanence of the substrate of paper, 
then, may play a role in supporting aspects of cognitive processing, but 
more empirical research is required for a more precise understanding of 
the relations between the physical affordances of the substrate, and differ-
ent aspects of cognitive processing. Nevertheless, the role of the hardware 
should be acknowledged in reading research as well as in information 
design. The implications from these two experiments for information 
design could be summarized as follows: in the transition from print to dig-
itized reading, optimal design depends not only on graphic and stylistic 
features, readability, layout, typography, and other (audio)visual aspects of 
text. Haptic and tactile affordances of the hardware – the device on which 
the text is displayed – should also be taken into consideration for optimal 
reading performance. Questions in merit of renewed attention concern 
navigation issues (page turning; browsing), spatiotemporal extension of 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 287 
Textual reading on paper and screens / 287 
the text (how long is it, and what is the relation between spatiotemporal 
dimensions in the text (e.g. the unfolding of a story) and the spatial exten-
sion of the text as displayed on a screen, or on paper. The reading of cer-
tain kinds of texts (whether fictional/literary or expository) may require 
a better grasp of temporal and spatiotemporal aspects; the less informative 
tactile feedback of digital reading devices may negatively affect cognitive 
and/or emotional aspects of reading, for the reading of certain kinds of 
texts, for certain purposes. More empirical research is needed to continue 
to map, more precisely, what kinds of texts and what reading purposes. 
References
Allen, Brock S., Richard G. Otto, and Bob Hoffman. 
2004. ‘Media as lived environments: the 
ecological psychology of educational technology.’ 
In Handbook of research on educational 
communications and technology, 2nd edn, edited 
by David H. Jonassen, 215–241. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Appel, Markus, and Barbara Malečkar. 2012. ‘The 
influence of paratext on narrative persuasion: fact, 
fiction, or fake?’ Human Communication Research 
38 (4): 459–484.
Baccino, Thierry. 2004. La lecture electronique. 
Grenoble: Presses Universitaires de Grenoble.
Bennett, Sue, and Karl Maton. 2010. ‘Beyond 
the “digital natives” debate: towards a more 
nuanced understanding of students’ technology 
experiences.’ Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning 26: 321–331.
Bennett, Sue, Karl Maton, and Lisa Kervin. 2008. 
‘The “digital natives” debate: a critical review 
of the evidence.’ British Journal of Educational 
Technology 39 (5): 775–786.
Blehm, Clayton, Seema Vishnu, Ashbala Khattak, 
Shrabanee Mitra, and Richard W. Yee. 2005. 
‘Computer vision syndrome: a review.’ Survey of 
Ophthalmology 50 (3): 253–262.
Bradford, John William. 2012. ‘A case study 
examining the reading and study habits of 
gifted readers in the context of deep reading.’ 
Doctoral dissertation (EdD), Department 
of Education, Kennesaw State University, 
Georgia, USA.
Busselle, Rick, and Helena Bilandzic. 2009. 
‘Measuring narrative engagement.’ Media 
Psychology 12 (4): 321–347.
Calvo, Paco, and Antoni Gomila (eds). 2008. 
Handbook of cognitive science: an embodied 
approach. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Chemero, Anthony. 2009. Radical embodied cognitive 
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chen, Guang, Wei Cheng, Ting-Wen Chang, Xiaoxia 
Zheng, and Ronghuai Huang. 2014. ‘A comparison 
of reading comprehension across paper, computer 
screens, and tablets: does tablet familiarity 
matter?’ Journal of Computers in Education 1 (1–3): 
213–225.
Clark, Andy. 1997. Being there: putting brain, body, and 
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, Andy. 2008. Supersizing the mind: embodiment, 
action, and cognitive extension. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Csordas, Thomas J. 1999. ‘Embodiment and cultural 
phenomenology.’ In Perspectives on embodiment: 
the intersections of nature and culture, edited by 
Gail Weiss and Honi Fern Haber, 143–162. New 
York: Routledge.
DeStefano, Diana, and Jo-Anne LeFevre. 2007. 
‘Cognitive load in hypertext reading: a review.’ 
Computers in Human Behavior 23 (3): 1616–1641.
Foasberg, Nancy M. 2011. ‘Adoption of e-book 
readers among college students: a survey.’ Infor­
mation Technology and Libraries 30 (3): 108–128.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1983. The modularity of mind: an essay 
on faculty psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gallagher, Shaun. 2005. How the body shapes the 
mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gallese, Vittorio, and George Lakoff. 2005. ‘The 
brain’s concepts: the role of the sensory-motor 
system in conceptual knowledge.’ Cognitive 
Neuropsychology 22 (3/4): 455–479.
Garland, Kate J., and Jan M. Noyes. 2004. ‘CRT 
monitors: do they interfere with learning?’ 
Behaviour & Information Technology 23 (1): 43–52.
George, Elizabeth. 2010. ‘Lusting for Jenny, inverted.’ 
In Two of the deadliest, edited by Elizabeth 
George, 227–254. New York: HarperCollins.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 2005. Embodiment and cognitive 
science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson, James J. 1979. The ecological approach to 
visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Glenberg, Arthur M. 2008a. ‘Embodiment for educa-
tion.’ In Handbook of cognitive science: an embod-
ied approach, edited by Paco Calvo and Antoni 
Gomila, 355–372. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

288 / Anne Mangen
Glenberg, Arthur M. 2008b. ‘Toward the integration 
of bodily states, language, and action.’ In 
Embodied grounding: social, cognitive, affective, 
and neuroscientific approaches, edited by Gün R. 
Semin and Eliot R. Smith, 43–70. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Glenberg, Arthur M., David Havas, Raymond Becker, 
and Mike Rinck. 2005. ‘Grounding language in 
bodily states.’ In Grounding cognition: the role of 
perception and action in memory, language, and 
thinking, edited by Diane Pecher and Rolf A. 
Zwaan, 115–128. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Glenberg, Arthur M., Beth Jaworski, Michal Rischal, 
and Joel Levin. 2007. ‘What brains are for: action, 
meaning, and reading comprehension.’ In Reading 
comprehension strategies: theories, interventions, 
and technologies, edited by Danielle S. McNamara, 
221–240. New York and London: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Green, Melanie C., and Timothy C. Brock. 2000. 
‘The role of transportation in the persuasiveness 
of public narratives.’ Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 79 (5): 701–721.
Haas, Christina. 1996. Writing technology: studies on 
the materiality of literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Helsper, Ellen Johanna, and Rebecca Eynon. 2010. 
‘Digital natives: where is the evidence?’ British 
Educational Research Journal 36 (3): 503–520.
Hillesund, Terje. 2010. ‘Digital reading spaces: 
how expert readers handle books, the web and 
electronic paper.’ First Monday 15 (4). <http://
www.firstmonday.org/article/view/2762/2504>.
Holzinger, Andreas, Markus Baernthaler, Walter 
Pammer, Herman Katz, Vesna Bjelic-Radisic, 
and Martina Ziefle. 2011. ‘Investigating paper vs. 
screen in real-life hospital workflows: perfor-
mance contradicts perceived superiority of paper 
in the user experience.’ International Journal of 
Human–Computer Studies 69 (9): 563–570.
Jabr, Ferris. 2013. ‘The reading brain in the digital 
age: the science of paper versus screens.’ Scientific 
American 309 (5): 48–53. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/scientificamerican1113-48>.
Jewitt, Carey. 2006. Technology, literacy and learning: 
a multimodal approach. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Jewitt, Carey. 2008. ‘Multimodality and literacy 
in school classrooms.’ Review of Research in 
Education 32 (1): 241–267.
Jewitt, Carey, ed. 2010. The Routledge handbook of 
multimodal analysis. London: Routledge.
Jewitt, Carey, and Gunther Kress. 2010. 
‘Multimodality, literacy and school English.’ In 
The Routledge international handbook of English, 
language and literacy teaching, edited by Dominic 
Wyse, Richard Andrews and James Hoffman, 
342–353. London: Routledge. 
Jewitt, Carey, and Gunther Kress, eds. 2003. 
Multimodal literacy. New York: Peter Lang.
Jones, Chris, Ruslan Ramanau, Simon Cross, and 
Graham Healing. 2010. ‘Net generation or Digital 
Natives: is there a distinct new generation 
entering university?’ Computers & Education 
54 (3): 722–732.
Kiefer, Markus, and Lawrence W. Barsalou. 2013. 
‘Grounding the human conceptual system 
in perception, action, and internal states.’ In 
Tutorials in action science: foundations of an 
emerging discipline, edited by Wolfgang Prinz, 
Miriam Beisert and Arvid Herwig, 381–408. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kiefer, Markus, and Natalie M. Trumpp. 2012. 
‘Embodiment theory and education: the foun-
dations of cognition in perception and action.’ 
Trends in Neuroscience and Education 1 (1): 15–20.
Kim, Hak, and Joan Kim. 2013. ‘Reading from an 
LCD monitor versus paper: teenagers’ reading 
performance.’ International Journal of Research 
Studies in Educational Technology (IJRSET) 2 (1): 
1–10.
Kress, Gunther. 2010. Multimodality: a social semiotic 
approach to contemporary communication. 
London: Routledge.
Kretzschmar, Franziska, Dominique Pleimling, Jana 
Hosemann, Stephan Füssel, Ina Bornkessel-
Schlesewsky, and Matthias Schlesewsky. 2013. 
‘Subjective impressions do not mirror online 
reading effort: concurrent EEG-eyetracking 
evidence from the reading of books and digital 
media.’ PloS one 8 (2): e56178.
Liu, Ziming. 2006. ‘Print vs. electronic resources: 
a study of user perceptions, preferences, and use.’ 
Information Processing & Management 42 (2): 
583–592.
Mackey, Margaret. 2007. Literacies across media: 
playing the text. 2nd edn. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Mangen, Anne. 2008. ‘Hypertext fiction reading: 
haptics and immersion.’ Journal of Research in 
Reading 31 (4): 404–419.
Mangen, Anne, and Don Kuiken. 2014. ‘Lost in the 
iPad: narrative engagement on paper and tablet.’ 
Scientific Study of Literature 4 (2): 150–177.
Mangen, Anne, Jean-Luc Velay, Pascal Robinet, and 
Gérard Olivier. In prep. ‘Where in the book and 
when in the story? Comparing comprehension 
when reading a mystery story in print and on 
Kindle.’
Mangen, Anne, Bente R. Walgermo, and Kolbjørn 
Brønnick. 2013. ‘Reading linear texts on paper 
vs. computer screens: effects on reading 
comprehension.’ International Journal of 
Educational Research 58: 61–68.
Margolin, Sara J., Casey Driscoll, Michael J. Toland, 
and Jennifer Little Kegler. 2013. ‘E‐readers, 
computer screens, or paper: does reading 

Textual reading on paper and screens / 289 
comprehension change across media platforms?’ 
Applied Cognitive Psychology 27 (4): 512–519.
Mayer, Richard E. 2005. The Cambridge handbook 
of multimedia learning. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Mayer, Richard E. 2009. Multimedia learning. 2nd 
edn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Noë, Alva. 2004. Action in perception, representation 
and mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Noë, Alva. 2012. Varieties of presence. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Norman, Donald A. 1988. The psychology of everyday 
things. New York: Basic Books.
Norman, Donald A. 1990. The design of everyday 
things. New York: Doubleday/Currency.
Norman, Donald A. 1993. Things that make us smart: 
defending human attributes in the age of the 
machine. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Norman, Donald A. 1999. ‘Affordance, conventions, 
and design.’ Interactions 6 (3): 38–43.
Noyes, Jan M., and Kate J. Garland. 2008. ‘Computer- 
vs. paper-based tasks: are they equivalent?’ 
Ergonomics 51 (9): 1352–1375.
Nuland, Sherwin B. 1994. How we die: reflections on 
life’s final chapter. New York: Vintage.
O’Regan, J. Kevin, and Alva Noë. 2001. ‘A sensorimo-
tor account of vision and visual consciousness.’ 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (5): 939–973.
Page, Ruth, ed. 2010. New perspectives on narrative 
and multimodality. New York: Routledge.
Pattuelli, M. Christina, and Debbie Rabina. 
2010. ‘Forms, effects, function: LIS students’ 
attitudes towards portable e-book readers.’ Aslib 
Proceedings: New Information Perspectives 62 (3): 
228–244.
Rockinson-Szapkiw, Amanda J., Jennifer Courduff, 
Kimberly Carter, and David Bennett. 2013. 
‘Electronic versus traditional print textbooks: 
a comparison study on the influence of university 
students’ learning.’ Computers & Education 63: 
259–266.
Rogers, Jason, Alexander Usher, and Edyta 
Kaznowska. 2011. The state of e-learning in 
Canadian universities, 2011: if students are digital 
natives, why don’t they like e-learning? ’ Toronto: 
Higher Education Strategy Associates.
Rose, Ellen. 2011. ‘The phenomenology of on-screen 
reading: university students’ lived experience 
of digitised text.’ British Journal of Educational 
Technology 42 (3): 515–526.
Shapiro, Lawrence A. 2010. Embodied cognition. New 
York: Routledge.
Shelburne, Wendy Allen. 2009. ‘E-book usage in an 
academic library: user attitudes and behavior.’ 
Library Collections, Acquisitions, & Technical 
Services 33: 59–72.
Siegenthaler, Eva, Pascal Wurtz, Per Bergamin, 
and Rudolf Groner. 2011. ‘Comparing reading 
processes on e-ink displays and print.’ Displays 
32 (5): 268–273.
Slater, Robert. 2010. ‘Why aren’t e-books gaining 
more ground in academic libraries? E-book use 
and perceptions: a review of published literature 
and research.’ Journal of Web Librarianship 4 (4): 
305–331.
Thompson, Evan. 2007. Mind in life: biology, 
phenomenology, and the sciences of mind. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Van der Weel, Adriaan. 2011. Changing our textual 
minds: towards a digital order of knowledge. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Van Leeuwen, Theo. 2005. Introducing social 
semiotics. London: Routledge.
Varela, Francisco J., Evan Thompson, and Eleanor 
Rosch. 1991. The embodied mind: cognitive science 
and human experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Wilson, Margaret. 2002. ‘Six views of embodied 
cognition.’ Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 9 (4): 
625–636.
Woody, William Douglas, David B. Daniel, and 
Chrystal A. Baker. 2010. ‘E-books or textbooks: 
students prefer textbooks.’ Computers & 
Education 55: 945–948.
Wästlund, Erik. 2007. ‘Experimental studies of 
human–computer interaction: working memory 
and mental workload in complex cognition.’ 
Doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, 
Gothenburg University.
Wästlund, Erik, Henrik Reinikka, Torsten Norlander, 
and Trevor Archer. 2005. ‘Effects of VDT 
and paper presentation on consumption and 
production of information: psychological and 
physiological factors.’ Computers in Human 
Behavior 21 (2): 377–394.
Zwaan, Rolf A. 2003. ‘The immersed experiencer: 
toward an embodied theory of language 
comprehension.’ In Psychology of Learning and 
Motivation, edited by Brian H. Ross, 44: 35–62. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Zwaan, Rolf A., and Michael P. Kaschak. 2009. 
‘Language in the brain, body, and world.’ In The 
Cambridge handbook of situated cognition, edited 
by Philip Robbins and Murat Aydede, 368–381. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zwaan, Rolf A., and Carol J. Madden. 2005. 
‘Embodied sentence comprehension.’ In 
Grounding cognition: the role of perception and 
action in memory, language, and thinking, edited 
by Diane Pecher and Rolf A. Zwaan, 224–245. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Zwaan, Rolf A., and Lawrence J. Taylor. 2006. 
‘Seeing, acting, understanding: motor resonance 
in language comprehension.’ Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General 135 (1): 1–11.


291
Applying science to design
The quest for the bridging representation 
Andrew Dillon
Scientific progress in understanding the cognitive and perceptual mechanisms 
underlying reading has been substantial, but translating these findings into 
design guidance remains a challenge. The present chapter argues that there is 
a need for a conceptual layer between the research findings of science and the 
design goals of a usable information artefact. Design knowledge is thus posited 
as a representational form that translates between science and practice. One 
example is provided of a multilevel framing that acknowledges reading as both 
a physical and cognitive process, involving different aspects of thought from 
automatic processes to rational decision-making.
More than a century of work on the psychology of reading has provided 
us with numerous insights into the factors that shape the human ability 
to extract meaning from written forms. Moreover, in a remarkable reve-
lation of foresight, recent data from eye movement tracker technologies 
have confirmed what early reading theorists such as Huey (1908) argued 
must be happening when humans read words. The human eye operates 
via a series of ballistic movements, with a perceptual span that captures 
letters in the periphery of the focal point and enables us to extract meaning 
without directly viewing every word. By now we have established reliable 
parameters on typical reading speed and demonstrated the impact of cer-
tain typographic cueing on performance. As evinced by the latest edition 
of Rayner et al.’s Psychology of reading (2012), there is sufficient data on the 
psychological processes underlying reading that merely summarizing the 
research is a major undertaking.
While such progress can rightly be considered an endorsement of the 
scientific approach in general, and the experimental psychology frame-
work in particular, there remains a significant gulf between the research 
base of empirical findings and their application in information design. Not 
only must experimental findings be contextualized, but few experimental 
results directly speak to the decisions being made by designers. 
In the present chapter I will examine the choice of representations we 
may make to bridge between the science base of human performance 
analysis and information design decision-making. While we certainly 
have sufficient knowledge to produce handbooks of design guidelines, 
I propose a best approach for design based on a multilevelled framing of 
human attention and behaviour at the interaction of people and informa-
tion, a form that itself is not intended to represent scientific understanding 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 291–299
17

292 / Andrew Dillon
directly but to assist designer thinking. The goal of this type of HCI research 
is, I would argue, to devise a representation of reading that is true to the 
science (or at a minimum, not in conflict with what we know) and suited 
to framing design decisions for information display. The broader issue of 
how to bridge between science and design in professional education and 
information research is also examined from the perspective of more than 
thirty years of HCI work on improving the human interface to technology.
Science for design
Early efforts at deriving guidelines from cognitive psychology reached 
their zenith in the mid 1980s when Card, Newell, and Moran published 
a seminal work entitled The psychology of human–computer interaction. 
This work presented a quantitative model of the human as information 
processor complete with time estimates for the necessary subtasks that 
formed the building blocks of interactive acts such as perceiving and recog-
nizing, pointing and clicking, and typing which were grouped under a task 
analytic framework termed GOMS (after Goals, Operators, Methods, and 
Selection rules). The aim was to provide designers with an engineering 
orientation that would support the calculation of task performance time 
for an expert user of a given interface. Armed with such, the model could 
be used to test design alternatives without needing to develop a prototype 
or involve users. This was, as the authors claimed, a deliberate attempt at 
using ‘hard’ science to drive out the ‘soft’ approach more typically associ-
ated with traditional user interface design.
While the model human processor approach had significant scholarly 
impact, the response was mostly critical. Academics argued over the value 
of a model that ultimately calculated only time estimates of routine and 
expert-level performance, and even then, only for tasks that involved little 
discretion in execution. Carroll and Campbell (1986), for example, dis-
missed the formal modelling approach to design as too limiting, describing 
it as a promissory note to the future that could never be practically paid. 
Though GOMS analyses of interactions (and the ongoing reaction by 
others to the approach) were a regular theme for many years at HCI con-
ferences, the design community paid little attention to this and it proved 
difficult to find many real world design teams willing to apply the model. 
John and Kieras (1996) report that more than a decade after its original 
publication, people continued to view the technique (rightly or wrongly) 
as the ‘Cadillac’ of design tools, a luxury only to be used where cost was 
no object, effectively ruling it out for most projects. These authors offer 
ten case studies from over a decade of research and application of the 
model but even their examples, selected to support the case for using the 
approach, failed to convince most in the field who to this day continue to 
view GOMS and other formal modelling approaches as limited, difficult to 
use, and time-consuming to learn (Carroll 2000). 

Applying science to design / 293 
As interactive technologies evolved away from fixed desktops and large 
displays, and began to be used less for routine office tasks where efficiency 
of performance was paramount, the model human processor approach 
increasingly appeared too restrictive. Designers aiming to enhance the 
‘user experience’ are seeking broader understanding of human require-
ments for digital tools than speed and accuracy of task completion. 
A case might now be made that formal modelling has renewed potential 
for application in the design of small, mobile devices where keypresses, 
icon selection, and touch are standard and repetitive activities. But the 
combination of perceived limitations and effort to use continue to hamper 
formal modelling’s routine adoption. 
Methods over models
As an alternative to theoretical knowledge packaged for consumption 
and application by designers, methodological approaches to design often 
preach the user-centred mantra of ‘design-test-repeat’, invoking a process 
of continual prototyping and testing until a viable end product results. 
This advice was encapsulated early in the HCI literature (see Norman and 
Draper 1986) and became the trademark of most interaction designers to 
this day. Common to established practices from other design disciplines, 
this approach promises a means of delivering better interfaces without 
needing to draw extensively on the science base of psychology. 
In principle, the iterative design process should move any interactive 
product interface closer to the target goals for usability, assuming that 
appropriate data is collected accurately and reliably from relevant users 
(a methodological matter that itself is not divorced from an understanding 
of the relevant science base). One lesson learned and sometimes in need 
of being relearned by design teams, is that nothing informs usability like 
data from real users. Thus, in the education of new interaction designers 
and HCI professionals, significant training is provided in the variety of 
usability evaluation methods, their respective cost-benefit trade-offs dur-
ing the design process, and the appropriate analysis and interpretation of 
results. Attention is usually also given to determining appropriate design 
advice for improving an interface from the evaluation data, and this step is 
among the most difficult to teach, relying as it does on an ability to trans-
late behavioural or cognitive responses from participants into actionable 
alterations within the user interface. Without this, user-centred design 
becomes a purely empirical endeavour that serves to highlight usability 
problems without offering solutions.
Combining empiricism with theory
While it might appear that theory and empiricism are competing rather 
than complementary approaches as described above, in reality, HCI 

294 / Andrew Dillon
designers are taught principles and methods established both through 
the science base and through the experience of practitioners (see, for 
example, Usability.gov for a wide-ranging treatment of available methods 
and shared experiences aimed at educating designers in the ways of user-­
centredness). So, for example, educators typically advise digital document 
designers that fully justified text layout is best avoided, and the argument 
is based on the view that a ragged edge profile on the right-hand side of 
a text block for English-like languages can offer important cueing infor-
mation to the reader, enabling anticipation of line-ending and the need 
to launch a ballistic eye-moment back to the start of the next line. In such 
a guideline one can trace a specific design recommendation (avoid right 
justification in text) to an explanation based on the scientific knowledge 
of how the human perceptual system functions when reading text. Even 
armed with this principle, designers are advised to test any resulting inter-
face to ensure the intended performance characteristics are being met. 
For many years, HCI operated, at least tacitly, under the belief that with 
sufficient experimentation, we could derive solid translations of science 
for application within design. If the formal modelling approach was not 
going to deliver, then at least with some stability in interface styles assured 
by the widespread adoption of GUI standards within the marketplace, a set 
of psychologically justifiable recommendations for layout, form, colour, 
navigation, and manipulation could be derived. Coupled with appropriate 
empirical methods for quick and reliable testing, the promise of usability 
within every interface could be delivered. Several decades later, it appears 
that despite the promise, too many products still fail to provide the type 
of user experience we would want. This state of affairs should give design 
educators pause, and encourage us to assess our efforts at codifying and 
representing good design principles and practices.
Trying to build the bridge between science and design:  
the example of reading
Carroll and Kellogg (1989, 13) noted that ‘it may be simplistic to imagine 
deductive relations from science to design but it would be bizarre if there 
were no relation at all’. So why then, has science proved so problematic 
when applied to practical design problems? In as much as people accept 
that science needs translation for use in design, there is much evidence 
that our efforts at translation are not particularly effective (see e.g. 
Mieczakowski et al. 2013). Explanations of cognitive and perceptual pro-
cesses seem particularly challenging to convey in a language and form that 
do not require familiarity with formal psychological knowledge and yet 
we are trying to shape activities and outcomes that are themselves, while 
reliant on human psychology, commonly understood and discussed in 
non-technical terms. 
As I have noted (Dillon 2004), perhaps the major problem for translating 

Applying science to design / 295 
scientific studies into design guidance is the absence of an appropriate rep-
resentation of the human aspects of the tasks that our designs are trying to 
support. When one examines the research literature on reading, it presents 
the act as a highly controlled process, usually involving the quick process-
ing of short text samples in the pursuit of meaning or the identification of 
errors. Consequently, we have a significant body of knowledge concerning 
how eyes move, how long it takes to determine if a sentence makes sense, 
or how fast people can read when trying to identify spelling mistakes or get 
a gist of meaning. At the other extreme is research on people finding their 
way around large, connected document spaces in search of target informa-
tion, which has given us insights into how structure is perceived and how 
well people can use cues to navigate large text spaces. But even now, sci-
entists struggle to define ‘reading’ and often disagree over the boundaries 
of what is or is not to be considered under this term (Rayner et al. 2012). 
In one sense, we should not be surprised by the lack of agreement on 
what constitutes reading, as it is a complex psychophysiological act involv-
ing multiple processes extended across time in disparate environments. 
Thus, reading a novel in your bedroom is quite different from checking 
the latest sports scores on your mobile phone while walking outdoors. If 
reading is to include every act reasonably described using that label by 
a lay person, then any field would be challenged to develop an agreeable 
and meaningful definition. No wonder then that most definitions resort 
to simple commonalities involving the extraction of meaning from visual 
stimuli. Every form of reading involves meaning extraction from visual 
stimuli. But when most of us think of the act of reading, we imagine it as 
more than just this.
When wrestling with the options for presenting and controlling a digi-
tal document, the number of parameters to be considered makes inter-
pretation of the science base difficult. If one’s only concern is with the 
question of which fonts to avoid, or how to meet minimum requirements 
for image quality, then precise guidance from the research can be derived 
(though only if one knows it exists in the first place, a separate and rather 
thorny problem of its own). Guideline handbooks and websites are full of 
such principles. But as many interface design professionals know, there 
is a compliance contradiction inherent with many sets of guidelines – in 
such a way that following individual guidelines can result in an aggregate 
design that is oddly unusable.
The crux of this problem is representing human activity in a cohesive 
manner for design purposes. Science makes progress by decomposition 
and this is evident in the approaches of psychologists to describing human 
behaviour. Newell and Card (1985) explicitly argue that there is an upper 
and lower bound on information processing approaches to cognition that 
enable it to offer useful explanations for acts of between 0.1 and 10 seconds 
duration; anything shorter being the realm of biology, anything longer the 
purview of rational behaviour and social science. Their neat partitioning 

296 / Andrew Dillon
of human engagement with the world posits layers reflecting the standard 
divisions of academic psychology into physiology, perception, cognition, 
and social interaction (we may argue the terms but the divisions are essen-
tially standard).
Most design guidelines derived from science are the product of a focus 
on the 0.1 to 10 seconds layer of Card, Moran, and Newell (1983), often 
interpreted as if human behaviour at this level operates independently of 
human activities at the other levels. Moreover, there is perhaps the belief 
in some that the accumulation of findings from this level, if combined, 
would fully or largely determine the user response to any interface which 
embodied the findings in its design. Thus, if we apply the findings on image 
quality determined by Gould et al. (1987) which explained the impact of 
font type, resolution, and polarity on reading speed, with the findings of 
Dyson and Kipping (1998) on people’s willingness to read scrolling text, it 
would appear we have a recipe for presenting more than a screen of text 
that will satisfy most users. Of course, one does not have to think too hard 
to imagine realistic reading scenarios where such a design might prove less 
than adequate. 
Regardless of how academic science might define reading, for most 
people the act involves a  range of engagements across all time-based 
boundaries of information processing. We certainly move our eyes law-
fully across visual stimuli but we also pick documents up and bend back 
pages, we angle a screen to aid visibility and scroll rapidly past targets. We 
jump from page to page, forward and backward and interpret what we are 
reading in the context of what is happening in our lives at that moment. 
We link ideas together in ways that go beyond the immediate textual sig-
nals, put texts down while we scratch ourselves and then sometimes have 
to remind ourselves where we were when we pick the task (and text) up 
again. And we can do all this in completely different environments, while 
performing some other tasks, while moving, while lying down, while pre-
tending to listen to someone talking to us, and when in a hurry to get to 
the end of a document as often as when leisurely reading for fun. We read 
for knowledge, for entertainment, for instructions, to monitor the world, 
or to check on a detail. While it is impossible to anticipate the full range 
of acts any one user can engage in with a designed digital space, when we 
design for ‘reading’ we must attend to more than is suggested by scientific 
models of this process.
Representation as missing link
Such a richer description of reading has face validity, it makes sense to us in 
our world, but how can we exploit this to inform design? We need a form 
of representation of human activity that serves design better than current 
forms. To obtain such might require us to invert the normal relationship 
of building bottom-up from science to design, and to consider theorizing 

Applying science to design / 297 
from a perspective of the designer making decisions on plausible options. 
In other words, while the principles derived from science are invaluable, 
they are not, as typically expressed, articulated in a form that can be used 
meaningfully or directly in design. What we need is a framing of human 
activity (in this case ‘reading, broadly conceived) that allows us to make 
justifiable claims about what will or will not work in a given context. 
Design education emphasizes processes and, to a lesser extent, princi-
ples (see e.g. Lawson 1980). This is actually a logical strategy faced with 
dynamic contexts and multiple means of achieving a desirable outcome. 
This approach also makes the empiricism of typical user-centred design 
methods very comfortable for many designers (though it must be acknowl-
edged that there is still an uphill struggle to have usability evaluations 
incorporated into routine design). But the ‘try it and see’ philosophy of 
user-centred design methods offers no assurances that design targets will 
be met. Translating the findings of a test into actionable design changes 
requires a certain level of skill that is often missing in typical HCI education 
also. Even where the skill exists, the need to cycle through test and refine-
ment stages might itself prove costly. Further, guiding the process towards 
improvement is likely easier if one can draw reliable interpretations from 
the science base to guide interpretation of results.
An appropriate representation of reading for design purposes would 
serve as a means for both shortening the space between the science and 
design, but perhaps more importantly, provide designers with a framing 
of the reading process that speaks to the choices they need to make more. 
I believe this is now more urgent than further refining principles from sci-
ence. In essence, it is the delivery of a design language that helps us think 
appropriately of the dynamics involved in human action. I proposed the 
‘TIMEframe’ representation (Dillon 2004) as one such attempt for digital 
document designers and I’ve taught this to generations of students stud-
ying HCI. The ‘TIMEframe’ posits four levels of concern for any designer 
to address: the visual ergonomics, the manipulation tools, the structural 
model the user forms, and the task constraints of the reader. The purpose 
of the tool is to focus attention on interacting elements of the reading 
process for which we have some scientific understanding while acknowl-
edging that the reader’s focus will shift across these elements (thus giving 
importance to one or other) throughout the task. 
Full details of the representation are presented in Dillon (2004) includ-
ing worked examples of how it might be employed. The point here is not 
to revisit the tool but to suggest that what we need in design are more 
such representations that speak directly to the design task, in appropriate 
language, offering a principled manner of constraining choices. This is 
a more important effort than the goal of encapsulating or translating sci-
ence. The design community, perhaps with justification, has been slow to 
articulate models or theories of human actions, presumably viewing these 
as the purview of scientists. However, it is clear that scientists’ attempts 

298 / Andrew Dillon
to package their knowledge into a form for use by designers face their 
own challenges and we should accept that a mainly scientific model is not 
likely the most useful form for enabling design thinking to proceed. Might 
it now be time for designers to create their own models of interaction? 
Such framings would attempt to describe and explain the act of reading (or 
other behaviours) in a way that emphasizes the interactive dynamics and 
interplay of humans and documents in use. 
In so doing, design representations need not seek to attain scientific 
validation, but should achieve reasonable plausibility or face validity. By 
this I mean that design thinkers should articulate descriptions of human 
activity that occupy the broad middle ground between common sense 
(which is often flawed) and scientific credibility (which requires a level 
of analysis and explication that is best left to scientists). Such representa-
tions would make no claims about truth, only about applicability. In other 
words, they should frame the essential elements of the design space that 
must be considered, excluding as much as including those to be addressed, 
and ideally indicate where the science base might be relevant. This should 
be possible without the wholesale adoption of any existing theory or 
model of human performance. Typical representational forms such as 
state transition diagrams or dataflow models offer guidance at functional 
levels and designers can employ these. But what we really require are 
equivalent representational forms for human–computer interaction that 
can be similarly employed to examine the flow of user experience across 
different information use contexts.
In the long run, I do not imagine science will ever guide design as hoped 
for by the formal modelling camp but nor do I imagine scientific findings on 
human performance cannot be applied in a more impactful manner than 
currently occurs. The challenge is less to accumulate sufficient findings 
and more to encourage and enable designers to articulate their own mod-
els of human users in order to inform the appropriate analysis of design 
contexts in the exploration of appropriate solutions. Much as doctors use 
test findings and medical science in combination with a skilled reading of 
contexts and patients to reach a diagnosis, a skilled designer needs multiple 
forms of knowledge to make the right choices. The science does matter, 
the principles of good design will always apply, but creating useful, usable, 
and attractive interactive information tools requires a representation of 
human actions in context to enable appropriate design constraints to be 
envisaged. Such representations are worthy of our serious attention now. 
References
Card, Stuart K., Thomas P. Moran, and Allen 
Newell. 1983. The psychology of human–computer 
interaction. New York: Ablex.
Carroll, John M., and Robert L. Campbell. 1986. 
‘Softening up hard science: reply to Newell 
and Card.’ Human–Computer Interaction 2 (3): 
227–249.249.
Carroll, John M. 2000. Making use: scenario-
based design of human–computer interactions. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Applying science to design / 299 
Carroll, John M., and Wendy A. Kellogg. 1989. 
‘Artefacts as theory-nexus: hermeneutics meets 
theory-based design.’ In Proceedings of the ACM 
CHI Conference (CHI’89 proceedings), 7–14. New 
York: ACM Press.
Dillon, Andrew. 2004. Designing usable electronic text. 
2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL and London: CRC Press. 
Dyson, Mary C., and Gary J. Kipping. 1998. ‘The 
effects of line length and method of movement on 
patterns of reading from screen.’ Visible Language 
32 (2): 150–181.
Gould, John D., Lizette Alfaro, Rich Finn, Brian 
Haupt, and Angela Minuto. 1987. ‘Reading from 
CRT displays can be as fast as reading from paper.’ 
Human Factors 29 (5): 497–517.
John, Bonnie E., and David E. Kieras. 1996. ‘Using 
GOMS for user interface design and evaluation: 
which technique?’ ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction 3 (4): 287–319.
Lawson, Bryan. 1980. How designers think. London: 
Architectural Press.
Mieczakowski, Anna, Patrick Langdon, and P. John 
Clarkson. 2013. ‘Investigating designers’ and 
users’ cognitive representations of products to 
assist inclusive interaction design.’ Universal 
Access in the Information Society 12 (3): 279–296.
Norman, Donald A., and Stephen W. Draper, eds. 
1986. User centered system design: new perspectives 
on human–computer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rayner, Keith, Alexander Pollatsek, Jane Ashby, and 
Charles Clifton Jr. 2012. Psychology of reading. 2nd 
edn. New York and London: Psychology Press.
Usability.gov. ‘Improving the user experience.’ 
<http://www.usability.gov>.
Wright, Patricia. 1979. ‘The quality control of 
document design.’ Information Design Journal 
1 (1): 33–42.


Part 3
Cognitive 
principles


303
Does my symbol sign work?
International standards for designing 
and testing graphical symbols
Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
Designers charged with producing symbols to convey information to the public 
should first consult the database of international standards, using a symbol 
from that database if appropriate, and designing within applicable international 
guidelines if not. Where a new symbol sign is developed, it can be tested for 
comprehension using the methods given in several international standards. 
The relevant international standards in relation to public information symbols, 
safety-related symbol signs, and symbols for use on equipment are presented 
and outlined.
In our developed world we encounter numerous graphical symbols in an 
increasingly wide variety of circumstances. We encounter them in pub-
lic buildings, in outdoor areas such as parks, nature reserves, and public 
beaches, in workplaces, and ubiquitously in association with technology.
In public areas symbols are used to locate facilities and, with the assis-
tance of arrows or other pointing devices, to give wayfinding directions 
to those facilities – toilets, food courts, or ticket offices are examples that 
come to mind. They are also used to indicate regulations such as no smok-
ing, no eating, that dogs must be on a leash, or that motorcycle helmets 
must be removed at the entrance to a bank. Furthermore, symbol signs 
are used to give advice, such as that hands should be washed, or face masks 
worn, or to indicate a safe condition, such as the familiar symbol sign indi-
cating the location of an exit.
In the home, anyone who has purchased a flat-pack item of furniture 
will be familiar with the sometimes puzzling use of graphical symbols, 
devoid of any words, to give instructions for the item’s assembly. Home 
products typically also display symbols on their labels or packaging, such 
as to indicate a poison, a flammable material, or for the care instructions 
for an item of clothing, for example the maximum washing temperature or 
the type of dry cleaning fluid that may be used.
In the workplace symbol signs are used in a wide variety of circum-
stances. They are used to present regulations, for example that particular 
safety equipment must be used, to indicate dangers such as from a slippery 
floor or from ionizing radiation behind a door, and to give instructions 
such as to keep a carton upright. They indicate safety-related items and 
instructions, for example an evacuation safety point, an eyewash station, 
or directions to a high place safe from a tsunami.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 303–314
18

304 / Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
Finally, there is an enormous range of technical symbols, from icons 
on computer and smartphone user interfaces to symbols giving instruc-
tions for using items of technology. Most of these symbols are clear in their 
meaning but it would be an unusual person who has not been in some 
doubt over the meaning of an obscure symbol.
In an attempt to reduce confusion over the meaning of graphical sym-
bols, a  range of standard graphical symbols, together with associated 
de­sign rules for producing uniformly designed new ones, is presented 
in a number of international standards. We discuss those standards here, 
generally limiting ourselves to standards produced by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO). There are, however, a number 
of other internationally recognized standardization bodies such as the 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the International Tele­
communications Union (ITU), and the European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI) that have produced standards including graph-
ical symbols.
Many national standards bodies have also produced standards related 
to graphical symbols and symbol signs. These are outside the scope of 
this chapter but one important set must be mentioned. It is the series of 
standards produced by ANSI of the USA in the form of their ANSI Z535 
suite. It covers much of the same ground as the ISO standards discussed in 
this chapter. ANSI Z535.1 2011 deals with safety colours, ANSI Z535.2 2011 
presents environmental and facility safety signs, ANSI Z535.3 2011 presents 
criteria for safety symbols, ANSI Z535.4 2011 presents product safety signs 
and labels, ANSI Z535.5 2011 presents safety tags and barricade tapes for 
temporary hazards, and ANSI Z535.6 2011 discusses the use of product 
safety information in manuals, instructions, and the like. These six stand-
ards contain information specifying formats, colours, and symbols for 
safety signs used in a wide range of contexts in the USA.
The main point of this present chapter is, on the one hand, to present 
a summary of the various standards from the International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) and other international bodies that are intended 
to provide some uniformity to the use of symbol signs in each of the many 
circumstances in which they are used, and on the other to present stand-
ards that provide ways of testing proposed symbols to ensure that they 
convey their intended meaning adequately.
Why symbols?
There are several reasons for the popularity of graphical symbols amongst 
designers and regulators. The most important is perhaps that in a multi-
lingual environment a symbol sign can obviate the need to repeat a verbal 
sign in many languages, an option that would almost certainly take much 
more space. Even when only a single language is involved, a symbol can be 
more effective than words in many ways:

Does my symbol sign work? / 305 
•	 A message can be presented more compactly with a symbol. Compare 
the text ‘Indoor swimming pool’ with the symbol for this message as 
shown in Figure 1.
•	 Symbols are more easily seen and identified from a distance than text. 
In the context of road symbols, an early publication (Jacobs, Johnston, 
and Cole 1975) showed that, for signs of the same size, a symbol sign 
can be recognized at a far greater distance than the equivalent sign in 
words. In their study the Signals ahead road sign, in words, had a 50% 
legibility distance of 80 metres for their study participants with normal 
acuity, but in symbol form it achieved the same legibility threshold at 
300 metres. The two versions are shown in Figure 2.
•	 Symbols may be recognized by those who do not read the vernacular. 
For example, Cairney and Sless (1982) showed that symbols effective 
with native-born Australians were equally effective with recent 
arrivals from Vietnam.
•	 Symbols can be recognized more quickly and accurately than the 
equivalent worded signs. King (1971) asked people to match briefly 
presented symbols to an array of symbols or briefly presented words 
to an array of words. The percentage of correct matches was greater 
for symbols than for word signs. Furthermore, performance for words, 
but not for symbols, decreased as exposure time decreased. Most 
recently, Potter et al. (2014) showed that pictures could be identified 
with as little as a 13 ms exposure.
•	 Under conditions of interference it appears that symbols can perform 
better than words. Ells and Dewar (1979) showed that under degraded 
visual conditions, for example when a glare source was in the visual 
field, verbal signs suffered more than did symbol signs. Finally, Kline 
et al. (1990) have shown that a symbol can have better visibility for 
viewers of all ages, particularly in the reduced light of dusk.
Producing a successful symbol sign
Much has been made in the literature regarding the requirements for 
a successful symbol sign. For warning symbols Wogalter et al. (2006) have 
presented a series of criteria that include factors from alerting value to 
Figure 1
An appropriately 
designed symbol 
can convey 
a message in 
a much smaller 
space than is 
required by the 
equivalent words.
Symbol PI SA 003 from 
ISO 7001:2007/Amd 
1:2013. Copyright 
remains with ISO.
Figure 2
A graphical 
symbol can be 
recognized from 
much further 
away than the 
equivalent words. 
Based on Jacobs, 
Johnson, and Cole 1975, 
figure 6.

306 / Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
legibility, comprehension, and finally compliance. Not all these criteria 
would apply to public information symbols but certainly legibility and 
comprehension are of prime importance.
Before a symbol can be comprehended it must be legible. Good legibility 
will be assisted by attending to matters such as minimum line width, the 
spacing of symbol elements, and overall contrast. These and other design 
requirements are presented in various standards discussed below. If, after 
attending to these details, it is suspected that some components within 
a symbol are responsible for poor comprehension, ISO 9186–2:2008 pro-
vides a method that can assist in determining the source within a symbol 
of possible legibility difficulties.
Comprehensibility to its target audience is a critical requirement for 
a successful graphical symbol. How that comprehensibility may be as­ses­
sed is discussed below, but in achieving wide comprehensibility there are 
a number of principles that can greatly assist. One is that the same symbol, 
or at least the same standardized image, should always be used for the same 
referent – the technical term for the idea or object that a graphical symbol 
is intended to represent. This would mean, for example, that a symbol 
for restaurant should always contain the images of a fork (on the left) and 
a knife (on the right), both in a vertical orientation. The exact way in which 
these symbol elements are drawn may vary without necessarily decreasing 
the symbol’s comprehensibility. In the case of safety symbol signage it is 
good practice to adhere to common conventions such as the use of the red 
annulus and slash to indicate prohibition. Indeed, in some circumstances 
the maintenance of these conventions, as spelled out in standards such as 
those discussed below, is legally required.
Standards presenting compendia of symbols
International Standard ISO 7000:2012 presents more than 2,500 symbols 
for use on equipment. These are generally technical symbols that are only 
expected to be understood by those who have been trained in the use of 
the relevant machinery or circumstances. A few of the ISO 7000 symbols, 
however, would be easily understood by the general public. An example 
of each of these types of symbols is shown in Figure 3. For each symbol the 
standard gives the symbol’s title together with notes and supplementary 
search terms.
International Standard ISO 7001:2007 presents symbols for almost 
150 referents to be used in public environments. Most of these will be 
familiar to readers. The symbols include ones for use in environments 
such as nature parks, bus stations, and airports as well as more specialized 
but nevertheless public locations such as ski resorts or child care facilities. 
All the symbols in both ISO 7000 and ISO 7001 are shown in the standard 
as solid black symbols but they may be presented in whatever colours and 
background presentations are appropriate for the circumstances of use. 

Does my symbol sign work? / 307 
Each symbol of ISO 7001 is accompanied by a verbal description of its 
content so that a designer is free to interpret the symbol within a specific 
graphical house style. An example showing the image and associated ver-
bal description for a symbol to indicate the location of an underground or 
metro station or train is given in Figure 4.
International Standard ISO 7010:2011, presenting safety colours and safety 
signs, is different from the previous two standards in that the 100 or more 
safety signs in the current edition are divided into five sign categories: Safe 
Condition, Fire Safety, Mandatory Action, Prohibition, and Warning. 
Each of these categories is associated with design rules regarding the spe-
cific colours to be used for the sign’s background and for the symbol itself 
as well as regarding the shape of the sign (square, circle, or triangle). The 
red of the annulus and slash of prohibition signs and the dimensions of the 
black border of warning signs are also precisely specified. The standard 
notes, however, that statutory regulations in some countries may differ 
from the details of this International Standard. ISO 7010 also notes that it is 
applicable to all locations where safety issues related to people need to be 
addressed, but not to signalling associated with rail, road, river, maritime, 
and air traffic, or to some other circumstances where different regulations 
may apply.
International Standard ISO 20712–1:2008 is a specialized standard in the 
field of water safety, providing some 50 symbols applicable to the water-
safety environment. The symbol signs are specified in the same ­categories, 
using the same design rules, as apply to the symbols of ISO 7010. Signs 
Figure 3
Two examples of 
symbols for use 
on equipment. 
The first is likely 
to be understood 
only by trained 
personnel.
Based on symbols 
0040 and 0087 of ISO 
7000:2012. Copyright 
remains with ISO.
Figure 4
An example 
of a public 
information 
symbol from ISO 
7001:2007. 
Symbol PI TF 003 
from ISO 7001:2007. 
Copyright remains 
with ISO.
	  
Adjust guide width at entry 
To indicate the adjustment of entry guide on machinery 
handling continuous material (for example, the adjustment of 
chain entry guides to a stenter on a textile machine).  
Textile machinery. 
	  
Windscreen wiper and washer; windshield washer and 
wiper 
When used as a control - activates the front wipers and 
dispenses washing fluid initiating a sweeping motion and fluid 
spray to clear the windscreen/windshield.  
Road vehicles, mobile cranes, industrial trucks, earth-moving 
machinery, tractors, agricultural and forestry equipment, 
powered lawn and garden equipment, aircraft ground support 
equipment, marine, small craft.   
Underground or metro station or train 
 
 
Function 
 
To indicate the location of underground or metro trains 
 
 
Image 
Content 
 
Front view of underground or metro train on railway line   

308 / Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
indicate, for example, ‘Tsunami evacuation area’ (a safe condition sign), 
‘Keep children under supervision’ (a mandatory action sign), ‘No swim-
ming’ (a prohibition sign), and ‘Thin ice’ (a warning sign).
All the standardized symbols referred to in this section can be seen in 
thumbnail form through ISO’s Online Browsing Platform, accessible at 
<http://www.iso.org/obp/ui/>. At this site first click on the Graphical 
symbols radio button. Then, in the text field, enter either a term of interest 
or the number of the desired standard, or enter the word ALL to bring up 
all the relevant symbols in the database. Hovering over a displayed symbol 
will bring up information about the committee responsible for the symbol 
and the graphical formats in which the symbol may be purchased. Clicking 
on it will bring up further information, including details of the symbol’s 
possible application. Entering the words metro train, for example, will 
bring up only the metro train symbol shown in Figure 4, but entering only 
the single word train will bring up a number of symbols that include the 
word train in their documentation.
Note that many symbols presented in standards, including many ISO 
symbols, have been accepted and published without comprehension test-
ing and so should be used with caution, as explained within the various ISO 
standards. Our admonition is that unless a designer wishes to design and 
test a new symbol, perhaps showing it to be better than the ISO or other 
published symbol, the published one should be used in the interests of 
achieving uniformity.
Designing graphical symbols
When no existing symbol is suitable and a new symbol is needed, various 
standards provide useful guidance regarding mechanical design details. 
Which standard or standards should be used for this information will 
depend on the purpose of the symbol. For public information symbols 
ISO 22727:2007 presents details of line widths, minimal size of details, 
layout, ways of indicating negation, rules for depicting water, and rules 
for designing a human figure. All these apply to symbols to be submitted 
to the subcommittee responsible for ISO 7001 for possible acceptance and 
registration. ISO 22727:2007 ends with a checklist for designers.
As well as presenting these technical details, ISO 22727 begins by dis-
cussing preliminary steps when considering the design of a public infor-
mation symbol. First, there should be verification that what is required 
is indeed a public information symbol and not a safety sign, as a safety 
sign would require the use of the more restricting rules of ISO 3864 parts 
1 and 3, discussed below. The precise meaning of the proposed symbol 
should then be determined. In generating any graphical symbol this is 
a particularly important step as very often a symbol is developed with 
one intention in mind but then the symbol is used more widely. Had the 
wider use been foreseen a better design might have been generated. For 

Does my symbol sign work? / 309 
example, should a symbol intended to mean ‘fast food outlet’ be designed 
to be more generally appropriate for ‘restaurant’?
Having determined the required meaning, reference should be made to 
the existing standards to determine whether there is already a registered 
graphical symbol with the required, or similar, meaning. This is most 
easily done through the ISO Online Browsing Platform detailed above. If 
there is no exactly relevant symbol is it possible to design one by incor-
porating elements of existing symbols in a way that maintains continuity 
between symbols? Perhaps there is an existing symbol but the designer 
feels it is not in the appropriate house style. If so, it may be possible to 
interpret the standardized image content – the written description of the 
elements of the graphical symbol and their relative disposition, as laid 
down in the standard together with the symbol itself – in a way that does 
fit the required style. The interests of comprehension are paramount and 
should not be compromised in the search for unique branding.
Design rules for safety symbols are given in three parts of ISO 3864. 
Part 1, ISO 3864–1:2011, covers Safe Condition, Fire, Mandatory Action, 
Prohibition, and Warning symbol signs, giving detailed colour (chro-
maticity), shape, and layout rules for these safety signs. For safety signs 
the standard mandates not only image content but also the background 
shape, colour, and other details. Although ISO warning signs are all given 
within a yellow triangle with a black border, some countries, notably the 
USA, Ireland, and Australia, use the diamond shape (a square rotated 45 
degrees) for road and public warning signs. Part 3, ISO 3864–3:2012, gives 
principles for the design of symbols themselves, with details for design-
ing human figures, including head and hands, and details for the design 
and use of arrows. Part 4, ISO 3864–4:2011, gives the technical details of 
the colours to be used in safety signs. The second part, ISO 3864–2:2004, 
applies to product safety labels, not considered here.
Graphical symbols for use on equipment constitute a  special case 
because they are produced jointly between ISO and the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). The design rules for these symbols 
are given in a series of four publications: IEC 80416–1:2008, IEC 80416–
2:2001, IEC 80416–3:2002, and IEC 80416–4:2005. Their titles, listed 
in the References to this chapter, give a good indication of their scope. 
Note that part 4 gives details of how to adapt graphical symbols for use on 
screens and displays.
All the International Standards mentioned above come under the juris-
diction of ISO Technical Committee 145 Graphical Symbols. A search for 
TC 145 will bring up the home page for this committee. A subsequent click 
on the Working area link will lead to a library which includes the link, To 
register new graphical symbols, giving complete details of the standardi-
zation process for each type of graphical symbol. Assistance can also be 
readily obtained by contacting the secretary of the relevant subcommittee, 
links for whom are given in the TC 145 web area. Note that because of the 

310 / Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
involvement of representatives of all the countries participating in each of 
the relevant ISO committees the acceptance and registration process can 
take some time.
A final mention must be made of difficult situations where it has been 
found that two-part symbols can make the required message clearer. 
Mayhorn and Goldsworthy (2007) developed two-part symbols warning 
against use of a medicine by pregnant women or those possibly becoming 
pregnant. One part indicated the prohibition against taking the medicine 
and the other showed the consequence of taking it. In a test, the two-
part symbols performed somewhat better than single symbols. Adams, 
Boersema, and Mijksenaar (2010) designed two-part symbols for water 
safety messages with one part indicating the required action or situation 
and a second part indicating the prohibited action or undesired situation. 
These two-part symbols (an example is shown in Figure 5) served as alter-
natives to single symbols indicating a mandatory action or a prohibition. 
The two-part symbols were much better understood than the single sym-
bols. Although two-part symbols have not been formally incorporated 
into any standards, the two-part approach may be found fruitful in some 
situations.
Testing the comprehensibility of symbols
Obtaining consensus on the best method for measuring how well a symbol 
sign is understood has proven difficult as many alternative testing methods 
have been proposed. Foster (1994) has presented the history of a number of 
methods, including methods involving choosing the appropriate symbol 
from a large group of potential symbols, matching the symbol with alter-
native descriptions, as well as simply asking for an open-ended descrip-
tion of what the symbol is intended to mean. After long consideration of 
alternatives, a current consensus method is presented in ISO 9186–1:2014.
International Standard ISO 9186–1:2014 presents what has been called 
a comprehension test method, one designed to provide a measure of the 
extent to which a given variant, or version, of a graphical symbol commu-
nicates its intended message. The standard requires at least 50 respondents 
for each test situation, all of whom should already be familiar with the sym-
bol’s referent or meaning – that is, they should understand the idea being 
symbolized. Using words or a picture, respondents are given information 
about where the symbol might be encountered and are asked to give its 
meaning. To assist scoring, a supplementary question may ask what they 
Figure 5
An example of a two-part symbol. Such a symbol can 
make the desired situation much clearer by drawing 
attention to the differences that apply between the 
undesired and the desired situation. 
Based on Adams, Boersema, and Mijksenaar 2010, figure 4.

Does my symbol sign work? / 311 
would do if they encountered the symbol. For example, in testing a symbol 
to indicate bus seating reserved for people with disabilities a respondent 
might be shown the proposed symbol and be told, ‘You enter a bus and 
see this symbol above a seat’. There would then be two questions: ‘What 
do you think it means?’ and ‘What would you do if you saw this symbol?’ 
If respondents genuinely do not know they are encouraged to write the 
words, ‘Don’t know’. The standard discusses scoring at some length, with 
answers scored as ‘correct’, ‘wrong’, or ‘wrong and opposite to intended 
meaning’. Even with the assistance of the answers to the extra question, 
scoring the free answers to the main question about the symbol’s meaning 
is not always straightforward. Prior to the test it has to be decided which 
response categories are to be considered correct. Inevitably, there will 
be responses where it is not immediately clear whether the respondent 
understood the symbol’s meaning correctly. In these cases judges should 
decide on the scoring by mutual agreement.
Criteria for accepting a symbol as suitable for use without supplemen-
tary text are left to the bodies to which application for registration would 
be made. For example, the ISO committee responsible for public informa-
tion symbols (ISO/TC 145/SC 1) currently accepts 66% correct whereas the 
committee responsible for safety symbol signs (ISO/TC 145/SC 2) requires 
at least 86% correct with less than 5% opposite responses. In each case 
these subcommittees require that respondents should be from a number 
of countries or cultures. Note that online testing is also permitted. Foster, 
Koyama, and Adams (2010) have shown that, with appropriate safeguards, 
online testing gives similar results to face-to-face testing.
A problem that can arise when using ISO 9186–1 is that, when a symbol 
fails to meet the required criterion and redesign is required, often very little 
information that could be useful in redesign can be obtained by inspecting 
the wrong responses to the comprehensibility test questions. It is possible, 
for example, that a small but poorly designed detail in a proposed symbol 
results in misinterpretation of the entire symbol. Thus a wrong response 
may be given, but it may be hard to know from the response precisely what 
it was that led the respondent to give that wrong response.
International Standard ISO  9186–2:2008 is a  standard that attempts 
to redress this difficulty by presenting a test for the perceptual quality of 
a symbol. Respondents are asked to name or describe all the elements of 
the symbol, either using terms related to their geometric form, such as 
‘rectangle’ or ‘vertical line’, or by describing elements as objects, such 
as ‘person’ or ‘umbrella’. Since some graphical symbols are required to be 
identified when reduced to a very small size, on a map for example, the 
standard provides for testing symbols in an appropriately small size.
In a  study of symbol design and redesign, Adams, Boersema, and 
Mijksenaar (2010) used a test that combined ISO 9186–1 and ISO 9186–2. 
Respondents were asked three questions: ‘What are the elements in this 
symbol? (Please write down what is shown, not what you think it means.)’, 

312 / Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
‘What do you think the symbol means?’, and ‘What is this symbol telling 
you to do, or not to do?’ The symbol’s context was specified. Scoring of 
answers to the second and third question was done as prescribed in ISO 
9186–1. Interesting for redesign purposes were the element descriptions 
from the first question given by those respondents who gave incorrect 
responses to the second and third question. The designer involved in this 
study was able to use these responses to improve comprehension. To give 
a specific example, a symbol element that was intended to be a faint line, 
indicating line of sight, was interpreted by many respondents as a spear. 
Redesign was able to correct this element.
In another somewhat creative use of ISO 9186–1, Foster, Koyama, and 
Adams (2010) were charged with testing a five-part symbol designed to 
indicate facilities for which a range of groups should be given priority: the 
elderly, the physically injured, pregnant women, adults with small chil-
dren, and those with what were described as internal injuries. Although 
the complete five-part signboard was tested, each of the five separate sym-
bols was also tested individually.
So far, all the standards concerned with testing, and the published ex­am-
ples of their use, have referred to symbols where the users or respondents 
could be expected to have prior knowledge of the concepts depicted. For 
example, we all understand the ideas of an indoor childcare centre or of 
a person with disabilities. However, sometimes symbols are developed 
for situations where the general public, or even specialized workers, may 
not have prior knowledge of, for example, the use of a particular machine 
control or of the possible dangers of a particular action.
The recently developed International Standard ISO 9186–3:2014 pro-
vides a test for use in circumstances where the test participant, as opposed 
to the target audience, may not understand a  symbol’s referent. The 
standard requires that, prior to testing, respondents are familiarized with 
the relevant concepts through familiarity training in which they are given 
a list of the referents and their functions for study. They can only proceed 
to a proposed symbol/referent association test if they understand all the 
referents. The symbol/referent association test is multiple choice: one 
symbol is presented, with a list of referents from which the respondent 
has to select the one that belongs to the symbol, with the final response 
alternative always ‘none of the above’. It is hoped that this test method 
will be suitable, for example, for the many specialized technical symbols 
that are continually being developed and that it will enable an effective 
comparison of the performance of alternative versions of such symbols.
Closing remarks
As an aid to the effective use of symbols in designing public information 
signage, safety signage, and signage on equipment, we have presented 
international standards dealing with the design and testing of such symbols 

Does my symbol sign work? / 313 
as well as standards giving lists of available symbols. The use of the ISO 
Online Browsing Platform has been highlighted as a useful starting point 
in the selection and use of such symbols.
How well should a graphical symbol be understood for it to be accept-
able to use it without supplementary text? Details have been given of the 
criteria set by ISO for public information symbols and for safety symbol 
signs, the main consideration being the gravity of the consequences of 
misunderstanding. This concern underlies the difference between the ISO 
comprehension criteria (for the symbol to be used without accompanying 
text) of 86% correct for safety symbols but only 66% correct for public 
information symbols.
The formal percentages required by standards bodies have been given 
here, but it should be borne in mind that these figures are ultimately arbi-
trary. It could be argued that there are safety symbols that are so important 
that a criterion of 86% correct is not strict enough, e.g. for an emergency 
exit symbol. Similarly, in an airport terminal 66% correct is perhaps too 
low for a flight departures symbol but perfectly appropriate for a symbol 
referring to a bar or to a bookshop. Our conclusion is that, when setting 
a  criterion for acceptability, the symbol’s function, and the context in 
which it is used should be considered together with the consequences of 
misunderstanding.
Some concepts are difficult if not impossible to represent with a sym-
bol. The concepts of dangerous ionizing radiation and of biological haz-
ards come to mind. Nevertheless, through long-term public education and 
experience the standard symbols for those concepts have come to be well 
understood. When developing new symbols for difficult concepts, how-
ever, either extensive education (which may be possible in circumstances 
where a symbol is only relevant to a restricted population) or supplemen-
tary text should always be used.
Because testing can be expensive and time-consuming, and because 
many apparently worthy symbols are submitted to ISO for registration 
without testing, ISO will accept symbols submitted without testing data, 
although testing is recommended. Where testing has taken place but ISO 
criteria have not been met, or where testing data are missing, the relevant 
symbol is presented in the ISO documentation with a statement that either 
supplementary text should be used or else some appropriate education 
should be implemented.
In the interests of uniformity, and of successful communication in our 
global environment, we strongly advocate the use of existing symbols 
from the available compendia. Even then, testing may be needed with the 
appropriate target population. Both of the present authors have taken part 
in unpublished testing of symbols that appeared to be well understood, 
only to be surprised at the poor outcome. We urge caution, therefore, 
when using untested graphical symbols without supplementary text.

314 / Theo Boersema and Austin Sorby Adams
References
Adams, A., T. Boersema, and M. Mijksenaar. 2010. 
‘Warning symbology: difficult concepts may 
be successfully depicted with two-part signs.’ 
Information Design Journal 18 (2): 94–106.
ANSI Z535.1 2011. Safety colors. Rosslyn, VA: National 
Electrical Manufacturers Association.
ANSI Z535.2 2011. Environmental and facility 
safety signs. Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical 
Manufacturers Association.
ANSI Z535.3 2011. Criteria for safety symbols. 
Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association.
ANSI Z535.4 2011. Product safety signs and labels. 
Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association.
ANSI Z535.5 2011. Safety tags and barricade tapes 
(for temporary hazards). Rosslyn, VA: National 
Electrical Manufacturers Association.
ANSI Z535.6 2011. Product safety information in 
product manuals, instructions, and other collateral 
materials. Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical 
Manufacturers Association.
Cairney, P., and D. Sless. 1982. ‘Communication 
effectiveness of symbolic safety signs with 
different user groups.’ Applied Ergonomics 13: 
91–97.
Ells, J. G., and R. E. Dewar. 1979. ‘Rapid 
comprehension of verbal and symbolic traffic sign 
messages.’ Human Factors 21: 161–168.
Foster, J. J. 1994. ‘Evaluating the effectiveness of 
public information symbols.’ Information Design 
Journal 7 (3): 183–202.
Foster, J., K. Koyama, and A. Adams. 2010. ‘Paper 
and on-line testing of graphical access symbols in 
three countries using the ISO 9186 comprehension 
test.’ Information Design Journal 18 (2): 107–117.
IEC 80416–1:2008. Basic principles for graphical 
symbols for use on equipment – Part 1: Creation of 
graphical symbols for registration. Geneva: IEC.
IEC 80416–2:2001. Basic principles for graphical 
symbols for use on equipment – Part 2: Form and 
use of arrows. Geneva: IEC.
IEC 80416–3:2002. Basic principles for graphical 
symbols for use on equipment – Part 3: Guidelines 
for the application of graphical symbols. 
Geneva: IEC.
IEC 80416–4:2005. Basic principles for graphical 
symbols for use on equipment – Part 4: Guidelines 
for the adaptation of graphical symbols for use on 
screens and displays (icons). Geneva: IEC.
ISO 20712–1:2008. Water safety signs and beach safety 
flags – Part 1: Specifications for water safety signs 
used in workplaces and public areas. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 22727:2007. Graphical symbols – Creation 
and design of public information symbols – 
Requirements. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 3864–1:2011. Graphical symbols – Safety colours 
and safety signs – Part 1: Design principles for safety 
signs and safety markings. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 3864–2:2004. Graphical symbols – Safety colours 
and safety signs – Part 2: Design principles for 
product safety labels. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 3864–3:2012. Graphical symbols – Safety colours 
and safety signs – Part 3: Design principles 
for graphical symbols for use in safety signs. 
Geneva: ISO.
ISO 3864–4:2011. Graphical symbols – Safety colours 
and safety signs – Part 4: Colorimetric and 
photometric properties of safety sign materials. 
Geneva: ISO.
ISO 7000:2012. Graphical symbols for use on equipment 
– Registered symbols. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 7001:2007. Graphical symbols – Public information 
symbols. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 7010:2011. Graphical symbols – Safety colours and 
safety signs – Registered safety signs. Geneva: ISO.
ISO 9186–1:2014. Graphical symbols –Test methods 
– Part 1: Method for testing comprehensibility. 
Geneva: ISO.
ISO 9186–2:2008. Graphical symbols – Test methods 
– Part 2: Method for testing perceptual quality. 
Geneva: ISO.
ISO 9186–3:2014. Graphical symbols – Test methods 
– Part 3: Method for testing referent association. 
Geneva: ISO.
Jacobs, R. J., A. W. Johnston, and B. L. Cole. 1975. 
‘The visibility of alphabetic and symbolic traffic 
signs.’ Australian Road Research 5: 68–86.
King, L. E. 1971. ‘A laboratory comparison of symbol 
and word roadway signs.’ Traffic Engineering & 
Control 12: 518–520.
Kline, T. J. B., L. M. Ghali, D. W. Kline, and S. Brown. 
1990. ‘Visibility distance of highway signs among 
young, middle-aged, and older observers: icons 
are better than text.’ Human Factors 32: 609–619.
Mayhorn, C. B., and R. C. Goldsworthy. 2007. 
‘Refining teratogen warning symbols for diverse 
populations.’ Birth Defects Research (Part A) 79: 
494–506.
Potter, M. C., B. Wyble, C. E. Hagmann, and E. S. 
McCourt. 2014. ‘Detecting meaning in RSVP 
at 13 ms per picture.’ Attention, Perception & 
Psychophysics 76: 270–279.
Wogalter, M. S., N. C. Silver, S. D. Leonard, and H. 
Zaiking. 2006. ‘Warning symbols.’ In Handbook 
of warnings, edited by M. S. Wogalter, 159–176. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

315
Icons as carriers of information 
Ⅱ, 
,  or pause for reflection
Alison Black
The use of icons, that is symbols to signal or give access to functionality in 
computer interfaces, continues a tradition of using symbols to convey meaning 
in contexts where space and, sometimes, time are constrained; for example in 
traffic signs or equipment controls. Since the first uses of icons to give access 
to functionality in the revolutionary Xerox Star and Apple Macintosh interfaces, 
discourse about icons has incorporated, and in some cases emphasized, their 
role in communicating brands distinctively, rather than their effectiveness as 
carriers of meaning. This paper seeks to redress the balance and equip design-
ers with a research-­based understanding of how icons in user interfaces carry 
information to their users, and how an icon’s interpretation can be influenced by 
the interplay between
• the icon itself
• its immediate context in the interface and
• the previous experience and preconceptions that the user brings to an 
interaction. 
The paper draws on the contributions of HCI, design and branding research, 
some quite historic but, nevertheless, relevant today.
Icons are the special graphic devices, typically non-­alphabetic or non-­
numerical, that have been an important feature of user interfaces since 
the introduction of the first WIMP systems for the Xerox Alto in 1972 and 
Star in 1981. In other contexts they are usually called pictograms, symbols 
or graphical symbols. Although icon efficacy in user interfaces was not 
tested before introduction (Bewley et al. 1983), developers of the Alto and 
Star wrote, ‘Our intention and hope is that users will intuit things to do 
with icons, and that those things will indeed be part of the system’ (Smith 
et al. 1982). 
Since that early experimentation, icon use has been extended across 
a range of interfaces, of increasing complexity (Wiedenbeck 1999). Icons 
continue to do the job of enabling access to interface functionality that 
they were originally conceived to do. They also play a role, first articu-
lated by Apple (Marcus 1984; Silberman 2011), in communicating product 
brand, competing for users’ recognition and attention in the current, open 
contexts of modern interfaces. The use of distinctive, graphic trademarks 
(logos) to convey brands is far from new but icons are particular in their 
combination of branding and interaction functions. It is in this context 
that this review considers factors that contribute to icon effectiveness.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 315–329
19

316 / Alison Black
What icons can do
Link users to underlying concepts
Descriptions of how icons indicate functionality often draw on the three-­
part, semiotic relationship between the sign a person sees and its intended 
meaning, described in the late 1800s by Charles Sanders Peirce. 
A picture of a lightbulb in an instruction leaflet for a light fitting might 
be interpreted directly as the concept ‘lightbulb’; on a computer interface 
it might be interpreted as the controller to adjust brightness settings. 
However, other, less direct, relationships are possible. Through meta-
phorical convention, the lightbulb might be understood as an indication 
of help. In order to understand such an icon, users may need to:
•	 Recognize the sign, in Peircian terms, the representamen (which 
in interface design we call the ‘icon’). In Figure 1 the user would 
recognize the interface icon as a glowing lightbulb.
•	 Understand what is being represented, the object, i.e. that lightbulbs 
illuminate and so, metaphorically, may shed light on users’ problems.
•	 Understand the intended meaning in this context, the interpretant, 
i.e. based on metaphor and convention that clicking on this icon will 
access some kind of help. 
The different relationships between signs and their meanings go some 
way to explaining variation in icon effectiveness for people with different 
levels of experience and from different cultures, which will be discussed 
below.
Describing this process of linking icons with their intended meanings 
(usually called their ‘referents’, in a broader sense than Peirce’s) already 
suggests that icons and words are not interchangeable. This has been 
demonstrated amply by Huang (2012), see Figure 2, who found both 
American and Taiwanese study participants rated icons as more abstract 
than their (alphabetic or logographic) text equivalents and that ‘read-
ing’ both photographs and icon-­style symbols was slower than reading 
What is depicted or 
suggested
Interpretant
Illumination
Icon
Representamen
Referent
Object
Hints and 
tips for 
users
Figure 1
Triadic linking 
between an icon, 
seen in a user 
interface and 
the functionality 
it represents, 
based on Peirce’s 
description of 
the relationship 
between signs and 
their meanings 
(Peirce’s 
terminology is 
shown in italic).

Icons as carriers of information  / 317 
text. Using neuroimaging, Huang further showed processing differences 
between words and images.
Help users find things
Icons help users find what they want on displays, at least in certain tasks. In 
most settings, icons are accompanied by word labels, either visible with the 
icon or on activation by rollover or touch. Search task studies (e.g. Kacmar 
and Carey 1991; Niemelä and Saarinen 2000) have shown that search is 
most accurate for icon–label combinations, least accurate for icon only, 
with label only selection falling midway between the two icon conditions.
Rogers (1989) has suggested that icons aid search because they pres-
ent rich information in a spatially condensed form. Similar arguments are 
made for the use of symbols in traffic signs, where recognition from a dis-
tance is essential (Ells and Dewar 1979). This is not to dismiss the import-
ance of icon labelling, particularly in the process of learning icon meaning. 
Wiedenbeck (1999) found icons were learned quicker when labelled than 
when presented alone, and that icon–label presentation was perceived as 
more usable than icon alone. With time, however, performance with icons 
only approached that of labelled icons. 
Note that in real user interfaces, rather than lab experiments, the 
broader spatial arrangement into contexts where users can perform spe-
cific tasks, such as launching applications or storing files, also cues search-
ing (Blankenberger and Hahn 1991; Moyes 1994). 
Indicate functional groupings
Beyond spatial organization, the design of icons themselves can show 
group membership. Rogers (1989) comments that large-­scale graphic 
attributes (such as colour, shape, and size) are best exploited to show 
grouping. The effectiveness of large-scale physical features in conceptual 
grouping may seem commonplace (consider the distinctiveness of docu-
ments and folders in both physical and virtual worlds). However, Peraya 
(1998) has discussed how icons that might be hard to interpret individually, 
such as word processor icons for ranged left, right, centred, and justified 
text, gather meaning from presentation as a set (see Figure 3). García et al. 
horse
car
車
馬
Figure 2
Sample materials 
from Huang 
(2012): left to 
right, icon-style 
images, pictures, 
English words 
(seen by American 
participants); 
Chinese 
logograms (seen 
by Taiwanese 
participants).
Reproduced with the 
author’s permission.
Figure 3
Scenario 
described by 
Peraya (1998) 
where icons that 
might be difficult 
to interpret 
individually, such 
as these text-
format settings, 
gather meaning 
from their graphic 
similarity and 
presentation in 
a group.

318 / Alison Black
(1994) and Niemelä and Saarinen (2000) have demonstrated an advantage 
for thematic grouping in searching for and identifying icons.
Provide look and feel
Marcus (1984) first drew attention to ‘corporate graphics’ in user inter-
faces, in his commentary on the interfaces of the Apple Lisa and Xerox 
Star. Subsequent Silicon Valley law suits, from the late 1980s, testify to the 
perceived commercial value of icons in brand communication. However, 
icon research in HCI tends to focus on icons’ functional role. Readers of 
Horton’s (1994), often quoted, manual on icon design might be frustrated 
by its limited discussion of aesthetics and their relationship to brand. They 
can, however, redress the balance elsewhere; for example by reading 
Abdullah and Hübner (2006) or Hicks (2011). 
Icons as communication 
Concrete versus abstract icons
Although many classifications of icon type have been proposed (see Wang 
et al. 2007) most research covers distinctions between concrete, or rep-
resentational, icons and abstract icons. General findings are that abstract 
icons take longer to learn, identify and find than concrete ones (Huang and 
Bias 2012; Rogers and Oborne 1987; Stotts 1998). Peirce’s triadic model 
(Figure 1) might suggest this difference stems from a more direct process 
of mapping between icon and referent for concrete than for abstract icons.
Despite the advantage generally shown for concrete icons, some 
abstract icons are easily understood; for example, the pause and advance 
symbols (Ⅱ, u) used in sound and video interfaces and the question mark 
(?) used to indicate help in some software programmes. Isherwood et al. 
(2007) have demonstrated that, in addition to concreteness, factors such 
as familiarity with icon image, the image’s complexity and the ‘semantic 
distance’ people perceive between the icon and its intended function 
affect initial learning and memory for icons. Semantic distance is subjec-
tive: an icon showing a beetle may be close to the mental representation of 
the activity of debugging for a programmer, but not to someone who is not 
used to programming jargon.1 
Impact of prior knowledge of icon sets and their referents
As Isherwood et al.’s characterization of icon familiarity suggests, people 
are likely to transfer knowledge of known and familiar icons to any new 
systems they encounter. A study by Koutsourelakis and Chorianopoulos 
(2010b) demonstrated that icons which looked the same across differ-
ent mobile phone handsets (i.e. followed a  convention for presenting 
  1	 This example is often cited, possibly because of the availability of the sketches, includ-
ing ‘debugging’, which Susan Kare created for Apple in the 1980s (Kare 2011).

Icons as carriers of information  / 319 
a  function) had better recognition rates than those that varied across 
handsets. (Although Koutsourelakis and Chorianopoulos do not make the 
distinction, their result may have been due to both icon consistency and to 
familiarity with the functionality represented.) So while designers might 
consider introducing a new icon to improve comprehension, differentiate 
a service from competitors’, or to make a set of icons internally consistent 
they should consider carefully. Grudin (1989) has argued that when an 
existing icon is available it is better to use it than introduce a new one. 
User groups with particularly limited experience
The preceding discussion suggests that people who do not share the same 
knowledge of technology or cultural referents as an icon’s designer could 
be disadvantaged in icon identification. In a small study comparing icon 
identification by software developers and university students Holloway 
and Bailey (1996) found significant differences between the groups and 
warn of the potential impact of assuming developers are typical users.
Older users may be particularly disadvantaged in the contextual know-
ledge they bring to bear on icon meaning, particularly for newer technol-
ogies such as mobile phones (Koutsourelakis and Chorianopoulos 2010a; 
Lim 2011). Similarly, users from cultures with relatively low levels of tech-
nology penetration may find icons difficult to interpret, lacking familiar-
ity with both the images depicted and the functionality they represent. 
Designing icons for use across cultures is discussed in more detail in below.
Visual design of icons
Complexity and simplicity
While early guidelines for the design of icons recommend that they be as 
simple as possible (Rogers 1989), establishing what simple icons are may 
not be straightforward. Attneave (1954) suggested that the complexity 
of a pattern can be measured by the amount of information necessary 
to specify it. Fleetwood and Byrne (2006) found a correlation between 
image analysis by mathematical programme and human judgements of 
complexity but these, still, may not relate directly to users’ ability to iden-
tify or find icons in an interface. 
Pre-­dating, considerably, recent research into icon design, a study of 
picture recognition by Ryan and Schwartz (1956) found cartoon drawings 
were more rapidly recognized than line drawings with a greater level of 
verisimilitude than the cartoons – with photographs and tonal drawings 
falling between the two (see Figure 4). It seems likely that study partic-
ipants were responding to the simplicity of the clear outlines of essential 
features that characterize cartoon drawing.
Parallels to Ryan and Schwartz can be seen in Huang’s 2012 study, dis-
cussed above. He found that photographs were responded to more slowly 
Figure 4
Picture categories 
used by Ryan and 
Schwartz (1956): 
a. photographs, 
b. tonal drawings, 
c. line drawings, 
d. cartoons.
Illustrations by Paul 
Luna and John Taylor 
after Ryan and Schwartz 
(1956).
a
b
c
d

320 / Alison Black
than icon-­style images, which may have been due to the photographs’ 
greater graphic complexity. Huang’s neuroimaging data also showed less 
complex brain activation when participants were interpreting icons com-
pared to photographs. 
Complexity and concreteness
McDougall et al. (2000) investigated the individual contributions of graph­
ic complexity and concreteness to visual search, using a corpus of icons 
that had been rated according to their concreteness, complexity, mean-
ingfulness, familiarity, and semantic distance from the depicted concept 
(McDougall et al. 1999). Sample icons, varying according to concreteness 
and complexity, are shown in Figure 5.
McDougall found that complexity affected performance in both 
search (where an icon must be matched to one in an array of alternative 
icons) and search and match (where a function is provided and an icon 
from an array matched to it), with simpler icons processed more rapidly. 
Concreteness did not influence searches, but conferred an advantage in 
search and match tasks. This concreteness effect diminished with repeat 
tests, suggesting that concreteness has a minimal effect if icon sets are used 
frequently, but that icon complexity continues to affect processing speed.
Distinctiveness
Arend et al. (1987) suggested that, since icons are typically selected from 
a group, their discriminability is as important as their individual meaning. 
They compared searches across arrays of words, abstract icons varying 
in global features (for example, using different geometric shapes, such as 
circles and triangles) and concrete icons varying in detailed features (for 
Fast processing
Library
Balance
Rinse
Visual complexity
Simple
Concreteness
Concrete
Abstract
Complex
Figure 5
Examples of the types of icon used 
(without the labelling shown here) in 
McDougall et al.’s (2000) study of icon 
complexity and concreteness.
Reproduced with the authors’ permission.

Icons as carriers of information  / 321 
example, a basic representation of a printed page with different details 
such as arrows in different positions or pointing in different directions). In 
this comparison the abstract icons, varying in their global features, were 
searched faster than the concrete icons or words. Arend et al. suggest that 
the abstract icons had ‘pop out’ features that could be processed rapidly, 
whereas the detailed, concrete icons had to be searched sequentially, as 
did the words. McDougall et al. have pointed to problems in separating the 
dimensions of distinctiveness and representativeness in Arend’s materials 
but, still, the study suggests an advantage for icons distinguished by global 
features and graphically simpler forms. 
McDougall et al. also asked participants to make judgements of the dis-
tinctiveness of individual icons appearing in carefully constructed sets of 
other icons. They found that:
•	 simple icons stood out from arrays of complex icons;
•	 concrete, complex icons stood out from arrays of simple icons;
•	 concrete icons stood out from arrays of abstract icons.
There is, therefore, a rather complicated relationship among icon charac-
teristics, depending on context. And there are other characteristics to con-
sider: Huang (2008) found searches for icons were generally faster when 
there was higher contrast between the colours of figure and background; 
that the larger the ratio of figure to background, the faster the search. The 
latter would seem logical given the relative ease of distinguishing detailed 
icon features at larger sizes. 
Icons in context
Perceptual span and crowding
One aspect of the perception of icons that has received little attention is 
perceptual span, i.e. the number of items that can be processed in one 
fixation. Lindberg and Näsänen (2003) examined search in icon sets of 
different sizes and spacing and suggest that the optimum ‘perceptual 
span’ for a set of icons is 25 in a 5 × 5 array (participants made significantly 
more saccadic eye movements and took longer to find a target in arrays 
of more than 25 icons). The distance between icons in the array did not 
affect search times but participants preferred relatively generous spacing, 
probably reflecting the intrusion of adjacent visual ‘clutter’ on perception 
of closely spaced icons (e.g. Pelli et al. 2007).
Icons size for vision and touch
Lindberg and Näsänen also tested search at different viewing distances 
and, unsurprisingly, found reduced performance with increased distance. 
They recommend that icons are designed to be no less than 0.7 of visual 
angle (minimum of 0.5 cm) at a  viewing distance of 40 cm (typical of 

322 / Alison Black
desktop or laptop computers) and 0.9 cm at a viewing distance of 70 cm 
(more typical of phones and mobile devices). 
Older people using icon interfaces may find even these generous rec-
ommendations challenging. They may have difficulty adapting to short 
viewing distance and, hence, attending to small details in icons. Similarly 
reduced colour discrimination and slower reaction times may slow their 
searches for a target (Lindberg et al. 2006). Pijukanna and Sahachaisaeree 
(2012) tested retired civil servants’ use of icons for mobile phone func-
tionality and found that participants (wearing their glasses) could see high 
contrast, simple icons at sizes as small as 0.5 to 1.00 cm, but needed icons 
as large as 3.00 cm to discriminate complex detail. Many younger users are 
likely to benefit from accessibly ­designed icons, as well as older ones. 
Sun et al. (2007) examined optimum size of touchscreen targets for 
male firefighters (likely to have finger size at the upper end of the popu-
lation range). They found that the firefighters’ responses were quickest 
and most accurate when icon size was at least 40 × 40 pixels (1 cm) but still 
accurate, although slightly slower, at 30 × 30 pixels (0.8 cm). Icon spacing 
in arrays did not significantly affect performance. 
Movement affects both ability to fixate visually and touch a target. In 
a  suggestive study, Lim and Feria (2012) tested people’s search, while 
walking, for target symbols on a mobile phone display. Study participants 
reduced their walking speed during the task, identifying targets in the cen-
tre of the display more quickly than targets nearer the edges. For rapid and 
accurate touch in mobile conditions, icons are likely to be required at large 
sizes, well spaced and positioned centrally on displays.
Attention to the wider visual field
While the eye focuses users’ attention on the centre of the visual field 
it is not entirely oblivious to stimuli outside its focal area. Movement in 
peripheral icons may be useful in alerting users to attend to changes of 
state or task (Poggel et al. 2007). Peripheral movement needs to be used 
selectively if it is not to prove too distracting. On the other hand designers 
need to be aware that users can miss detailed change if their attention is 
focused elsewhere or if change occurs during eye blinks or movements, 
or during screen flashes or transitions (Varakin, Levin, and Fidler 2004). 
Icons across cultures
Cultural differences in icon image interpretation
Some literature on cultural differences in perception might seem to sug-
gest fundamental differences in icon perception across cultural groups. In 
a review of studies comparing how East Asians and Americans perceive 
images, such as photographs of city streets and diagrams of flowers, Nisbett 
and Miyamoto (2005) concluded that Western cultures focus on salient 

Icons as carriers of information  / 323 
features in the foreground; conversely, East Asian cultures consider entire 
images more holistically, looking for relationships between elements. In 
an increasingly global world, however, it is not clear whether or how such 
differences in perception would map to icon identification. The key lesson 
for designers is to avoid assumptions about the universal appropriateness 
of an icon or set of icons and to test candidate icons with their intended 
users.
Cultural differences in response to concrete and abstract images have 
been illustrated in Pappachan and Ziefle’s (2008) comparison of Indian 
and German users’ comprehension of icons for mobile phone function-
ality. Across participants of both nationalities, concrete icon images were 
identified more successfully than abstract. Additionally, German partici-
pants performed better than their Indian counterparts, which. Pappachan 
and Ziefle attribute to the cultural specificity of some icons. For example, 
the typical mobile phone symbol for silent mode (a musical note with 
a diagonal line through it) is well understood in Western cultures but may 
be uninterpretable to people who are not familiar with typical Western 
musical notation. 
Wang (2010) has claimed that once initial familiarity with icon images 
had been gained, cultural differences are reduced. She presented expert 
and non-­expert Taiwanese computer users with a set of standard icons 
from Microsoft Word and Corel Draw and a set of icons designed specif-
ically to be culturally appropriate. Whereas the non-­expert users were 
better at identifying the meaning of icons that were culturally appropriate, 
the expert computer users were equally able to identify the standard and 
culturally appropriate icons.
Cultural preferences
Cultural preferences and traditions may also influence how well icons 
are interpreted and accepted. Marcus (2011) has used anthropologist, 
Hofstede’s (2001) characterization of different cultural dimensions (for 
example, individualism/collectivism; tolerance for uncertainty) to ex-
plain the design of websites. These dimensions, however, are difficult to 
apply specifically to icon design. Indeed when discussing icons Marcus 
recommends practical guidelines to avoid images that might be difficult to 
interpret or cause offence; for example:
•	 Roman alphabet or numbers;
•	 icons associated with religions, or witchcraft;
•	 hand gestures;
•	 gendered icons, immodest clothing.
Similar guidance can be found in most primers on icon design. Some of this 
guidance is violated in current systems, without apparent consequences 

324 / Alison Black
for their producers; for example, the thumbs up ‘Like’ icon in Facebook or 
alphabetic icons for Microsoft Office applications.
Certain applications of colour may also be offensive or lead to very 
specific interpretations, according to culture. Again, however, in the 
wider context of a colour interface, specific negative associations may be 
less likely. For example, red and orange, which are typically associated 
with hazard warnings in Western cultures, are often used in app icons. 
Kondratova and Goldfarb (2007) audited the colours used on websites 
across fifteen countries, finding that some colours were more prevalent 
than others. They identified white, greys, blues, and light yellow as the 
most prevalent colours, suggesting that these colours form an ‘interna-
tional palette’, although individual countries’ preferences can vary widely. 
The characterization of an ‘international palette’ might imply a global 
set of web design values, which technology users are exposed to. Some 
evidence for such a value set is suggested in a study by Shen et al. (2009). 
They examined Taiwanese students’ comprehension and judgements of 
appropriateness of icons for functions from Internet Explorer and Safari 
web browsers compared to alternatives that had been designed (by the 
research team) for cultural appropriateness (Figure 6). Identification of 
icon meaning was relatively high across all icon sets but participants pre-
ferred the Internet Explorer icons, suggesting a strong influence of famil-
iarity (98% of participants were IE users), regardless of cultural tuning. 
Icons, emotion, and brand
Emotion and icon familiarity
The impact of interface aesthetics on user experience has, typically, been 
described in design and popular psychology literature (for example Jordan 
2000; Norman 2004). In a survey study Huang et al. (2002) found that 
designers considered icon style important, alongside ease of interpret-
ation and access. Unfortunately they didn’t carry out a parallel survey of 
icon users (indeed, it may have been difficult to get users to reflect mean-
ingfully on icon style) so there is no way of knowing how designer and user 
expectations map to one another.
Figure 6
Internet 
Explorer, Safari 
and culturally 
appropriate icons 
used by Shen et al. 
2009.
Materials reproduced 
with the authors’ 
permission.

Icons as carriers of information  / 325 
Icons as carriers of information  / 325 
In attempt to establish the factors underlying the appeal of individual 
icons to end-users, McDougall and Reppa (2008) tracked people’s ratings 
of the appeal of their corpus of 359 icons (see Figure 5), reasons for judge-
ments, and ability to identify icon meaning. They then correlated their 
results against factors they had previously proposed as important for icon 
identification: concreteness, familiarity, and simplicity (McDougall et al. 
2000). Analysis showed that the strongest factor influencing visual appeal 
was familiarity. Additionally, the simpler an icon, the more likely it was to 
be rated as appealing. Once the factors of familiarity and complexity had 
been accounted for, concreteness was not related to the appeal ratings. 
Analysis of study participants’ reasons for their judgements showed 
that ability to identify an icon’s meaning was significantly correlated with 
its appeal rating. A significant proportion of the reasons people gave for 
their decisions was related to global icon features, such as symmetry, over-
all pattern, or shape. 
McDougall and Reppa discuss their findings in relation to the mere 
exposure effect, first described by Zajonc in 1968, after discovering that 
people prefer stimuli they have been exposed to previously to those they 
have not been exposed to. Subsequently Reber et al. (1998) proposed 
the perceptual fluency hypothesis: that prior perception makes a visual 
stimulus easier for a person to perceive subsequently and that this ease 
of perception (taking place at a subconscious level) is then interpreted by 
the individual as liking for a stimulus. McDougall hypothesizes that in the 
case of icons it is not perceptual fluency at work but processing fluency; i.e. 
study participants found it easier to make links between icon and meaning 
for familiar icons, which they then interpret as icon appeal. As McDougall 
says, this interpretation of their data is, at the moment, speculative. 
Additionally McDougall’s method and materials did not allow exploration 
of the impact of icon style on judgements of appeal, other than the broad 
(albeit important) factor of simplicity/complexity.
Emotion and icon usability
It is likely that well-­designed icons or icon–­label combinations contribute 
to a sense that an interface is approachable. In the broader area of interface 
aesthetics, Tractinsky et al. (2000) found that if the overall appearance 
of an interface (in their study, an ATM interface) is considered aestheti-
cally pleasing it will also be perceived as usable. This work has not been 
extended to discover whether actual performance is also enhanced by aes-
thetic appeal. Possibly the two will not be correlated. In concluding their 
respective research, however, both McDougall and Tractinsky point out 
that aspects of an interface that contribute to a sense of ease of use are likely 
to encourage users to take up a new interface and persist in learning it.
Tractinsky and Hassenzahl (2005) add that the aesthetic design of a user 
interface may be important, not just because of its potential impact on usa-
bility, but also because of its extension to the owner’s sense of self. Such an 

326 / Alison Black
effect may have contributed to the demonstration by Shen et al. (above) of 
Taiwanese users’ preference for icons from global products over culturally 
attuned alternatives.
Extrapolating from logo design research
Outside the area of interface design, research on logo design may have 
some bearing on discussion of the emotional impact of icons, particularly 
when icons represent software that a user might choose to use or down-
load. Henderson and Cote (1998) remarked on the need for logos to be 
recognizable, familiar, to elicit a consensually held meaning in the target 
market and to evoke positive emotion. They note that cultures tend to be 
homogeneous in their response to a logo’s design, picking up socially and 
historically dominant cultural norms on ‘goodness of form’. 
In a task where participants rated whether they liked or disliked unfa-
miliar logos Henderson and Cote found that responses were influenced 
by logo characteristics they described as ‘naturalness’ (how representative 
or like a curved, biological form a logo was), ‘harmony’ (logo symmetry 
or balance), and ‘elaborateness’ (they note that elaborate does not mean 
intricate, but combines a degree of complexity with the other characteris-
tics). See Figure 7 for examples from their study.
Henderson and Cote observe that their study does not consider the 
impact of colour on logo effectiveness. Hynes (2009) has shown that 
people have conventional expectations of colour use in logos and that vio-
lating stereotypical associations (for example, choosing a brown logo for 
a games company) might interfere with people’s ability to understand and 
make positive associations with the logo. 
Anecdotally we know of the emotional (and financial) investment some 
users make in the products of a particular manufacturer (such as Apple) 
and their sensitivity to changes in the aesthetic of its products. Walsh et al. 
(2011) studied the impact on customers of changes to sports shoe logos and 
found that resistance to change tends to be strongest in those loyal to the 
brand, while those with less commitment tend to see change positively. 
The difference may be, in part, because committed customers process 
the detail of a logo’s design deeply, hence notice change most acutely. 
However, Walsh also suggests that an emotional connection with the 
brand is carried through the logo. It is possible, although again speculative, 
that committed users of an interface make a similar emotional connection 
with its appearance, including icons, as part of its overall look and feel. 
Figure 7
Examples of 
logos tested by 
Henderson and 
Cote 1998. The 
two on the left 
are examples that 
will achieve high 
recognition and 
emotional impact 
because they have 
been rated as high 
in naturalness, 
harmony and 
moderate in elab-
orateness. The two 
logos on the right, 
although rated as 
high in naturalness 
and harmony, are 
too elaborate to 
achieve the level of 
emotional impact 
as those on the 
left.
Reproduced with 
permission of the 
authors.

Icons as carriers of information  / 327 
Takeaways for designers
By bringing together perspectives on icon design from the HCI and per-
ception research communities with research that approaches people’s 
emotional responses to icons, it’s possible to highlight some consistent 
themes for icon design:
•	 the importance of image familiarity and a clear correspondence 
between icon image and referent;
•	 the positive impact of simple images with distinctive profiles;
•	 the role of familiarity and relative simplicity in fostering positive 
emotional responses to icons;
•	 the interplay between target icons and others appearing alongside 
them, and the consequent impact of grouping and icon position;
•	 the need to consider users’ tasks (viewing, touching, near or far, static 
or mobile) in icon implementation;
•	 the potential tension between localized and global design.
Discussion throughout this chapter implies the need for involvement of 
people who will use icons, across cultures, from the earliest stages of icon 
and icon set development. 
To end at the beginning, though, the chapter subtitle ‘Ⅱ, 
, or pause 
for reflection’ reminds us that icons are not simple substitutes for words 
and, in most cases, cannot be expected to stand alone. As Haramundis 
(1994) advises ‘. . . support your icons with text in any form that is suitable 
for your product. These will all assist in the clarity, meaning, and content 
of your icons and make them a delight for your users.’
References
Abudullah, Rayan, and Roger Hübner. 2006. 
Pictograms, icons and signs. London: Thames & 
Hudson.
Arend, Udo, Klaus-­Peter Muthig, and Jens 
Wandmacher. 1987. ‘Evidence for global feature 
superiority in menu selection by icons.’ Behaviour 
& Information Technology 6 (4): 411–426.
Attneave, Fred. 1954. ‘Some informational aspects of 
perception.’ Psychological Review 61: 183–193.
Bewley, William L., Teresa L. Roberts, David Schroit, 
and William L. Verplank. 1983. ‘Human factors 
testing in the design of Xerox’s 8010 ‘Star’ office 
workstation.’ In Proceedings of the ACM CHI 83 
Human Factors in Computing Systems Conference, 
73–77. New York: ACM.
Blankenberger, Sven, and Klaus Hahn. 1991. ‘Effects 
of icon design on human–computer interaction.’ 
International Journal of Man-­Machine Studies 
35 (3): 363–377.
Ells, Jerry G. and Robert E. Dewar. 1979. ‘Rapid 
comprehension of verbal and symbolic traffic sign 
messages.’ Human Factors 21 (2): 161–168.
Fleetwood, Michael D., and Michael D. Byrne. 
2006. ‘Modelling the visual search of displays: 
a revised ACT-­R model of icon search based on 
eye-­tracking data.’ Human–Computer Interaction 
21 (2): 153–197.
García, Mariano, Albert N. Badre, and John T. Stasko. 
1994. ‘Development and validation of icons 
varying in their abstractness.’ Interacting with 
Computers 6 (2): 191–211.
Grudin, Jonathan. 1989. ‘The case against user 
interface consistency.’ Communications of the ACM 
32 (10): 1164–1173.
Haramundanis, Katherine. 1996. ‘Why icons cannot 
stand alone.’ SIGDOC Asterisk Journal of Computer 
Documentation 20 (2): 1–8.
Henderson, Pamela W., and Joseph A. Cote. 1998. 

328 / Alison Black
328 / Alison Black
‘Guidelines for selecting or modifying logos.’ 
Journal of Marketing 62 (2): 14–30.
Hicks, John. 2011. The icon handbook. Penarth: Five 
Simple Steps.
Hofstede, Geert. 2001. Culture’s consequences: 
comparing values, behaviors, insti­tutions, and 
organizations across nations. 2nd edn. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Holloway, Julie B., and John H. Bailey. 1996. ‘Don’t 
use a product’s developers for icon testing.’ In 
CHI’96 Conference Companion on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, 309–10. New York: ACM.
Horton, William K. 1994. The icon book: visual 
symbols for computer systems and documentation. 
New York: John Wiley.
Huang, Kuo-­Chen. 2008. ‘Effects of computer icons 
and figure/background area ratios and color 
combinations on visual search performance on an 
lcd monitor.’ Displays 29 (3): 237–242.
Huang, Sheng-­Cheng. 2012. ‘Are icons pictures or 
logographical words? Statistical, behavioral, 
and neuroimaging measures of semantic 
interpretations of four types of visual information.’ 
PhD thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Huang, Sheng-­Cheng, and Randolph G. Bias. 
2012. ‘Without context, icons are significantly 
worse than texts to convey meanings in 
terms of accuracy and efficiency.’ ASIST 2012. 
<http://https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/266500440_Without_Context_
Icons_are_Significantly_Worse_than_Texts_to_
Convey_Meanings_in_Terms_of_Accuracy_and_
Efficiency>.
Huang, Shih-­Miao, Kong-­King Shieh, and Chai-­
Fen Chi. 2002. ‘Factors affecting the design of 
computer icons.’ International Journal of Industrial 
Ergonomics 29 (4): 211–218.
Hynes, Niki. 2009. ‘Colour and meaning in corporate 
identity: an empirical study.’ Journal of Brand 
Management 16 (8): 545–555. 
Isherwood, Sarah J., Siné J. P. McDougall, and Martin 
B. Curry. 2007. ‘Icon identification in context: 
the changing role of icon characteristics with 
user experience.’ Human Factors: The Journal of 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 49 (3): 
465–476.
Jordan, Patrick W. 2000. Designing pleasurable 
products. London: Taylor & Francis.
Kacmar, Charles J., and Jane M. Carey. 1991. 
‘Assessing the usability of icons in user interfaces.’ 
Behaviour & Information Technology 10 (6): 
443–457.
Kare, Susan. 2011. Susan Kare icons book. San 
Francisco: KarePrints.
Kondratova, Irina, and Ilia Goldfarb. 2007. ‘Color 
your website: use of colors on the web.’ In 
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on 
Usability and internationalization, 123–113. Beijing: 
Springer-­Verlag.
Koutsourelakis, Charalambos, and Konstantinos 
Chorianopoulos. 2010a. ‘Icons in mobile phones: 
comprehensibility differences between older and 
younger users.’ Information Design Journal 18 (1): 
22–35.
Koutsourelakis, Charalambos, and Konstantinos 
Chorianopoulos. 2010b. ‘Unaided icon 
recognition in mobile phones: a comparative 
study with young users.’ Design Journal 13 (3): 
313–328.
Lim, Christopher S.C. 2009. ‘Designing inclusive 
ICT products for older users: taking into account 
the technology generation effect.’ Journal of 
Engineering Design 21 (2)–3: 189–206.
Lim, Ji Jung, and Cary Feria. 2012. ‘Visual search on 
a mobile device while walking.’ In Proceedings 
of the 14th international conference on Human–
computer interaction with mobile devices and 
services, 295–304. San Francisco: ACM.
Lindberg, Tomas, and Risto Näsänen. 2003. ‘The 
effect of icon spacing and size on the speed of icon 
processing in the human visual system.’ Displays 
24 (3): 111–120.
Lindberg, Tomas, Risto Näsänen, and Kiti Müller. 
2006. ‘How age affects the speed of perception of 
computer icons.’ Displays 27 (4)–5: 170–177.
McDougall, Siné J. P., Oscar de Bruijn, and 
Martin B. Curry. 2000. ‘Exploring the effects 
of icon characteristics on user performance: 
the role of icon concreteness, complexity, 
and distinctiveness.’ Journal of Experimental 
Psychology – Applied 6 (4): 291–306.
McDougall, Siné J. P., Martin B. Curry, and Oscar 
de Bruijn. 1999. ‘Measuring symbol and icon 
characteristics: norms for concreteness, 
complexity, meaningfulness, familiarity, and 
semantic distance for 239 symbols.’ Behavior 
Research Methods Instruments & Computers 31 (3): 
487–519.
McDougall, Siné J. P., and Irene Reppa. 2008. ‘Why 
do I like it? The relationships between icon 
characteristics, user performance and aesthetic 
appeal.’ In Proceedings of the Human Factors 
and Ergonomics Society 52nd Annual Meeting, 
1257–1261. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Marcus, Aaron. 1984. ‘Corporate identity for iconic 
interface design: the graphic design perspective.’ 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 2 (4): 
24–32.
Marcus, Aaron. 2011. ‘Cross-­cultural user-­experience 
design.’ In SIGGRAPH Asia 2011 Courses, 1–201. 
Hong Kong: ACM. 
Moyes, Jackie. 1994. ‘When users do and don’t rely 
on icon shape.’ In Conference Companion on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Boston 
Massachusetts, 283–284. New York: ACM.
Niemelä, Marketta, and Jukka Saarinen. 2000. ‘Visual 
search for grouped versus ungrouped icons in 
a computer interface.’ Human Factors: The Journal 

Icons as carriers of information  / 329 
Icons as carriers of information  / 329 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
42 (4): 630–635.
Nisbett, Richard E., and Yuri Miyamoto. 2005. ‘The 
influence of culture: holistic versus analytic 
perception.’ Trends in cognitive sciences 9 (10): 
467–473.
Norman, Donald A. 2004. Emotional design. New 
York: Basic Books.
Pappachan, Preethy, and Martina Ziefle. 2008. 
‘Cultural influences on the comprehensibility of 
icons in mobile–computer interaction.’ Behaviour 
& Information Technology 27 (4): 331–337.
Pelli, Denis G., Patrick Cavanagh, Robert Desimone, 
Bosco Tjan, and Anne Treisman. 2007. 
‘Crowding: including illusory conjunctions, 
surround suppression, and attention.’ Journal of 
Vision 7 (2): i. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1167/7.2>.
Peraya, Daniel. 1998. ‘Structures et functionnement 
semiotiques des icones de logiciels et 
d’environnements informatiques standardizes 
(ILEIS).’ Recherches en comunicationm n° 10, 
TECFA, Unité des technologies éducatives, 
Université de Genève.
Pijukkana, Kingkarn, and Nopadon Sahachaisaeree. 
2012. ‘Graphical design and functional perception 
on technology-­driven products: case study on 
mobile usage of the elderly.’ Procedia – Social and 
Behavioral Sciences 42: 264–270.
Poggel, Dorothe A., Hans Strasburger, and Manfred 
MacKeben. 2007. ‘Cueing attention by relative 
motion in the periphery of the visual field.’ 
Perception 36: 955–970.
Reber, Rolf, Piotr Winkielman, and Norbert 
Schwartz. 1998. ‘Effects of perceptual fluency on 
affective judgments.’ Psychological Science 9 (1): 
45–48.
Rogers, Yvonne. 1989. ‘Icon design for the user 
interface.’ International Reviews of Ergonomics 3: 
129–154.
Rogers, Yvonne, and David J. Oborne. 1987. ‘Pictorial 
communication of abstract verbs in relation to 
human–computer interaction.’ British Journal of 
Psychology 78 (1): 99–112.
Ryan, T. A., and Carol B. Schwartz. 1956. ‘Speed of 
perception as a function of mode of presentation.’ 
American Journal of Psychology 69 (1): 60–69.
Shen, Siu-­Tsen, Stephen D. Prior, and Kuen-­Meau 
Chen. 2009. ‘Comparing the perspicacity, 
appropriateness and preference of web browser 
icons with Chinese users.’ Digital Creativity 
20 (1–2): 59–78.
Silberman, Steve. 2011. ‘The sketchbook of Susan 
Kare, the artist who gave computing a human 
face.’ Plos Blogs: Neurotribes. Acesed 20 January 2016. <http://blogs.
plos.org/neurotribes/2015/02/18/updated-
sketchbook-susan-kare-artist-gave-computing-
human-face/>.
Smith, David C., Charles Irby, Ralph Kimball, and 
William L. Verplank. 1982. ‘Designing the STAR 
user interface.’ Byte 7: 242–82. Reprinted in 
Perspectives on the Computer Revolution, 1989, 
edited by Zenon W. Pylyshin and Liam Bannon. 
New York: Ablex.
Stotts, Daniel B. 1998. ‘The usefulness of icons on the 
computer interface: effect of graphical abstraction 
and functional representation on experienced and 
novice users.’ Proceedings of the Human Factors 
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 42 (5): 
453–457.
Sun, Xianghong, Tom Plocher, and Weina Qu. 2007. 
‘An empirical study on the smallest comfortable 
button/icon size on touch screen.’ In Proceedings 
of the 2nd International Conference on Usability and 
Internationalization, 615–621. Beijing: Springer.
Tractinsky, Noam, and Marc Hassenzahl (2005). 
‘Arguing for aesthetics in human–computer 
interaction.’ i-­com 4 (3): 66–68.
Tractinsky, Noam, Adi Shoval-­Katz, and D. Ikar. 
2000. ‘What is beautiful is usable.’ Interacting with 
Computers 13 (2): 127–145.
Varakin, D. Alexander, Daniel, T. Levin, and Roger 
Fidler. 2004. ‘Unseen and un­aware: implications 
of recent research on failures of visual awareness 
for human–computer interface design.’ Human–
Computer Interaction 19 (4): 389–422.
Walsh, Michael, F., Karen P. Winterich, and Vikas 
Mittal. 2010. ‘Do logo redesigns help or hurt your 
brand? The role of brand commitment.’ Journal of 
Product and Brand Management 19 (2): 76–84.
Wang, Hsiu Feng. 2010. ‘The appropriateness of icon 
representations for Taiwanese computer users.’ 
Visible Language 44 (3): 25.
Wang, Hsiu Feng, Sheng H. Hung, and Ching C. 
Liao. 2007. ‘A survey of icon taxonomy used in 
the interface design.’ In Proceedings of the 14th 
European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics: 
Invent! Explore!, 203–206. London: ACM.
Wiedenbeck, Susan. 1999. ‘The use of icons and 
labels in an end user application program: 
an empirical study of learning and retention.’ 
Behaviour & Information Technology 18 (2): 68–82.
Zajonc, Robert B. 1968. ‘Attitudinal effects of 
mere exposure.’ Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology Monographs 9: 1–27.


331
Warning design
Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
Warnings are a type of risk communication intended to give people information 
about potential hazards and instructions to promote safe behaviour. Warnings 
can also serve as a reminder to cue access to existing knowledge. They serve as 
the third tier of hazard control with hazard elimination and guarding being the 
preferred methods. This chapter is organized around a Communication-Human 
Information Processing model that describes effective warning processing 
according to a set of stages involving a source, channel, and receiver. The 
receiver is further broken down into the stages of attention switch and mainte-
nance, comprehension and memory, beliefs, motivation, and compliance. The 
influence of information design at each stage is discussed including format 
(size, contrast, colour, list/bulleting, graphics), content (chunking, graphics, 
signal words, and information on the nature of the hazard, consequences, and 
instructions), and context (aspects of product/environment, and awareness/
knowledge). Methods for developing and evaluating warnings are given, includ-
ing heuristic evaluation, iterative design, and testing of comprehension levels 
and response times.
Definition and purposes of warnings 
Warnings are hazard communications, used in a  variety of contexts to 
inform people about potential dangers and provide instructions to avoid 
or minimize undesirable consequences such as death, injury, or property 
damage. For example, a product warning for a wet-dry vacuum cleaner 
might inform people about an electrocution hazard; a sign warning might 
advise people to keep out of an electrical transformer box or other hazard-
ous area. 
Warnings reflect a fundamental right that people be given informed 
consent when placed into risky conditions. They also have another pur-
pose. Consider that almost all adults know that lawnmowers have spin-
ning blades that can cause severe injury but that sometimes this relevant 
information is not present in cognitive awareness when it is needed. In 
such cases warnings can bring to awareness latent knowledge (from long-
term memory). Indeed the US Consumer Product Safety Commission 
(CPSC) requires a warning to be attached to all powered, walk-behind 
lawnmowers. 
Since about the mid 1980s, research on the factors that influence the 
effectiveness of warnings, has resulting in a body of work that concludes 
that certain basic components can increase warning-sign effective-
ness. These components are illustrated in this chapter, which focuses 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 331–348
20

332 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
particularly on the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z535 
series, 2012 (hereafter referred to as ANSI Z535), to demonstrate the appli-
cation of research-based standards in practice. 
ANSI Z535 suggests the following components for warnings:
•	 a signal word panel comprised of one of three hazard-related words, 
usually DANGER, WARNING, and CAUTION along with associated 
colour, usually red, orange, and yellow, respectively. Frequently an 
alert symbol (an upright triangle surrounding an exclamation point) is 
included to the left of the signal word;
•	 a statement of the nature of the hazard (e.g. radiation, high voltage, 
confined space);
•	 the consequences if the hazard is not avoided (e.g. biological injury, 
electrocution, death); and 
•	 instructions on how to avoid the hazard (e.g. do not enter, keep away, 
wear a hard hat). 
Not every warning needs to include all these components (Wogalter et al. 
1987). Some information can be combined or cued by other components 
in the warning. For example, a slippery floor sign might not need to state 
the consequence of falling. Also, parts or the entire message may be con-
veyed by pictorial symbols instead of, or in addition to, words. 
While warning designers ought to consider existing standards and 
guidelines the specifications are usually minimums needed; following 
them may not be enough to produce effective warnings. A  particular 
warning may need additional components, and testing may be necessary 
to verify that the components comprising the warning accomplish the job 
intended. Thus most warnings require effort beyond simply following the 
specifications of standards and guidelines to be made effective.
This chapter focuses on visual warnings associated with products, 
equipment, and environments. There are other sources for warning 
design in other domains and a growing literature regarding warnings that 
use modalities other than visual (Baldwin et al. 2012a; Haas and Edworthy 
2006; Haas and van Erp 2014).
Visual warnings are not limited to product labels and environmental 
signs; they can be in product manuals and information sheets, in advertis-
ing, on posters, accessible through the internet, etc. Sometimes different 
modes or media serve different purposes. For example, a warning on a box 
containing a product could help people at the point of purchase decide 
whether the product is appropriate or not.
Warnings as a method of hazard control
Warnings are one of the three main methods used to control hazards. 
The other two are more primary methods of hazard control: eliminat-
ing (designing out hazards) and guarding against them. Some hazards 

Warning design / 333 
cannot be completely eliminated by design, and sometimes guarding is 
incomplete. Sometimes called the strategy of ‘last resort’, warnings are 
third in the hazard control hierarchy. Returning to the blades of the power 
lawnmower: a cowl cover over the blades prevents most types of bodily 
contact; a so-called ‘dead man’s switch’ stops the blades spinning if the 
operator releases the handle; the handle position distances the user from 
the blades and motor (guarding by distance). And yet, a warning is still 
needed to cover residual hazards after design and guarding have been 
employed. Given their important role in hazard control, warning design 
is of critical importance.
Figure 1 illustrates the ANSI Z535 warning sign, labels, and tags stand-
ard; 1 a shows old-style panels and 1 b the newer style. The ANSI signal 
words have different meanings in terms of hazard severity and probability:
•	 danger: a hazardous situation, which if not avoided, will result in death 
or serious injury (immediate and grave danger);
•	 warning: a hazardous situation, which if not avoided, could result in 
death or serious injury;
•	 caution: a hazardous situation, which if not avoided, could result in 
minor or moderate injury.
There is no signal word indicating that a minor injury will (definitely) 
occur. ISO (Organization for International Standardization) also suggests 
that warnings convey three levels of hazard (ISO 3864 2011). 
‘Danger’ is printed in white with a  red background, ‘Warning’ and 
‘Caution’ are printed in black with an orange or yellow background, 
respectively. The Xs in Figure 1 indicate where text messages for particu-
lar warnings would be placed. The newer panels include the safety alert 
symbol (signal icon). Figure 2 shows an example ANSI Z535 warning, 
designed to inform people of the burn hazards associated with touching 
a hot surface. 
Figure 1
a. Old-style ANSI 
warning panel 
format.
b. Newer style.
Figure 2 
Example ANSI warning 
panel for burn hazards.
a
b

334 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
Communication-Human Information 
Processing (C-HIP) model
To help explain how people process warnings and how a warning might suc-
ceed or fail, the Communication-Human Information Processing (C-HIP) 
framework (see Figure 3) is useful (Wogalter, DeJoy, and Laughery 1999). 
C-HIP has two main parts: 
•	 a basic communications framework to focus on a warning message 
being sent from a source (e.g. a manufacturer) to a receiver (e.g. an 
end-user) through some channel(s) (e.g. warning label, product 
manual)
•	 the stages of information processing, from attention switch and 
maintenance, through memory/comprehension, beliefs/attitudes, to 
motivation and compliance. Linear processing through these stages 
is implied, with inability to process information in an earlier stage 
preventing or limiting later processing. Nonlinear processing, where 
later stages affect processing in earlier stages, is illustrated by feedback 
loops.
We use the C-HIP framework in the following sections to discuss infor-
mation design factors in warnings, covering first the communication fea-
tures of C-HIP and, subsequently, factors in the receiver’s internal infor-
mation processing.
Source 
The source (e.g. a manufacturer with responsibility for warning) is the 
initial transmitter of the warning information. The source must determine 
if there are hazards present that necessitate a warning through some form 
of hazard analysis (e.g. Young, Frantz, and Rhoades 2006) and should 
consider, first, if there are better ways of controlling hazards, as discussed 
above, by eliminating or guarding against them.
Channel 
The channel is the medium where the information is embedded (e.g. label, 
video) and modality (visual, auditory) that transmits information from the 
source to receivers. Some media involve one modality (e.g. product man-
ual involves the visual sense) and others involve two (e.g. videos often have 
both visual and auditory components). Visual presentation can be in the 
form of text and/or graphics, such as symbols. Multimodal warnings are 
more effective than single modality warnings because they provide redun-
dancy (e.g. Baldwin et al. 2012b). 
Delivery
Delivery refers to the point of reception where a warning arrives at the 
receiver. A warning that a person sees is a warning that has been delivered. 

Warning design / 335 
However, warnings might not reach some of the targets at risk (Williamson 
2006). A warning in a manufacturer’s brochure that hardly ever reaches 
the end-user is ineffective; for example, the brochures may be in a ware-
house, undistributed due to cost cutbacks. Because warnings may miss 
being delivered to individuals, manufacturers need to consider using mul-
tiple channels to increase the likelihood that they will reach end-users. 
Environmental stimuli 
Other stimuli are almost always simultaneously present with warnings. 
These may be other warnings and a wide assortment of non-warning stim-
uli. They compete for attention and could interfere with warning process-
ing. Interference is more likely if the other stimuli in the environment are 
highly salient (conspicuous or prominent). 
Source
Channel
Delivery
Motivation
Behaviour
Environmental
stimuli
Other persons, objects,
lighting, sound, etc.
Attention
switch
Attention
maintenance
Comprehension &
Memory
Attitudes &
Beliefs
Receiver
demographics, person variables
Figure 3 
Communication-
Human 
Information 
Processing (C-HIP) 
model.
(After Wogalter 2006b).

336 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
Receiver 
The receiver is the person to whom the warning is directed. The following 
sections describe how, once a warning has been delivered, stages of infor-
mation processing within the receiver influence its effectiveness. 
Attention switch 
Attention switch enables the first stage of warning processing. Several 
design factors influence how well warnings may compete for attention 
with other stimuli in the environment (Wogalter and Leonard 1999; 
Wogalter and Vigilante 2006). 
Larger is generally better. Increasing the overall size of a warning, its 
type size and contrast increases its conspicuity. It is not just the absolute 
size of the warning, but also its size relative to other information in its con-
text that matters. 
Colour can facilitate attention switching (Bzostek and Wogalter 1999; 
Laughery et al. 1993b). As seen in Figures 1 and 2, ANSI Z535 uses colour, 
as one of several components of the signal word panel, to attract attention. 
Its salience, however, will depend on context. A red warning on a mostly 
red-coloured product will have reduced salience. Thus distinctiveness 
aids attention capture.
Graphical configurations such as symbols and icons can also elicit an 
attention switch. The alert symbol in the newer ANSI Z535 signal word 
panels is an example. Bzostek and Wogalter (1999) found people located 
warnings on medicine labels more quickly when they were accompanied 
by symbols (e.g. an alert symbol, skull and crossbones, etc.). 
The ANSI Z535 configuration of signal word panel has several features 
that could help attract attention (relatively large type size, colour, and an 
alert symbol). A potential downside of consistently using a recommended 
configuration is that, with repeated exposure, habituation could negatively 
affect attention (Kim and Wogalter 2009; Thorley, Hellier, and Edworthy 
2001). However, features such as distinctive shapes and colour may slow 
the habituation process. Note that in the former Z535 style each signal 
word panel had a distinctive shape/configuration, which disappeared in 
the newer set of panels (see Figure 1). 
Warnings should be located near the hazard, both temporally and 
physically to maximize the chance that they will be encountered (Frantz 
and Rhoades 1993; Wogalter, Barlow, and Murphy 1995). Placing a warn-
ing directly on the product or its primary container is preferred. Product 
manuals and information sheets are often discarded, lost, or if pre-owned, 
never received (Mehlenbacher, Wogalter, and Laughery 2002; Wogalter, 
Vigilante, and Baneth 1998). There are exceptions, however, where 
a warning is too close in location or time to the hazard, and the individual 
sees it too late; or where other tasks the individual is performing may com-
pete with the warning for attention (Wogalter and Usher 1999). 

Warning design / 337 
Attention maintenance 
Individuals may notice the presence of a  warning but still not stop to 
examine it. Attention must be maintained on the information for it to be 
assimilated with existing knowledge in memory. 
In order to quickly and easily communicate important warning infor-
mation, content should be as brief as possible. Warnings need to have 
qualities that make them easy to grasp and avoid aspects that slow down 
or cause the reader to stop processing them. Some of the same design fea-
tures that facilitate attention switch, discussed above, also help maintain 
attention (Wogalter et al. 1999a). For example, large print attracts atten-
tion and, by increasing legibility, makes content easier to read. 
Print legibility can be affected by numerous factors including choice 
of font, stroke width, letter compression, etc. (Frascara 2006). Research 
does not support an unequivocal preference for particular fonts, although 
the general recommendation is for relatively plain, familiar alphanumeric 
lettering, presented in mixed case rather than all capitals. ANSI Z535.4 
includes a chart with print sizes for expected reading distances for both 
good and degraded lighting. Legibility is also improved by high contrast 
of the text relative to its background. Over time, and with wear-and-tear 
of environmental exposure and ageing, legibility is likely to be reduced.
Formatting warning content by ‘chunking’ it into distinct categories can 
assist in information acquisition, making the information easier to search 
and remember (Shaver and Wogalter 2003). Structured formatting reduces 
perceived difficulty and mental workload (Desaulniers 1987; Mendat et al. 
2005). Figure 4 shows an over-the-counter pharmaceutical product label 
displaying the ‘Drug Facts’ format required by US law. Evidence suggests 
Figure 4 
Over-the-counter 
pharmaceutical 
product label 
displaying the 
‘Drug Facts’ 
format required by 
US law.

338 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
that consumers extract information quicker from stand­ard­ized labels than 
from labels that do not follow such formatting (Kalsher, Wogalter, and 
Racicot 1996; Wogalter, Shaver, and Chan 2002).
The formatting guidelines of the ANSI Z535 reflect some research find-
ings but not all of them. Warning designers need to know the applicable 
standards in their country. And where there are not answers, research lit-
erature provides a resource that goes beyond standards. 
Comprehension and memory 
Warning comprehension may derive from:
•	 subjective understanding, such as the hazard connotation of a signal 
word or colour;
•	 understanding the text;
•	 understanding graphical features, such as symbols;
•	 an individual’s background knowledge and beliefs; that is, long-term 
memory formed from prior exposures to the information. 
The subsections below review some major warning features pertinent 
to the comprehension stage.
Signal words 
As described earlier, ANSI Z535, and other standards, designate three spe-
cifically defined signal words (Danger, Warning, and Caution) to denote 
levels of hazard probability and severity. While Caution and Warning have 
different definitions, empirical studies indicate that people do not readily 
distinguish between the two. Danger connotes a more significant injury 
than either Warning or Caution. The term Deadly is not part of ANSI Z535 
but several studies have shown that it connotes significantly higher levels of 
hazard than the three standard signal words (Hellier and Edworthy 2006; 
Wogalter et al. 1998a; Wogalter and Silver 1990, 1995). Figure 5 shows use 
of the signal word Deadly to warn of an electrocution hazard. 
Figure 5 
Exemplar warning panel using the 
signal word DEADLY.

Warning design / 339 
Colour
As discussed earlier ANSI Z535 assigns specific colours, red, orange, 
and yellow, for Danger, Warning, and Caution respectively. As with sig-
nal words, people rate red as higher hazard than the other colours, but 
do not reliably distinguish the hazard associated with orange and yellow 
(Chapanis 1994; Mayhorn, Wogalter, and Shaver 2004; Wogalter et al. 
1998a; Wogalter, Mayhorn, and Zielinska 2016). 
Message content 
The content of a  warning message should include three main compo-
nents: information about the hazard, instructions on how to avoid it, and 
the potential consequences if instructions are not followed (Wogalter et 
al. 1987). Additional information may be required beyond these general 
categories. 
Specific descriptions are more likely to encourage users to act cautiously 
than general information (Laughery and Paige-Smith 2006; Laughery et 
al. 1993a).
Consider the two warnings from containers of wood stain products 
in Figure 6. Both warn about the potential for rags used during product 
application to catch fire spontaneously if disposed of incorrectly. While 6 a 
is commonly used in the USA, 6 b is a revision that describes safe disposal 
more clearly (for example, that the water filled metal container is not just 
for ‘temporary storage’). 
Symbols 
Safety symbols can provide information, either in lieu of or together with 
textual statements (e.g. Dewar 1999; Mayhorn and Goldsworthy 2007, 
2009; Mayhorn, Wogalter, and Bell 2004; Wolff and Wogalter 1998; Young 
and Wogalter 1990; Zwaga and Easterby 1984). Symbols can sometimes 
have value as a means to communicate to people who do not understand 
the textual components. 
Symbols that directly represent concepts are usually better understood 
than more abstract symbols. Figure 7 (overleaf) is a well-­designed pictorial 
warning communicating electrical hazard and possible consequences of 
Figure 6 
Two product 
warning labels 
concerning 
spontaneous 
combustion 
hazard.
a. Label commonly 
found on wood 
stain cans in the 
USA.
b. Another version 
that conveys 
how to discard 
the product in a 
somewhat clearer 
manner.
a
b

340 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
flying a kite near high voltage wires. The relationship between the hazard 
and consequences can be understood without being able to read the text. 
However, symbols are difficult to design for concepts that are invisible 
(such as radiation), have a time course, or represent an abstract or com-
plex concept (Wogalter et al. 2006). Typically, the meaning of abstract and 
arbitrary symbols has to be learned (Lesch 2003; Wogalter, Sojourner, and 
Brelsford 1997). 
Symbols should be designed to have the highest level of comprehen-
sion attainable. For a symbol that will be used without accompanying text 
ANSI Z535 suggests a goal of at least 85% comprehension using a sample 
of 50 participants representative of the target audience. Additional cul-
tural differences affect symbol interpretation. Tests of conventional ANSI 
symbols in Ghana revealed severe interpretation discrepancies from the 
intended meaning (Smith-Jackson and Essuman-Johnson 2002). Other 
research found comprehension differences for traffic signs across Canada, 
Israel, Finland, and Poland (Shinar et al. 2003). Likewise, Hong Kong resi-
dents had difficulty interpreting some industrial signs used in mainland 
China (Chan and Ng 2010). If 85% comprehension cannot be achieved, 
the symbol may still have utility by aiding attention switch and helping at 
least some people understand the message. Some kinds of interpretation 
errors are worse than others, particularly misinterpretations that could 
increase the potential for injury. According to ANSI Z535, an acceptable 
symbol must produce fewer than 5% critical confusions (opposite or 
wrong answers that might lead to unsafe behaviour) using a sample of 50 
participants. 
Figure 7
Electrocution hazard 
sign (based on an 
original from Puerto 
Rico) with symbols 
and Spanish text.

Warning design / 341 
Reminder value
Although people hold knowledge about hazards in long-term memory, at 
any given time only a small portion of that knowledge is consciously avail-
able. As people are doing tasks, attention to safety-related information 
may need to be cued by a warning. Reminder warnings may be appropriate 
in situations where a hazard is infrequently encountered so that memory 
degrades over time, or where foreseeable distractions or high mental 
workload could distract attention from hazard con­sider­ations.
Level of knowledge 
The message receiver’s knowledge should be considered, particularly 
their language skill and technical knowledge. Open-ended comprehension 
tests can be used to assess whether people understand the hazard and the 
consequences and instructions statements. Where there is a need to cross 
language barriers, multiple languages, graphics, and transmission through 
multiple methods and channels may be needed (Lim and Wogalter 2003; 
Mayhorn et al. 2014). 
Attitudes and beliefs
Beliefs refer to an individual’s knowledge base that they accept as true 
(although some of it may not actually be true). Attitudes are similar to 
beliefs but include the involvement of emotion. 
According to the C-HIP model, a warning will be successfully processed 
if its message concurs (or at least is not discrepant) with the receiver’s 
beliefs and attitudes. If warning information does not concur with existing 
beliefs and attitudes, it may need to be persuasive so as to override them. 
Persuasion is particularly important when a product is more hazardous 
than people believe, possibly as the result of a build up of benign experi-
ences and memories associated with it. For example, an individual may 
have used over-the-counter pain relief containing paracetamol/acetami-
nophen with no adverse effects, which may reduce their receptivity to 
new warning messages. Incorrect beliefs about safety can also come from 
advertising campaigns that convey a product’s positive benefits without 
giving any negatives. 
The greater the perceived hazard, the more responsive people will be to 
warnings. Perceived hazard and willingness to act with caution are closely 
tied to beliefs about injury severity (Wogalter et al. 1999b), whereas injury 
likelihood appears to be less important in people’s judgements (Wogalter 
et al. 1991; Wogalter, Brems, and Martin 1993). An individual’s belief that 
they are familiar with a product will reduce the likelihood of them look-
ing for or reading a warning (Godfrey and Laughery 1984; Goldhaber and 
deTurck 1988; Wogalter et al. 1991). 
Hazard perception can be enhanced by prior experience of injury 
or personal knowledge of someone else being injured (Mayhorn et al. 
2004). Lack of such experiences may lead people to fail to consider or to 

342 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
underestimate dangers. Warnings that give explicit consequences may 
provide some of the persuasion needed to change beliefs when perceived 
hazard is inappropriately low. 
For a  warning to succeed, the recipient must believe it is relevant. 
Individuals may instead believe a  warning is directed to other people, 
rather than to them. Such beliefs may be overcome by personalizing warn-
ings, directing them to specific users and conveying facts that are relevant 
to them (Wogalter et al. 1994). Available technology may enable tailoring 
warnings to the characteristics of people within a specific location; for 
example, using their personal information (names, language preference, 
etc.) entered into mobile phones or other devices (Wogalter and Mayhorn 
2005).
Experts in a domain can be so facile with their knowledge about a topic 
that they overestimate what people know, which in turn may affect what 
kinds of warnings are produced (Laughery 1993). Without operator or 
end-user input into the design, the warnings produced may be poor.
Motivation
Motivation energizes the individual to carry out an activity, linking beliefs 
and attitudes to actual behaviour, but it is susceptible to several influenc-
ing factors.
Compliance with warnings generally requires time and effort (Wogalter 
et al. 1987; Wogalter, Allison, and McKenna 1989). When people perceive 
the costs of compliance to be too high, they are less likely to perform safety 
behaviours. Perceived cost of compliance can sometimes be reduced; for 
example, the cost of using protective gloves can be reduced by including 
gloves with the product (Dingus, Hathaway, and Hunn 1991; Wogalter, 
Allison, and McKenna 1989). Additionally, people report higher willing-
ness to comply with warnings when they believe there is high probability 
for incurring a severe injury (Wogalter, Brems, and Martin 1993; Wogalter 
et al. 1991, 1999b). Warnings including explicit wording and images depict-
ing severe consequences may help motivate compliance. 
The social influence of seeing others comply with a warning can also 
motivate compliance (Wogalter, Allison, and McKenna 1989; Edworthy 
and Dale 2000). The reverse is also true. Other influential factors are time 
stress (Wogalter et al. 1998b) and mental workload (Wogalter and Usher 
1999) where competing activities can detract from processing warnings, 
reducing the likelihood of compliance. 
Behaviour 
Behavioural compliance is one of the most important measures of warning 
effectiveness (Kalsher and Williams 2006; Silver and Braun 1999) but is 
usually difficult to test since:
•	 researchers cannot expose participants to real risks because of ethical 
and safety concerns;

Warning design / 343 
•	 events that could lead to injury are relatively rare;
•	 the stimulus scenario must appear to have a believable risk, yet at the 
same time must be safe;
•	 running such research is costly in terms of time and effort. 
Compliance can sometimes be measured indirectly; for example, deter-
mining whether protective gloves have been worn from the appearance 
of stretch marks (Wogalter and Dingus 1999; Kalsher and Williams 2006). 
Virtual reality or simulation may allow research that avoids some of the 
difficulties discussed above (Duarte, Rebelo, and Wogalter 2010). Because 
of the difficulty in measuring actual behaviour, many researchers use 
a ratings-type measure of ‘intentions to comply’, comprised of subjective 
judgements.
Assessing the effectiveness of warnings
One of the main methods of assessing warnings is through a  checklist 
of characteristics or features that have been found useful in research. 
Wogalter (2006a) give such a list. Warnings can also be assessed through 
heuristic evaluation, similar to a checklist evaluation except that an expert 
in warnings does it. 
An alternative approach is to test warnings using participants. Although 
focus groups can be used and are sometimes beneficial in collecting ideas, 
they have limitations, such as the group being influenced by one or two 
individual participants. A better method is to conduct iterative cycles of 
design and test across several rounds of participants, tested individually, 
who are asked various questions about the warnings. Information gath-
ered at each round is used to aid redesigning and fixing the warning. The 
revised warning is then shown to another set of individuals who again give 
feedback, the process continuing until the warning appears satisfactory. 
However, even at this point the process is not complete until a larger pool 
of participants is tested to assure the resulting warnings communicate 
their intended message effectively. 
Warning salience in context can be determined by asking test par-
ticipants to rate on a numbered scale how well a warning attracts their 
attention when features (colour, presence of symbols, etc.) are manipu-
lated (Zielinska, Wogalter, and Mayhorn 2014). Measuring reaction time 
or speed of responses provides a more objective measure (Bzostek and 
Wogalter 1999), as can studying eye movement to assess where people 
make initial glances and eye movements to various parts of visual materials 
(Laughery et al. 1993b). More on evaluation methodologies can be found 
in Wogalter, Conzola, and Vigilante (2006). Note that once a warning 
is put into use on a product, it should be reviewed over time to see if it 
can be improved, particularly if critical events such as reported injuries  
continue. 

344 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
C-HIP model as an investigative tool
This C-HIP model can be used as tool to systematize the assessment of 
a warning that is not effective, to help pinpoint bottlenecks in processing 
and suggest solutions that allow processing to continue. 
Evaluation can be directed to any stage in the model. Evaluating the 
source perhaps differs a little from other stages. It is fundamental that 
manufacturers analyse their products to determine and document residual 
hazards that could result in injury. When hazards become known, man-
ufacturers have an obligation to try to control them. One way is to use 
effective warnings. 
Warning channel mainly concerns how safety information is sent to 
end-users. If the assessment suggests end-users are not receiving warnings 
then the distribution channels may need to be reconsidered. The concept 
of ‘cascading responsibility’ in commerce requires that equipment man-
ufacturers, intermediaries (e.g. distributors and retailers) and employers 
share a responsibility to ensure that users are provided with needed safety 
information (Williams, Kalsher, and Laughery 2006). 
The success of attention switch can be measured by placing a warning 
in expected environments or locations where people carry out a relevant 
task and then asking them later whether they saw it (McGrath 2011). As 
discussed above, head and eye movement tracking and response time 
recordings may be used to determine a warning’s effectiveness in context.
Comprehension may be assessed by memory tests, open-ended re-
sponse tests, structured interviews, etc. People’s pre-existing beliefs and 
attitudes regarding perceived hazard and their familiarity with the tool, 
task, or environment may be determined through questionnaires so that 
if, for example, perception of hazard is too low, greater persuasiveness can 
be applied. 
To assess motivation, measures of behavioural intentions can be used. 
Low intentions to comply may indicate that consequence information 
should be enhanced (e.g. by being more explicit) or that cost of compli-
ance should be reduced. Behavioural intentions are not the same as actual 
behavioural compliance, so some caution should be exercised. While 
measuring behavioural compliance is difficult, when the negative conse-
quences of an ineffective warning are substantial, the effort and resources 
may be warranted. 
Why should such high level of care be taken to design and present 
warning information? The answer has been given throughout this chap-
ter. Warnings are needed when product designers or employers or public 
communities cannot (or for other reasons do not) design out or guard 
against all of the hazards. Warnings should be constructed to be effective 
to fulfil their role in hazard control. There are plenty of tools in the toolbox 
for the warning designer to accomplish an effective design. 

Warning design / 345 
Warning design / 345 
References
ANSI. 2012. Accredited standards committee on 
safety signs and colours. Z535.1–6. Arlington, 
VA: National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association.
Baldwin, Carryl L., Jesse L. Eisert, Andre Garcia, 
Bridget Lewis, Stephanie M. Pratt, and Christian 
Gonzalez. 2012a. ‘Multimodal urgency coding: 
auditory, visual, and tactile parameters and their 
impact on perceived urgency.’ Work – A Journal 
of Prevention Assessment & Rehabilitation 41: 
3586–3591.
Baldwin, Carryl L., Charles Spence, James P. 
Bliss, J. Christopher Brill, Michael S. Wogalter, 
Christopher B. Mayhorn, and Thomas K. Ferris. 
2012b. ‘Multimodal cueing: the relative benefits 
of the auditory, visual, and tactile channels in 
complex environments.’ Proceedings of the HFES 
Annual Meeting 56 (1): 1431–1435. 
Bzostek, Julie A., and Michael S. Wogalter. 1999. 
‘Measuring visual search time for a product 
warning label as a function of icon, colour, 
column, and vertical placement.’ Proceedings of 
the HFES Annual Meeting 43 (16): 888–892.
Chan, Alan H. S., and Annie W. Y. Ng. 2010. 
‘Investigation of guessability of industrial safety 
signs: effects of prospective-user factors and 
cognitive sign features.’ International Journal of 
Industrial Ergonomics 40 (6): 689–697. 
Chapanis, Alphonse. 1994. ‘Hazards associated with 
three signal words and four colours on warning 
signs.’ Ergonomics 37: 265–275.
Desaulniers, David R. 1987. ‘Layout, organization, 
and the effectiveness of consumer product 
warnings.’ Proceedings of the HFES Annual Meeting 
31 (1): 56–60.
Dewar, Robert, 1999. ‘Design and evaluation of 
graphic symbols.’ In Visual information for 
everyday use: design and research perspectives, 
edited by Harm J. G. Zwaga, Theo Boersema, and 
Henriëtte C. M. Hoonhout, 285–303. London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Dingus, Thomas A., Jill A. Hathaway, and Bruce P. 
Hunn. 1991. ‘A most critical warning variable: two 
demonstrations of the powerful effects of cost 
on warning compliance.’ Proceedings of the HFES 
Annual Meeting 35 (15): 1034–1038.
Duarte, M. Emilia C., Francisco Rebelo, and Michael 
S. Wogalter. 2010. ‘Virtual reality and its potential 
for evaluating warning compliance.’ Human 
Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & 
Service Industries 20 (6): 526–537.
Edworthy, Judy, and Stephen Dale. 2000. ‘Extending 
knowledge of the effects of social influence in 
warning compliance.’ Proceedings of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 
44 (25): 107–110. 
Frantz, J. Paul, and Timothy P. Rhoades. 1993. 
‘A task analytic approach to the temporal 
placement of product warnings.’ Human Factors 
35: 719–730.
Frascara, Jorge. 2006. ‘Typography and the visual 
design of warnings.’ In Handbook of warnings, 
edited by Michael S. Wogalter, 385–406. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Godfrey, Sandra S., and Kenneth R. Laughery. 1984. 
‘The biasing effect of familiarity on consumer’s 
awareness of hazard.’ Proceedings of the HFES 
Annual Meeting 28: 483–486. 
Goldhaber, Gerald M., and Mark A. deTurck. 1988. 
‘Effects of consumer’s familiarity with a product 
on attention and compliance with warnings.’ 
Journal of Products Liability 11: 29–37.
Haas, Ellen C., and Judy Edworthy. 2006. ‘An 
introduction to auditory warnings and alarms.’ 
In Handbook of warnings, edited by Michael 
S. Wogalter, 189–220. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Haas, Ellen C., and Jan B. F. van Erp. 2014. ‘Multi­
modal warnings to enhance risk communication 
and safety.’ Safety Science 61: 29–35.
Hellier, Elizabeth, and Judy Edworthy. 2006. ‘Signal 
words.’ In Handbook of warnings, edited by 
Michael S. Wogalter, 407–417. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). 
2011. Graphical symbols – Safety colours and safety 
signs. ISO 3864. New York: American National 
Standards Institute.
Kalsher, Michael J., and Kevin J. Williams. 2006. 
‘Behavioral compliance: theory, methodology, 
and results.’ In Handbook of warnings, edited 
by Michael S. Wogalter, 289–300. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kalsher, Michael J., Michael S. Wogalter, and 
Bernadette M. Racicot. 1996. ‘Pharmaceutical 
container labels and warnings: preference and 
perceived readability of alternative designs and 
pictorials.’ International Journal of Industrial 
Ergonomics 18: 83–90.
Kim, Soyun, and Michael S. Wogalter. 2009. 
‘Habituation, dishabituation, and recovery effects 
in visual warnings.’ Proceedings of the HFES 
Annual Meeting 53: 1612–1616.
Laughery, Kenneth R. 1993. ‘Everybody knows: or do 
they?’ Ergonomics in Design 1 (July): 8–13.
Laughery, Kenneth R., and Danielle Paige-Smith. 
2006. ‘Explicit information in warnings.’ In 
Handbook of warnings, edited by Michael S. 
Wogalter, 419–428. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Laughery, Kenneth R., Kent P. Vaubel, Stephen L. 
Young, John W. Brelsford, and Anna L. Rowe. 

346 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
346 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
1993a. ‘Explicitness of consequence information 
in warning.’ Safety Science 16: 597–613.
Laughery, Kenneth R., Stephen L. Young, Kent P. 
Vaubel, and John W. Brelsford Jr. 1993b. ‘The 
noticeability of warnings on alcoholic beverage 
containers.’ Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 
12: 38–56.
Lesch, Mary F. 2003. ‘Comprehension and memory 
for warning symbols: age-related differences and 
impact of training.’ Journal of Safety Research 34: 
495–505
Lim, Raymond W., and Michael S. Wogalter. 2003. 
‘Beliefs about bilingual labels on consumer 
products.’ Proceedings of the HFES Annual Meeting 
47: 839–843.
McGrath, John M. 2011. ‘The role of equipment 
warning labels in the industrial workplace.’ 
International Journal of Occupational Safety and 
Ergonomics 17 (1): 49–60.
Magurno, Amy B., Michael S. Wogalter, Jill R. 
Kohake, and Jennifer Snow Wolff. 1994. ‘Iterative 
test and development of pharmaceutical 
pictorials.’ Proceedings of the 12th Triennial 
Congress of the International Ergonomics 
Association 4: 360–362. 
Mayhorn, Christopher B., and Richard C. 
Goldsworthy. 2007. ‘Refining teratogen warning 
symbols for diverse populations.’ Birth Defects 
Research Part A: Clinical and Molecular Teratology 
79 (6): 494–506.
Mayhorn, Christopher B., and Richard C. 
Goldsworthy. 2009. ‘ “New and improved”: 
the role text augmentation and the application 
of responses interpretation standards (coding 
schemes) in a final iteration of birth defects 
warnings development.’ Birth Defects Research 
Part A: Clinical and Molecular Teratology 85 (10): 
864–871.
Mayhorn, Christopher B., Timothy A. Nichols, 
Wendy A. Rogers, and Arthur D. Fisk. 2004. 
‘Hazards in the home: using older adults’ 
perceptions to inform warning design.’ Journal of 
Injury Control and Safety Promotion 11 (4): 211–218.
Mayhorn, Christopher B., Michael S. Wogalter, 
and Jennifer L. Bell. 2004. ‘Are we ready? 
Misunderstanding homeland security safety 
symbols.’ Ergonomics in Design 12 (4): 6–14.
Mayhorn, Christopher B., Michael S. Wogalter, 
Richard C. Goldsworthy, and Brannan R. 
McDougal. 2014. ‘Creating inclusive warnings: the 
role of culture in the design and evaluation of risk 
communications.’ In Cultural ergonomics: theories, 
methods, and applications, edited by Tonya 
Smith-Jackson, Marc L. Resnick, and Kayenda T. 
Johnson, 97–128. Clermont, FL: Taylor & Francis.
Mayhorn, Christopher B., Michael S. Wogalter, 
and Eric F. Shaver. 2004. ‘What does Code Red 
mean?’ Ergonomics in Design 2 (4): 12.
Mehlenbacher, Brad, Michael S. Wogalter, and 
Kenneth R. Laughery. 2002. ‘On the reading 
of product owner’s manuals: perceptions and 
product complexity.’ Proceedings of the HFES 
Annual Meeting 46: 730–734.
Mendat, Christina C., Aaron M. Watson, Christopher 
B. Mayhorn, and Michael S. Wogalter. 2005. 
‘Age differences in search time for two over-the-
counter (OTC) drug label formats.’ Proceedings of 
the HFES Annual Meeting 49: 200–203.
Shaver, Eric F., and Michael S. Wogalter. 2003. 
‘A comparison of older v. newer over-the-counter 
(OTC) nonprescription drug labels on search time 
accuracy.’ Proceedings of the HFES Annual Meeting 
47: 826–830.
Shinar, David, Robert E. Dewar, Heikki Summala, 
and Lidia Zakowski,. 2003. ‘Traffic symbol 
comprehension: a cross-cultural study.’ 
Ergonomics 46: 1549–1565.
Silver, N. Clayton, and Curt C. Braun. 1999. 
‘Behavior.’ Warnings and risk communication, 
edited by Michael S. Wogalter, David M. DeJoy, 
and Kenneth R. Laughery, 245–262. London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Smith-Jackson, Tonya L., and Abeeku Essuman-
Johnson. 2002. ‘Cultural ergonomics in Ghana, 
West Africa: a descriptive study of industry and 
trade workers’ interpretations of safety symbols.’ 
International Journal of Occupational Safety and 
Ergonomics 8 (1): 37–50.
Thorley, Paula, Elizabeth Hellier, and Judy Edworthy. 
2001. ‘Habituation effects in visual warnings.’ 
In Contemporary Ergonomics 2001, edited by 
Margaret Hanson, 223–228. London: Taylor & 
Francis.
Williams, Kevin J., Michael J. Kalsher, and Kenneth 
R. Laughery. 2006. ‘Allocation of responsibility 
for injuries.’ In Handbook of warnings, edited 
by Michael S. Wogalter, 617–628. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Williamson, R. B. 2006. ‘Fire warnings.’ In Handbook 
of warnings, edited by Michael S. Wogalter, 
701–710. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wogalter, Michael S. 2006a. ‘Purposes and scope of 
warnings.’ In Handbook of warnings, edited by 
Michael S. Wogalter, 3–9. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Wogalter, Michael S. 2006b. ‘Communication-
human information processing (C-HIP) model.’ 
In Handbook of warnings, edited by Michael S. 
Wogalter, 51–61. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wogalter, Michael S., Scott T. Allison, and Nancy 
A. McKenna. 1989. ‘Effects of cost and social 
influence on warning compliance.’ Human Factors 
31: 133–140.
Wogalter, Michael S., Todd Barlow, and Sean A. 
Murphy. 1995. ‘Compliance to owner’s manual 
warnings: influence of familiarity and the task-
relevant placement of a supplemental directive.’ 
Ergonomics 38: 1081–1091.

Warning design / 347 
Warning design / 347 
Wogalter, Michael S., John W. Brelsford, David 
R. Desaulniers, and Kenneth R. Laughery. 
1991. ‘Consumer product warnings: the role of 
hazard perception.’ Journal of Safety Research 
22: 71–82.
Wogalter, Michael S., Douglas J. Brems, and Elaine 
G. Martin. 1993. ‘Risk perception of common 
consumer products: judgments of accident 
frequency and precautionary intent.’ Journal of 
Safety Research 24: 97–106.
Wogalter, Michael S., Vincent C. Conzola, and 
William J. Vigilante Jr. 2006. ‘Applying usability 
engineering principles to the design and testing 
of warning text.’ In Handbook of warnings, edited 
by Michael S. Wogalter, 487–498. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wogalter, Michael S., David M. DeJoy, and Kenneth 
R. Laughery. 1999. ‘Organizing framework: 
a consolidated communication-human 
information processing (C-HIP) model.’ In 
Warnings and risk communication, edited by 
Michael S. Wogalter, David M. DeJoy, and 
Kenneth R. Laughery, 15–24. London: Taylor & 
Francis. 
Wogalter, Michael S., and Thomas A. Dingus. 1999. 
‘Methodological techniques for evaluating 
behavioral intentions and compliance.’ In 
Warnings and risk communication, edited by 
Michael S. Wogalter, David M. DeJoy, and 
Kenneth R. Laughery, 53–82. London: Taylor & 
Francis.
Wogalter, Michael S., Sandra S. Godfrey, Gail A. 
Fontenelle, David R. Desaulniers, Pamela R. 
Rothstein, and Kenneth R. Laughery. 1987. 
‘Effectiveness of warnings.’ Human Factors 29: 
599–612.
Wogalter, Michael S., Michael J. Kalsher, Linda 
J. Frederick, Amy B. Magurno, and Blair M. 
Brewster. 1998a. ‘Hazard level perceptions 
of warning components and configurations.’ 
International Journal of Cognitive Ergonomics 2: 
123–143.
Wogalter, Michael S., and David S. Leonard. 1999. 
‘Attention capture and maintenance.’ In Warnings 
and risk communication, edited by Michael S. 
Wogalter, David M. DeJoy, and Kenneth R. 
Laughery, 123–148. London: Taylor & Francis.
Wogalter, Michael S., Amy B. Magurno, David A. 
Dietrich, and Kevin L. Scott. 1999a. ‘Enhancing 
information acquisition for over-the-counter 
medications by making better use of container 
surface space.’ Experimental Aging Research 25: 
27–48.
Wogalter, Michael S., Amy B. Magurno, R. Rashid, 
and K. W. Klein. 1998b. ‘The influence of time 
stress and location on behavioral compliance.’ 
Safety Science 29: 143–158.
Wogalter, Michael S., and Christopher B. Mayhorn. 
2005. ‘Providing cognitive support with 
technology-based warning systems.’ Ergonomics 
48: 522–533.
Wogalter, Michael S., Christopher B. Mayhorn, and 
Olga Zielinska. 2016. ‘Use of colour in warnings.’ 
In Handbook of the psychology of colour, edited by 
A. G. Elliot, M. D. Fairchild, and Anna Franklin, 
377–400. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wogalter, Michael S., Bernadette M. Racicot, Michael 
J. Kalsher, and S. Noel Simpson. 1994. ‘The role of 
perceived relevance in behavioral compliance in 
personalized warning signs.’ International Journal 
of Industrial Ergonomics 14: 233–242.
Wogalter, Michael S., Eric F. Shaver, and Linda 
S. Chan. 2002. ‘List vs. paragraph formats on 
time to compare nutrition labels.’ In Advances in 
ergonomics, edited by P. T. McCabe, 458–462. 
London: Taylor & Francis.
Wogalter, Michael S., and N. Clayton Silver. 1990. 
‘Arousal strength of signal words.’ Forensic Reports 
3: 407–420.
Wogalter, Michael S., and N. Clayton Silver. 1995. 
‘Warning signal words: connoted strength 
and understandability by children, elders, and 
non-native English speakers.’ Ergonomics 38: 
2188–2206.
Wogalter, Michael S., N. Clayton Silver, S. David 
Leonard, and Helen Zaikina. 2006. ‘Warning 
symbols.’ In Handbook of warnings, edited by 
Michael S. Wogalter, 159–176. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wogalter, Michael S., Russell J. Sojourner, and John 
W. Brelsford. 1997. ‘Comprehension and retention 
of safety pictorials.’ Ergonomics 40: 531–542.
Wogalter, Michael S., and Mary O. Usher. 1999. 
‘Effects of concurrent cognitive task loading on 
warning compliance behavior.’ Proceedings of the 
HFES Annual Meeting 43: 106–110.
Wogalter, Michael S., and William J. Vigilante. 2006. 
‘Attention switch and maintenance.’ In Handbook 
of warnings, edited by Michael S. Wogalter, 
245–266. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Wogalter, Michael S., William J. Vigilante, and Robin 
C. Baneth. 1998. ‘Availability of operator manuals 
for used consumer products.’ Applied Ergonomics 
29: 193–200.
Wogalter, Michael S., Stephen L. Young, John W. 
Brelsford, and Todd Barlow. 1999b. ‘The relative 
contribution of injury severity and likelihood 
information on hazard-risk judgments and 
warning compliance.’ Journal of Safety Research 
30: 151–162.
Wolff, Jennifer Snow, and Michael S. Wogalter. 1998. 
‘Comprehension of pictorial symbols: effects 
of context and test method.’ Human Factors 40: 
173–186.
Young, Stephen L., J. Paul Frantz, and Timothy P. 
Rhoades. 2006. ‘Revisions of labeling for personal 
watercraft: label development and evaluation.’ 

348 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
348 / Michael S. Wogalter and Christopher B. Mayhorn
In Handbook of warnings, edited by Michael 
S. Wogalter, 723–738. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Young, Stephen L., and Michael S. Wogalter. 1990. 
‘Comprehension and memory of instruction 
manual warnings: conspicuous print and pictorial 
icons.’ Human Factors 32: 637–649.
Zielinska, Olga A., Michael S. Wogalter, and 
Christopher B. Mayhorn. 2014. ‘A perceptual 
analysis of standard safety components and 
fluorescent counterparts.’ Proceedings of the HFES 
Annual Meeting 58: 1879–1883.
Zwaga, Harm J. G., and Ron S. Easterby. 1984. 
‘Developing effective symbols or public 
information.’ In Information design: the design and 
evaluation of signs and printed material, edited by 
Ron S. Easterby and Harm J. G. Zwaga. New York: 
John Wiley.

349
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 349–360
Diagrams
Cognitive foundations for design
Barbara Tversky 
Diagrams structure information in order to foster communication, behaviour, 
comprehension, inference, and discovery. To do so, they map ideas, and 
relations among ideas, to marks and place in space on a virtual page. In this 
way they convey knowledge more directly and effectively than symbolic words. 
Empirical research can guide diagram design by uncovering cognitive design 
principles for creating marks and arranging them on a page. Whereas clarity is 
key when a single interpretation is desired, ambiguity promotes inference and 
discovery.
What are diagrams for?
Look around the world and you will see diagrams everywhere. Not just 
in newspapers, on screens, in manuals, in textbooks, but on the very 
streets that we travel: road signs, zebra crossings, street dividers, parking 
lines, bicycle and bus lanes. The world we inhabit is not just designed, it 
is diagrammed. The ancient world displayed diagrams as well, with sche-
matic maps in petroglyphs scattered across the world (see, for example, 
Brown 1979): a painting from the tomb of the Egyptian king, Rameses III, 
showing the making of bread step ­by ­step (Redford 2001), and a string of 
footprints carved in a stone walkway in Ephesus directing ancient Romans 
to the brothel. In all these cases, ancient and modern, diagrams select and 
visualize the information that is relevant, sometimes exaggerating and dis-
torting it, and eliminate the information that is not relevant. The ancient 
examples capture the two fundamental kinds of information that diagrams 
convey: the static structural spatial information of a map, and the dynamic 
functional temporal information of instructions. Space and time, and then 
causality. Space, whether maps of towns, or of the bones in our bodies, or 
the structure of a corporate organization; time, whether a scroll depicting 
an emperor’s journey, or the steps in making of bread, or the narrative of 
a graphic novel. 
Our understandings of space and time bear similarities and differences 
(see, for example, Tversky, Zacks, and Hard 2008). Diagrams use space 
to convey time. The preserved ancient diagrams were public diagrams, 
intended to communicate to others, to affect their thoughts and behaviour, 
but there are private ones as well, meant to communicate to oneself. There 
are diagrams of knowledge structures that are fixed and understood, but 
there are also diagrams meant to work out or to create a knowledge struc-
ture. Diagrams, like language, have innumerable roles in our lives, but one 
21

350 / Barbara Tversky 
role is key: to structure information to enable comprehension, inference, and 
discovery. A map can allow people to construct many routes through a city, 
but it can also serve historians to understand the political and economic 
structure of the society and city planners to redesign a city. Although early 
diagrams represented ‘literal’ space and time, later ones represent a broad 
range of concepts and dimensions that can be thought of spatially (see, for 
example, Lakoff and Johnson 1980). Perhaps because they map thought 
to space, diagrams serve communication, memory, sense-­making, and 
innovation, both for their consumers and their creators, often surpassing 
language in those roles (Hegarty 2011; Mayer 2001; Tversky 2011). 
What makes a diagram?
Many authors from many disciplines have written insightfully on diagrams 
and similar images, often attempting to separate them from other images 
such as paintings, illustrations, photographs, or video on the one hand and 
strings of words and sentences on the other (for example, Arnheim 1974, 
1988; Bender and Marrinan 2010; Card, Mackinlay, and Shneiderman 
1990; Elkins 2001; Gombrich 1961; Goodman 1978; Ittelson 1996; McCloud 
1994; Stjernfelt 2007; Tufte 1983; Walton 1990; Winn 1987). As with so 
many useful concepts, there is bound to be more agreement on examples 
than on definitions and more agreement on prototypical cases than on 
boundary ones (see Wittgenstein 1958). Diagrams, like representational 
art, illustrations, video, and photos, often include depictions of people, 
objects, and scenes that are easily recognized. Like texts, diagrams often 
include words, though typically not in sentences. Texts in turn use dia-
grammatic features, such as spacing between words and indenting for 
paragraphs to visually separate levels of meaning, or aligning logical prop-
ositions in rows and columns (Netz 1999). 
Our working definition of a diagram is an arrangement of marks on a 
virtual page (stone, paper, or screen) that represents a set of ideas and their 
relations (Tversky 1995, 2001, 2011). Defined as such, diagram includes 
graphs, charts, models, visualizations, and other graphic representa-
tions. The marks can include depictions that are representational (such 
as line drawings of objects), metaphoric (such as trash cans for disposing 
of computer files), or symbolic (such as $) as well as words. Importantly, 
the marks can also include a small set of what have been termed glyphs 
(Tversky 2011). These are abstract geometric forms, notably dots, lines, 
boxes, and arrows, that derive meanings from their geometric and gestalt 
properties and convey meanings that are readily understood in context 
(Tversky, Zacks, Lee, and Heiser 2000). The spatial diagrammatic devices 
include the proximity of marks, the grouping of marks, and the placement 
and direction of marks relative to the canonical sides and orientation of 
the page (left/right, top/bottom, centre). Like marks in space, place and 
direction in space carry meaning, again, in context. 

Diagrams / 351 
Glyphs 
The many diagrammatic uses of marks and place in space that have ap-
peared repeatedly in visualizations (such as schematic maps) throughout 
the ages, constitute an important indication of shared meanings. Further 
evidence comes from common parallel uses of spatial language and ges-
ture (see, for example, Lakoff and Johnson 1980; Tversky 2011; Tversky, 
Heiser, Lee, and Daniel 2009; Tversky and Kessell 2014). More recently, 
the meanings of spatially arranged marks have been verified in experi-
ments of production and comprehension, research that can be viewed as 
a kind of empirical semiotics. A typical approach is to ask one group of 
people to produce diagrams to express a specific meaning and to ask an-
other group to interpret diagrams using the devices produced by the first 
group. Ideally, production and comprehension converge. 
For example, in the case of arrows, for the production task, one group 
was given a description of the structure of an engine, car brake, or pulley 
system and another group was given a description of the behaviour of an 
engine, car brake, or pulley system. Both groups were asked to produce dia-
grams. The group asked to represent the structure of the system produced 
diagrams of the spatial arrangement of the parts of the system, with the 
parts labelled. The group asked to represent the behaviour of the system 
produced dia­grams of the parts involved in the action of the system with no 
labels, but with arrows indicating the sequence of the process from start to 
finish (Heiser and Tversky 2006). The comprehension groups were asked 
to interpret diagrams with arrangements of labelled parts but no arrows, 
or to interpret diagrams of the parts involved in the action of the system 
with arrows but no labels. Those asked to interpret diagrams with labelled 
parts and no arrows produced descriptions of structure, whereas those 
asked to interpret diagrams with arrows but no labelled parts produced 
step-­by-­step causal descriptions of the behaviour of the system from start 
to finish. Thus, arrows turn diagrams of structure into diagrams of causal 
behaviour in time. 
Although frequent nowadays, the diagrammatic uses of arrows to con-
vey direction or causality or movement or forces or implication seem to 
have appeared only quite recently (see Gombrich 1990). Other glyphs like 
lines, dots, and frames (such as circles, blobs, and boxes), as well as use of 
place and direction in space can be found in ancient times. Dots or blobs 
in ancient maps or modern networks are produced for and understood as 
places or landmarks or ideas, that is, things that can be regarded as zero-­
dimensional (Talmy 1983; Tversky and Lee 1999). Lines in route maps or 
networks or graphs are produced for and understood as relations between 
places or ideas or numbers, just as paths in the world connect places in 
the world (Kessell and Tversky 2011; Nickerson et al. 2008; Tversky and 
Lee 1999). Boxes or frames are produced for and understood as containers 
of like things (Zacks and Tversky 1999) just as boxes and frames are used 

352 / Barbara Tversky 
to contain similar objects in the real world. In particular, lines in graphs 
are interpreted as and produced for trends, whereas bars are produced for 
and interpreted as discrete comparisons. Arrows, as we have seen, are pro-
duced for and understood as asymmetric relations, in particular, causal or 
temporal relations (Heiser and Tversky 2006). A set of glyphs can consti-
tute a rudimentary vocabulary, a partial semantics for classes of diagrams. 
Their interpretations and syntax varies with context; dots and lines and 
boxes are produced, understood, and conjoined differently for circuit dia-
grams, decision trees, route maps, and statistical graphs. Dots are places 
on route maps and values in graphs. Lines are paths in route maps and 
dimensions in graphs; in both, they represent relations or connections. 
These glyphs that appear repeatedly in diagrams are not arbitrary conven-
tions, they are grounded in the world, in the body, and in the mind. 
Place in space
The strongest diagrammatic axis is the (virtual) vertical, conceptually 
aligned with gravity, the major asymmetric axis in the world. Undoubtedly 
because going upwards against gravity requires strength, health, power, 
wealth, up in diagrams, language, and gesture is associated with evaluative 
dimensions like better, stronger, and more. Down is associated with the 
opposite, across cultures, in children as well as adults (see, for example, 
Cooper and Ross 1975; Lakoff and Johnson 1980; Schubert and Maass 
2011; Tversky, Kugelmass, and Winter 1991). There can be competition 
for the vertical axis: inflation and unemployment are both negative, but 
the numbers that measure them go upwards. The horizontal axis does not 
correspond to any strong asymmetry in the world, but cultural factors, 
notably reading/writing order, create a horizontal asymmetry, so that for 
languages that are read left to ­right, quantities increase from left to right, 
people facing rightwards are perceived as more powerful, and movement 
headed rightwards as faster (Chatterjee 2002; Maass, Pagani, and Berta 
2007; Maass et al. 2007; Tversky, Kugelmass, and Winter 1991). The body 
as well as the world confers meaning to space (see, for example, Franklin 
and Tversky 1990; Casasanto 2011) so that good is sometimes associated 
with right in right-­handers and left in left-­handers (Casasanto 2011). 
Centre also has a special status in diagrams, language, and gesture (see 
Arnheim 1988). 
Words and symbols
Diagrams map ideas, and relations among ideas, to marks and place in 
space, whether literally spatial as in an architectural plan or a map, or 
metaphorically spatial as in a graph. Words can do this but for the most 
part only symbolically. Thus diagrams are a privileged means to convey 
meaning. Most diagrams – think of maps and graphs – are mixed media, 
and use words and symbols, though these are typically used diagrammati-
cally. In text, words appear in sentences and paragraphs. In diagrams, they 

Diagrams / 353 
typically appear as labels and annotations, spatially connected to the ideas 
they elaborate, as in the names of cities or streets on maps, the names of 
parts in diagrams, and as labels of dimensions in graphs. 
Two examples
Because it is easier to exemplify than to define, let us exemplify. The 
plates in Diderot and D’Alembert’s Encyclopédie (1751–1772), perhaps 
unintentionally, provide a diagrammatic definition of diagram. They show 
depictions of scenes of workers, such as beekeepers, in action at the top 
of a page, and a catalogue of the tools used in the activity at the bottom 
(Figure 1). (I am indebted to the analyses of Bender and Marrinan [2010] 
but have added observations of my own.) 
The top third of the image depicts the setting for beekeeping, including 
beehives, trees, tools, a hut, and beekeepers and other workers arrayed 
and sized as they would be at work. The bottom part is quite different. 
It shows various objects and tools involved in beekeeping approximately 
Figure 1
Plate showing the 
tools and practice 
of beekeeping, 
from Diderot and 
D’Alembert’s 
Encyclopédie 
(1751–1772). 
University of Reading, 
Special Collections.

354 / Barbara Tversky 
equally spaced and lined up in rows and columns. The objects are not 
proportional to their actual sizes, but rather approximately equal in image 
size. Their orientations are not as they would be in a scene, but rather ori-
entations that best show most of their features. Shading is used to accen-
tuate the features of the objects. The three types of bees are grouped, and 
placed next to cutaways of the honeycomb they work in. The hive is shown 
whole, and as a cutaway. The box and drawers are shown whole to the left 
and different views of their parts are lined up to the right, in reading order. 
There are letters next to the objects that refer to a key. Each of the two 
global sections of the image is explicitly framed. There is a frame around 
the juxtaposed pair, drawing explicit comparison of similarities and differ-
ences, of scenes and diagrams in general and of the activities of beekeeping 
and the tools for beekeeping in particular. This diagram, then, serves as 
a meta-­diagram, an implicit definition of a diagram, juxtaposing a depic-
tion of a scene to a diagram of it in which the same objects are organized 
and displayed along different principles. 
This meta-­diagram of diagramming shows some of the key features 
employed in diagrams: using standardized image size, perspective, and 
shading; using empty space to separate comparable objects; using amount 
of space to group like things and separate unlike things; organizing things 
in rows and columns; juxtaposing things that are alike yet different; using 
left-­to-­right reading order to guide viewers’ looking; ordering rows by 
showing the whole, then the parts; using top-­down reading order to direct 
attention first to the scene, then to the diagram; framing the scene and the 
diagram, and framing the whole; adding letters and a key.
The beekeeping diagram is primarily a structural story. The next ex-
ample (Figure 2), by Charles Minard, Inspector General of Bridges and 
Roads in mid-eighteenth-­century France, is a story about space and time 
and causality – Napoleon’s unsuccessful campaign on Moscow. The geog-
raphy from the then-­French border to Moscow, the temporal and spatial 
course of the campaign and the retreat, the size and losses of French troops, 
and the temperature (in the lower graph) are each mapped to space and 
linked to each other. There are no arrows; like all diagrams, it presumes 
shared knowledge with an audience, in this case, that its audience will 
know that the attack advanced eastwards, conveniently in reading order. 
How should diagrams be designed?
Clarity
As noted, the fundamental aim of diagrams is to structure information for 
comprehension, sense-­making, inference, and discovery. For many pur-
poses, diagrams are designed for clarity. Subway maps are designed to nav-
igate the subway. Assembly diagrams to ensure correct assembly of chil-
dren’s toys or industrial equipment. Statistical graphs to convey essential 

Diagrams / 355 
numbers, trends, and relationships accurately. Science diagrams to illumi-
nate scientific processes. In such cases, diagram design should be guided 
by two principles: congruity, that is, the spatial array should conform to 
the desired conceptual model; and apprehension, that is, the essential 
information should be readily and accurately perceived and understood 
(see, for example, Tversky, Morrison, and Bétrancourt 2002). This entails 
selecting the necessary information, eliminating the information that clut-
ters and distracts, and presenting that information in the right way. Saying 
is easier than doing. Selecting the crucial information and structuring it 
congruently can be difficult tasks that depend on both the information to 
be conveyed and the audience for that information, among other things. 
Similar to establishing meanings of glyphs, an empirical approach to 
designing diagrams can be fruitful. In particular, the 3Ps programme – pro-
duction, preference, performance – has been developed for this purpose and 
has led not only to effective diagrams, when the 3Ps converge, but also to 
principles for creating effective diagrams (see Kessell and Tversky 2011; 
Tversky et al. 2007). In the production part of the programme, domain 
experts are asked to create diagrams for a specific purpose. The diagrams 
they produce are evaluated by another experienced group in the preference 
phase. From these, cognitive design principles are extracted and instanti-
ated (or not) in diagrams that are used by a third group in a performance 
task. 
There is some artistry in inferring the cognitive design principles from 
the preference phase, but ultimately they are tested by performance. 
In an application of the 3Ps to route maps, empirically inferred design 
principles suggested that paths and direction of turns at landmarks were 
critical, but exact distance and orientation were not (Denis 1997; Tversky 
and Lee 1999). For the case of assembly instructions, a production group 
Figure 2
Charles Minard’s 
representation 
of Napoleon’s 
Russian campaign 
of 1812, showing 
the temporal and 
spatial course 
of the campaign 
and retreat, the 
size and losses of 
French troops, and 
the temperature 
(in the lower 
graph).
Bibliothèque nationale 
de France. GE DON-4182.

356 / Barbara Tversky 
first assembled a piece of furniture using the photo on its box and then 
created assembly instructions for others. The instructions that were rated 
highly by the preference group showed the assembly step by step (where 
each step was the attachment of a new object part), showed the perspec-
tive of the actions, and specified the actions using arrows and guidelines. 
Instructions instantiating these principles led to better performance than 
the original instructions that came with the furniture (Tversky et al. 2007). 
A third case of applying the 3Ps considered diagrams for keeping track of 
and making inferences about certain people who happened to be in spec-
ified places at specified times. Inferences could be about characteristics of 
individuals or groups, about the nature of places, about sequences in time, 
and more. For the majority of kinds of inferences, people produced, pre-
ferred, and performed better when the information was arrayed in tables; 
however, temporal inferences were preferred, produced, and facilitated 
by line graphs (Kessell and Tversky 2011). 
The steps of the three Ps can be iterated to further refine designs. In 
the best cases, the cognitive design principles can be extended to a range 
of diagrams. For example, the cognitive design principles for instructions 
for furniture assembly hold not only for instructions for other assembly 
tasks but also for instructions to operate equipment and for explanations 
of how something works, as well as for some kinds of interface design. We 
can segment the action into natural steps, for example, by parts; show the 
perspective of the action; enhance the action with arrows, guidelines, and 
the like. Of course, this is not a complete set of cognitive design principles, 
but a start that has considerable generality. 
Conveying static structural information about parts and their interre-
lations, as in a map, a corporate chart, or a circuit diagram, is relatively 
easy. Conveying dynamic information about change or process or cau-
sality, is more difficult, if only because diagrams are static. Arrows can 
be effective for showing some cases of change over time, as they can be 
readily perceived as such (Heiser and Tversky 2006). Many have turned 
to animations, which use change in time to show change in time. As such, 
animations are congruent with the desired thinking. However, in a large 
number of studies, the vast majority of educational animations that were 
compared to static equivalents did not surpass them (Tversky, Morrison, 
and Bétrancourt 2002). The failure of animated educational graphics to 
surpass static ones is most likely because many all too often violate the 
apprehension principle: too many changes occur too quickly to be per-
ceived (Tversky, Morrison, and Bétrancourt 2002). In addition, most ani-
mations show, but do not explain; and they show continuously in real time 
rather than segmenting the actions into the natural units created by com-
pleted actions. Nevertheless, successful animations can be and have been 
designed. Some of the ways that animations can be made more effective 
include: allowing easy-­to-­use interaction with the critical aspects of the 
process; using diagrammatic devices like arrows, frames, and highlighting 

Diagrams / 357 
to show where to look; emphasizing and foreshadowing key changes; and 
including concurrent step-­by-­step causal explanations. 
Another solution for designing visual explanations of behaviour or pro- 
cess or causal change is a sequence of essential stills, as in the case of fur-
niture assembly. Segmentation of action into essential, natural steps is 
evident in the Egyptian tomb paintings of bread making, with each step 
in a distinct panel. Chinese scrolls depicting stories are also segmented, 
sometimes by the grouping of the figures in each segment, and also by 
standardizing the size of segments, as in the pages of an illustrated book. 
The segments are approximately the same length, and correspond to a size 
that is both readily perceived and readily advanced by simultaneous roll-
ing and unrolling (Chou 2009). Graphic novels and comics also segment 
action into natural units (or not) for effect (McCloud 1994). However, 
showing a process as a sequence of stills requires people to integrate them, 
often a challenging task for both the producer and users of the diagram 
because so many different aspects need to be represented and integrated. 
Again, various diagrammatic devices for linking frames such as arrows, 
repetition of key elements, and insets can facilitate the integration that 
underlies understanding. 
Ambiguity
To a great extent, the goals to communicate clearly and to foster inference 
and discovery clash. Compare a single route map from one specific desti-
nation to another specific destination to a city map that allows the user to 
compute many different routes to many different places. The single route 
map is easier to use in that single case because it eliminates the information 
that is currently irrelevant, but the multiple route city map is more useful 
for planning many journeys and for many travellers, as well as for many 
other kinds of inferences that can be made from maps. Clarity encourages 
a single interpretation, the one intended. At the other extreme, ambiguity 
encourages many interpretations. Encouraging multiple interpretations 
can be essential, for example in cutting-­edge science where information 
is inconsistent or incomplete; that is, where the relevant and irrelevant 
information have yet to be discovered. 
Premature structuring of information restricts interpretations and can 
prevent discovery. Consider a common form of data, the movements of 
agents in space and time. The ‘agents’ could be diseases, pollen, packages 
in the mail, or terrorists. Diagrams of such information are often used to 
discover the mechanisms generating the movements. Such information 
can be displayed in a table or matrix, showing agent by place by time, but 
is often displayed in graphs with lines that link the movements of agents 
through space and time. In one experiment, participants were asked to 
generate as many inferences as possible for the same information dis-
played in tables or in line graphs. The tables, the less-­structured pres-
entations of the data, yielded more inferences than the line graphs, the 

358 / Barbara Tversky 
358 / Barbara Tversky 
structured arrangements of the data (Kessell and Tversky 2011). Similarly, 
in the initial stages of design, designers prefer vague ambiguous sketches, 
one of the reasons they dislike rectified CAD-­CAM programs. They report 
having conversations with their sketches: sketching for one reason, but, 
on reinspection, making new discoveries in their own sketches. Designers 
say they find new interpretations when they reconfigure their sketches, 
and experienced designers are more adept at this than novices. In design, 
as in all problem-solving, avoiding fixation and generating multiple inter-
pretations are desirable. Ambiguity affords reconfiguring sketches, and 
reconfiguring yields new interpretations, discovery, and new design ideas, 
a positive and productive cycle (see, for example, Schon 1983; Suwa and 
Tversky 1996; Suwa et al. 2001; Tversky and Suwa 2009).
Brief recap
Diagrams, graphs, and charts – that is, graphics of all kinds – are ubiqui-
tous across time and space. They put thought into the world where it can 
be contemplated and revised. They do this by mapping ideas and relations 
among ideas to marks and place on a virtual page. Because diagrams use 
marks and place to represent thought that is literally or metaphorically 
spatial, they convey knowledge more directly and efficiently than strings 
of words that bear relations to meanings that are primarily arbitrary. Thus 
making sense and making inferences are often faster and more productive 
from well-­designed diagrams than from language. 
Empirical research can guide diagram design by uncovering cognitive 
design principles for creating marks and arranging them on a page. By 
externalizing thought, diagrams play many roles in our lives: they facilitate 
memory and information processing, they communicate, they explain, 
they establish common ground, they promote inference and discovery. 
Whereas clarity in diagrams is key when a single interpretation is desired, 
ambiguity allows many interpretations and promotes inference and 
discovery. 
Acknowledgements
The author is also indebted to the following grants for facilitating the research 
and/or preparing the manuscript: National Science Foundation HHC 0905417, 
IIS-0725223, IIS-0855995, and REC 0440103, and Office of Naval Research 
NOOO14-PP-1-O649, N000140110717, and N000140210534.
References
Arnheim, Rudolf. 1974. Art and visual perception: 
a psychology of the creative eye. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Arnheim, Rudolf. 1988. The power of the center: 
a study of composition in the visual arts. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California  
Press.
Bender, John, and Michael Marrinan. 2010. 
The culture of diagram. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.

Diagrams / 359 
Diagrams / 359 
Brown, Lloyd A. 1979. The story of maps. New York: 
Dover.
Card, Stuart K., Jock Mackinlay, and Ben 
Shneiderman. 1999. Readings in infor­mation 
visualization: using vision to think. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Casasanto, Daniel. 2011. ‘Different bodies, different 
minds the body specificity of language and 
thought.’ Current Directions in Psychological 
Science 20 (6): 378–383.
Chatterjee, Anjan. 2002. ‘Portrait profiles and the 
notion of agency.’ Empirical Studies of the Art 20: 
33–41.
Chou, J. 2009. ‘Mapping the invisible: a meaningful 
viewing experience in Chinese handscroll maps.’ 
Poster presented at Gordon Conference on 
Science Visualizations, Oxford University, July. 
Cooper, William E., and John Robert Ross. 1975. 
‘World order.’ In Papers from the parasession on 
functionalism, edited by Robin E. Grossman, L. 
James San, and Timothy J. Vance, 63–111. Chicago: 
Chicago Linguistic Society.
Denis, Michel. 1997. ‘The description of routes: 
a cognitive approach to the production of spatial 
discourse.’ Current Psychology of Cognition 16: 
409–458.
Elkins, James. 2001. The Domain of images. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press.
Franklin, Nancy, and Barbara Tversky. 1990. 
‘Searching imagined environments.’ Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General 119, 63–76.
Gombrich, Ernst H. 1961. Art and illusion. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gombrich, Ernst H. 1990. ‘Pictorial instructions.’ 
In Images and understanding, edited by Horace 
Barlow, Colin Blakemore, and Miranda Weston-
Smith, 26–45. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Goodman, Nelson. 1978. Languages of art: an 
approach to a theory of symbols. New York: 
Bobbs-­Merrill.
Hegarty, Mary. 2011. ‘The cognitive science of 
visual displays: implications for design.’ Topics in 
Cognitive Science 3 (3): 446–474.
Heiser, Julie, and Barbara Tversky. 2006. ‘Arrows 
in comprehending and producing mechanical 
diagrams.’ Cognitive Science 30 (3): 581–592.
Ittelson, William H. 1996. ‘Visual perception of 
markings.’ Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 3: 
171–187.
Kessell, Angela M., and Barbara Tversky. 2011. 
‘Visualizing space, time, and agents: production, 
performance, and preference.’ Cognitive 
Processing 12: 43–52.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors 
we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McCloud, Scott. 1994. Understanding comics. New 
York: Harper Collins.
Maass, Anne, Damiano Pagani, and Emanuela Berta. 
2007. ‘How beautiful is the goal and how violent 
is the fistfight? Spatial bias in the interpretation of 
human behavior.’ Social Cognition 25: 833–852.
Maass, Anne, Caterina Suitner, Xenia Favaretto, 
and Marina Cignacchi. 2007. ‘Groups in space: 
stereotypes and the spatial agency bias.’ Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 45: 496–504.
Mayer, Richard E. 2001. Multimedia learning. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Netz, Reviel. 1999. ‘Linguistic formulae as cognitive 
tools.’ Pragmatics and Cognition 7: 147–176.
Nickerson, Jeffrey V., James Corter, Barbara Tversky, 
Doris Zahner, and Yun Jin Rho. 2008. ‘Diagrams 
as a tool in the design of information systems.’ In 
Design computing and cognition ’08, edited by John 
S. Gero and Ashok Goel, 103–122. Dordrecht, 
Netherlands: Springer.
Redford, Donald B., ed. 2001. Oxford encyclopedia of 
ancient Egypt. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schön, Donald A. 1983. The reflective practitioner: 
how professionals think in action. New York: 
Harper Collins.
Schubert, Thomas, and Anne Maass, eds. 2011. 
Spatial dimensions of social thought. Berlin: De 
Gruyter Mouton. 
Stjernfelt, Frederik. 2007. Diagrammatology: an 
investigation on the borderlines of phenomenology, 
ontology, and semantics. New York: Springer. 
Suwa, Masaki, and Barbara Tversky. 1996. ‘What 
architects see in their sketches: implications for 
design tools.’ In CHI ’96 Conference Companion 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 191–192. 
New York: ACM.
Suwa, Masaki, Barbara Tversky, John Gero, and 
Terry Purcell. 2001. ‘Seeing into sketches: 
regrouping parts encourages new interpretations.’ 
In Visual and spatial reasoning in design, edited 
by John S. Gero, Barbara Tversky and Terry 
Purcell, 207–219. Sydney: Key Centre of Design 
Computing and Cognition.
Talmy, Leonard. 1983. ‘How language structures 
space.’ In Spatial orientation: theory, research and 
application, edited by Herbert L. Pick and Linda 
P. Acredolo, 225–282. New York: Plenum.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The visual display of quanti­
tative information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Tversky, Barbara. 1995. ‘Cognitive origins of graphic 
conventions.’ In Understanding images, edited 
by Francis T. Marchese, 29–53. New York: 
Springer-­Verlag.
Tversky, Barbara. 2001. ‘Spatial schemas in 
depictions.’ In Spatial schemas and abstract 
thought, edited by Merideth Gattis, 79–111. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tversky, Barbara. 2011. ‘Visualizations of thought.’ 
Topics in Cognitive Science 3: 499–535. 
Tversky, Barbara, Maneesh Agrawala, Julie Heiser, 
Paul Lee, Pat Hanrahan, Doantam Phan, Chris 
Stolte, and Marie-­Paul Daniel. 2007. ‘Cognitive 

360 / Barbara Tversky 
360 / Barbara Tversky 
design principles for generating visualizations.’ In 
Applied spatial cognition: from research to cognitive 
technology, edited by Gary L. Allen, 53–73. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tversky, Barbara, Julie Heiser, Paul Lee, and Marie-­
Paul Daniel. 2009. ‘Explanations in gesture, 
diagram, and word.’ In Spatial Language and 
dialogue, edited by Kenny R. Coventry, Thora 
Tenbrink, and John A. Bateman, 119–131. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Tversky, Barbara, and Angela, M. Kessell. 
2014. ‘Thinking in action.’ Special issue on 
Diagrammatic Reasoning. Pragmatics and 
Cognition 22, 206–223. 
Tversky, Barbara, Sol Kugelmass, and Atalia Winter. 
1991. ‘Cross-­cultural and developmental trends 
in graphic productions.’ Cognitive Psychology 23: 
515–557.
Tversky, Barbara, and Paul U. Lee. 1999. ‘Pictorial 
and verbal tools for conveying routes.’ In Spatial 
information theory: cognitive and computational 
foundations of geographic information science, 
edited by Christian Freksa and David M. Mark, 
51–64. Berlin: Springer.
Tversky, Barbara, Julie Bauer Morrison, and Mireille 
Bétrancourt. 2002. ‘Animation: can it facilitate?’ 
International Journal of Human Computer Studies 
57: 247–262. 
Tversky, Barbara, and Masaki Suwa. 2009. ‘Thinking 
with sketches.’ In Tools for innovation, edited by 
Arthur B. Markman. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Tversky, Barbara, Jeffrey M. Zacks, and Bridgette 
Martin Hard. 2008. ‘The structure of experience.’ 
In Understanding events, edited by Thomas 
Shipley and Jeffrey M. Zacks, 436–464. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Tversky, Barbara, Jeffrey M. Zacks, Paul U. Lee, 
and Julie Heiser. 2000. ‘Lines, blobs, crosses, 
and arrows: diagrammatic communication with 
schematic figures.’ In Theory and application of 
diagrams, edited by Michael Anderson, Peter 
Cheng and Volker Haarslev, 221–230. Berlin: 
Springer.
Walton, Kendall L. 1990. Mimesis as make-­believe. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Winn, William D. 1987. ‘Charts, graphs and diagrams 
in educational materials.’ In The psychology of 
illustration, edited by Dale M. Willows and Havey 
A. Haughton. New York: Springer-­Verlag.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1958. Philosophical 
investigations. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Zacks, Jeff, and Barbara Tversky. 1999. ‘Bars and 
lines: a study of graphic communication.’ Memory 
and Cognition, 27: 1073–1079.

361
Designing static and animated 
diagrams for modern learning 
materials
Richard K. Lowe
Today’s learning resources, whether traditional print materials such as textbooks 
or the latest educational apps for electronic tablets, are replete with diagrams. 
Accompanying this graphics explosion has been a decreasing reliance on text as 
the primary means of presenting information to learners. This chapter examines 
reasons for the general shift towards diagrams in modern learning materials. 
Special attention is given to the challenge of conveying dynamic subject matter 
via static diagrams and the potential of animated diagrams to address this 
challenge. However, a warning is given against regarding such animations as an 
educational magic bullet. The recent rapid rise in the use of animated diagrams 
contrasts starkly with the gradual evolution of static diagrams whose design has 
benefitted enormously from hundreds of years of trial and error. Designers of 
today’s animated diagrams lack the long legacy of craft-based knowledge that 
is available to those who design static diagrams. Drawing on recent research, 
this chapter identifies key new design issues confronting those charged with 
developing animated diagrams that are intended to support learning. It calls for 
a fundamental change in how animated diagrams are designed that is based 
on empirical evidence and a deep understanding of how learners process these 
representations.
When textbooks were textbooks
Since the introduction of movable type, the printed word has been the 
dominant means by which educators have presented to-be-learned infor-
mation to students. An early notable exception to this dominance of text 
was the profusely illustrated Orbis sensualium pictus by Comenius that 
originally appeared in 1657 and was one of the first publications specifically 
produced for general educational purposes (Comenius 1777; Figure  1, 
overleaf). The inspired work of Comenius in allocating pictures and words 
essentially joint responsibility for information presentation was relatively 
short-lived and reliance on words as the primary form of communication 
to students soon became the norm. As the term indicates, ‘textbooks’ were 
mostly made up of text, while pictures, if present at all, typically played 
a  minor role as adjuncts to the written word. Today, the educational 
establishment still very much tends to privilege words over pictures. Only 
with the recent advent of graphics-oriented computers, tablets, and smart 
phones have significant challenges to the dominance of text begun to arise. 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 361–375
22

362 / Richard K. Lowe
Ascendancy of graphics
The dramatic advances in technologies for generating, manipulating, and 
distributing graphics that have occurred in recent years make it far easier 
and cheaper to include a wide range of high-quality pictorial materials in 
educational resources. These illustrations are markedly different from 
those provided by Comenius – they were relatively crude and lacking in 
fine detail due to the physical limitations of the woodcut technique used 
for their execution. For Comenius, a key challenge was to provide learn-
ers with illustrations that were sufficiently faithful to the referent subject 
matter. However, today there are essentially no practical limitations on 
what can be depicted or the style and quality of that depiction. Further, 
the move to computer and tablet presentation of learning materials has 
made it increasingly common for dynamic graphics to be included along-
side, or instead of, static graphics. The current situation can be seen in the 
historical context of developments in mass education that have occurred 
through the technologically based distribution of resources such as text-
books (see Houghton and Willows 1987). 
Of particular note is that current graphics hardware and software mean 
that today’s educational resources can have as much depictive realism as 
is desired. However, the historical development of explanatory depictions 
shows that educational effectiveness is not a simple function of how closely 
graphics resemble their referent subject matter (see also Smallman and 
Cook 2010; Tversky 2000). If this were the case, the need for depictions 
Figure 1 
Pages from Orbis 
Sensualium Pictus 
(Comenius 1777).
University of Reading, 
Special Collections.

Designing static and animated diagrams / 363 
such as diagrams that are deliberately non-realistic would never have 
emerged – we would now only ever use high resolution full-colour static or 
moving photographic images because of their match to the actual appear-
ance of the referent. However, as discussed in the next section, education 
also relies on diagrams, a type of depiction that intentionally discards most 
of the information required for veridical portrayal of their referent subject 
matter. In addition to abstracting to retain a very limited subset only of 
the available information, diagrams may also extensively manipulate the 
information they do include. Given the virtually unlimited options design-
ers of educational illustrations currently have in terms of the nature of the 
depiction they can generate, the challenge is no longer one of producing 
a sufficiently faithful rendition of the target content. Rather, the issue now 
is to choose what type of depiction is most appropriate for the topic, audi-
ence, and purpose (Davenport et al. 2008; Prangsma et al. 2009).
Characteristics of diagrams
As noted above, two key ways in which diagrams differ from more real-
istic depictions are in their abstraction and manipulation of the referent 
subject matter. These departures from reality typically result not only in 
simplification of the original information, but also its reorganization. In 
educational settings, the intentions behind both these treatments include 
making targeted aspects of the subject matter more comprehensible, more 
memorable, and more generalizable. Figure 2 exemplifies some of the ways 
in which a diagram (in this case, of a battery powered LED headtorch) dif-
fers from a realistic portrayal.
switch
LED (hidden from view)
resistor (hidden)
3 cell battery
wire
Figure 2 
Photograph of LED headlamp torch (left) and diagram of headlamp’s electrical 
circuit (right). Note diagram’s clean lines, removal of inessentials (e.g. 
headband), abstraction of components (e.g. graphic tokens for battery), 
and manipulation of layout (e.g. more orderly arrangement). Despite the 
correspondence between some aspects of the diagram and its referent being 
indirect, it is still possible for an informed viewer to map between the two. 

364 / Richard K. Lowe
Diagrams single out important information by removing what is con-
sidered to be irrelevant contextual material that may obscure the essentials 
or otherwise distract learners (Lowe 1993a). One instance of this parsi-
mony is the distinctive clean line-drawing approach that is a hallmark of 
diagrammatic representations. As well as stripping away the inessential, 
designing diagrams also typically involves extensive paring down of infor-
mation that is retained so that what remains is often little more than a set 
of graphic tokens (e.g. simple geometric markings). This tokenization 
helps to reveal underlying relationships that could otherwise be masked 
by the detail included in a more faithful portrayal (Moreno, Ozogul, and 
Reisslein 2011). Further, any rendering that is applied to spaces enclosed 
by lines within a diagram tends not to be for giving the depiction a more 
realistic appearance. Rather, it is usually intended for more deliberate 
explanatory purposes such as indicating conceptually distinct regions of 
the diagram or cueing learners about where they should direct their visual 
attention. Diagrams often also substantially alter the spatial and tempo-
ral ­organization that is present in the original referent subject matter. In 
some cases, the intention of such reorganization is to separate items that 
would other­wise be spatially or temporally coincident and therefore result 
in some aspects of the information being hidden. In other cases, strongly 
related entities, that are in reality widely separated, can be brought together 
into close groupings to indicate that they belong together in a conceptual 
sense. 
Descriptive versus depictive representations
The burgeoning use of diagrams in today’s educational materials is not 
driven solely by technological factors. Enlightened educators have long 
appreciated the distinctive advantages that graphics can have over text as 
a means of presenting certain types of to-be-learned subject matter effec-
tively. As noted by Schnotz (2001), these potential benefits for learners 
arise from the very different ways in which graphics (depictive representa-
tions) and text (descriptive representations) convey information. Rather 
than characterizing either type of representation as in all respects superior 
to the other, Schnotz regards graphics and text as each having their own 
distinctive strengths and weaknesses. From an educational perspective, 
they are complementary and, hence, often used in combination within 
modern learning materials. For example, text can be far more effective than 
graphics for presenting abstract conceptual information or generaliza-
tions. However, the properties of text as a sign system make it ill-suited for 
some other important uses. In particular, whereas there is typically a high 
degree of visuospatial or structural correspondence between a graphic 
and the subject matter it represents, this is not the case with text. With 
more realistic graphics at least, the depicted entities both directly resem-
ble the referent entities in some respects and are configured in a manner 

Designing static and animated diagrams / 365 
that closely reflects their arrangement in the referent. Even with diagrams 
that portray the subject matter in a highly abstracted and manipulated 
form, there is some degree of correspondence between the depiction and 
the referent (as Figure 2 illustrates), albeit rather more indirect. 
As long as the learner is competent in handling the types of conven-
tions that are used in a diagram, mapping between the structure of the 
representation and referent’s structure is reasonably straightforward. In 
contrast, a text representation of the same subject matter neither looks 
anything like that referent nor is arranged in a corresponding manner. The 
words that comprise a text passage have no resemblance to the referents 
they represent and their rule-based, linear, sequential arrangement gener-
ally differs from the actual spatial and temporal organization of the original 
subject matter. This means that text can be a less effective way of present-
ing information to learners when it is important for them to know what 
things look like and appreciate how they are structured. Understanding 
text-only representations is particularly demanding when the subject mat-
ter is complex and unfamiliar to the target learner group (e.g. Bransford 
and Johnson 1972). Under these circumstances, the learners are likely to 
have far more difficulty in visualizing what is being described than they 
would if provided with a diagram. 
The advantages of graphic forms of representation can also extend to 
higher-order learning tasks such as problem-solving because they provide 
information processing affordances that are not available with text-based 
alternatives (Larkin and Simon 1987). For example, relationships that 
people find difficult to detect in a passage of text can become immediately 
apparent when presented diagrammatically because of the high degree of 
structural correspondence between a diagram and its referent. 
Diagrams and educational effectiveness
Unfortunately, the potential benefits of depictive representations for fos-
tering learning are not always fulfilled in practice, particularly in the case 
of diagrams. As already noted, the special characteristics of diagrams set 
them apart from more everyday forms of depiction that have a far closer 
resemblance to their referent subject matter (Cheng, Lowe, and Scaife 
2001). A worst case scenario might be that if the target audience to whom 
a diagram is directed do not understand the depictive conventions used 
in a diagram, their interpretation could be compromised – graphicacy 
(Bétrancourt et al. 2012) is still very much the Cinderella area of educa-
tion (compared with literacy and numeracy). Further problems can arise 
if the learners are insufficiently familiar with the content depicted in the 
diagram. Under such circumstances, it would be foolish for an educational 
publisher to include a diagrammatic representation on its own without any 
supporting material (such as a realistic depiction) that helps the learner 
process the diagram appropriately (Moreno, Ozogul, and Reisslein 2011). 

366 / Richard K. Lowe
However, even when learners possess the requisite graphicacy skills and 
are familiar with the presented topic, they can be let down by diagrams 
that are poorly designed (Catley and Novick 2008). 
For the purposes of this chapter, we will assume that the educational 
goal of providing a  diagram is to help the learner build a  high-quality 
mental model (Johnson-Laird 1983) of the to-be-learned subject matter. 
The diagram designer plays a crucial role in facilitating the achievement 
of this goal. A mental model is a knowledge structure within the learner’s 
mind that is formed during their perceptual and cognitive processing of 
the educational resources provided to support learning (Schnotz 2014). 
For example, when a learner studies a diagram (an external representation 
of the subject matter), the implicit expectation is that this will result in 
the learner constructing a mental model of the subject matter (an internal 
representation). 
Mental models are considered to represent subject matter in a simpli-
fied way (in the form of tokens rather than in all its detail), something they 
share with the physical models that we use in the external world. However, 
they should be of the requisite quality to provide a sound basis for taking 
action such as making the inferences and predictions that are the founda-
tion of understanding. For a mental model to be of high quality, it needs 
to be task-appropriate, accurate, and sufficiently comprehensive (Lowe 
and Boucheix 2008). Ideally, the design of an educational diagram should 
help the intended learners to construct a high-quality mental model of 
the depicted subject matter. At a bare minimum, it should therefore be 
designed with a particular learning task in mind, be free from inaccuracies, 
and provide essential but not superfluous information. However, there are 
many ways in which these minimum requirements could be met and yet 
still result in educationally ineffective diagrams. The crucial issue is that 
merely including these characteristics in an external representation does 
not automatically guarantee that they will be successfully incorporated 
into the mental model (an internal representation) learners build when 
they study the diagram (Lowe 1988, 1993b). In other words, to be effec-
tive, the design of an educational diagram must be such that it facilitates 
learner extraction and internalization of the raw materials for constructing 
a high-quality mental model of the subject matter (Lowe 1989). 
It is therefore important to understand the processes that learners 
use to extract information from diagrams and the processes involved in 
building a mental model from that internalized information (Winn 1993). 
These essentially psychological issues can have a powerful impact on how 
effective a diagram will be as a learning resource and therefore need to 
be understood by those who design educational diagrams. However, too 
often, those who are involved in designing diagrams lack sufficient under-
standing of the potential educational repercussions of the design decisions 
they make. 

Designing static and animated diagrams / 367 
Who’s responsible (where do diagrams  
come from)?
In the first instance, those who have most say about the diagrams that 
will be included in an educational resource tend to be the subject matter 
experts who provide the content. For example, if the resource is to be used 
for learning physics, it will be a physicist who is mostly responsible not only 
for the written information, but also for the accompanying visual material. 
Often, the diagrams to be included are based on pre-existing depictions 
that are considered by experts in the field to be standard ways of represent-
ing particular aspects of the subject matter. However, where warranted, 
authors can also devise their own original diagrams from scratch. The 
next step is typically to furnish a professional illustrator with the reference 
material (such as annotated pre-existing diagrams or sketches made by the 
author) upon which the final diagrams are to be based. In many cases, the 
author has a great deal of experience in teaching the subject matter and so 
will be aware of those aspects that learners are likely to find challenging. 
Further, an experienced educational illustrator will have a repertoire of 
craft-based knowledge to call on that can guide the diagram’s design. 
From the author’s point of view, the finished diagram should depict the 
subject matter accurately and clearly. From the illustrator’s point of view, 
the end result should be a professional-looking diagram that satisfies the 
author and the publisher. The best case scenario is that the intuitions and 
experience of both author and illustrator about how to present a particu-
lar aspect of the subject will result in an educationally effective diagram. 
However, production imperatives mean that it is comparatively rare for 
the effectiveness of diagrams so designed to be systematically evaluated 
with the target learner audience and revised accordingly before being 
published. It is not enough for a diagram to be accurate and to look good. 
It must also be well matched to the perceptual and cognitive process-
ing capacities and proclivities that learners bring to bear when studying 
diagrams. 
If diagrams are increasing relied on for presenting information to 
learners, how can we make it more likely that they will be educationally 
effective? A feasible alternative to extensive field testing is to apply recent 
insights from research in educational psychology to develop a more prin-
cipled approach to diagram design. Such an approach would be based 
on empirical findings of how learners actually go about dealing with the 
graphic information that confronts them when presented with a diagram. 
In the next section, we consider one aspect of diagram design that can be 
particularly problematic – the depiction of dynamic information about 
the referent subject matter.

368 / Richard K. Lowe
Depicting dynamics
Much of the subject matter that educators are charged with imparting has 
important dynamic aspects. Examples range from the composite move-
ments of land masses involved in plate tectonics to the convoluted fluc-
tuations of share prices on the stock market. Complex types of dynamic 
subject matter such as these can be notoriously challenging for learners, 
especially if the topic is unfamiliar (Tversky, Morrison, and Bétrancourt 
2002). In order to understand such content, learners need to appreciate 
how the changes involved take place over time. Until relatively recently, 
the ­diagrams available for explaining dynamic content could not represent 
these changes directly because they could provide only static portrayals 
of their referents – the technical means of readily infusing diagrams with 
dynamics did not yet exist. In an effort to circumvent this inherent limita-
tion, designers of static diagrams devised a range of depictive approaches 
by which these depictions can indicate dynamics indirectly (Cutting 2002; 
de Souza and Dyson 2007). Figure 3 presents one of the most common of 
these – the use of successive ‘snapshots’ to show the progress of a process. 
However, because static diagrams still lack a temporal dimension, none 
of these approaches fully mirrors the continuous change over time that 
actually occurs in the referent. At best, the static indicators such as arrows 
(Heiser and Tversky 2006; Jian, Wu, and Su 2014) or multiple frames de­
picting successive states of the subject matter (Boucheix et al. 2012) pro-
vide the learner with a basis upon which to work out how it behaves. It 
is ultimately up to the learner to interpret the intention of these graphic 
conventions correctly, then to apply the information they provide to gen-
erate a mental representation of the implied dynamics. However, success 
in both initial interpretation of these conventions and subsequent applica-
tion of the provided information is by no means guaranteed (as known all 
too well by those who have ever had trouble following the diagrammatic 
instructions for assembling a piece of flat-pack furniture). Learners who 
1
2
3
4
Figure 3 
How to fit a champagne stopper to an opened bottle. Selected snapshots 
of the fitting process are depicted with their spatial arrangement (left to 
right) indicating their temporal order. Other possible approaches include 
the addition of arrows or action lines to indicate movements, and the use of 
dashed or ghosted images to portray earlier states. 

Designing static and animated diagrams / 369 
lack the graphicacy background necessary for appropriately decoding 
conventions such as arrows or multiple frames are clearly disadvantaged 
by static depictions of dynamic content. This is particularly likely with 
younger students because graphicacy is a  learned capacity rather than 
something innate (de Vries and Lowe 2010). However, even those who 
possess the level of graphicacy required to interpret the dynamic indica-
tors in a static depiction may have difficulty in reconstituting the dynamics 
of the original referent content accurately, especially if the topic is neither 
simple nor familiar. 
Animated diagrams
The advent of computer technology that permitted diagrams to be ani­
mated was initially regarded as a  major educational breakthrough. No 
longer would learners be required to interpret static indicators of dynam-
ic information or mentally infer the indicated behaviours (Lowe 1994). 
Rather, information about how the referent subject matter changed over 
time would be provided explicitly in a directly available spatiotemporal 
form. Because animated diagrams provide students with unmediated 
access to the dynamics, it seemed reasonable to suppose that they would 
greatly facilitate the learning of subject matter that was difficult to teach 
via traditional static diagrams. It would be relatively easy to generate ani-
mated versions of these older diagrams that freed students from non-core 
tasks and allowed them to direct all their efforts to learning of the pre­
sented dynamics. 
Developers of educational materials were quick to incorporate ani-
mated diagrams in their products on the assumption that learning would 
be improved, not only because they showed dynamics directly, but also 
because animations are widely considered as intrinsically motivating. 
However, the burgeoning use of educational animations was not informed 
by a long legacy of design experience of what works and what doesn’t 
(as was the case with static diagrams) (Tversky et al. 2008). Inevitably, 
approaches to designing animated diagrams borrowed some ideas 
from accumulated craft knowledge about how to design effective static 
­diagrams. This is reasonable, considering their various commonalities 
(Schnotz and Lowe 2008). Nevertheless, because these ideas provided 
no specific guidance about the best way to provide direct depictions of 
the subject matter’s dynamics, decisions about how to design animated 
diagrams relied heavily on intuition.
Unfortunately, intuitive approaches to designing educational anima-
tions did not take account of the very different perceptual and cognitive 
demands that this type of depiction imposed upon learners. In particular, 
they overlooked the profound effect that the dynamics of such displays 
have on how learners selectively extract and internalize the depicted infor-
mation (Lowe 1999). Research showed that for displays of any complexity 

370 / Richard K. Lowe
that portrayed subject matter unfamiliar to the target audience, learners 
preferentially directed their visual attention to information whose dynam-
ics made it highly conspicuous. However, this occurred irrespective of the 
relevance of that information to the theme of the learning task at hand. 
This in turn meant that the learners tended to neglect aspects of the dis-
play that were less perceptually salient but more thematically relevant 
(Figure 4 gives an example). As a consequence, their extraction of infor-
mation required to build a high-quality mental model of the depicted sub-
ject matter was compromised and poor learning resulted. It was concluded 
that animations were not necessarily the educational panacea that many 
believed they should be, and this was due in large part to the powerful 
attention-directing effect of their dynamics. 
On the basis of such findings, researchers began investigating ways of 
re-directing learner attention towards key aspects of the animation that 
may otherwise be overlooked. One approach aimed to better align percep-
tual salience with thematic relevance by the borrowing a technique long 
employed with static diagrams – the use of visual cues. The idea here was 
to highlight key aspects of the display using a contrasting colour or spot-
lighting to direct learner attention more appropriately. However, results 
from using this approach were equivocal at best. It appeared that the visuo­
spatial contrast provided by the added cues was not sufficient to re-direct 
learner attention amidst the far more perceptually compelling effect of the 
animation’s dynamics. Detailed investigation of the processes by which 
hammer
jack
key
string
grey circles indicate pivots
Piano mechanism: initial stage 
Strike stage
Figure 4 
Early and later frames from an animation portraying a traditional piano 
mechanism’s action. The hammer component is far more conspicuous than 
the jack, not only because of the difference in their size/shape, but especially 
because its dynamics are so much more extensive. Viewers tend to notice the 
hammer and neglect the inconspicuous (but very important) jack. 

Designing static and animated diagrams / 371 
learners interrogated an animated display suggested that the effect of the 
dynamic contrast due to the animation itself simply out-­competed the 
standard visuospatial cues (Lowe and Boucheix 2011). 
If the animation’s dynamics were the problem, perhaps dynamic rather 
than static cues would have sufficient strength to direct learner attention 
as required. Progressive Path cues (Boucheix and Lowe 2010) consist-
ing of moving bands of colour that traced out the route of causal chains 
through a  complex animation were found to be beneficial in guiding 
learner attention to low salience, high relevance aspects that lay along 
their path. Nevertheless, these dynamic cues still did not directly address 
an unquestioned fundamental design assumption: that animations should 
present their subject matter in a comprehensive way that is faithful to how 
the referent actually behaves. In essence, it was tacitly accepted that it was 
the learner’s responsibility to break down the animation’s continuous flux 
of information into a form that fitted with human information processing 
capacities. 
An unintended consequence of these conventionally designed ‘com-
prehensive’ animations is that they inevitably impose a  considerable 
processing burden on learners that can seriously impede their efforts to 
build a coherent mental model of the depicted subject matter. In short, 
they require individuals to engage in the demanding but non-core tasks 
involved in decomposing the animation that interfere with the primary 
goal of learning the topic at hand. Although dynamic cues appeared to 
help learners cope with these tasks by signalling how the decomposition 
should be carried out, they did not eliminate the need to perform such 
tasks.
New directions for design
Developing more effective alternatives to prevailing comprehensive 
approaches to the design of educational animations requires an under-
standing of the perceptual and cognitive processes that learners engage 
in when faced with these dynamic visualizations. Table 1 (overleaf) sum­
marizes the Animation Processing Model (APM) (Lowe and Boucheix 
2008) that offers an integrated theoretical account of the processes 
involved in learning from animations. This model builds on the work of 
Zacks and Tversky (2003) with regard to the processing of events. It indi-
cates that if learners could be relieved of having to decompose the anima-
tion and so allowed to proceed directly to higher-order aspects of building 
a mental model, substantial improvements in learning should result. 
The Composition Approach (Lowe and Boucheix 2012) to designing 
educational animations is based on the APM and makes very different 
assumptions about how dynamic subject matter should be presented to 
learners. Instead of implicitly assuming that learners will decompose an 
animation’s comprehensive and faithful presentation of the topic, this 

372 / Richard K. Lowe
approach acknowledges that such a  requirement imposes unnecessary 
demands on them. It therefore by-passes this decomposition stage of pro-
cessing and furnishes learners with pre-decomposed subsets of the overall 
set of information that is to be internalized. These relation sets consist of 
small groupings of event units (individual entities plus their associated 
behaviours) that are linked by thematically relevant relationships. The 
nature of these relation sets and the sequence in which they are progres-
sively presented to the learner are determined by considering both human 
information processing capacities and the hierarchical structure of the sub-
ject matter concerned. Using this approach, animation design moves from 
the uncertain realm of intuition to become a principled activity informed 
by research that focuses on finding ways to reconcile the characteristics of 
human learners and those of the information they are required to learn. 
Recent research (Lowe and Boucheix, submitted) indicates that the 
Composition Approach indeed provides a more effective way of designing 
animations than prevailing approaches that present the subject matter in 
a traditional comprehensive manner. However, widespread adoption of the 
Composition Approach would require a major departure from entrenched 
current practice. Nevertheless, it is possible that conventionally designed 
comprehensive animations could be made more effective than at present if 
a wider variety of options for portraying the subject matter were explored 
or if innovative ways of supporting improved learner processing of these 
animations were implemented. For example, it has been found that if 
multiple animated episodes that have higher-order relationships amongst 
them are presented simultaneously on the same display, learning is better 
Table 1  Summary of main phases of the Animation Processing Model
Top-down 
influences
⬇
5
Mental model 
consolidation
Elaborating system 
function across 
varied operational 
requirement
Flexible 
high-quality 
mental model
4
Functional 
differentiation
Characterization of 
relational structure  
in domain-specific 
terms
Functional 
episodes
3
Global 
characterization
Connecting to bridge 
across ‘islands of 
activity’
Domain-
general causal 
chains
⬆
Bottom-up 
influences
2
Regional structure 
formation
Relational processing 
of local segments  
into broader 
structures
Dynamic 
micro-chunks
1
Localized 
perceptual 
explanation
Parsing the 
­continuous flux  
of dynamic 
information
Individual 
event units
Based on Lowe and Boucheix 2008.

Designing static and animated diagrams / 373 
than if these episodes are presented sequentially (Ploetzner and Lowe 
2014). Despite initially seeming counter-intuitive, this empirical finding is 
actually consistent with what would be predicted by the APM. 
An implication for designers of animated diagrams is that the temporal 
characteristics of the subject matter do not necessarily need to be treated 
as sacrosanct in the search for more effective approaches to fostering 
learning. Rather than being slavishly faithful to behavioural realism when 
depicting subject matter dynamics, there may well be advantages for 
learners in designers adopting a more adventurous approach to the rep-
resentation of time-based changes (see Tversky et al. 2008). This would be 
consistent with the history of static diagrams in which designers became 
increasingly bold in manipulating the visuospatial characteristics of the 
subject matter in order to present key aspects more effectively. However, 
in the case of today’s animated diagrams, it would be prudent for designers 
to temper their innovations with a research-based understanding of how 
learners actually deal with such depictions so that new approaches are at 
least consistent with the characteristics of human information processing.
Providing greater support that could help learners to process compre-
hensive animated diagrams is another potentially beneficial approach. 
One possibility is to require learners not merely to view the animation, 
but also to engage in active analysis and synthesis of the information it 
presents. In a  recent study, the performance of pupils who studied an 
animated diagram of a Newton’s Cradle device, with the requirement to 
generate their own set of drawings of how it behaved, were compared with 
students who either did not draw or merely traced existing drawings of the 
device in action (Mason, Lowe, and Tornatora 2013). The results showed 
an advantage for learners in the self-generated drawing group on tests of 
both immediate and delayed performance. Although this is an encourag-
ing finding, the subject matter of the animation used in this investigation 
was very easy for the participants to draw. Such positive results may not 
have been obtained if the demands of drawing were more extensive due to 
complexity of the animation’s topic (Lowe and Boucheix, in press). Future 
research should address such challenges in using self-generated drawing to 
enhance learning from animation. For example, instead of being expected 
to cope with the drawing task unaided, learners could be provided with 
scaffolding (such as partially completed drawings or training in graphic 
conventions) that allows them to generate drawings that are more benefi-
cial as tools for learning.
Conclusions
Animated diagrams have a much shorter design history than their static 
predecessors. The resulting lack of a comparative body of rich craft know-
ledge presents designers of such diagrams with considerable challenges. 
Because the field is in its infancy, it is difficult for designers to judge if their 

374 / Richard K. Lowe
374 / Richard K. Lowe
efforts to produce educationally effective animations will be successful 
in practical learning contexts. However, recent theoretical and empirical 
research into the perceptual and cognitive process that learners use when 
studying animated diagrams is providing insights about what approaches 
may benefit learning from these potential powerful visual representations. 
Findings from this research provide a principled and defensible basis for 
future design approaches that make it more likely this potential will be 
fulfilled in practice.
References
Bétrancourt, Mireille, Shaaron Ainsworth, Erica 
de Vries, Jean-Michel Boucheix, and Richard K. 
Lowe. 2012. ‘Graphicacy: do readers of science 
textbooks need it?’ In Proceedings of the EARLI 
SIG 2 Comprehension of text and graphics meeting, 
edited by Erica de Vries and Katharina Scheiter, 
37–39. Grenoble: Laboratoire des Sciences de 
l’Education.
Boucheix, Jean-Michael, and Richard K. Lowe. 2010. 
‘An eye tracking comparison of external pointing 
cues and internal continuous cues in learning with 
complex animations.’ Learning and Instruction 20: 
123–135.
Boucheix, Jean-Michel, Richard K. Lowe, Shaaron 
Ainsworth, Mireille Bétrancourt, and Erica de 
Vries. 2012. ‘Paired graphics: an exploratory 
study of graphicacy.’ In Proceedings of the EARLI 
SIG 2 Comprehension of text and graphics meeting, 
edited by Erica de Vries and Katharina Scheiter, 
43–45. Grenoble: Laboratoire des Sciences de 
l’Education.
Bransford, John D., and Marcia K. Johnson. 1972. 
‘Contextual prerequisites for understanding: 
some investigations of comprehension and recall.’ 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
11 (6): 717–726.
Catley, Kefyn F., and Laura R. Novick. 2008. ‘Seeing 
the wood for the trees: an analysis of evolutionary 
diagrams in biology textbooks.’ Bioscience 58 (10): 
976–987.
Cheng, Peter C., Richard K. Lowe, and Mike 
Scaife. 2001. ‘Cognitive science approaches to 
understanding diagrammatic representations.’ 
Artificial Intelligence Review 15: 79–94.
Comenius, Johann Amos. 1777. Orbis sensualium 
pictus. 12th edn. Translated by Charles Hoolf. 
London: printed for S. Leacroft. 
Cutting, James E. 2002. ‘Representing motion in 
a static image: constraints and parallels in art, 
science, and popular culture.’ Perception 31: 
1165–1193. 
Davenport, Jodi L., David Yaron, David Klahr, and 
Kenneth R. Koedinger. 2008. ‘When do diagrams 
enhance learning? A framework for designing 
relevant representations.’ In ICLS’08 Proceedings 
of the 8th International conference for the learning 
sciences, Volume 1, 191–198. International Society 
of the Learning Sciences.
De Souza, José Marconi Bezerra, and Mary C. Dyson. 
2007. ‘An illustrated review of how motion is 
represented in instructional graphics.’ Paper 
presented at the First global conference: Visual 
literacies: exploring critical issues, Mansfield 
College, Oxford, July 3–5.
De Vries, Erica, and Richard K. Lowe. 2010. 
‘Graphicacy: what does the learner bring to 
a graphic?’ Paper presented at the EARLI SIG 2 
Comprehension of text and graphics meeting, 
Tübingen, Germany. <http://www.earlisig2-2010.
de/sig2-2010/program.php>.
Heiser, Julie, and Barbara Tversky. 2006. ‘Arrows 
in comprehending and producing mechanical 
diagrams.’ Cognitive Science 30: 581–592. 
Houghton, Harvey A., and Dale M. Willows. 
1987. The psychology of illustration. Volume 2: 
Instructional issues. New York: Springer. 
Jain, Yu-Cin, Chao-Jung Wu, and Jia-Han Su. 2014. 
‘Learners’ eye movements during construction 
of mechanical kinematic representations from 
static diagrams.’ Learning and Instruction 32: 
51–62. 
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. 1983. Mental models: 
towards a cognitive science of language, inference 
and consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Larkin, Jill H., and Herbert A. Simon. 1987. ‘Why 
a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand 
words.’ Cognitive Science 11: 69–100. 
Lowe, Richard K. 1988. ‘ “Reading” scientific 
diagrams: characterising components of skilled 
performance.’ Research in Science Education 18: 
112–122.
Lowe, Richard K. 1989. ‘Search strategies and 
inference in the exploration of scientific diagrams.’ 
Educational Psychology 9: 27–44. 
Lowe, Richard K. 1993a. Successful instructional 
diagrams. London: Kogan Page. 
Lowe, Richard K. 1993b. ‘Constructing a mental 

Designing static and animated diagrams / 375 
Designing static and animated diagrams / 375 
representation from an abstract technical 
diagram.’ Learning and Instruction 3: 157–179. 
Lowe, Richard K. 1994. ‘Selectivity in diagrams: 
reading beyond the lines.’ Educational Psychology 
14: 467–491. 
Lowe, Richard K. 1999. ‘Extracting information from 
an animation during complex visual learning.’ 
European Journal of Psychology of Education 14: 
225–244. 
Lowe, Richard K., and Jean-Michel Boucheix. 
2008. ‘Learning from animated diagrams: how 
are mental models built?’ In Diagrammatic 
representation and inference: proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference Diagrams 2008, edited 
by Gem Stapleton, John Howse, and John Lee, 
266–281. Berlin: Springer.
Lowe, Richard K., and Jean-Michel Boucheix. 2011. 
‘Cueing complex animations: does direction of 
attention foster learning processes?’ Learning and 
Instruction 21: 650–663.
Lowe, Richard K., and Jean-Michel Boucheix. 2012. 
‘Dynamic diagrams: a composition alternative.’ 
In Diagrammatic representation and inference: 
proceedings of the 7th International Conference 
Diagrams 2012, edited by Philip Cox, Beryl 
Plimmer, and Peter Rogers, 233–240. Berlin: 
Springer.
Lowe, Richard K., and Jean-Michel Boucheix. In 
press. ‘When may drawing help learning from 
animations?’ In Proceedings of the EARLI SIG 2 
Comprehension of text and graphics meeting, edited 
by Huib Tabbers. Rotterdam.
Lowe, Richard K., and Jean-Michel Boucheix. 
Submitted. ‘Principled animation design 
improves comprehension of complex dynamics.’ 
Learning and Instruction.
Mason, Lucia, Richard K. Lowe, and Maria Caterina 
Tornatora. 2013. ‘Self-generated drawings 
for supporting comprehension of a complex 
animation.’ Contemporary Educational Psychology 
38: 211–224.
Moreno, Roxana, Gamze Ozogul, and Martin 
Reisslein. 2011. ‘Teaching with concrete 
and abstract visual representations: effects 
on students’ problem solving, problem 
representation, and learning perceptions.’ Journal 
of Educational Psychology 103: 32–47. 
Ploetzner, Rolf, and Richard K. Lowe. 2014. 
‘Simultaneously presented animations facilitate 
the learning of higher-order relationships.’ 
Computers in Human Behaviour 34: 12–22.
Prangsma, Maaike E., Carla van Boxtel, Gellof 
Kanselaar, and Paul A. Kirschner. 2009. ‘Concrete 
and abstract visualizations in history learning 
tasks.’ British Journal of Educational Psychology 
79: 371–387.
Schnotz, Wolfgang. 2001. ‘Sign systems, 
technologies, and the acquisition of knowledge.’ 
In Multimedia learning: cognitive and instructional 
issues, edited by Jean-François Rouet, Jarmo J. 
Levonen, and Agnès Biardeau, 9–29. London: 
Pergamon.
Schnotz, Wolfgang. 2014. ‘Integrated model of text 
and picture comprehension.’ In The Cambridge 
Handbook of Multimedia Learning, edited by 
Richard E. Mayer, 72–103. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Schnotz, Wolfgang, and Richard K. Lowe. 2008. 
‘A unified view of learning from animated and 
static graphics.’ In Learning with animation: 
research implications for design, edited by Richard 
K. Lowe and Wolfgang Schnotz, 304–356. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Smallman, Harvey S., and Maia B. Cook. 2010. 
‘Naïve realism: folk fallacies in the design and use 
of visual displays.’ Topics in Cognitive Science 3: 
579–608.
Tversky, Barbara. 2000. ‘Some ways that maps and 
graphs communicate.’ In Spatial cognition II: 
integrating abstract theories, empirical studies, 
formal methods, and practical applications, edited 
by Christian Freksa, Wilfried Brauer, Christopher 
Habel, and Karl F. Wender, 72–79. New York: 
Springer.
Tversky, Barbara, Julie Heiser, Rachel MacKenzie, 
Sandra Lozano, and Julie B. Morrison. 2008. 
‘Enriching animations.’ In Learning with 
animation: research implications for design, edited 
by Richard K. Lowe and Wolfgang Schnotz, 
263–285. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Tversky, Barbara, Julie B. Morrison, and Mireille 
Bétrancourt. 2002. ‘Animation: can it facilitate?’ 
International Journal of Human Computer Studies 
57: 247–262.
Winn, William. 1993. ‘An account of how readers 
search for information in diagrams.’ Contemporary 
Educational Psychology 18 (2): 162–185. 
Zacks, Jeffrey M., and Barbara Tversky. 2003. 
‘Structuring information interfaces for procedural 
learning.’ Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Applied 9: 88–100.


377
Designing auditory alarms
Judy Edworthy
Auditory alarms are ubiquitous in many work environments and are used to 
support visual displays and warnings. This chapter briefly describes the role 
of auditory perception and cognition as support for the visual system, and 
discusses the circumstances under which auditory signals and alarms might 
be used in a multimedia environment. It then introduces the central issues 
of alarm design, incorporating key acoustics issues such as localizability and 
detectability. Finally it considers auditory cognition issues, and in particular the 
relationship between the different types of sound which might be used in alarm 
design, and their stronger and weaker features in terms of their efficiency as 
auditory alarms. 
Auditory alarms in a broader context
The excellent Willy Russell play Educating Rita, first performed in 1980 and 
turned into a very successful film in 1983, tells the story of an uneducated 
woman (Rita) seeking an education through the Open University, a UK 
university which is historically noted for its inclusive student recruitment 
policy. At one of their tutorial meetings Rita’s tutor, Frank, is unhappy 
with her most recent assignment. Frank reads the question: ‘Suggest 
how you might resolve the staging difficulties inherent in a production of 
Ibsen’s Peer Gynt’, to which Rita’s entire answer is one sentence: ‘Do it 
on the radio’. This line is not only one of the best comedic lines in the 
play, but from a pragmatic point of view Rita may be right. If there are 
inherent difficulties in doing something via one medium, and if it is easier 
to achieve a better effect via a different medium, then following that alter-
native route will be the best policy. Ibsen himself deliberately disregarded 
the problems inherent in staging a play with 40 scenes, in different times 
and places, so the play is probably best suited to non-visual staging, or an 
elaborate and expensive film.
The designer may not always have the latitude to respond in the same 
way as Rita, but it is important to think about design issues at this level. 
A designer needs to be aware of what level one should be thinking at with 
any design problem involving sound – or indeed the level at which one is 
permitted to think by those who have commissioned the work, in order to 
provide the best solution. For example if the designer has been commis-
sioned to design a set of auditory alarms for a noisy environment where 
there are already a lot of alarms, then the most ergonomic solution might 
be to not use sound at all but another medium such as vision or touch. 
However, the designer may be commissioned as a result of a strategic 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 377–390
23

378 / Judy Edworthy
decision already made by those paying for the work (even though that 
decision may not be the best one), so must design within that constraint. 
Indeed, the designer may be competent to design auditory but not visual 
alarms, and therefore not wish the nature of the project to change for 
commercial reasons. Thus the first question designer and client need to 
address is the choice of medium, and the pros and cons of one particular 
medium in comparison with others. 
Sound and vision 
The senses have evolved to work together, and the auditory system typi-
cally supports the visual sense in ways that allow objects and events to be 
identified. The auditory sense is always ‘on’ in a way that the visual sense is 
not, so is of central importance when identifying objects and events which 
cannot be seen, either momentarily or permanently. A momentarily hid­
den object might be a motorcycle obscured by a lorry as it overtakes; 
a permanently hidden object might be water pipes under a house, which 
can be surveyed using sensing equipment which provides auditory feed-
back on the quality of the pipes (for example, provides a sound or change 
in a sound if an obstruction or dent is detected). Also, because sounds are 
the result of an activity (one object interacting with another), they are 
ephemeral in a way that many visual events are not. 
Selecting a modality
There are situations where it is best to use visual forms of information, 
and situations where it is best to use auditory forms. Although the cir-
cumstances under which either is favoured can be guessed at, two useful 
reference sources are Deatherage (1972, Table 1), and Sanderson (2006). 
Sanderson (2006) takes the more analytical stance by summarizing the 
fundamental properties of visual, auditory, and haptic processing (increas-
ingly an option for many applications), which can help lead to more prag-
matic decisions as to which modality (or mixture of modalities) is best for 
specific applications. Deatherage’s table (1972) is the more practical and 
prescriptive of the two. In order to use the tables in an informed fashion, 
the designer needs to have thought at some length about the qualities of 
a particular application.
An online source of advice is the Rail Safety and Standards Board’s 
(RSSB) ‘Alarms and Alerts Guide and Evaluation Tool’ (<http://www.rssb.
co.uk/toolkits/T326/main.html>) which provides an interactive tool for 
assessing both visual and auditory alarms. It also contains a section con-
cerned with selection of an appropriate modality and other more general 
human factors issues in alarm design. It contains a sound library demon-
strating different types of auditory alarms. 
Deatherage’s and Sanderson’s tables and the RSSB tool are useful for 
design as they allow the designer to reflect on which modality (or mixture 
of modalities) to use in any particular application. While some aspects of 

Designing auditory alarms / 379 
this guidance might be obvious with a little thought (for example, avoid 
sound if the environment is already noisy; avoid vision if the person’s job 
means that they are continually moving around) there are other aspects 
which are not intuitively obvious, such as guidance concerning events in 
time and space, and the contrast between immediate and later action. It is 
worth bearing in mind that Deatherage’s table is now more than 40 years 
old; while ears and eyes work in pretty much the same way that they did 
then, technological developments mean that the scope of sounds which 
can be designed is now much larger (indeed even limitless), and there has 
also been growth in relevant research which has challenged earlier assump-
tions about the limits of sound as a vehicle for carrying information about 
complex events. Two significant research developments are in ‘earcons’ 
(Brewster et al. 1993) and sonification (Hermann et al. 2011). Earcons are 
relatively short and simple melody-like stimuli, used to represent events 
which are related to one another (possibly in a hierarchical fashion, such as 
in computer menus), with systematic variations in those melodies repre-
senting the hierarchical structure. Sonification can be thought of as the art 
and science of turning information into sound. In one style of sonification, 
each of several streams of information is represented by a specific auditory 
parameter (such as loudness or pitch), with changes in that parameter rep-
resenting a change in the physical parameter being monitored (Anderson 
and Sanderson 2009; Hermann et al. 2011). Sonification has been applied 
in a number of work domains including patient monitoring (Watson and 
Sanderson 2004) and weather reporting (Scheutt et al. 2014). 
As indicated earlier, the decision as to which modality (or modalities) 
to implement should be made early on in the commissioning process, 
and requires considerable thought. Scoping this issue, and the thought 
Table 1
Use auditory presentation if
Use visual presentation if
The message is simple
The message is complex
The message is short
The message is long
The message will not be referred to later
The message will be referred to later
The message deals with events in time
The message deals with location in space
The message calls for immediate action
The message does not call for immediate 
action
The visual system of the person is 
overburdened
The auditory system of the person is 
overburdened
The receiving location is too bright, or dark 
adaptation is necessary
The receiving location is too noisy
The person’s job requires him or her to 
move about continually
The person’s job allows him or her to 
remain in one position
After Deatherage 1972.

380 / Judy Edworthy
that should be put into it, is known as an ‘alarm philosophy’ (Edworthy 
2011; Hollifield and Habibi 2011; Rotherberg 2009). Alarm philosophies 
concern thinking about the relationship between the events which might 
trigger alarms (‘referents’), and the application and design of those alarms 
(‘signals’). It is a powerful approach as it can encourage those who use or 
have developed a system to think about the kinds of risks involved, the 
levels of those risks, and the implications of alarm use in that environment; 
for example, the possibility of developing a system which may result in 
‘alarm fatigue’, a growing problem in many work environments, particu-
larly medicine (Cvach 2012). A thoroughly thought-out alarm philosophy 
can address issues concerning the way a system with inherent risk (i.e. 
those typically considered to need auditory alarms) manages and informs 
of that risk.
Using the auditory modality
Having made the decision to use the auditory modality there are impor-
tant perceptual and cognitive factors to be borne in mind. I will deal with 
these very briefly below. There are many good sources of more detailed 
information; for example, Moore (2013) now in its sixth edition.
Acoustics fundamentals
The basic building block of sound is the sine wave. All sounds consist of 
at least one sine wave, usually many more. These individual sine waves 
can also be known as harmonics, partials, or components. Any sound can 
be analysed and broken down into its individual sine waves using Fourier 
analysis, a reversible frequency/time transformation used in a variety of 
fields, including sound analysis and processing. The result of this analysis 
gives the frequency (number of cycles per second), the amplitude (the 
peak deviation from a central starting position), and the phase (the num-
ber of degrees between 0 and 360 through which each wave is passing at 
any moment in time). Typically, we don’t hear these individual sine waves 
but hear them as a composite whole. The nature of the whole sound is 
determined by the nature of its individual sine waves. The frequencies of 
the sine waves (the number of times per second that each wave completes 
a whole cycle) and the relationships between these frequencies determine 
the PITCH of the resultant sound and indeed whether or not we even hear 
a defined pitch. The amplitudes determine the LOUDNESS of the sound 
and the way the amplitudes are distributed across the various frequencies 
will determine the dullness or brightness of the sound and other timbral 
qualities. Phase is important when listening to sounds in real environ-
ments because sine waves which are out of phase with one another (i.e. are 
at a different point of their cycle at any one moment) can produce beats 
and standing waves through what is known as constructive and destruc-
tive interference. 

Designing auditory alarms / 381 
There are some very important acoustics fundamentals which under-
pin successful auditory alarm design and which should be put at the fore-
front of any design process. While acoustic features are unlikely to affect 
the aesthetics of the resultant sounds (if they do, they tend to affect them 
adversely) they are nevertheless crucial, so should not be compromised. 
These are complex issues, so the following paragraphs provide some rules 
of thumb for general guidance. Two key topics are the localizability and 
the detectability of the sound. 
Localizability
The accuracy with which a sound can be located depends to some extent 
on the acoustic properties of that sound and how they interact with the 
ears and brain of the hearer and the physical environment in which a sound 
is heard. Some sounds are easier to locate than others. The topic of spatial 
hearing is an immensely complex and technical one (Blauert 1997). 
It is important to be aware of how acoustics fundamentals influence 
localization because a listener (for example a client) may not pick up issues 
relating to localization, but they can make all the difference in application. 
The more harmonically rich a sound (that is, the more harmonics/partials/
components it possesses) then the easier it usually is to localize. People’s 
ability to localize white noise (which has many components) is superior to 
their ability to locate a pure tone (which may have only one component) 
(Jongkees and Groen 1946; Nordlund 1962, 1964). In terms of demonstra-
tion, note how much more accurately one can localize a reversing lorry 
which uses a white noise signal than one which uses a tone. Additionally, 
the ear can call upon two different mechanisms to localize sound, one of 
which works well with low frequencies and the other with higher frequen-
cies. The mechanism used with lower frequencies works because the size 
of the head (particularly the distance between the two ears) is equal to or 
less than the size of half a wavelength. The size of this wavelength approx-
imates to about 800 Hz for most people and works because the points in 
the wave cycle (phase) reaching both ears are different from one another. 
At frequencies double this (approximately 1600 Hz, which is a whole wave 
in that same space) then the ear is able to localize sounds using a different 
mechanism which relies on differences in sound intensity between each 
of the ears. Given that a priori one should avoid high frequencies because 
they have other adverse characteristics, such as making sounds shrill and 
irritating, the best frequency range of (at least) the fundamental frequency 
of an audible alarm is likely to be below 800 Hz. 
Detectability
Unless a listener has a hearing deficit, our ability to hear sounds is very 
good. We are sensitive to even very quiet sounds if they are not masked by 
other sounds. In practice, our ability to hear a sound depends on the other 
sounds in the environment. There is a large body of research on sound 
detectability, again complex in its scope, but again from which some rules 

382 / Judy Edworthy
of thumb can be derived. First, the more harmonically rich an auditory 
stimulus, the less likely it is that it will be masked. Second, the further 
away a sound is in pitch from its potential mask the less likely it is to be 
masked. Third, a sound is likely to be readily detectable in noise provided 
it is 10–15 dB above that noise, though it can be less than this depending 
on what is being masked. Guidance (Patterson 1982) and software tools 
(‘Detectsound’, Laroche et al. 1991) can provide significant help in deter-
mining whether or not alarm and other sounds will mask one another in 
specific environments.
Of course, there are few environments where the ambient noise level 
is fixed, creating a design problem where alarms and other sounds may 
be sometimes too loud but at other times too quiet. Alarms that are too 
quiet are obviously not desirable, but defaulting to making sounds ‘as loud 
as they will ever need to be’ is not a good tactic either, as this can result in 
sounds being judged as too loud, too often. If this happens, alarm fatigue 
or annoyance will result and the alarm may be switched off. This has the 
same consequence as the alarm being too quiet – in both cases the alarm 
will be missed. A useful solution to this problem is the emergent technol-
ogy (sometimes used in PA systems, for example) whereby the loudness of 
signals is varied in real time, dependent on current (or very recent) ambi-
ent noise in that environment. 
Cognition background
On perceiving an alarm sound, listeners hear the totality of a complex 
sound and will tend to report on what are perceived as its aesthetic attrib-
utes rather than its component frequencies and other acoustic attributes. 
Thus listeners will be aware that the sound is a melody, or a beep, or the 
sound of an object/event; they may derive a sense of urgency from the 
sound, or ascribe other aesthetic attributes to it; and they will probably 
have an opinion as to whether they like the sound or not. This does not 
mean that these aspects are more important, but it does mean that they 
will probably figure highly in a client’s acceptance of a proposed design. 
In the days before computers were fast and had large storage capacity, 
only a few types of sounds could be used as alarms. However, the scope 
these days is enormous, as described earlier in this chapter, due to the 
combination of massive computer memory, easy ways to record sound, 
and tools for manipulating and editing it. Thus it is important to scope the 
types of sounds that are possible, and to delineate their pros and cons (to 
the extent that they are currently understood). Table 2 (from Edworthy 
2013) shows a taxonomy of different classes of sound which can potentially 
be used as alarms, with some of the pros and cons of each class. The reader 
is also referred to Sanderson et al. (2009) which presents a slightly differ-
ent taxonomy. 
We can see from Table 2 that certain classes of sounds have different 
advantages and disadvantages when used as auditory alarms. One question 

Designing auditory alarms / 383 
which springs to mind (and indeed I am often asked this question) is why 
we don’t always use speech as a matter of course. While speech could 
probably be used more than it is, there are some important caveats to 
be borne in mind. The first is that speech is more prone to masking than 
many types of abstract, non-verbal sound as we can construct non-verbal 
sounds specifically to be robust and resistant to masking. Second, while 
transparency of an alarm’s meaning is important in many work domains, 
sometimes coding the information is necessary – think of a hospital ward 
with patients and relatives, whom it might be best to shield from the pre-
cise meaning of an alarm. A third consideration is that if the message is so 
complex that it requires speech, then in the interests of noise pollution and 
appropriateness (see Table 1) it may be better to signal the problem with 
a simple auditory tone, indicating to the operators that they should seek 
out further information (on a computer screen, for example). Fourthly, 
there are aesthetic issues. Speech messages, especially using digitized 
speech, can become irksome for reasons connected with the acoustic 
quality of the speech, the nature of the interruption, or for some other 
subjective and idiosyncratic reason. 
Table 2  Examples of sound classes
Class of sound
Acoustic issues
Cognitive issues
Traditional abstract  
e.g. bell
Shrill, aversive, disruptive
Can be heard through noise
Sound ‘alarm-like’
Can become associated with meanings 
through learning
Can be hard to learn initially but meaning 
evolves through use
Modern abstract  
e.g. ‘ping’
Can be tailored to acoustic environment
Some are amenable to urgency 
manipulation
Typically more aversive than is necessary 
(e.g. high pitched, monotonous)
Sound ‘alarm-like’
Difficult to learn and can be difficult to 
discriminate
Tonal/Patterson  
e.g. IEC 60601
Can be tailored to acoustic environment 
Amenable to urgency manipulation
Music perception issues 
Amenable to coding
Difficult to learn and can be similar to one 
another
Auditory icons  
e.g. heartbeat
Enormous variation in acoustic structure 
as they are typically everyday sounds
Meaning is related to sound 
Do not sound ‘alarm-like’ but can 
represent alarm events 
Easier to learn than most other alarms
Speech
Sometimes difficult to tailor to noise 
environment
Usually easy to understand
Can be indiscreet
Easy to learn
After Edworthy 2013.

384 / Judy Edworthy
Information in alarms
If we assume that an alarm sound needs to attract attention (largely a per-
ceptual issue, discussed earlier) then the next task it might perform is to 
provide information. A key question is what kind of information an audi-
tory alarm can (or should) convey. This has not been completely deline-
ated in the literature, but the kinds of information an alarm can convey 
(once the receiver has undergone appropriate training) include identifi-
cation of a problem area or object, the nature of a change that has taken 
place, the probability that there is a problem to be attended to, what the 
operator should do in response, and the degree of urgency of a problem. It 
is not always obvious which of these qualities alarms for a specific applica-
tion should possess, so the designer needs to be careful in selecting a type 
of design class (or classes) and to be aware of how that will constrain the 
information available in the alarm. Some of the main classes of alarms are 
considered below. The sound library in the RSSB’s alarms and alerts tool 
demonstrates many different types of possible alarm sound.
Traditional alarms
Traditional alarms are constrained by the nature of the way the sound is 
produced. Klaxons produce their sound by passing air through the sound-
ing device, a bell sound is produced by a small object hitting a larger one, 
and so on. Thus traditional alarms tend to have particular sound qualities, 
dependent on their physical characteristics. Although there is no intrin-
sic relationship between sound and meaning, people may come to learn 
particular associations because of the way the sounds are used in practice 
(Lazarus and Hoge 1986). Traditional alarms tend to be loud and atten-
tion-getting, and are most useful in outdoor and workplace settings such 
as factories and schools. Although their meanings can be learned, they are 
often unnecessarily intrusive. 
Abstract and synthetic alarms
These are the modern version of traditional alarms – the ‘beeps’, ‘pings’, 
and other sounds to which we have become accustomed. Typically these 
are relatively simple acoustically, often with a fixed pitch. Because they 
can be synthesized, they can be made resistant to masking and can be fairly 
accurately tailored to the intended acoustic environment. Their down-
side is that they are often designed using unnecessarily high-frequency  
sounds, a design problem which can be corrected. Another disadvantage 
is that the sounds are unrelated to their referent. In semiotic terms they are 
symbols, where there is no relationship between the sound and its mean-
ing (see Johansen and Larsen 2002). Therefore their meaning has to be 
learned. Learning the meanings of abstract alarm sounds tends to be slower 
than learning sounds with more intuitively obvious meanings (Edworthy 
et al. 2014; Leung et al. 1997; Ulfvengren 2003). However, meanings for 

Designing auditory alarms / 385 
sounds can be learned and new associations built up between signal and 
referent (Petocz et al. 2008). Non-verbal sounds can also become iconic 
and associated with particular objects or events. For example the ‘ping’ 
of the microwave is universally recognizable, even though the association 
has been learned rather than being intuitive. If there is a  strong asso-
ciation between a  particular abstract sound and a  particular meaning, 
then the designer should be careful in using that sound for a different  
referent. 
If coding is required (for example in a hospital ward where it may not be 
tactful to make meanings of alarms too obvious) then abstract alarms are 
a sensible design choice. However, care should be taken to provide variety 
within any alarm set, as high acoustic similarity between alarm sounds will 
cause confusion and make those alarms difficult to learn. A high-profile 
example of such a problem is encapsulated in the alarms currently support-
ing an important global medical alarms standard (IEC 60601-1-8 ‘Medical 
electrical equipment’ Parts 1 to 8, which are concerned with general safety 
requirements, including alarms). In the standard, the compounding of 
very high acoustic similarity with lack of any obvious association between 
the alarms and their meanings has resulted in alarms which are difficult to 
learn and retain (Edworthy et al. 2014; Lacherez et al. 2007; Sanderson 
et al. 2006; Wee and Sanderson 2008). Heterogeneity amongst sets of 
abstract alarms appears to make them easier to learn (Edworthy et al. 2011; 
Edworthy et al. 2014). 
Auditory icons
There is a ‘class’ of sounds which have demonstrated favourable qualities 
in terms of their ability to function as alarms (the word class is in quotes 
because the defining factor for this class is their use, particularly the rela-
tionship between sound and referent, rather than their physical structure). 
An auditory icon has typically been regarded as any sound which has some 
kind of relationship to the object or event that it is signalling (Belz et al. 
1999; Gaver 1989; Graham 1999; Keller and Stevens 2004; Perry et al. 2007; 
Stephan et al. 2006), whether this relationship is direct or metaphorical. 
Unlike an abstract or traditional alarm, the meaning of these alarms might 
be intuitive, or possible to guess. For example, an alert for a car indicating 
that a crash is imminent could be the sound of tyres skidding; an indicator 
for a cardiovascular problem on a hospital patient could be the sound of 
a drum; a sound indicating that a helicopter is close could be a mosquito 
buzzing; and so on. Typically, but not always, auditory icons are everyday 
sounds which already have some inherent meaning for us. Abstract sounds 
can also serve as auditory icons if their meaning has been well learned 
(such as the ping of a microwave, or the ring of a doorbell). The use of 
everyday sounds, and sounds which already have meaning for the listener, 
has considerable merit and is appealing as a design approach. 
The issue of metaphor in sound is very important in the design of 

386 / Judy Edworthy
auditory icons, and has been explored at length (Edworthy et al. 2014; Haas 
and van Erp 2014; Keller and Stevens 2004; Petocz et al. 2004; Stephan et 
al. 2006; Perry et al. 2007). Auditory icons and other sounds which serve 
as metaphors have also been extensively studied and published in the 
proceedings of the International Community on Auditory Display (ICAD; 
<http://www.icad.org>). 
Research into the use of auditory icons as alarms has, generally, pro-
duced favourable results. People respond more quickly and more accu-
rately when presented with auditory icons than with abstract alarms (Belz 
et al. 1999; Graham 1999; Perry et al. 2007). A particular benefit of audi-
tory icons is that people seem to be able to learn their meanings quickly 
(Edworthy et al. 2014; Leung et al. 1997; Ulfvengren 2003). So, if ease of 
learning is of great importance then the use of auditory icons appears to be 
a good design approach. 
On the downside, auditory icons may not be attractive to some clients, 
who sometimes think that warnings need to sound ‘serious’. Auditory 
icons may also be more difficult to tailor to specific acoustic environ-
ments because if they need to be acoustically altered this may obscure the 
intrinsic meaning of the sound. Their complex acoustic nature means that 
they require good production systems (e.g. sound cards on computers) 
and quality speakers. There is also some concern that if everyday sounds 
are used they may be confused with other sounds in that environment. 
Counter-arguments are that if the meanings are intuitive and easily learned 
little confusion will result; and if there is still concern about confusion 
with other sounds, then sounds should be chosen which are unlikely to be 
heard in the environment in which the alarms will be used. For example, 
unless things have gone very wrong, one is unlikely to hear a cockerel or 
a rainforest in an operating theatre. 
Between abstract and iconic
Many sounds that are used in alarm and sound design are not totally 
abstract or iconic (or analogic) but sit somewhere between the two. The 
degree to which a particular type of sound or alarm design sits on the 
abstract-iconic/analogic continuum is important in understanding the 
nature of the design, and how it is likely to perform (for an early discus-
sion, see Kramer 1994). 
Patterson’s early proposal for ergonomic alarm sounds (Patterson 1982) 
encapsulates many of the acoustic properties necessary for good design, 
as well as introducing the concept of having silence between occurrences 
of short alarm bursts (to allow communication either between operators 
or by an operator to someone else, depending on the context). Patterson 
recommended a style of design which is amenable to urgency manipula-
tion (Edworthy et al. 1991; Haas and Casali 1995; Haas and Edworthy 1996; 
Hellier et al. 1993) whereby the alarm can alter in intensity, pitch, and speed 
as the urgency of the referent varies over time. Though conceptualized 

Designing auditory alarms / 387 
as a  way of designing ergonomic abstract alarms, some of the alarms 
designed to illustrate Patterson’s principle incorporated mnemonics of 
the referents being represented – for example six fast pulses mimicking 
the word ‘cardiovascular’ – in order to make the alarms easier to learn and 
more meaningful for the user (Patterson et al. 1985). 
The concept of earcons has also been highly developed and tested as 
a rather different form of abstract alerting and informing sound (Blattner 
et al. 1989; Brewster et al. 1993). As has been discussed, the typical, hierar-
chical structure of a set of earcons allows relationships between functions 
to be conveyed through sounds which are related through variation in their 
design. Thus earcons are particularly useful for fairly complex work envi-
ronments where hierarchical structure of operations might be important. 
The concept of earcons has more recently been developed into a more 
analogic form through the idea of musicons (McGee-Lennon et al. 2011).
Also more recently there has been considerable development of the 
idea of spearcons, which are shortened, speech-based earcons (Walker et 
al. 2013). These have the benefit of using language as their basis, but also 
of being shorter than normal speech, length being one of the drawbacks of 
using speech. Walker et al.’s study (2013) demonstrated that the time taken 
and accuracy with which items could be accessed on a computer menu 
was better for spearcons than for earcons or auditory icons. 
Summary
Auditory alarm design projects need to be carried out in several stages, if 
the resultant alarms are to be genuinely effective and appropriate for their 
intended environment. If alarms are added at a late stage in the process 
– for example, if they are simply purchased and wired into a system, or 
added as an afterthought – then the risks are many. These include acous-
tic problems such as the alarms being too loud or irritating and difficult 
to localize, unnecessary masking, as well as cognitive issues such as lack 
of variability (and thus confusion), problems associated with the use of 
abstract alarms for particular functions which are typically used for other 
functions, and lack of appropriateness in the relationship between alarms 
and their referents. Unergonomic alarms will ultimately lead to errors and 
costs, both human and otherwise. Such problems can be avoided if the 
steps taken in this chapter are followed through. 
To summarize, the first step in the design process is to determine (if 
possible) whether an auditory modality is the best modality for the par-
ticular design remit (taking into consideration the environment, the tasks 
in which operators will engage, and so on). The second is to develop an 
alarm philosophy: the situations giving rise to alarms, their priorities, and 
the way operators might respond to them should be taken into account. 
It is at the alarm philosophy stage that a degree of future-proofing can be 
achieved. For example, if it has been decided that all top priority situations 

388 / Judy Edworthy
388 / Judy Edworthy
should have unique alarm sounds, but that all second- and third-priority 
situations should be indicated by appropriate generic alarms, then this will 
help in classifying new situations that might arise during the lifetime of 
the system. For example, all situations other than top priority situations 
do not require a  further alarm, which prevents a  piecemeal approach 
and limits proliferation. This chapter also makes it clear that the acoustic 
environment in which the alarm sounds will be heard is a very important 
consideration, and a complex one to which expert knowledge is usually 
best brought to bear. Some rules of thumb have been given for this part 
of the process. The chapter has also emphasized that the acoustic charac-
teristics of alarm sounds are not always obvious to the listener (except for 
the most obvious features of inaudibility, excessive loudness, and probably 
excessive shrillness) but need to be enshrined within the sound, in order 
for it to be acoustically effective. Finally, the chapter has introduced the 
idea that there are many types of alarm sounds, each with advantages and 
disadvantages which need to be taken into account when designing for 
a specific environment. For example, if coding is required (so that people 
in a work area who are not employees cannot decode the alarm) then 
abstract sounds of one kind of another would be the best option. These 
also have the advantage that the urgency of the alarm sound can be readily 
manipulated. If the alarm sounds need to fit within a wider soundscape, 
and the meanings need to be immediately obvious, then auditory icons 
will be a better design choice. Work environments where the cost of errors 
is high deserve such an approach. 
References
Anderson, J. E., and P. Sanderson. 2009. ‘Sonification 
design for complex work domains: dimensions 
and distractors.’ Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Applied 15: 183–198. 
Belz, S., C. Robinson, and J. Casali. 1999. ‘A new 
class of auditory warning signals: auditory icons.’ 
Human Factors 41: 608–618.
Blattner, M., D. Sumikawa, and R. Greenberg. 1989. 
‘Earcons and icons: their structure and common 
design principles.’ Human-Computer Interaction 
4 (1): 11–44.
Blauert, J. 1997. Spatial hearing: the psychophysics of 
human sound localization. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Brewster, S. A., P. C. Wight, and A. D. N. Edwards. 
1993. ‘An evaluation of earcons for use in auditory 
human–computer interfaces.’ In Conference on 
human factors in computing systems, edited by 
S. Ashlund, 222–227. Amsterdam, Netherlands. 
<http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/3257/1/CHI4493.pdf>.
Cvach, M. 2012. ‘Monitor alarm fatigue: an 
integrative review.’ Biomedical Instrumentation 
and Technology July/August: 268–277.
Deatherage, B. 1972. ‘Auditory and other sensory 
forms of information processing.’ In Human 
engineering guide to equipment design, edited by 
H. P. VanCott and R. G. Kincade, 124. Washing­
ton, DC : American Institutes for Research.
Edworthy, J. 2013. ‘Medical audible alarms: a review.’ 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association 20 (3): 584–589.
Edworthy, J. 2011. ‘Designing effective alarm sounds.’ 
Biomedical Instrumentation and Technology July/
August 45 (4): 290–294.
Edworthy, J., E. Hellier, K. Titchener, A. Naweed, 
and R. Roels. 2011. ‘Heterogeneity in alarm sounds 
makes them easier to learn.’ International Journal 
of Industrial Ergonomics 41: 136–146.
Edworthy, J., S. Loxley, and I. Dennis. 1991. 
‘Improving auditory warning design: relationship 
between warning sound parameters and 
perceived urgency.’ Human Factors 33: 205–231.
Edworthy, J., R. Page, A. Hibbard, S. Kyle, P. 
Ratnage, and S. Claydon. 2014. ‘Learning three 
sets of alarms for the same medical functions: 
a perspective on the difficulty of learning alarms 

Designing auditory alarms / 389 
Designing auditory alarms / 389 
specified in an international standard.’ Applied 
Ergonomics 45 (5): 1291–1296.
Gaver, W. W. 1989. ‘The SonicFinder: an interface 
that uses auditory icons.’ Human–Computer 
Interaction 4 (1): 67–94.
Graham, R. 1999. ‘Use of auditory icons as emergency 
warnings: evaluation within a vehicle avoidance 
application.’ Ergonomics 42: 1233–1248.
Haas, E., and J. Casali. 1995. ‘Perceived urgency 
and response time to multi-tone and frequency-
modulated warning signals in broadband noise.’ 
Ergonomics 38: 2313–2326.
Haas, E., and J. Edworthy. 1996. ‘Designing urgency 
into auditory warnings using pitch, speed and 
loudness.’ IEE Computing and Control Journal 7: 
193–198.
Haas, E. C., and J. B. F. van Erp. 2014. ‘Multimodal 
warnings to enhance risk communication and 
safety.’ Safety Science 61: 29–35.
Hellier, E., J. Edworthy, and I. Dennis. 1993. 
‘Improving auditory warning design: quantifying 
and predicting the effects of different warning 
parameters on perceived urgency.’ Human Factors 
35: 693–706.
Hermann, T., A. Hunt, A., and J. G. Neuhoff. 
2011. The sonification handbook. Berlin: Logos 
Publishing House. 
Hollifield, B. R., and E. Habibi. 2011. Alarm 
management: a comprehensive guide. 2nd edn. 
<http://www.mavtechglobal.com/latest-
thinking/white-papers/alarm-management.pdf>.
IEC, 2006. Medical electrical equipment, Part 1–8. 
General requirements, tests and guidance for 
alarm systems in medical electrical equipment and 
medical electrical system. Geneva: International 
Electrotechnical Commission. 
Johansen, J., and S. Larsen. 2002. Signs in use. 
London: Routledge. 
Jongkees, L. B. W., and J. J. Groen. 1946. ‘On 
directional hearing.’ Journal of Laryngology 61: 
494–504. 
Keller, P., and C. Stevens. 2004. ‘Meaning from 
environmental sounds: type of signal-referent 
relations and their effect on recognising auditory 
icons.’ Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Applied 10: 3–12.
Kramer, G. 1994. ‘Some organising principles for 
representing data with sound.’ In Auditory display: 
sonification, audification and auditory interfaces, 
edited by G. Kramer, 185–222. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Lacherez, P., E. Seah, and P. Sanderson. 2007. 
‘Overlapping medical alarms are almost 
indiscriminable.’ Human Factors 49: 636–645
Laroche, C., H. Tran Quoc, R. Hetu, and S. McDuff. 
1991. ‘ “Detectsound”: a computerised model for 
predicting the detectability of warning signals 
in noisy environments.’ Applied Acoustics 33 (3): 
193–214.
Lazarus, H., and H. Hoge. 1986. ‘Industrial safety: 
acoustic signals for danger situations in factories.’ 
Applied Ergonomics 17 (1), 41–46.
Leung, Y., S. Smith, S. Parker, and R. Martin. 1997. 
‘Learning and retention of auditory warnings.’ In 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Auditory Display, edited by S. Frysinger and G. 
Kramer. Palo Alto, CA, USA. <http://www.icad.
org/websiteV2.0/Conferences/ICAD97/Leung.
pdf>.
McGee-Lennon, M., M. Wolters, R. McLachlan, 
S. Brewster, and C. Hall. 2011. ‘Name that tune: 
musicons as reminders in the home.’ In CHI’11 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
factors in Computing Systems, 2803–2806. New 
York: ACM.
Moore, B. C. J. 2013. An introduction to the psychology 
of hearing. 6th edn. Bingley: Emerald.
Nordlund, B. 1962. ‘Angular localization.’ Acta Oto-
Laryngologica 55: 405–424.
Nordlund, B., 1964. ‘Directional audiometry.’ Acta 
Oto-Laryngologica 57: 1–18.
Patterson, R. 1982. Guidelines for auditory warnings 
systems on civil aircraft. UK Civil Aviation 
Authority contract report No. 82017. London: 
Civil Aviation Authority.
Patterson, R., J. Edworthy, M. Shailer, R. Milroy, 
M. Lower, and P. Wheeler. 1985. ‘Alarm sounds 
for medical equipment in intensive care areas 
and operating theatres.’ Institute of Sound 
and Vibration Research report No. AC598. 
Southampton: Institute of Sound and Vibration 
Research. 
Perry, N., C. Stevens, M. Wiggins, and C. Howell. 
2007. ‘Cough once for danger: icons versus 
abstract warnings as informative alerts in civil 
aviation.’ Human Factors 49 (6): 1061–1071. 
Petocz, A., P. Keller, and C. Stevens. 2008. ‘Auditory 
warnings, signal-referent relations, and natural 
indicators: re-thinking theory and application.’ 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 14 (2): 
165–178. 
Rotherberg, D. H. 2009. Alarm management for 
process control. New York: Momentum Press.
Sanderson, P. 2006. ‘The multimodal world of 
medical monitoring displays.’ Applied Ergonomics 
37: 501–512.
Sanderson, P., D. Liu, and S. A. Jenkins. 2009. 
‘Auditory displays in anesthesiology.’ Current 
Opinion in Anaesthesiology 22 (6): 788–795.
Sanderson, P., A. Wee, and P. Lacherez. 2006. 
‘Learnability and discriminability of melodic 
medical equipment alarms.’ Anaesthesia 61: 
142–147
Schuett, J. H., R. J. Winton, J. M. Batterman ,and 
B. Walker. 2014. ‘Auditory weather reports: 
demonstrating listener comprehension of five 
concurrent variables.’ In Proceedings of the 9th 
Audio Mostly: a conference on interaction with 

390 / Judy Edworthy
390 / Judy Edworthy
sound, article 17. New York: ACM. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/2636879.2636898>.
Stephan, K. L., S. E. Smith, R. L Martin, S. P. A. 
Parker, and K. I. McAnally. 2006. ‘Learning 
and retention of associations between auditory 
icons and denotative referents: implications for 
the design of auditory warnings.’ Human Factors 
48 (2): 288–299.
UK Rail Safety and Standards Board. 2010. ‘Alarms 
and alerts guidance and evaluation tool’ <http://
www.rssb.co.uk/pages/research-catalogue/t326.
aspx>.
Ulfvengren, P. 2003. ‘Design of natural warning 
sounds in human-machine systems.’ Doctoral 
thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm. 
Walker, B. N., J. Lindsay, A. Nance, Y. Nakano, 
D. K Palladino, Y. Dingler, and M. Jeon. 2013. 
‘Spearcons (speech-based earcons) improve 
navigation performance in advanced auditory 
menus.’ Human Factors 55 (1): 157–182.
Watson, M., and P. Sanderson. 2004. ‘Sonification 
supports eyes-free respiratory monitoring and 
task time-sharing.’ Human Factors 46 (3): 497–517.
Wee, A., and Sanderson, P. 2008. ‘Are melodic 
equipment alarms easily learned?’ Anesthesia & 
Analgesia 106: 501–508.

391
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 391–404
Design challenges in helping older 
adults use digital tablets
Design for diversity
Patricia Wright
Tablet computers offer big computing power in a small physical size. This and 
their touchscreen interface make them convenient devices for older adults 
wishing to access the internet from home. Because some older adults have 
difficulties remembering novel information and learning sequences of steps 
in new procedures, this chapter explores ways in which interface design could 
reduce the need for training. The exploration contrasts how inputting informa-
tion and deleting items are implemented on two operating systems (iOS and 
Android). These contrasts provide evidence that design options are available 
for tablet interfaces. Examining the implications of design options for learning 
and ­memory points to ways in which tablet interfaces could be made easier to 
master. It is concluded that a small shift in design perspective, to consider the 
implications of design possibilities for learning and remembering, would result 
in interfaces that better support audiences with a diversity of skills and experi-
ences, be they younger or older adults. 
Introduction
The internet is integrated with daily life through communication tech-
nologies such as mobile phones and digital tablets. Just a screen tap away 
is information ranging from local details about entertainment to general 
advice on healthcare for humans, pets, or plants. Many older adults find 
the internet enriches daily life (Harwood 2007). Tablets, through their 
speed and portability, can enhance that experience. They have a screen 
large enough for text to be displayed in a font size that is easy to read. 
Their rapid onset and touchscreen interface make them seem easier to 
use than conventional laptop or desktop computers (Jochems, Vetter, 
and Schlick 2013). Certainly some gestures feel intuitive (e.g. spreading 
fingers to zoom). Nevertheless it has been noted that the diversity of 
gestures (even a tap may be short/long, soft/hard, single/double/triple) 
has now become so great that the difficulty facing users resembles the his­
toric command-line interface with a great deal needing to be remembered 
(Norman 2014). One consequence can be that people choose to remem-
ber only a subset of the tablet’s available functions. This chapter examines 
whether the interfaces of tablets, and the applications running on them, 
could be designed so that almost no new learning was required. Making 
24

392 / Patricia Wright
digital devices easier to pick up and use straight away will have benefits 
not just for older adults who may have memory issues (Maylor 2005) but 
for everyone who replaces their phone or tablet and finds things look and 
work differently. 
There can be a trade-off between using limited screen space to provide 
navigation and other help, and alternatively using screen space to display 
as much content as possible, with little explicit guidance about functional-
ities. Finding the tipping point requires detailed consideration of the cir-
cumstances of use, i.e. who (expert/novice), when (regular/intermittent), 
for what (users of only a few applications will have less to remember than 
those using many). If the default interface of most applications catered 
for novice intermittent users it would be feasible to provide options for 
expert or regular users to turn off some of the support and free up screen 
space. This usable-out-of-the-box approach could be especially helpful to 
older adults, some of whom find it difficult to remember new, ‘arbitrary’ 
information.
Designing for diversity has long been recognized as an important 
challenge for interface designers (Shneiderman 2002). Older people are 
far from a homogeneous group. As people age, diversity of both physi-
cal and cognitive characteristics increases among peer cohorts. Redish 
and Chisnell (2004) point out that older adults differ in their expertise 
and understanding of computers (not just their years of experience using 
them) and in their confidence when approaching unfamiliar technology. 
This confidence factor was found to be important by Loorbach, Karreman, 
and Steehouder (2013) who showed how the design of a cell phone man-
ual could influence the confidence of people in their 60s, especially when 
they encountered setbacks in operating the phone. Confidence may be 
critical for mastering tablets because the accompanying manual is often 
perfunctory. Product designers rely on users exploring to discover how 
things work. Yet sometimes the active areas of tablet screens have ‘low dis-
coverability’, with no visual cues inviting people to touch them (Budiu and 
Nielsen 2011). There is evidence that providing older adults with support 
through explicit guidance from screen/manual or a safe exploration space 
can help build competence in using tablets (Barnard et al. 2013). 
There already exist critiques of tablet usability (Nielsen 2013), and 
guidelines for interface design (Shneiderman et al. 2014; Tognazzini 
2014). This chapter will focus more narrowly on the links between inter-
face design and the amount of learning/training tablet users need. It will 
take advantage of the fact that for commercially popular tablets there are 
two main operating systems: Android and iOS. With the aid of copyright 
and patent laws, these two systems take different approaches to common 
procedures such as adding and removing information. Getting informa-
tion into tablets is essential for numerous tasks, including logging-in, 
email, online shopping, searching for information, and maintaining a 
contacts list. Items for deletion from tablets are similarly diverse. This 

Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets / 393 
chapter will contrast how applications on different systems accomplish 
these activities, illustrating how assessing what people need to remember 
can offer a useful perspective for choosing among design alternatives. The 
audience being considered comprises able-bodied adults who experience 
mild memory challenges and so find that training classes do not always 
meet their needs. Yet forgetting is easy at any age. The design challenge is 
to create an interface that reduces what needs to be remembered.
Text input challenges
In most evolving systems the current designs are constrained by what has 
gone before. Sometimes familiarity with the old may lead product design-
ers to overlook the possibilities of the new. Keyboards offer an example. 
On tablets, keyboards are virtual, just pictures on the screen. Therefore 
tapping the caps lock key could change the appearance of letters on the 
keys, showing people whether they will be typing capitals or lower case. 
Some Android tablets do this (e.g. the Samsung Galaxy Tab 3) but at first 
Apple tablets did not (e.g. iPad 2). People who are not trained typists tend 
to look at the keyboard rather than the text, and can easily type several 
words in unwanted capitals after using the caps lock. For novice typists, 
as many older people are, visual cues on the keys could circumvent the 
need to remember the difference between a dark arrow on a light ground 
(signalling caps) and a  light arrow on a  dark ground (signalling lower 
case). Even dynamic words on the caps lock key could reduce the need to 
remember the arrows’ meanings. There is no lack of solutions, just a fail-
ure to discern the need and appreciate the benefits from addressing it.
Fitting a full keyboard into a tablet screen raises issues that for different 
products have been resolved in different ways. The typewriter’s top row of 
numeric keys is retained by some Android tablets but removed by iOS tab-
lets to a second display, summoned by a key tap. Both options are usable 
but, considering the kinds of tasks that older tablet users engage in, deliver 
a different user experience. Few older people write long documents on 
their tablets. Instead they log in to social media, to email accounts, to 
shopping areas. Login procedures involve passwords, and strong pass-
words require both numbers and letters. Consequently, having numeric 
keys visible simplifies login procedures, removing the two clicks needed 
to summon first the numerals and then return to the letters. In other con-
texts it has been suggested that there can be cognitive costs to actions as 
simple as mouse clicks (Wright et al. 1994).
For people who are familiar with computers and word processing, 
the transition to tablets is not altogether comfortable. The key combi-
nations possible on a physical keyboard are replaced on a touchscreen 
by sequences of taps that can feel lengthy, especially if each tap changes 
the keyboard display and initiates hunting for the next key to be tapped. 
More serious is the absence on a tablet of functionality delivered by some 

394 / Patricia Wright
traditional key combinations. On laptops Control-Z undoes an action 
within most software programs but an undo option is not consistently 
provided on tablets. Some versions of iOS display an undo option if people 
shake the iPad but not everyone discovers this hidden button. In contrast, 
undo is often available on Android tablets via the back button on the dis-
play surround, although sometimes this button will jump to a previous 
application. Consistency is context-dependent, but to a newcomer it can 
feel intermittent.
Both iOS and Android systems have menus that appear when people 
flick inwards from the screen edge (though the relevant edge varies across 
applications). People have to be told about and remember that these 
menus exist and learn to avoid summoning them accidentally. Both the 
accidents and the memory requirements can be reduced by a physical but-
ton that produces menus (as on many Android tablets) or a permanently 
visible, on-screen button.
The lessons to be drawn from these design challenges are that inter-
faces are easier to learn when designers:
•	 Critically assess legacy interface procedures before accepting them. 
Previous methods may not be needed on a different device, and may 
not suit the needs of a different audience.
•	 Reduce the number of taps needed to accomplish a task. Nevertheless 
consistency across procedures may be preferable to separately 
minimizing individual procedures because consistency will reduce the 
total amount that people need to remember.
•	 Boost people’s confidence through safety net functions, such as Oops 
and Back buttons, made accessible across contexts.
The design advice listed above applies to actions that are fundamental 
to the operation of the tablet, not optional extras. It applies more widely 
than tablets; complex devices, from washing machines to automobiles, 
pose similar interface issues. The advice is also not specific to the needs 
of older adults. When people forget what to do next, or cannot find func-
tionality they need, the result can be frustration, loss of confidence, and 
an unwillingness to embark again on such a challenging experience. Too 
easily older adults blame themselves and mistakenly conclude that they 
are too old for new technology, especially computers. This is an outcome 
as sad as it is needless. As with accessibility issues elsewhere in computing, 
improvements for a subgroup of users often result in an interface that is 
easier for everyone to use (e.g. Horton and Quesenbery 2013). Examining 
the variety of implementations of item deletion will further illustrate this 
point.

Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets / 395 
Deleting items
New users with uncertain grasp of file sizes and the storage capacities of 
solid state disks can become anxious about running out of space on their 
tablets. Knowing how to remove items can be a high priority for some 
people but applications differ in the steps for deleting items, making it 
harder to learn. This variety is also evidence that there are design choices.
The simplest delete procedure is probably the visible trash icon which, 
when tapped, deletes whatever item has been selected. Usually this icon 
is at the top of the screen but is sometimes at the bottom (see Figures 1a 
and 1 b). Adding words to an icon can boost understanding (see Figure 1c). 
Sometimes a word will replace the icon (see Figure 1d) and, across appli-
cations, that word may be Bin, Delete, Trash, Remove. Lack of standard-
ized terminology results in more for people to learn. 
Yahoo mail and Gmail have delete functions that work through a single 
tap on both iPad and Android tablets. Other applications (e.g. Office 365) 
adopt a two-tap approach. First tap the Move icon (the folder next to the 
flag in Figure 2a, overleaf) to produce a list on the left of the screen of all 
available folders. Then find and tap the Trash option within this list (see 
Figure 1 a–d
Varieties of 
explicit Delete 
operations.
a. Icons at top of screen.
b. Icons at foot of screen.
c. Menu combining icons and words.
d. Menu items without icons, and language 
change from Trash (USA) to Bin (UK).

396 / Patricia Wright
Figure 1 c). This two-step procedure illustrates the contrasting perspec-
tives of tablet users and product developers. The design team saw ‘moving’ 
as the overarching concept, but other people may differentiate between 
moving within the storage space on their tablet and moving outside it, and 
so think of deleting an email as more akin to forwarding it than to placing it 
in a folder. Studies of mobile phone users have found that older adults tend 
to form relatively shallow representations of menu structures (Zhou, Rau, 
and Salvendy 2012) and that fewer procedural steps to a goal are generally 
preferable (Wright et al. 1994).
Office 365 offers an alternative delete procedure. A  long tap on the 
Archive icon produces a short menu that includes Delete (see Figure 2b). 
This is a quicker procedure but is more likely to be helpful to the expe-
rienced user. For newcomers it will be harder to remember because the 
association of the icon with archiving will be stronger than with deleting. 
Presenting different menus in response to short or long taps weakens the 
link between the icon and its meaning and increases the load on memory.
Nevertheless there are contexts where having Delete as a menu option 
seems to work well. The application Fish Bowl offers photo manipulation 
facilities with almost all functions accessible by tapping the word Actions 
at the top of the screen. If the user asks, ‘What can I do to this photo?’ or 
‘How do I do X to this photo?’ the answer will be found under the Actions 
button. In this context ‘Delete photo’ seems highly appropriate. There is 
little for users to learn. The critical difference from the mail example is that 
almost all possible actions for photos can be found under the Actions label, 
whereas only actions relating to the designer’s concept of ‘move’ options 
were included in the mail example. 
When managing emails or photos people often want to delete more 
than one item at a time. There are several design solutions to this problem. 
Some email applications provide tick boxes alongside the emails listed, 
others require an action, e.g. a tap on Edit, to make these tick boxes visible. 
While the designer is clear that Edit is short for ‘edit the list’, others may 
Figure 2 a–b
Ways of hiding the 
Trash.
a. Trash option invisible.
b. Trash functionality revealed by long tap on 
Archive icon.

Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets / 397 
think it will let them edit the currently viewed email. It can be difficult 
for product developers to anticipate how others may think about tasks or 
interpret interface elements. User testing offers many insights but even 
explicitly considering what needs to be learned/remembered to accom-
plish a task could help tip design decisions in the direction of supporting 
new users, especially those who are older.
Another form of the delete function is marking the item itself, e.g. with 
a cross as on the iPad Home screen, and inviting people to tap the cross 
to make the deletion (see Figure 3a). This procedure requires that people 
remember how to initiate it. It only needs a long tap on an item to make 
the cross appear but this action has to be remembered, as does the pro-
cedure for subsequently getting rid of all crosses by pressing the Home 
Screen button. Deleting applications from Android tablets is even harder 
because the application must be uninstalled. To do this people start from 
Settings, find the Application Manager, select the application, and tap 
Uninstall. Again people have to remember how to initiate and complete 
this sequence.
Android tablets use a long press on items on the Home screen to initiate 
a sequence of actions that removes items from this screen, without delet-
ing them from the tablet. This long press results in the screen displaying 
several options, including a  trash can labelled Remove (see Figure 3b, 
the subtle difference from Delete may not be noticed by people new to 
tablets). The user must now drag the item to be removed on to this trash 
icon. Dragging without dropping is not an easy action for older users. It 
is unclear why there is any need for a drag action on tablets other than to 
resize selection boxes, where dragging offers control of shape that would 
not otherwise be available. Neilsen’s (2013) comments on skeuomorphism 
may offer an explanation: in the physical world an unwanted item is phys-
ically put into the trash can, so the designer’s assumption may be that 
a similar action in the digital world will be intuitive. Probably dragging is 
easier to remember than the two-step solution where people must recall 
Figure 3 a–b
Removing items 
from a tablet.
a. A way of achieving deletions without 
menu options.
b. Trash icon labelled ‘Remove’ to signal its 
different function from permanently delete.

398 / Patricia Wright
the order in which items must be tapped – not ‘Trash this’ but ‘This to 
the trash’. Here the design issue concerns the trade-off between ease of 
remembering and ease of execution. Remembering what to do is of little 
use if the action is difficult to perform. On some tablets exasperation with 
dragging items is further increased by menu options disappearing if the 
item being moved is dropped. 
The syntax ‘select item then select action’ is relatively consistent across 
computing applications, which makes it easier to remember. On the 
Home screen a long press on an item could show a selection marker (e.g. 
a highlight or tick) on that item, together with the menu, from which the 
required action (Remove) could then be selected. If the interface offered 
alternatives ‘Remove from screen’ and ‘Delete from tablet’ this could further 
reduce confusion and shorten the Uninstall procedure.
Deletions are needed to correct errors, made when entering text. 
Deleting text can involve a variety of two-step procedures depending on 
the amount of text to be changed. The procedure picked up first by most 
people is intended for the removal of single or just a few letters: tapping 
to position the cursor to the right of the letter(s) to be deleted and then 
tapping the backspace key. The procedure itself seems easy for people to 
understand and remember; the design challenges relate both to adjusting 
the cursor position and to the signage on the delete key. An arrow pointing 
backwards may be an inadequate cue for people who have not previously 
been typists. Tablet designers often add a cross (X) to this key which helps 
flag its deleting function. The word Delete would be even more explicit 
and a colour cue (e.g. red) might caution people against thinking this key 
will move the insertion point. 
Knowing how to locate the cursor beside specific letters requires train-
ing, or at least explanation. Different tablets offer different solutions. On 
the iPad, pressing on a word produces a circle showing an enlarged ver-
sion of these letters above the text, and sliding the finger sideways moves 
the cursor inside this zoomed circle or may move the magnifying bubble 
within the text itself. Some Android tablets provide a  large tail to the 
cursor, descending below the text line, so that people can drag this tail to 
move the cursor’s position. Both procedures are usable but when tugging 
the cursor’s tail the writer can see the whole of the line of text which is 
helpful if changes are ‘editing’ rather than just correcting typing errors. 
Procedures for deleting larger chunks of text are harder to discover. 
They follow the basic syntax of selection-then-action. For single words 
this is started by a long tap, which generates a menu of options such as 
Select, Copy, and Cut. The issue of Menu location arises here. The iPad 
Pages application puts these options immediately above/below the tapped 
text. In contrast some applications put the options at the top of the screen 
where they may not be noticed, especially if they replace other menu items 
relating to the main task (e.g. emailing) rather than the subtask of edit-
ing text. This design option of unexpectedly changing items in a task bar 

Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets / 399 
means that people have to learn to look. Flagging the change (e.g. with 
a different coloured background) could help encourage attentional shift 
from the text to the menus.
Deleting several adjacent words requires selecting one word and then 
dragging the handles of the highlighting rectangle to cover all the words 
to be deleted. Larger handles make this dragging procedure easier, so 
some applications on Android tablets achieve deletions more comfortably 
than similar actions on the iPad. The problems that people may have with 
dragging actions have already been mentioned. Another design possibility 
would be an option button to ‘Extend Selection’ that required just a single 
tap elsewhere in the text, but this seems not to have been implemented, 
perhaps because highlighting several words was not a  problem when 
selecting by mouse and, as was noticed above in relation to the caps lock, 
design solutions that worked well on a different device are not always 
re-evaluated for tablets.
Mistakes can also be made during the process of deletion, and appli-
cations differ in how easily they guard against, and enable recovery from, 
accidental deletions. One option is to require a confirmation of intention 
to delete (e.g. while reading an email in Yahoo, tapping the Trash icon pro-
duces an adjacent pop-up saying Delete Item). An alternative approach is 
immediately presenting an undo option, e.g. in Gmail tapping the Trash 
icon at the top of the screen produces a rapidly vanishing pop-up win-
dow at the bottom saying ‘Moved to bin. Undo’ (see Figure 4). Both these 
options work without making memory demands as long as people spot 
their mistaken deletion immediately.
For people new to computing there is a conceptual distinction to be 
learned between items in the Trash can and items permanently deleted 
from the tablet. Finding that items can be retrieved from Trash is probably 
a relief to most people. In Gmail’s Bin (see Figure 1d) people must tap the 
selection box alongside a message, not just open the message, in order to 
view the option to move it back to the Inbox. Finding the Trash folder 
in some other mail applications involves remembering to tap the three 
Figure 4
Pop-up at foot of 
screen offers brief 
opportunity to cancel 
a Delete instruction.

400 / Patricia Wright
horizontal bars at the top of the screen. Some versions of Yahoo retain the 
Move action for retrieving from Trash but within the Trash folder the icons 
at the bottom of the screen remain unchanged from those in Figure 1 a for 
the Inbox. Also the confirmatory pop-up, Delete Message, remains the 
same. So an identical Trash icon denotes both recoverable and permanent 
deletions. People must remember where they are when tapping the Trash 
can. Helpfully Gmail provides a changed pop-up message asking if the 
intention is to Permanently Delete the item. 
Several mail applications offer an additional but completely different 
route for removing emails. Swiping an Inbox item to the left reveals three 
hidden buttons: Gmail labels these Move, Flag, Archive. But a very rapid 
swipe to the left will delete the email immediately without requiring con-
firmation or giving an Undo option. Retrieving this message is possible, 
but there are no clues on the interface suggesting what to do. First people 
must tap the Go Back arrow at the top of the screen, then select the appro-
priate Gmail account from the new list that appears (see Figure 2a where 
people must tap the Gmail account not the Gmail mailbox). After selecting 
Trash from the new list that appears, all the items in the Trash folder can be 
seen. Options now include tapping the visible Trash icon to permanently 
delete the selected email or tapping the Move icon to transfer the mes-
sage back into the Inbox or other mail folder. After this, with luck, people 
will correctly guess that the back arrow at the top of the screen will return 
them from Trash to view the emails listed in their Inbox. Discovering and 
remembering all six steps of this procedure can be a challenge for people 
new to using tablets.
The lessons for interface design that can be drawn from examining 
­people’s need to delete items from tablets are:
•	 Make visible how to start any procedure in order to help people with 
weak memories.
•	 Enable a two-tap move (source+destination; selection+action) so 
that fewer demands are made on a person’s movement control than 
procedures involving dragged items. This will help anyone with arm-
related mobility challenges.
•	 Provide actions and menus that minimize disruption to the visual 
context of the user’s task.
•	 Ensure that menu options are salient enough to be noticed by people 
engrossed in their task.
•	 When dragging cannot be avoided, provide easily grabbed dragging 
handles and create a sympathetic system response to pauses during 
the dragging action. 

Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets / 401 
Enhancements for older adults and  
everyone
The discussion of entering and deleting information has shown that inter-
face options exist and some make fewer demands on memory than others. 
When older adults confront tablets for the first time they encounter three 
main learning obstacles (Wright 2014). One is needing to learn a language 
of gestures. The diversity and inconsistency of gestures causes problems 
that have design implications (Norman 2014). For the most part, the prob­
lems that older adults have are not in learning actions to achieve their 
initial task goals, but in accidentally performing unwanted actions – e.g. 
inadvertently touching some part of the screen – and finding themselves 
somewhere unexpected with little or no idea how to return to where they 
were. This highlights the value of having a physical Back button always 
present, as on many Android tablets. In similar vein others have pointed 
out that easy access to a Help function would assist error correction and 
boost confidence (Mace 2013), but this is not commonplace on tablets.
Another hurdle for older adults can be knowing where to look (Wright 
2014), mentioned earlier in connection with temporary menus when de­­
leting text. There is a  research literature on ‘inattentional bias’, where 
people fail to perceive an entity in full view because they are engrossed in 
watching something else (Bredmeier and Simons 2012). The presence of 
advertising materials on web pages may heighten this tendency for people 
to focus their attention narrowly. Personal experience of demonstrating 
how to search using Google illustrates the impact of inattentional bias. 
A group of older adults easily mastered the basics of entering a search term 
and selecting a website from the results. But responding to the sugges-
tion that they might like to tap ‘Images’ and see what happens, they were 
astonished at the result. Even those who were already familiar with Google 
had either not noticed or not understood the relevance of this Images 
button, not realizing it will provide relevant images after any search. It 
becomes a design challenge to find ways of helping people engage with 
the full functionality of tablet applications. For mouse-driven interfaces 
richer descriptions can pop up when the mouse hovers over a button, but 
there is less scope for implementing this solution on tablets where screen 
taps are already nuanced – e.g. into short and long. One solution might 
be a ubiquitous Explain button that alters the functionality of a tap from 
Action to Inform. Such help would boost people’s confidence when they 
encounter unfamiliar and unlabelled icons. Novice tablet users can be 
nervous about tapping just to discover what happens, in case it is difficult 
to get back to where they were.
Related to the issue of knowing where to look are more general consid-
erations of making design decisions that correspond to how people think 
about the task they are trying to accomplish. The input sequence for emails 
(To, Subject, Message) is one example of how design decisions that worked 

402 / Patricia Wright
well enough in the work place can become bewildering for people who are 
new to email and may be accustomed only to postal mail. One problem is 
the Subject field. Even text messages from a mobile phone do not require 
inventing a ‘subject’ for the message. I have received emails with the entire 
message written in the Subject field, and even more have arrived that had 
no subject at all. I have tried, sometimes in vain, to explain to writers that 
a generic subject (such as ‘Newsletter’) needs to be more informative – 
e.g. giving clues about the originating organization. It is probably too late 
to change the legacy of this established sequence of To, Subject, Message, 
but ideally Subject would be better at the end of the message and the label 
changed to flag the content’s usefulness later as a retrieval aid. Even though 
it may be too late to consider resequencing, it would be feasible to have 
an icon beside the word Subject that when tapped displayed a pop-up 
window explaining the function of this field. The whole topic of online 
help for tablet users, although touched on earlier, is clearly an area where 
interface design can offer support. It is no longer the case that people must 
download a manual and look up the answer to their query, or even con-
sult an online manual. Advances in artificial intelligence enable software 
to monitor people’s behaviour and offer help when needed. Nevertheless, 
promoting the design objective of people not needing help could benefit 
product developers as well as new users because supporting information 
would be needed less. 
The viability of choosing a design rather than a training solution to the 
problem of helping newcomers use ‘pocket’ computers has been demon-
strated by Wright et al. (2001a, 2001b). They found that people who had 
memory impairments resulting from brain injury could master an elec-
tronic pocket diary that had reminder-alarm functions, plus a digital note-
book and a few games. It is not being suggested that age is a disability, but 
that the success experienced by adults with memory problems is strong 
evidence that interfaces can be designed to reduce the amount that people 
need to learn and remember when using computers.
Conclusions
This chapter has explored the scope for design to reduce the need for 
training because this would be helpful for older adults. The tendency of 
product developers to guard interface innovations behind copyright and 
patent protection does little to assist the dissemination of best practice in 
the evolution of interfaces. There are many ways of achieving the goal of 
reducing how much the new user needs to learn. The critical factor is to 
ensure such a goal has high priority on the interface design agenda.
Decisions about a tablet’s interface are team decisions (Krug 2006). 
The designer’s input is weighed against marketing opinions and the pref-
erences of other stakeholders who, in many companies, may include not 
only the project manager but also the CEO. This chapter has sought to 

Design challenges in helping older adults use digital tablets / 403 
strengthen the arguments for interface designs that make fewer demands 
on learning and memory. Comprehensive lists of design principles for 
tablets exist elsewhere – e.g. Nielsen has listed 126. All tablet users, not 
just older adults, would benefit if interfaces implemented existing design 
principles (e.g. Tognazzini 2014) especially in relation to legibility, con-
sistency, and navigation. Too often people are faced with design infelici-
ties including text that is too small, screens that have not been designed to 
respond to the zoom by finger-spread action, scattered, invisible buttons, 
and meaningless icons. Examples are easy to find in spite of evidence that 
some tablet interfaces are improving (Budiu and Nielsen 2011). During the 
discussion of design trade-offs more weight needs to be given to cognitive 
ergonomics. Companies who cynically postpone improvements until the 
next software release may find that people who are disheartened by their 
current experience will switch products or perhaps abandon such devices 
altogether.
Computing technology is changing rapidly. If touchscreen tablets are 
but a  short-lived phase in the development of communication via the 
internet, perhaps their interface design is of little consequence. Already 
the term ‘phablet’, a device combining the functionality of phone and 
tablet, has a history recorded in Wikipedia. Communication devices are 
certain to continue, as will the need for people to input information and 
delete items. This chapter has illustrated how becoming aware of what 
people will need to remember can point the way to making interfaces 
more intuitive.
Tomorrow’s tablets may become the remote controls for smart, inter-
net enabled televisions. The numerous buttons on today’s remote controls 
present a  daunting, complicated interface. Devices with touchscreen 
interfaces could provide fuller descriptions for control information and 
so offer a simpler, more supportive solution. Design challenges similar to 
those discussed here will remain even when tablets cease to exist for their 
present purposes.
By their size, speed, and convenience tablets offer older adults a bridge 
across the digital divide. Few people in retirement want to drive spread-
sheets or conduct complex searches in databases. Instead they want access 
to the internet in order to maintain contact with family and friends, to 
show and share photos, and find details about local information (theatres, 
transport services, etc.). Potentially tablets can make these goals attain-
able with less effort than by laptop or desktop computers. It is within 
the grasp of interface designers to make these goals easily achievable for 
everyone by giving greater priority to reducing how much must be learned 
and remembered.

404 / Patricia Wright
References
Barnard, Yvonne, Mike D. Bradley, Frances Hodgson, 
and Ashley D. Lloyd. 2013. ‘Learning to use 
new technologies by older adults: perceived 
difficulties, experimentation behaviour and 
usability.’ Computers in Human Behavior 29: 
1715–1724.
Bredmeier, Keith, and Daniel J. Simons. 2012. 
‘Working memory and inattentional blindness.’ 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 19: 239–244.
Budiu, Raluca, and Jacob Nielsen. 2011. ‘iPad app and 
website usability. 2nd edition: research findings 
a year after launch.’ Acesed 15 March 2014. <http://www.nngroup.com/
reports/ipad-app-and-website-usability/>. 
Harwood, Jake. 2007. Understanding communication 
and aging. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications Inc.
Horton, Sarah, and Whitney Quesenbery. 2013. A web 
for everyone: designing accessible user experiences. 
New York: Rosenberg Media.
Jochems, Nicole, Sebastian Vetter, and Christopher 
Schlick. 2013. ‘A comparative study of information 
input devices for aging computer users.’ Behaviour 
and Information Technology 32: 902–919.
Krug, Steve. 2006. Don’t make me think: a common 
sense approach to web usability. 2nd edn. Berkley, 
CA: New Riders.
Loorbach, Nicole, Joyce Karreman, and Michael 
Steehouder. 2013. ‘Verification steps and personal 
stories in an instruction manual for seniors: effects 
on confidence, motivation and usability. ‘IEEE 
Transactions on Professional Communication 56: 
294–312.
Mace, Michael. 2013. ‘Style vs substance in mobile 
software.’ Acesed 21 February 2014. <http://mobileopportunity.blogspot.
co.uk/2013/06/style-vs-substance-in-mobile-
software.html>.
Maylor, Elizabeth A. 2005. ‘Age-related changes in 
memory.’ In The Cambridge handbook of age and 
ageing, edited by Malcolm L. Johnson, 200–208. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Nielsen, Jacob. 2013. ‘Tablet usability.’ Acesed 15 March 2014. <https://www.
nngroup.com/articles/tablet-usability/>.
Nielsen, Jacob. No date. ‘126 guidelines for improving 
usability of tablet apps.’ Acesed 15 March 2014. <http://www.nngroup.
com/reports/tablets>.
Norman, Don. 2014. ‘Gestural control: the good, 
the bad and the ugly.’ ‘Influencer column’ in 
LinkedIn. <http://www.LinkedIn.com/today/
post/article/20140320012035-12181762-gestural-
control-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly?_
mSplash=1>.
Redish, Janice (Ginny), and Dana Chisnell. 2004. 
‘Designing web sites for older adults.’ Acesed 15 March 2014. <http://
assets.aarp.org/www.aarp.org_/articles/
research/oww/AARP-LitReview2004.pdf>.
Shneiderman, Ben. 2002. Leonardo’s laptop: human 
needs and the new computing technologies. Boston, 
MA: MIT Press.
Shneiderman, Ben, Catherine Plaisant, Maxine 
Cohen, and Steven Jacobs. 2014. Designing the 
user interface: strategies for effective human–
computer interaction. 5th edn. Harlow: Pearson.
Tognazzini, Bruce. 2014. ‘First principles 
of interaction design’ (revised and 
expanded). Acesed 15 March 2014. <http://asktog.com/atc/
principles-of-interaction-design>.
Wright, Patricia. 2014. ‘Digital tablet issues for older 
adults.’ Gerontechnology 13: 306.
Wright, Patricia, Ann Lickorish, and Robert 
Milroy. 1994. ‘Remembering while mousing: the 
cognitive costs of mouse clicks.’ SIGCHI Bulletin 
26: 41–45.
Wright, Patricia, Nick Rogers, Christine Hall, 
Barbara Wilson, Jon Evans, Hazel Emslie, and 
Christine Bartram. 2001a. ‘Comparison of 
pocket-computer memory aids for people with 
brain injury.’ Brain Injury 9: 787–800.
Wright, Patricia, Nick Rogers, Christine Hall, 
Barbara Wilson, Jon Evans, and Hazel Emslie. 
2001b. ‘Enhancing an appointment diary on 
a pocket computer for use by people after brain 
injury.’ International Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research 24: 1–10.
Zhou, Jia, Pei-Luen Patrick Rau, and Gavriel 
Salvendy. 2012. ‘Use and design of handheld 
computers for older adults: a review and 
appraisal.’ International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction 28: 799–826.

405
On-­screen colour contrast for 
visually impaired readers
Selecting and exploring the limits of WCAG2.0 colours
Frode Eika Sandnes
Design for the web is challenging because the designer has limited control 
over how the end result is perceived by the user. Reduced vision is probably the 
most common impairment among users on the web, and the types of visual 
impairment vary greatly. A fundamental condition for perceiving visual stimuli 
is the presence of sufficient contrast, which often still leaves users at the mercy 
of designers. The widely recognized WCAG2.0 accessibility guidelines provide 
minimum contrast levels recommendations for the web. However, two prob-
lems with WCAG2.0 include its mathematical complexity that repels designers 
and encourages a post-­design checklist approach. This paper explores visual 
contrast and the properties of the WCAG2.0 contrast definition. Simplified 
contrast calculations are proposed that will suffice for most practical purposes. 
More importantly, the paper argues for formatively embedding contrast-­limit 
constraints into the design process eliminating the need for post-­design checks 
and unnecessary and exhaustive user testing.
(In)visibility and (dis)ability
Universal accessibility often addresses users classified has having a tech-
nical loss of sight and how the visual content can be replaced using other 
modalities perceivable through hearing and touch. Still, most users rely on 
visual contents, even though many users have reduced vision – especially 
as vision often deteriorates with age (Wood 2002). 
A common cause of invisible web content is not related to the users’ 
vision, but rather that designers hide important functionality. An example 
of hidden functionality is a menu that is revealed when the mouse pointer 
is placed above a certain area of the web page. Users therefore have to 
explore the user interface. Visible functionality needs to be perceivable by 
the senses (Norman 1998). 
Visible content may become invisible next to competing visual elem-
ents. Competing visual elements become noise. Visible content may also 
become invisible if the organization of the information on a web page does 
not match the expectations of the user. Users tend to interpret the intended 
structure of a page and thereby predict the location of the desired target. 
If the logical structure it not communicated well, more effort is needed to 
locate the target (Spencer 2011).
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 405–415
25

406 / Frode Eika Sandnes
Contrast = difference
Sight can be described as the ability to perceive differences in the field of 
view, that is, differences in the light that is captured by the eyes from vari-
ous angles. If the eye simply captured a single pixel it would not be able to 
detect spatial differences. The only differences that can be captured with 
one pixel are temporal variations, that is, changes in the pixel value over 
time. However, with two pixels it is possible to determine whether the two 
pixels are equal or different. 
Humans are incapable of evaluating the absolute intensity of a single 
light source. For example, it is difficult to objectively evaluate the bright-
ness of a wall painted in a single colour. We are able to approximately 
describe the hue, but we often incorrectly assess the intensity of the light 
reflected by the wall. This is usually due to a lack of comparison.
Effective visual communication relies on the eye’s ability the detect 
differences in light. This is what usually is referred to as contrast. Large 
differences result in high contrast, while small differences result in low 
levels of contrast. Images, symbols, and text are all dependent on sufficient 
contrast to be visually perceivable.
Text is probably the most significant carrier of information on the web. 
It is thus important that there is sufficient contrast between the characters 
making up the text and the background on which these characters rest, 
in order for characters to be perceived. In other words, there has to be 
a sufficiently large difference between the colour vector which is used to 
define the text and the colour vector that is used to define the background. 
It is assumed that the colours of both the text and its background are uni­
form. Given the text colour vtext and background colour vbackground, the con-
trast, represented by their difference, needs to be larger than a minimum 
­threshold t.
​t = | v​text – ​v​background  ​|​​
​
(1)
The perception of colour and brightness depends on the area or viewing 
angle. Small text requires high contrast, while larger text requires lower 
contrast levels. This size factor is reflected in the different WCAG contrast 
recommendations for body text and headings. In addition, stroke width 
also makes low-contrast text easier to read. Ricco’s law predicts this (Hood 
and Finkelstein 1986), namely that the product of the threshold intensity 
and the area is constant. Contrast is also related to the luminance intensity 
and follow Weber’s law (Majumder and Irani 2007), that is, the higher 
the luminance the larger the difference is needed to detect the difference. 
This phenomenon is the basis of several image contrast enhancement 
algorithms. 
A  common design approach is to employ a  high level of contrast 
between the body text and the background, for instance black on white. 

On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers / 407 
The headings may have a different hue with a lower contrast, often in 
a tone of colour found in other visual elements of the design to establish 
a connection between the image and the text. 
Although not yet relevant to the web, contrast can also be provided by 
the surface material characteristics – an effect that is often exploited in the 
design of physical products. That is, a surface may have areas with a reflec-
tive blank surface and matt non-­reflective surface, such as some pocket 
books with matt non-­reflective background and book titles in the same 
colour, but reflective. Although the colour of the text is identical to the col-
our of the background, the eyes are able to detect the difference because 
the way the light is reflected differently in the different parts of the surface. 
Such contrasts are also tactile as they often can be felt with the fingertips.
Contrast is also achieved with shadows and reflective properties of the 
material such as inscriptions on stone tables and jewellery or coins. Coins 
have distinct visual patterns although the entire surface has the same col-
our. Obviously, the visual patterns emerge due to the shadows cast by the 
surface contours and the different reflection angles (Foley et al. 1995).
WCAG2.0 contrast 
Web developers often work with hardware oriented red, green, and blue 
(RGB) colour vectors, while web designers often work with the HSB-­
colour model that more closely resemble the human visual system where 
colours are described according to hue (red, green, yellow, etc.), satur-
ation (the degree of whiteness), and brightness (from bright to black). 
According to this model contrast can be achieved with different hues, dif-
ferent levels of saturation, or different levels of brightness. Alternatively, 
contrast is achieved through a combination of these three types of contrast 
differences. 
The human eye is most sensitive to differences in brightness and it 
is recommended to predominantly rely on brightness contrast as hue 
and saturation have limited effect for users with colour deficiencies 
(Knoblauch, Arditi, and Szlyk 1991). A visual design based on brightness 
contrast is therefore also robust in terms of colour blindness, that is, the 
design is perceivable by individuals who are unable to distinguish certain 
hue combinations. 
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Contents Accessibility 
Guidelines (WCAG2.0) refer to luminance contrast which combines hue, 
brightness, and saturation. The most basic level ‘a’ success criterion of 
the WCAG2.0 guidelines (criterion 1.4.3), recommends that body text 
should not rely on hue contrast at all. This, for example, means that an 
arbitrary red and green does not guarantee contrast. It is relatively easy to 
understand the level ‘a’ criterion and it will not be discussed any further 
herein. The stricter level ‘aa’ criterion states that the contrast should have 
a luminance contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1 for body text and 3:1 for headings 

408 / Frode Eika Sandnes
rendered with larger text. The most strict recommendation, the level ‘aaa’ 
criterion, suggests a contrast ratio between body text and its background 
of as much as 7:1 and that the contrast ratio for headings are 5:1. 
The level ‘a’ criterion ensures that designs are robust to colour blind-
ness. The level ‘aa’ criterion is based on empirical findings for users with 
a  visual acuity of 20/40 and the strict level ‘aaa’ criterion is based on 
empirical findings for users with a visual acuity of 20/80. 
WCAG2.0 defines luminance contrast according to the standards ISO-
9241–3 and ANSI-­HFES-100–1988 as
​contrast =   ​ L1 + 0.05 
_______________________ 
L2 + 0.05 ​ 
(2)
where L1 is the luminance of the brightest colour and L2 is the luminance 
of the darkest of the two colours. Luminance is defined as 
​L = 0.2126r + 0.7152g + 0.0722b​ 
(3)
The factors r, g, and b represent the linear red, green, and blue colour com-
ponents. The conversion between linear c and non­linear components k is 
based on IEC/4WD 61966–2-1 and (Stokes et al. 1996) as
​c = ​  k 
_______________________ 
12.95 ​ 
(4)
if k <= 0.03928, or
​c = ( ​ ​k​  ​  ​+ 0.055 
_______________________ 
1.055
  ​ ​)​
2.4​
(5)
if k > 0.03928. The value k is given by 
​k = ​ C 
_______________________ 
255 ​ 
(6)
where C represents one of the three RGB-­vector values defined by an 8-bit 
value in the interval 0 to 255, where 0 represents no contribution and 255 
represent the maximum contribution of the given RGB-­channel.
This formulation is relatively intricate and does not serve as an inspira-
tional tool for designers with a limited interest in mathematics. Contrast 
calculators1 are therefore often used for checking contrast levels against 
the WCAG2.0 guidelines.
Simplified luminance contrast calculations
The luminance contrast formulation referred to in WCAG2.0 provides 
more accuracy than is needed for most practical purposes, and a computer 
or a scientific calculator is needed. This section proposes a simplified for-
mulation that requires fewer steps and only a basic calculator. The alterna-
tive luminance computation is derived as
  1	  <http://www.snook.ca/technical/colour_contrast/colour.html>.

On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers / 409 
​L = ​ 3.27 ​r​  ​ 2​ + 11 ​g​  ​ ​ 2​ + 1.11 ​b​  ​ ​ 2​ 
 
_______________________ 
1,000,000 
​ 
(7)
where L is the luminance, r, g, and b are the red, green, and blue html 
components, that is 0 to 255. This simplification is achieved ignoring the 
linear part of the transfer function in Eq. 4, and replacing the power 2.4 
with a square and removing the factors in the nominator and denomina-
tor. Finally, the constants are factored out. This simplification yields fewer 
than 1% errors in most cases.
The contrast between two colour vectors is found by simple substitution 
and refactoring as
​contrast =  ​ 3.27 ​r​  1​ 2​ + 11 ​g​  1​ 2​ + 1.11 ​b​  1​ 2​ + 50,000 
 
_______________________ 
 
 
 3.27 ​r​ 2​ 2​ + 11 ​g​ 2​ 2​ + 1.11 ​b​ 2​ 2​ + 50,000 ​ 
(8)
where r1, g1, b1 is the brightest colour, and r2, g2, b2 is the darkest colour. 
The total error in contrast with the simplified luminance expression is usu-
ally between 0 and 7.5%. For example, to compute the contrast between 
white (255, 255, 255) and red (255, 0, 0) these values are substituted into 
Equation 8:
​contrast =  ​ 3.27 ⋅ 255 ⋅ 255 + 11 ⋅ 255 ⋅ 255 + 1.11 ⋅ 255 ⋅ 255 + 50,000 
 
 
 
__________________________________________ 
 
 
 
3.27 ⋅ 255 ⋅ 255 + 11 ⋅ 0 ⋅ 0 + 1.11 ⋅ 0 ⋅ 0 + 50,000 
​ = ​3, 9 
‾
​
Irrespective of the complexity of the contrast calculations it can be hard 
to mentally understand the relationship between colour choices and the 
WCAG2.0 level ‘aa’ and ‘aaa’ criteria. The following sections thus explore 
the effects colour choices have on remaining available colours in the col-
our space.
RGB impact on luminance
Figure 1 illustrates the luminance impact of the red, green, and blue com-
ponents respectively according Equation 3. Clearly, the green component 
has the strongest impact on the luminance of a colour of about 70% with its 
large weighting in Equation 3; the impact of the red component is less than 
0
0.1
0.2
0,3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
luminance
RGB value
red
green
blue
Figure 1
Luminance 
impacts of the red, 
green and blue 
components.

410 / Frode Eika Sandnes
a third of green with approximately 20% impact. The blue component has 
the least impact on luminance with a mere 7%. In other words, humans are 
better at perceiving changes in green, and least able to perceive variations 
in blue. Consequently, when selecting colours more effect is achieved by 
varying the green component, while varying the blue will have the least 
effect on contrast.
Exploring contrast as a function of luminance
Figure 2 explores WCAG2.0 colour contrast with a concrete example where 
the contrast of (a) white, (b) grey, (c) dark grey, and (d) black are plotted 
as a function of the red component. The WCAG2.0 contrast limits for the 
‘aa’ criteria are plotted as horizontal lines in orange, where body text is the 
thin line (4.5:1) and headings as a thick line (3:1). The ‘aa’ ­criteria are plot-
ted in green with the limits for body text as the thin line (7:1) and headings 
as the thick line (5:1). Clearly, the contrast levels are overall larger between 
red and white (luminance 1) for which most of the red ranges satisfies the 
‘aa’ and ‘aaa’ ­criteria besides the very bright reds.
When comparing red and grey with a luminance of 0.5 (medium bright) 
nearly half of the red shades satisfy the most strict level ‘aaa’ criteria while 
only the brightest part of red does not satisfy the level ‘aa’ heading criteria. 
The contrast curve is reversed when comparing red with black (zero lumi-
nance). None of the shades of red satisfied the strict ‘aaa’ criterion for body 
text and only a small part at the high end of red satisfied the ‘aaa’ heading 
criterion and the ‘aa’ criteria. A comparison between red and a dark grey 
with a luminance of 0.08 reveals that none of the shades of red satisfy the 
‘aa’ or ‘aaa’ criteria. In simple terms, red gives higher contrast with bright 
colours compared to dark colours.
Contrast effects in the colour plane: single choices
The previous example illustrates the effects of colour choices as a func-
tion of one colour component. This section explores the effects of colour 
choices in the colour plane, that is, the effects colour choices has on two of 
the three colour components. When a given colour is chosen for the text 
or the background, certain parts of the colour space becomes unavailable 
as it represents colours with insufficient contrast according to WCAG2.0. 
The red–­green plane is chosen as these components have more impact 
on contrast than the blue component. A two-dimensional analysis is cho-
sen because it is challenging to simultaneously visualize the entire three-­
dimensional colour space (Gonzalez and Latulipe 2011). 
Figure 3 (overleaf) shows the effects of colour choice in the red–green 
colour plane. The white area without a grid shows the parts of the colour 
space that yield insufficient contrast, orange indicates parts of the colour 
space that satisfy the level ‘aa’ criteria for headings, the yellow area satisfies 

On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers / 411 
the level ‘aa’ criteria for body text, and the green area satisfies the strict 
level ‘aaa’ criteria for body text. Figure 3a shows the effects of selecting 
black (the bottom left corner). The area on the right side of the red–green 
plane constitutes colours that satisfy ‘aa’ headings, that is, colours with 
a green component with a pixel value greater than 125 goes well with black. 
Colours with a green component greater than 175 all satisfy the level ‘aaa’ 
body text criterion. If only using red, a value of 200 or more is needed 
to achieve contrasts that satisfy the level ‘aa’ criterion for headings. The 
red–­green plane is separated by curved lines, which indicates that com-
binations of red and green contribute nonlinearly to contrast. Hence, 
the illustrations confirm that it is hard to mentally comprehend contrast 
relationships.
Figure 3b shows that by selecting white (in the top right corner) the 
situation is reversed. That is, the left side of the red–­green colour plane 
is dominated by low levels of green constitute colours that yield contrasts 
that satisfy the requirements for ‘aa’ headings.
Figure 2 a–d
Contrast as 
a function of 
luminance. 
Horizontal 
lines shows the 
requirements for 
‘aaa’ body text, 
‘aaa’ headings, 
‘aa’ body text and 
‘aa’ headings from 
top to bottom.
–1
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
liminance contrast
red component
red
aa heading
aa body text
aaa body 
text
–1
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
liminance contrast
red component
red
aa heading
aa body text
aaa body 
text
–1
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
liminance contrast
red component
red
aa heading
aa body text
aaa body 
text
–1
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
liminance contrast
red component
red
aa heading
aa body text
aaa body 
text
a. Red and white (luminance 1)
c. Red and dark grey (luminance 0.08)
b. Red and grey (luminance 0.5)
d. Red and black (luminance 0)

412 / Frode Eika Sandnes
Figures 3c and 3d show the effect of selecting red (in the top left corner) 
and green (in the bottom right corner), respectively. The area of valid con-
trasting colours is smaller with red than with green. The explanation for 
this is that red constitutes medium luminance requiring sufficient colour 
distance towards the low luminance values and high luminance values. 
Green, on the other hand, is a high luminance colour, which is closer to 
white. This means that a larger area in the low luminance area of the colour 
plane yields sufficient contrast.
Contrast effects in the colour plane: double choices
Is it possible to find more than two colours with the property that they all 
have sufficient contrast in relation to each other? This section attempts 
to answer this question by visualizing the colour plane as a result of two 
colour choices. 
It may be useful to distinguish between colour sets and local colour sets. 
A colour set is defined herein as a set of colours used such that sufficient 
contrast between these colours is needed. For example, a  text colour 
and a background colour makes up a colour set. A local colour set is one 
instance of a colour set used in one part on a web page. However, a web 
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
black
aaheading
aa body
aaabody
insuﬃcient
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
white
insuﬃcient
aaheading
aa body
aaabody
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
red
insuﬃcient
aaheading
aa body
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
green
insuﬃcient
aaheading
aa body
aaabody
a. Black (0, 0, 0)
c. Red (255, 0, 0)
b. White (255, 255, 255)
d. Green (0, 255, 0)
Figure 3 a–d
Effect of colour 
choices on 
contrasts in the 
red–green plane.

On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers / 413 
page may contain multiple local colour sets in different and disjoint areas 
of the display real estate. The contrast requirements apply within each set, 
but not between the sets. Figure 4 shows a colour set with three colours 
that can be used in any combination and four local colour sets with two 
colours each.
Figure 5a shows the effect of selecting black and white, namely that it 
is possible to select a third contrasting colour. The area of third colour 
options that all satisfy the ‘aa’ criterion for headings is significantly large, 
that is from green components in the range of 125–160 with zero red up to 
all greens less than 100 with maximum red components. Two small areas 
also satisfy the ‘aa’ body text criterion, that is the colours in the region 
(180, 110, 0) and (235, 55, 0). None of the colours satisfy the two ‘aaa’ 
criteria.
Figure 5b shows the valid parts of the colour space after selecting white 
and red. This area is smaller, but the proportion of the area that satisfies 
the ‘aa’ ­body text criterion is larger. Most of these colours are in the black 
part of the plane. Figures 5c and 5d show green combined with white and 
black, respectively. 
Figure 4
a. A colour set.  
b. Four local 
colour sets.
text
text
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
white
green
insuﬃcient
aaheading
aa body
aaabody
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
black
green
insuﬃcient
insuﬃcient
aaheading
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
black
white
insuﬃcient
insuﬃcient
aaheading
aa body
aa body
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0
25
50
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
red
green
3–4
2–3
1–2
0–1
white
red
insuﬃcient
aaheading
aa body
Figure 5 a–d
Effects of two colour choices on contrast in the red–­green plane. 
a. White (255, 255, 255) and black (0, 0, 0)
c. Green (0, 255, 0) and white (0, 0 ,0)
b. White (255, 255, 255) and red (255,0,0)
d. Green (0, 255, 0) and black (0, 0, 0)
a
b
text
text
text
text
text
text
text
text

414 / Frode Eika Sandnes
The results show that is possible to select up to three colours that simul-
taneously satisfy the WCAG2.0 ‘aa’ heading criteria, but not more than 
three colours. It is not possible to select three colours that simultaneously 
satisfy the ‘aa’ body text criterion or the strict ‘aaa’ criteria. The conclusion 
is that global colour sets have a maximum size of three and the third colour 
can only be used for larger text headings.
Conclusions and implications
WCAG2.0 defines the theoretical minimum contrast recommendation. It 
is therefore advisable to allow for a certain margin of error. The theoretical 
minimum recommendation defined by WCAG is static. The developer has 
limited control over how the end results appear to users. There are several 
factors at play, such as display characteristics, lighting conditions, and the 
observer’s vision. Conditions indoors and outdoors are different and also 
vary according to the time of day (Sandnes 2010). 
A common question is whether one should always strive to maintain 
maximum possible contrast. Too much is usually better than too little, but 
there are situations where too much contrast may pose a problem. For 
example, self-­luminous white text on a black background may ‘bleed’ and 
therefore be difficult to read (Bressan et al. 1997). Colour bleeding can be 
used to explain the use of bright yellow or green text on black background 
found on information boards in public spaces such as train stations and 
airports.
There is a general myth that universal accessibility requirements con-
stitute constraints that make accessible websites unattractive and boring. 
However, the best designers will exploit the available opportunities despite 
the constraints and be inspired by the challenge. Although guidelines, 
such as WCAG2.0, impose certain constraints, the possibilities are endless, 
providing the designers with a large range of possibilities to play with in 
terms of creating beautiful, exciting, engaging, and innovative designs for 
the web. 
Currently, contrast checks are often performed after design (Alonso 
2010), and the WCAG recommendations are technically intricate. More­
over, research show that several common colour picking interfaces are 
complex to use (van den Broek el al. 2004) and that visual feedback in the 
tool is more important than the actual colour model used (Douglas and 
Kirkpatrick 1999). Attempts have been made at generating palettes that 
help designers cater for colour blindness (Troiano et al. 2008). In a similar 
manner, it is argued for incorporating WCAG2.0 requirements into the 
design tools such that the requirements are satisfied throughout the design 
process. This can be achieved by introducing colour pickers that change 
according to the chosen colours and only allow the selection of colours 
that constitute colours that yield sufficient contrast.

On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers / 415 
On-­screen colour contrast for visually impaired readers / 415 
References
Alonso, Fernando, José Luis Fuertes, Ángel 
Lucas González, and Loïc Martínez. 2010. 
‘On the testability of WCAG 2.0 for beginners.’ 
In Proceedings of the 2010 international cross 
disciplinary conference on web accessibility. New 
York: ACM. 
Bressan, Paola, Ennio Mingolla, Lothar Spillmann, 
and Takeo Watanabe. 1997. ‘Neon color 
spreading: a review.’ Perception 26 (11): 1353–1366.
van Den Broek, Egon L., Peter. M. F. Kisters, and 
Louis G. Vuurpijl. 2004. ‘Design guidelines for 
a content-­based image retrieval color-­selection 
interface.’ In Proceedings of the conference on Dutch 
directions in HCI (Dutch HCI ’04), 14–18. New 
York: ACM. 
Douglas, Sarah. A., and Arthur E. Kirkpatrick. 1999. 
‘Model and representation: the effect of visual 
feedback on human performance in a color picker 
interface.’ ACM Transactions on Graphics 18 (2): 
96–127. 
Foley, James D., Andries van Dam, Steven K. Feiner, 
and John. F. Hughes. 1995. Computer graphics: 
principles and practice: in C. 2nd edn. Reading, 
MA: Addison-­Wesley. 
Gonzalez, Berto, and Celine Latulipe. 2011. ‘BiCEP: 
bimanual color exploration plugin.’ In CHI ’11 
extended abstracts on human factors in computing 
systems (CHI EA ’11), 1483–1488. New York: ACM. 
IEC/4WD 61966–2-1. 1998. ‘Colour measurement 
and management in multimedia systems and 
equipment: part 2–1: default RGB Colour 
Space – sRGB.’ International Electrotechnical 
Commission.
ISO-9241–3. 1992. ‘Ergonomic requirements for 
office work with visual display terminals (VDTs): 
part 3: visual display requirements.’ International 
Organization for Standardization.
Hood, Donald C., and Marcia A. Finkelstein. 1986. 
‘Sensitivity to light.’ In Handbook of perception 
and human performance, vol. I: sensory processes 
and perception, edited by Kenneth R. Boff, Lloyd 
Kaufman, and James P. Thomas, 5–66. New York: 
John Wiley.
Knoblauch, Kenneth, Aries Arditi, and Janet Szlyk. 
1991. ‘Effects on chromatic and luminance 
contrast on reading.’ Journal of the Optical Society 
of America A, 8 (2): 428–439.
Majumder, Aditi, and Sandy Irani. 2007. ‘Perception-­
based contrast enhancement of images.’ ACM 
Transactions on Applied Perception 4 (3): article 17. 
Norman, Donald. 1998. The design of everyday things. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Sandnes, Frode Eika. 2010. ‘Where was that photo 
taken? Deriving geographical information from 
image collections based on temporal exposure 
attributes.’ Multimedia Systems 16 (4): 309–318.
Spencer, Donna. 2011. Information architecture. 
[e-book] Five Simple Steps.
Stokes, Michael, Matthew Anderson, Srinivasan 
Chandrasekar, and Ricardo Motta. 1996. 
‘A standard default color space for the internet: 
sRGB.’ <http://www.w3.org/Graphics/Color/
sRGB>.
Troiano, Luigi, Cosimo Birtolo, and Maria 
Miranda. 2008. ‘Adapting palettes to color vision 
deficiencies by genetic algorithm.’ In Proceedings 
of the 10th annual conference on genetic and 
evolutionary computation (GECCO ’08), edited by 
Maarten Keijzer, 1065–1072. New York: ACM.
Wood, Joanne M. 2002. ‘Aging, driving and vision.’ 
Clinical and Experimental Optometry 85 (4): 
214–220.
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). 2008. ‘Web 
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.’ 
Last modified 11 December 2008. <http://www.
w3.org/TR/WCAG20/>.


417
Contrast set labelling
Theoretical essentials and suggestions for good practice
Ian Watson
This chapter explores the graphical tools that information designers use to 
distinguish between the members of sets. Numbers may label the floors of 
a building, the hours of the day, or the pages of a book. Designers may use words 
to distinguish the different bus stops in a town, letters for the different sectors 
of a train platform, colours for the different keys to a building or office, and sym-
bols for different types of restrooms. (There are other, less commonly used tools, 
too.) In general, designers use sets of contrasting graphic forms to label sets of 
contrasting ‘things’ in the real world. Those sets of things often have a built-in 
topology: the hours of the day form a metaphorical circle, the pages of a book 
a line, and the gates at an airport may be arranged in a branching pattern. That 
topology typically makes some labelling tools more appropriate than others. 
Information designers always need to choose labels that they are sure users will 
understand. This means that they are partly slaves to convention, but there is 
also room for a good amount of creativity.
Imagine that you woke up one day and found that all the numbers had 
disappeared from the houses in your town, the cars parked on the streets, 
and the pages of all the books you own. While social life would not grind 
to a halt, its gears would turn more slowly. To help someone find a house, 
or identify a car, or flip to a particular page in a book, you would need to 
give them a description rather than an identifier: the red house with the 
funny-looking roof at the end of the street, the dark green minivan parked 
on the street that runs by the river, or the page that’s sort of in the middle 
of the book (a little after the picture of the aardvark).
It’s not that labelling pages, cars, and houses is essential. It isn’t. There 
are books without page numbers and towns without house numbers, and 
although automobiles were produced commercially in the 1890s, it was 
only in 1903 that Britain, for example, started requiring them to carry 
licence plates (A brief history of registration 2006). But what labels do is to 
make certain operations on these classes of things more easy. In particular, 
they help us coordinate the way that different people refer to the same 
thing.
Unlike the words in a language, labels for things are most often con-
sciously created. Their creators, though they may or may not think of 
themselves as designers, are indeed designing information – and they have 
the opportunity to reflect on how that might best be done. The goal of this 
chapter is to review the most common tools that are used to label sets of 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 417–423
26

418 / Ian Watson
things, and to show which tools are most appropriate in different contexts 
and circumstances.
When we apply labels, we typically apply them to the members of sets. 
These sets are made up of items which contrast with each other, and thus 
we call them contrast sets. The American linguistic anthropologists Harold 
Conklin (1962) and Charles Frake (1962) were the first to use this term in 
print. You can recognize a contrast set because it fits the formula ‘X and 
other Ys’: Hungary and other European countries, Thomas Jefferson and 
other former presidents of the United States, tuna-and-pickle and other 
sandwiches on the cafe’s menu. The X is the name of an individual item and 
the Y is the name of the entire class.
Labelling tools
Names are a handy and descriptive way of labelling the members of a con-
trast set. Designers commonly use them to label streets and transport 
stops, as well as rooms within a building, groupings within a school or 
kindergarten, or the days of the week and the months of the year. Yet their 
varying length can make them difficult to display, and interpreting them 
depends on knowledge of the language they are in. As well, they frequently 
lack any obvious topology: except insofar as it can be put in alphabetical 
order, a collection of names does not naturally suggest that it might be 
arranged along a line, circle, hierarchy, or any other kind of shape. When 
names are used, for example, to label the classrooms in several different 
university buildings, as on one campus the author is familiar with, the 
name of the room provides no clue to the building it is in or to the names 
of other nearby rooms.
Numbers are a popular and functional labelling tool that are widely used 
to label things as diverse as farm animals, the residents of a country, the 
terminals at an airport, the hours of the day, the hangers in a coat-check 
room, or the user-facing web pages in a  content management system. 
Numbers, unlike names, are politically fairly neutral, their length can be 
standardized, and they have an obvious topology. The most that can be 
said against labelling by number is perhaps that it is a bit dull. 
The letters of the alphabet (whether the Roman alphabet or any other) 
have some of the same advantages and disadvantages as numbers, yet are 
more restricted in their range of usability. When used singly, their famili-
arity and clear linear topology makes them well suited for things like the 
different sectors of a train platform or the notes in the musical octave. But 
single letters are only appropriate labels for small sets of up to a couple 
dozen items or so. Identifiers made up of multiple letters can label much 
larger sets, but we are more used to identifiers made up of multiple num-
bers than multiple letters. Also, stating a letter-based identifier orally in 
a  difficult acoustic environment (like over the phone) risks confusing 
similar-sounding pairs such as S and F. Letters are also less neutral than 

Contrast set labelling / 419 
numbers; combinations of letters sometimes spell out inconvenient things. 
In some environments it is common to design identifiers which combine 
both letters and numbers. Letter-number combinations work fine if a label 
needs to be primarily machine-interpretable (as with computer session 
IDs) but are more problematic for labels (such as airline ticket reservation 
numbers) which are also subject to human use; in these cases care should 
taken to avoid confusion between 0 and O and 1 and I.
Colour is a popular and useful way of labelling contrast sets, but the 
number of distinctions available is small and nonstandardized. For ex-
ample, it is a matter of choice for the designer whether to use just blue, 
or distinct shades (light blue and dark blue) as contrasting hues. As well, 
a surprisingly large percentage of males have variant colour vision and 
thus difficulty distinguishing colours such as red and green (Kaiser and 
Boynton 1996, ch. 10). The author has heard the designer Paul Mijksenaar 
suggest that ‘colour supporting’ for contrast sets distinguished with other 
labels is sometimes more successful than ‘colour-coding’ where the colour 
identity must be remembered. For example, in Mijksenaar’s own design, 
the ten stops on the Airtrain at JFK Airport in New York are primarily dis-
tinguished by having different names. System maps and signage also col-
our the stops differently. The colours highlight the contrast between set 
members, but knowing the colour is not a prerequisite for recognizing the 
stop. In fact, the same colour is sometimes used for more than one stop.
Using icons, pictures, and patterns (usually visual or auditory) as label-
ling tools can be cute, but it is practical only in certain circumstances. One 
major problem is the lack of conventionalized sets of images or patterns. 
Whereas users can be relied on to know what graphic forms do and do 
not count as numbers or letters (or even common colours), users typi-
cally have no idea what counts as a member of a set of images or patterns, 
and may thus have a harder time remembering them or perceiving them 
on the fly. The author has seen a number of ineffective uses of icons in 
information design: for example, using animal and nature icons to label 
the different levels of the underground Sydney Casino parking garage in 
Australia (some of the animals were unfamiliar and the set did not clearly 
replicate the linear topology of the garage), and using smiley faces with 
a smile, frown, or straight mouth to represent three different levels of typ-
ical success in cooperation between businesses in the five Nordic coun-
tries (the differences in mouth shape were too minor to be easily visible). 
However, in environments where users are heavily socialized into the set, 
icons can be effective. Consider, for example, that the letters of the Roman 
alphabet and the elements of other writing systems are, at least originally, 
pictorial ways of labelling sounds with contrasting graphic forms. Or think 
of the black and red circular icons used to represent product performance 
levels by the American magazine Consumer Reports. They are opaque to 
uninitiated users but arguably function well for the many people who read 
the magazine every month.

420 / Ian Watson
In addition, graphic devices such as variations in font weight can be an 
effective way of communicating contrast within small sets. For example, 
some airports with bilingual signs use the same font for both languages, but 
distinguish between them by using differing weights, sizes, or styles. Users 
master this mapping quickly, and marking languages with a visual distinc-
tion probably helps speed sign comprehension and reduce confusion.
Contrast sets are often embedded within each other in hierarchical 
structures which we can call taxonomies. In such cases two or more ‘levels’ 
of labels may be used to refer to the ‘terminal nodes’ of the taxonomy. For 
example, in a factory, three different buildings might be labelled A, B, and 
C, and the rooms within them might be labelled with numbers. Thus there 
might be a room 2 in both buildings A and B, whose full labels would be 
A2 and B2. To make things even more complicated, the room numbers 
might include the floor number (say, A202 and A302), creating a three-
level system. Taxonomic labels can and often do combine different types 
of labelling tools in the same identifier.
In sum, key issues to consider when choosing tools for labelling a set 
include:
•	 the structure, topology, and size of the underlying contrast set;
•	 how easy it will be to perceive the labels (and the differences between 
them) in the environment where they are displayed;
•	 the degree of contact, training, or habituation that users have with 
both the contrast set and the labels for it.
Iconicity
Iconic labels are those where the relations between the members of the 
label set reflect the relations between the members of the contrast set that 
they label. Typically, the topology of the label set replicates the topology 
of the contrast set. In simpler terms, the label set says something about the 
underlying contrast set. For example, on a typical street, the further up 
you walk, the higher the house numbers will be. The topology or configu-
ration of the house numbers replicates the topology of the street itself. In 
Manhattan (and many other American cities), where not just houses but 
also streets are numbered, there is also an iconic relationship between the 
street’s number and its geographical position.
Set topologies can be of several forms. There are linear topologies, like 
streets; circular topologies, like the hours of the day or months of the year; 
and branching, taxonomy-like topologies, like the gates at many larger 
airports. 
The value of using an iconic labelling style is that users can grasp the 
system as a generative principle rather than as a collection of individual 
links. This allows users to predict roughly what a given label refers to or 
how a given contrast set member might be labelled. For example, if you are 

Contrast set labelling / 421 
standing between two airport departure gates and one is called C46, it is 
unlikely that the other will be called B2, but it would not be surprising if it 
were called C47 or C48. If you are standing in front of house number 700 
near the end of a long street, it is likely that house number 2 will be at the 
other end. These inferences are possible when users understand the way 
the label topology maps on to the set topology.
Iconicity is a standard information design strategy. In contrast, linguists 
have long recognized that the words in the lexicon are largely arbitrary, so 
that the difference between the words dog and cat reflects nothing about 
the actual difference between dogs and cats. There is, though, a certain 
amount of iconicity in regular language (linguists have debated its extent 
for centuries). In information design, iconicity is the rule rather than the 
exception, partly because of the deliberateness with which its semantic 
systems are created and their simplicity when compared to language. After 
all, designers often label particular, concrete instances of things, such as 
a specific train platform, while words can label actions, qualities, or entire 
classes of objects.
Related to iconicity is what we could call ‘coordinated labelling’, where 
a single label set maps on to the same features of multiple contrast sets. For 
example, in the Faroe Islands in the 1980s, a system was developed in which 
postal codes, telephone numbers, road numbers, bus route numbers, and 
ferry route numbers in each part of the islands all began with the same one 
or two numbers. Formally speaking, the same set of labels was mapped to 
the islands’ geography in multiple ways. Although the system later broke 
down, while it lasted this degree of coordination was quite impressive 
to those who appreciate such things. An example where such coordina-
tion is lacking is that European countries have varying rules about which 
telephone numbers are reserved for mobile phones and which for land 
lines. Each time they cross a national border, telephone users must relearn 
which numbers refer to mobile phones (and thus cost more to call). This 
was surely a missed design opportunity for users, though perhaps a source 
of revenue for telephone companies.
Other issues
Visual identities for entire sets
It is often important to create a design identity (usually a visual one) for 
entire contrast sets. If you are labelling the platforms at a train station, it 
is not just important that users see the number 5 when they arrive at plat-
form 5; it is important that they recognize this particular number 5 as a plat-
form number (rather than as marking sector 5 within that platform, giving 
instructions to train drivers to limit their speed to 5 kilometres an hour, or 
any of the other things that the number 5 could be used to say). Presenting 
all the members of a particular contrast set to users in a consistent way 

422 / Ian Watson
helps users learn what a given labelling device is being used to represent, 
and it is even more helpful if this is part of a more widely standardized 
convention. For example, a traveller changing trains at a station for the 
first time will have an easier time finding their platform if they can rely on 
their familiarity with the look of platform-number signs at other stations in 
the same system (such signs might, say, all be square and blue with white 
numbers in the Helvetica font). In some cases, it can be helpful to display 
a word that describes the entire set (for example, writing ‘Platform 5’ or 
‘Gate 46’ on a sign rather than just ‘5’ or ‘46’, typically setting the word 
in a smaller type size than the number). For further reading see Watson 
(2005, section 3.3).
Exemplifiers or placeholder labels 
It also often makes sense to specify a particular label that will serve as an 
example or ‘placeholder’ when referring to the idea of ‘any member of 
the contrast set in question.’ Strings like ‘123456’ are commonly used for 
numerical labels. In the realm of personal names, ‘John Doe’ is a common 
placeholder label in English, while Germans often use ‘Erika Mustermann’, 
and Chinese ‘Zhang San’ (Zhang Three). Such labels are sometimes called 
metasyntactic signifiers, as they signify the idea of individual members of 
a contrast set rather than any actual member. By specifying a placeholder 
label, one hopes to ensure that it will become conventionalized and com-
monly enough used that one can rely on users not interpreting it as refer-
ring to something real. For further reading, see Watson (2005, section 3.7).
Using multiple labels for accessibility
Design that aims at being as inclusive or multifunctional as possible often 
labels the same contrast set in several different ways at the same time. For 
example, Braille playing cards list the number and suit of each card both 
visually and tactically so that both sighted and unsighted players can use 
them. Product labels at IKEA housewares stores typically include a name 
(used especially by customers), a stock number (for employees), a bar-
coded version of the stock number (for machine readability), and an actual 
description of the product.
Nametags and wayfinding
Many labels are displayed on or near the contrast set members that they 
refer to. At the very least, they then serve as a means of confirming that one 
is indeed looking at that member of a contrast set (like a nametag worn at 
a conference). Consider the different roles of a house number as displayed 
on the house itself, and as listed in the owner’s entry in the telephone 
book. Nametag-style labels with an iconic relationship to the underlying 
contrast set serve as wayfinding aids, as users who understand the iconic 
principle can use labels to grasp their ‘location’ within the set and predict 
the location of other members. Such labels ought to be designed in a way 

Contrast set labelling / 423 
which facilitates visibility during navigation. This explains why libraries 
make an effort to place the call numbers on book spines at the same height, 
as well as the frustration that comes from searching unsuccessfully for 
a missing house number on a building. For further reading, see Watson 
(2005, section 3.4).
Social aspects of introducing or changing labels
The process of introducing labels for the first time (for a  contrast set 
that was previously unlabelled) or changing an established set of labels 
can meet with a considerable amount of resistance from users. After all, 
labels mediate our cognitive relationship with important features of our 
environment, and we even integrate them into our feelings of identity. For 
example, the French government faced considerable opposition when it 
decided to revamp French automobile licence plates and eliminate the 
iconic relationship between the plate number and the département of reg-
istration (Lichfield 2008), while novelist Salvatore Satta (1987, 89) gives 
a convincing fictional description of resentment at the introduction of 
street names in Nuoro, Sardinia. An awareness of the sensitive feelings sur-
rounding labels can smooth the process of designing new ones. For further 
reading on this issue see Watson (2005, section 6.5).
References
A brief history of registration. 2006. Swansea, Wales: 
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency.
Conklin, Harold C. 1962. ‘Lexicographical treatment 
of folk taxonomies.’ In Problems in lexicography: 
report (conference publication), edited by 
Fred W. Householder and Sol Saporta, 119–141. 
Bloomington: Indiana University [variant title: 
International Journal of American Linguistics 28 
(2) part 4: 119–141]. Reprinted 1968 in Readings 
in the sociology of language, edited by Joshua 
A. Fishman, 414–433. The Hague: Mouton 
<http://www.degruyter.com/viewbooktoc/
product/148926>. Reprinted 1969 in Cognitive 
anthropology: readings, edited by Stephen A. 
Tyler, 41–59. New York and London: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston.
Frake, Charles O. 1962. ‘The ethnographic study 
of cognitive systems.’ In Anthropology and 
human behavior, edited by T. Gladwin and W. C. 
Sturtevant, 72–85, 91–93. Washington, DC: 
Anthropological Society of Washington.
Kaiser, Peter K., and Robert M. Boynton. 1996. 
Human color vision. 2nd edn. Washington, DC: 
Optical Society of America.
Lichfield, John. 2008. ‘Number-plate revolution 
sparks an uprising across France.’ The 
Independent, 16 January.
Satta, Salvatore. 1987. The day of judgment. London: 
Harvill.
Watson, Ian. 2005. ‘Cognitive design: creating the 
sets of categories and labels that structure our 
shared experience.’ PhD dissertation, Department 
of Sociology, Rutgers University. <http://hdl.
handle.net/1946/6366>.


425
Gestalt principles
Opportunities for designers
Rune Pettersson
The essential thesis in gestalt psychology is that in perception the whole is 
other than the sum of its parts. Our perception cannot be understood simply by 
analysing a scene into its elements. What we interpret depends on the relations 
of these elements to one another. The brain works fast and in a holistic way. We 
immediately ‘see the big picture’. This chapter presents the gestalt principles 
that provide the most opportunities for information designers.
Attention
There are always far more stimuli in our environment that we can see, 
hear, smell, taste, or feel through touch, than we can notice consciously. 
We select what we want to hear or see, i.e. pay attention to, and we ignore 
the rest. Most stimuli remain unheard, unseen, and thus unknown to us. 
For Stern and Robinson (1994), selection of sensory data is the first step of 
perception. However, selection of sensory data may also be seen as a part 
of attention. When we attend to something, we select that information for 
further processing.
Perception 
While mere sensation is thought to be a lower-­level function, perception 
is thought to be a function of higher-­order areas of the brain. It is the 
awareness of complex characteristics of stimuli. Sensory organs jointly 
constitute a perceptual system that, in a natural environment, collects an 
enormous amount of superfluous data about our environment. In a natural 
environment, the sensory system normally supplies us with exhaustive, 
unambiguous data about events occurring there. We are often unaware of 
the sensory channels that supply us with data. We are merely aware of the 
external events.
Perception processes
The concept ‘perception’ is a collective designation for all the different 
processes in which an organism obtains data about the outside world. 
Perception is the organizing and analysing of the data that we actually pay 
attention to. 
Perception of two- or three-­dimensional representations entails fast, 
holistic, parallel, and simultaneous processing (Sperry 1982). We do not 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 425–434
27

426 / Rune Pettersson
‘see’ patches of colours and shades of brightness. We look for and recog-
nize patterns, and combine them into meaningful structures. We perceive 
‘things’, like apes, books, cats, dogs, etchings, and flowers, while we rely 
on our experiences, thoughts, and values to interpret, understand, and 
create meaning from what we see, hear, taste, smell, and touch. 
Perception is subjective
Perception is certainly not an absolute and objective process. It is subjec-
tive, and it varies as a result of a number of factors. Individuals differ in how 
they perceive any given stimulus. Age and gender, cultural, economic, his-
torical, political, religious, and social factors may be important. We inter-
pret new impressions against the background of our previous experience 
and knowledge. Our experiences change over time, and a stimulus may 
easily be perceived differently at different times, and internalized know-
ledge will influence interpretation and understanding. 
The perception system strives to obtain clarity. When the system arrives 
at clarity, then clarity serves as reinforcement, a reward. An important 
principle for the designer is to improve the clarity of any message (Winn 
1993). Thus the main goal in information design and in instruction design 
should always be clarity of communication (Pettersson 2015a). We should 
limit the content to what the intended audience needs, and emphasize 
what is most important. 
Perceptual constancy
In the real world objects may have similar colours to the ones in the 
background, and the objects are often partly hidden behind other vari-
ously sized objects. The outline of an object is often indistinct. In order 
to handle such complex scenes our visual system combines visual elem-
ents even when they are distorted. We are quick to make the best possible 
interpretation of the available fragments of data. There is a large degree 
of perceptual constancy. We can view an object, a picture, a text, or a sym-
bol from various distances and from various angles and still get the same 
understanding of the content (Pettersson 2015e). You only need to look at 
a single car passing by to realize the importance of perceptual constancy.
Visual perception 
Our visual system is remarkable. We are capable of perceiving objects in 
bright light from the sun, and in pale light from the moon. We can also 
follow rapidly moving objects, like a car passing by. Visual perception is 
the product of complex interactions among various stimuli. A number 
of psychologists view our attempts to establish order as an innate faculty 
carried out in accordance with certain laws, or principles. These laws, or 
principles, can be utilized or relied on for information design purposes.

Gestalt principles / 427 
Gestalt psychology
For verbal language, syntax is the rules for combining words and phrases 
into well-­formed sentences. In non-­verbal visual languages, syntax de-
pends upon the spatial arrangements of the visual elements (Horn 1998, 
75). Our ideas about good spatial arrangements depend on how our per-
ceptual system works. 
Early in the 20th century the three psychologists Max Wertheimer 
(1880–1943), Kurt Koffka (1886–1941), and Wolfgang Köhler (1887–1967) 
collaborated on the founding of a new holistic attitude towards psych-
ology called gestalt psychology, or gestalt theory. Wertheimer started his 
research on the gestalt principles of perceptual grouping already in 1910, 
but he did not formally publish anything about his work before 1923 (King 
and Wertheimer 2005).
The German word gestalt means ‘whole form’, or ‘configuration’. Ge-
stalt psychologists believe that conscious experience must be viewed as 
a ‘whole form’, and cannot be analysed into its parts. This ‘whole form’ 
can be an image, a map, a shape, or a thought. Feeling, hearing, and seeing, 
must be studied together in order to understand their relationships.
The essential thesis in gestalt psychology is that in perception the whole 
is different from the sum of its parts (Palmer 1999). Because of the character-
istics of our mental visual system, visual perception cannot be understood 
simply by analysing a scene into its elements. Instead, what we interpret 
depends on the relations of these elements to one another. The brain 
works fast and in a holistic way. We immediately ‘see the big picture’. Later 
we may return and attend to some of the separate parts. This explains why 
a picture may have something new to offer even when we have viewed it 
many times.
Maps are good examples of the relationship between the ‘whole’ and 
the ‘parts’. In a city map the ‘whole’ is the layout of the city, and the ‘parts’ 
are all the symbols for blocks, buildings, and streets (Lohr 2010). An air-
port map shows the overall relational layout of the airport as well as the 
concourses, gates, shops, and terminals. 
The observations on which the ‘gestalt theory’ is based, form a basic part 
of the graphic designer’s craft knowledge (Waller 1987). These principles 
might be seen as relatively inflexible perceptual rules with consequences for 
interpretation that act as a fundamental constraint for the graphic designer 
alongside conventional rules such as the left-­to-­right direction of the writ-
ing system in many countries. The gestalt principles are often referred to as 
gestalt laws. However, we should really only use the term gestalt principles, 
since these principles are considerably weaker than one would expect of 
scientific laws (Palmer 1999).
For recent historical and conceptual discussions on gestalt theory, see 
Wagemans (2015); for recent discussions on the role of gestalt theory in art, 
design, and graphic design, see Behrens (1998) and Moszkowicz (2011).

428 / Rune Pettersson
Organization and perceptual groupings
The gestalt principles, or gestalt laws, were introduced by Wertheimer 
(1922, 1923), and were further developed by Köhler (1929, 1947), Koffka 
(1935), and Metzger (1936/2006). These gestalt principles help us organ-
ize the world around us in a legible way. They are basic for the syntax in 
visual languages. They describe and explain the organization of perceptual 
scenes. The proximity principle was the first principle that Wertheimer 
demonstrated. This was followed by the principles of similarity, common 
fate, continuity, closure, and Prägnanz or the principle of good form. There 
is no definitive list of gestalt principles (Todorović 2008). 
Each gestalt principle is supposed to function, as long as all other things 
are constant (Palmer 1999). Sometimes two, or even several, principles 
apply to the same grouping of elements. When the principles agree, the 
effect is stronger. When the principles disagree, the effect is weaker, and 
one of them will take over. Schriver (1997, 326) noted that gestalt prin-
ciples are important for document design. Gestalt principles can ‘help us 
guide the reader’s focus of attention, emphasize certain groupings, and 
organize sequences of the content’. 
Information designers can use several of the gestalt principles as tools 
in order to make it easier for the intended audiences to interpret the mes-
sages in information materials as meaningful wholes, rather than as ambig-
uous configurations or random individual elements.
The figure and ground organization and the following seven gestalt 
principles provide most opportunities for designers:
1	 similarity principle
2	 contrast principle
3	 continuity principle
4	 proximity principle
5	 grouping principle
6	 common fate principle
7	 closure principle 
However, only principles 1–5 are discussed in this chapter.
There are also gestalt principles that are less useful as tools for design-
ers. These principles are not discussed in this chapter: (8) area principle, 
(9) auditory principles, (10) common region principle, (11) connectedness 
principle, (12) convexity principle, (13) good form principle, (14) objec-
tive set principle, (15) past experience principle, (16) spatial concentration 
principle, (17) symmetry principle, and (18) synchrony principle.
Figure/ground organization
Figure/ground perception is a fundamental aspect of field organization. It 
is however, not always referred to as a gestalt principle, but rather as ‘figure/

Gestalt principles / 429 
ground articulation’ or as ‘figure/ground organization’. The Danish psy-
chologist and phenomenologist Edgar John Rubin (1886–1951) presented 
his work on figure/ground perception between 1915 and 1921 (Palmer 
1999). This was before Max Wertheimer presented his gestalt laws.
Edgar Rubin is especially famous for his optical illusion called ‘the Rubin 
vase/face’. This illusion is perceived either as a white vase, or as the pro-
files of two black heads facing each other. The visual system has a strong 
preference to ascribe the contour to just one of its border regions and to 
perceive the other side as part of a surface extending behind it (Palmer 
1999). The interpretation of the Rubin vase/face fluctuates between the 
two possibilities even though the image on your own retina remains con-
stant. Rubin’s theories became influential within gestalt psychology, yet 
he did not want to be included in the group of early gestalt psychologists.
Figure/ground articulation is also known as the figure/ground principle, 
figure–ground articulation, figure/ground organization, figure and back-
ground principle, figure and ground principle, and as the theory of figure and 
ground. According to this principle we select some elements in a picture as 
the figure, the object of interest (Figure 1). The remaining parts constitute 
the ground on which the figure rests. This is one of the simplest perceptual 
organizations. 
We perceive the figure as being in front of the ground, and the ground 
as being behind the figure. We might be tempted to view figure and ground 
as a relationship between just two levels (Schriver 1997, p. 307). However, 
what serves as the ground in one relationship can serve as the figure in 
another relationship. The figure/ground organization is affected and influ-
enced by several factors, such as: contrast, convexity, meaningfulness, 
motion, orientation, parallelism, size, enclosure, and symmetry.
Sometimes it may be hard to distinguish between figure and ground, 
and some structures will be perceived as reversible. Reality and what we 
see at any given moment will always be separated and different. We will 
perceive different things at different occasions, both with respect to reality 
and with respect to pictures. In some cases figure/ground articulation has 
apparently been based on experience (Peterson and Skow-­Grant 2003).
Miller (2007, 11) noted that the animal kingdom is filled with creatures 
whose colours and patterns help conceal and protect them from their 
Figure 1
In the illustration 
to the left we 
recognize a square 
as a ‘figure’ 
against a dotted 
background. In 
the other two 
illustrations, 
the properties 
of ‘figure and 
ground’ cannot 
be sharply 
distinguished. 
However, the three 
squares are equal, 
and the distances 
between them are 
the same.

430 / Rune Pettersson
enemies. This animal camouflage helps them to survive. The birth of mod-
ern military camouflage was a direct consequence of the invention of the 
aeroplane (Newark 2007). Aircraft were initially used in the First World 
War for aerial reconnaissance missions. Their task was to spot enemy 
artillery, troops, and vehicles. Their own artillery could then direct their 
fire directly at these targets. All sides formed ‘camouflage units’. Members 
of staff painted bold disruptive patterns on aircrafts, guns, and tanks. In 
France several prominent cubist artists were working as ‘camoufleurs’ at 
the front.
In animal camouflage as well as military camouflage, objects are percep-
tually subdivided. Their parts are grouped with parts of the surrounding 
environment. Gestalt principles make it possible for organisms and things 
that are in plain sight to become effectively invisible and therefore unde-
tectable. In camouflage the intention is to make a figure as much like the 
background as possible. Information design is the opposite of camouflage.
The graphic designer or the information designer can use the figure and 
ground principle to facilitate effective perception. The content and mes-
sage must stand out as clearly as possible from the ground.
For example, the most legible combinations of colours for text are black 
or dark brown on a light background. Other combinations may attract 
more attention but are less legible and, thus, may require larger type. A text 
can be easy to read in any colour, provided the colour of the background 
is carefully selected. However, generally speaking, the best text colour is 
black, which causes good contrast to most background colours. 
Similarity principle 
The similarity principle is also known as the law of similarity, and the theory 
of similarity. According to this principle we tend to perceive and group 
our impressions of things, all other things being equal, on the basis of the 
similarity of their properties. Events, objects, and units that look alike, 
resemble each other, and share similar characteristics and properties, 
belong together (Figure 2). 
These properties can be brightness, colour, darkness, orientation, pattern, 
shape, size, texture, or value. We use them to group elements into percep-
tual units, and the cognitive load on our short-­term memory is automat-
ically reduced. Elements that are different are not part of the group. One 
single black sheep in a flock of white sheep tends to be noticed.
The similarity principle is one of the most powerful organizing prin-
ciples and one of the most useful in information design for facilitating 
perceptual organization of data. The graphic designer and the infor-
mation designer can use the similarity principle to facilitate perception 
Figure 2
This illustration 
shows an example 
of ‘similarity of 
colour’. The four 
circles in each 
group have the 
same shape, and 
size, and they 
have the same 
distance from 
each other.

Gestalt principles / 431 
by emphasizing both differences and similarities of different parts in a  
document.
For example, the reader should be able to recognize quickly different 
categories of textual elements within a document. There should be clear 
distinctions between textual elements such as abstract, captions, foot-
notes, running heads, headings, sub­headings, lists, tables, body text, mar-
ginal notes, inline quotations, block quotations, and page numbers.
Contrast principle 
The contrast principle is also known as the contrast law. In nature, as well 
as in art and design, contrast is of major importance for our perception of 
a message. In accordance with the contrast law we tend to arrange impres-
sions that form natural opposites in groups. Thereby the impressions are 
reinforcing one another. 
Visual acuity, our ability to discriminate small objects, peaks at about 
age 22, and then a steady decline starts. This decline is not possible to cor-
rect with eyeglasses. At about age 40 the tissues of the eyes get stiffer. This 
condition is called presbyopia or ‘old eyes’. It makes it harder for us to shift 
the distance of our focus. Thus it is harder to change between reading on 
a screen and reading on paper. Throughout our lives our lenses become 
less and less transparent. The result of this increasing opacity is that we 
require more contrast between a message and its background to see any 
fine details in images and to read text.
The information designer can use the contrast principle to aid percep-
tion. There can be no large without small, and no small without large. It 
is usually a good idea to include some familiar object, like a hand, a face, 
a whole person, a car, a house, a tree, or a scale for judging the size of any 
unfamiliar object.
Many different elements in a visual can cause emphasis. Arrows, change 
in size, circles or ovals around objects, colour against no colour, com-
plexity, detail against no detail, directionality, implied motion, isolation, 
light against dark, line drawings in photos, line intersections, position or 
placement of elements, shaded areas, stars, tonal contrast, words, or any 
other unexpected change or variation out of context will create emphasis. 
Furthermore, emphasis on the core message is achieved by reducing the 
number of details in the picture to those that are really essential (Pettersson 
2015c). Emphasis may be used to attract, direct, and to keep attention. The 
most important elements in information material may be emphasized to 
enhance attention and perception.
For example, we can use colour and colour contrast to enhance percep-
tion of a visual message (Dwyer 1985). We should, however, remember 
that many people suffer from colour blindness. Anomalies of colour vision 
is much more commonly observed among men than among women, with 
estimates ranging as high as 10% of the male population (Hartley 1987; 
Ware 2004) – while only 1% of the female population has anomalous 

432 / Rune Pettersson
colour vision. The failure to distinguish between red and green is most 
common. Both hues are perceived as grey. Unfortunately, red and green 
are often used as discriminating colours in symbols and in warning signs. 
Continuity principle
The continuity principle is also known as the contiguity principle, the law of 
continuity, law of good continuation, line of direction, principle of good con-
tinuation, and the theory of direction. This principle refers to continuation 
and simplicity. 
When we see two lines crossing in the middle we usually perceive this 
pattern as two lines crossing (Figure 3). 
However, it could be two (or even four) opposing angles that are joined 
together at their apexes. Lines that are moving in the same direction belong 
together. Events that have a simple and natural relationship to one another 
also give the impression of being continuous and unbroken. Straight or 
curved lines, like bold lines, tend to lead the eye along, and even beyond, 
the line. An arrow or a finger pointed at something leads your eye to it. The 
information designer can use the continuity principle to aid perception, 
and to indicate relatedness between elements in a design. 
For example, we understand the gradual changes in diagrams, and the 
rise and fall of the bars in a bar graph.
Proximity principle
The proximity principle is also known as the law of nearness, and law of 
proximity. According to this principle we see individual elements but we 
will perceptually group events, objects, and units on the basis of their near-
ness and proximity to one another in space or in time. Elements that are 
close together are perceptually grouped together, all other things being 
equal (Figure 4). 
These elements ‘belong together’ and they are processed together. In 
this way the need to process large numbers of small stimuli is reduced. 
As a result, perception is faster. As a consequence, elements that are far 
apart are perceived as separate objects. Spatial proximity is one of the most 
powerful organizing principles and one of the most useful in information 
design for facilitating perceptual organization of data. 
Figure 3
We perceive 
the left-hand 
pattern as two 
lines crossing 
in the middle 
rather than as 
two (or even four) 
opposing angles 
joined together 
at their apexes 
(right). This is also 
referred to as ‘line 
of direction’.
Figure 4
We perceive four 
groups of squares, 
each with two 
squares. In each 
group the squares 
have the same 
colour, shape, 
and size, and they 
have the same 
distance from 
each other.

Gestalt principles / 433 
For example, the information designer can rely on the proximity princi-
ple to facilitate perception by carefully grouping headings with their asso-
ciated body text, and illustrations with their captions. The amount of white 
space distributed around headings should correspond to each heading’s 
relative position in the hierarchy of headings and sub­headings. A major 
heading requires more space than a minor heading. The amount of space 
and the positioning of a heading in that space can be used to emphasize the 
document’s hierarchic structure (Jonassen 1982). The distance between 
a heading and the text below (to which it belongs) should thus always be 
smaller than the distance between the heading and the body text above 
(Pettersson 2015d).
Grouping principle
The principle of grouping is also known as the law of grouping. Most figures 
are defined by a boundary. However, the presence of a boundary is not 
required for the perception of form or shape. When small elements are 
arranged in groups, we tend to perceive them as larger forms (Figure 5). 
The principles of common region, connectedness, proximity, similarity, 
and symmetry all work together to evoke grouping.
Visual grouping into meaningful semantic clusters enables readers to 
get a sense of the overall structure (Tullis 1997), and it can help the readers 
to reduce their cognitive loads (Niemelä and Saarinen 2000). Readers will 
better remember the content and make fewer errors.
For example, the information designer can use the principle of grouping 
(as well as the above mentioned proximity principle), to facilitate percep-
tion and understanding by carefully grouping headings with their associ-
ated body text, and illustrations with their captions. 
Summary 
Our perception cannot be understood simply by analysing a scene into 
its elements. What we interpret from a message depends on the relations 
of different elements to one another. Our brains work fast and in holistic 
ways. We will immediately ‘see the big picture’. In attention and percep-
tion the whole is other than the sum of its parts. The information designer 
can make good use of the gestalt principles in order to improve the possi-
bilities for the intended audience to effectively understand the intended 
message. 
Figure 5
Groups of smaller 
elements may be 
perceived as larger 
figures. Here 
small black dots 
form a square. 
All the dots are of 
the same colour, 
shape and size, 
and approximately 
at the same 
distance from 
each other.
References 
Behrens, Roy R. 1998. ‘Art, design and gestalt theory.’ 
Leonardo 31 (4): 299–303.
Dwyer, Francis M. 1985. ‘Visual literacy’s first 
dimension: cognitive information acquisition.’ 
Journal of Visual Verbal Languaging 5 (1): 7–16. 
Hartley, James. 1987. ‘Designing electronic text: 
the role of print-­based research.’ Educational 
Communications and Technology Journal 35 (1): 
3–17. 
Horn, Robert E. 1998. Visual language: global 

434 / Rune Pettersson
434 / Rune Pettersson
communication for the 21st century. Bainbridge 
Island, WA: MacroVU. 
Jonassen, David H., ed. 1982. The technology of text: 
principles for structuring, designing, and displaying 
text, vol. 1. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational 
Technology Publications.
King, D. Brett, and Michael Wertheimer. 2005. Max 
Wertheimer and gestalt theory. New Brunswick 
and London: Transaction Publishers.
Koffka, Kurt. 1935. Principles of gestalt psychology. 
New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Köhler, Wolfgang. 1929. Gestalt psychology. New 
York: Horace Liveright.
Köhler, Wolfgang. 1947. Gestalt psychology: an 
introduction to new concepts in modern psychology. 
New York: Liveright.
Lohr, Linda L. 2010. Creating graphics for learning 
and performance: lessons in visual literacy. 2nd 
edn. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Miller, Jonathan. 2007. ‘Visual subterfuge in the 
natural world.’ Introduction in Camouflage, by 
Tim Newark. London: Thames & Hudson, in 
association with Imperial War Museum.
Moszkowicz, Julia. 2011. ‘Gestalt and graphic design: 
an exploration of the humanistic and therapeutic 
effects of visual organization.’ Design Issues 27 (4): 
56–67.
Newark, Tim. 2007. Camouflage. London: Thames 
& Hudson, in association with Imperial War 
Museum.
Niemelä, Marketta, and Jukka Saarinen. 2000. ‘Visual 
search for grouped versus ungrouped icons in 
a computer interface.’ Human Factors 42 (4): 
630–635.
Palmer, Stephen E. 1999. Vision science: photons to 
phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Peterson, Mary A., and Emily Skow-­Grant. 2003. 
‘Memory and learning in figure–ground 
perception.’ In The psychology of learning and 
motivation (Advances in research and theory: 
cognitive vision, volume 42), edited by David E. 
Irwin and Brian H. Ross, 1–34. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.
Pettersson, Rune. 2015a. Information design 1: message 
design. Revised edition. Tullinge: Institute 
for Infology. e-­book <http://www.iiid.net/
rune-pettersson-information-design-1-message-
design/>.
Pettersson, Rune. 2015b. Information design 2: text 
design. Revised edition. Tullinge: Institute for 
Infology. e-­book <http://www.iiid.net/rune-
pettersson-information-design-2-text-design/>.
Pettersson, Rune. 2015c. Information design 3: image 
design. Revised edition. Tullinge: Institute 
for Infology. e-­book <http://www.iiid.net/
rune-pettersson-information-design-3-image-
design/>.
Pettersson, Rune. 2015d. Information design 4: 
graphic design. Revised edition. Tullinge: Institute 
for Infology. e-­book <http://www.iiid.net/
rune-pettersson-information-design-4-graphic-
design/>.
Pettersson, Rune. 2015e. Information design 5: 
cognition. Revised edition. Tullinge: Institute 
for Infology. e-­book <http://www.iiid.net/rune-
pettersson-information-design-5-cognition/>.
Schriver, Karen A. 1997. Dynamics in document 
design: creating texts for readers. New York: John 
Wiley.
Sperry, Roger W. 1982. ‘Some effects of disconnecting 
the cerebral hemispheres.’ Science 217 (4566): 
1223–1226. 
Stern, Richard C., and Rhonda S. Robinson. 1994. 
‘Perception and its role in communication 
and learning.’ In Visual literacy: a spectrum of 
visual learning, edited by David M. Moore and 
Francis M. Dwyer, 31–52. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Educational Technology Publications. 
Todorović, Dejan. 2008. ‘Gestalt principles.’ 
Scholarpedia 3 (12): 5345. <http://www.
scholarpedia.org/article/Gestalt_principles>.
Tullis, Thomas S. 1997. ‘Screen design.’ In Handbook 
of human–computer interaction, 2nd edn, edited 
by Martin Helander, Thomas K. Landauer, and 
Prasad V. Prabhu, 503–531. New York: Elsevier 
Science.
Wagemans, Johan, ed. 2015. The Oxford handbook 
of perceptual organization. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Waller, Robert. 1987. ‘The typographic contribution 
to language: towards a model of typographic 
genres and their underlying structures.’ PhD 
thesis, Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication, University of Reading. <http://
www.robwaller.org/RobWaller_thesis87.pdf>.
Ware, Colin. 2004. Information visualization: 
perception for design. 2nd edn. Amsterdam: 
Morgan Kaufmann. 
Wertheimer, Max. 1922. ‘Untersuchungen zur Lehre 
von der Gestalt: I. Prinzipielle Bemerkungen.’ 
Psychologische Forschung 1: 47–58.
Wertheimer, Max. 1923. ‘Untersuchungen zur Lehre 
von der Gestalt: II.’ Psychologische Forschung 4: 
301–350. 
Winn, William D. 1993. ‘Perception principles.’ 
In Instructional message design: principles from 
the behavioral and cognitive sciences, 2nd edn, 
edited by Malcolm L. Fleming and W. Howard 
Levie, 55–126. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational 
Technology Publications. 

435
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 435–449
Information design research 
methods
Why, when, who, what, and how?
Mary C. Dyson
The chapter proposes a framework for describing approaches used in 
information design research to provide a means of positioning these methods 
within the design process. The framework is intended to enable students, 
teachers, researchers, and practitioners to evaluate past research and choose 
their own research method. 
The chapter starts by outlining some research categories to which the 
questions of why, when, who, and what are applied. Purposes for conducting 
different types of research are described followed by characteristics of each 
category which identify the stage in the design process, participants in the 
study, and the focus of the evaluation. Methods are then broken down into 
components to permit a more detailed examination of the processes. Brief 
outlines of ten published studies within information design are used to 
illustrate cases from each of the research categories and to introduce pointers 
to good practice. 
A rather broad range of activities can be subsumed under information 
design research. I am limiting my scope to a set of evaluation methods with 
which I am more familiar: theoretical and empirical methods with out-
comes that may contribute to a body of knowledge to underpin practice. 
The methods are those which evaluate products or aspects of information 
design. I am excluding research conducted as part of the discovery phase, 
early in the design cycle. I mention historical research to ensure that this 
category is included within the field of information design research. This 
category is not analysed in any detail but serves as a way of identifying 
meaningful characteristics of different approaches through recognizing 
similarities and differences.
Categories of research
Rather than attempt to define information design research, I propose a set 
of categories or approaches which define the scope of my framework and 
encompass various research methods which are applied within informa-
tion design. These differ along various dimensions, do not form a natural 
continuum, and there are no definite boundaries between the categories. 
However, they might be construed as moving from narratives to scientific 
28

436 / Mary C. Dyson
data.1 A  brief outline of each approach aims to address their purposes 
(i.e. why use this approach) and points out some overlaps and differences 
between categories. Within some categories, e.g. user research, various 
methods may be used. 
Historical accounts
This category includes analyses of historical examples of graphic language 
and therefore overlaps with the next category. However, one way in which 
the methods may be distinguished from the theoretical approach of frame-
works (below) is in the way the primary and secondary sources are used 
to construct a narrative. This research tends to involve in-depth investiga-
tions of a single case, or small number of cases, drawing on diverse sources. 
Using case studies as a research method is not confined to historical mate-
rial but this approach is not included within the theoretical and empirical 
methods as case studies involve formal collections of evidence, rather than 
data generation.2 
Application of frameworks
Various terms may be used to describe this category which refer to the tool 
(e.g. framework, taxonomy, scheme, or schema) or the process (descrip-
tion, analysis). This approach applies the same analytical framework 
repeatedly to a sample of artefacts. The structured and systematic nature 
of this approach, and sometimes the scale, are criteria which distinguish 
this work from an informal survey of existing artefacts, carried out as part 
of the design process. 
The purposes of research within this category are less obvious, and con-
sequently more diverse than the categories which follow. Some examples 
of reasons for developing and applying frameworks are: 
•	 mapping out possibilities for subsequent research (explanatory value);
•	 identifying patterns or conventions (e.g. for guideline development);
•	 to understand why particular design (and production) decisions 
were made.
Heuristics or expert opinions
The term ‘heuristics’ comes from usability methods and describes an eval­
uation of (originally) a screen-based application, through applying a set 
of principles, guidelines, or rules of thumb. Heuristics can be derived 
from relevant research or analysis of usability problems. Developed in the 
  1	 This contrast is invoked by Keith Thomas in describing his working methods as 
a historian: ‘When writing history, there are rules to be followed and evidence to be 
respected. But no two histories will be the same, whereas the essence of scientific 
experiments is that they can be endlessly replicated’ (Thomas 2010).
  2	 This chapter does, however, use a collection of cases to illustrate applications of 
methods in published research. As these are not in-depth investigations, I have avoided 
the term ‘case studies’. 

Information design research methods / 437 
early 1990s, these inspection methods function as debugging procedures 
(Nielsen and Landauer 1993) and are sometimes applied as a substitute 
for user (diagnostic) testing. Evaluations are based on expert opinion and 
infer how users will interact with the artefacts. Some consultancies use 
individual, rather than multiple evaluators, due to cost and evaluations 
are sometimes described as expert critiques (Sharp, Preece, and Rogers 
2011, 507). When this approach is applied within information design, the 
evaluation might appear less rigidly structured, particularly if the criteria 
are not made explicit, e.g. in the form of information design principles. 
These analyses differ from the approach above as judgements of the arte-
facts are made (e.g. whether the headings are clearly differentiated from 
the text), rather than descriptions (e.g. method of indicating headings). 
However, description and evaluation may be combined, suggesting an 
overlap between the two categories, with the reason for the research dis-
tinguishing between them. 
Diagnostic testing
This form of testing is used to pinpoint specific problems in a design and 
ideally is part of an iterative process of designing. Sless (2008) outlines 
a testing process for re-designing existing artefacts which tests the ori-
ginal design, the various new prototypes, and the final design in use. This 
form of testing typically involves a small number of users for each test. 
Nielsen (2000, 2012) proposes that five users be tested as more will not 
bring a large return in terms of detecting problems, and a greater number 
of small tests are a better use of resources. 
User research
This category covers the comparison of more than one design through 
alternative prototypes, original and re-designed versions, and a  range 
of existing artefacts. A critical difference between this approach and the 
form of diagnostic testing promoted by Sless is the inclusion of more than 
one design in a single context enabling direct comparison. By introducing 
versions which differ along one or more dimensions of visual or verbal lan-
guage, and obtaining feedback from users, some idea of the effect of the 
variations on the use of the artefacts can be obtained. As with diagnostic 
testing, this method may also identify specific problems which occur with 
one or more of the versions. The data generated informs decisions in the 
design process. These decisions may be part of the particular design cycle, 
or the results may be couched in terms of recommendations for the design 
of future artefacts of this nature.
Research studies
If the variation in the alternative versions is controlled, the research is able 
to produce more generalizable results, but usually at the expense of pro-
viding direction for the design of particular artefacts. The aim of research 

438 / Mary C. Dyson
studies in information design is to generate findings which contribute to 
design principles or guidelines. A single study is unlikely to do this, but 
research which builds on existing knowledge, either from research or 
design expertise, can strengthen, elaborate on, or question theory and 
practice. 
General characteristics of approaches
The main characteristics of each theoretical and empirical approach can 
be summarized according to when (in the design process) the research 
is conducted, who produces the data, and what is being evaluated (see 
Table 1). The choice of approach is therefore influenced not only by the 
purpose of the evaluation, but also by the availability of resources at differ-
ent stages in the development of the design. 
Table 1  Main characteristics of each category of research
Stage in design cycle
Participants
Focus
Part of 
process
Evaluating 
outcomes
Experts
Users
Material
Users’ inter-
action with 
material
Research 
categories
Frameworks/
analyses
✓
✓
✓
Heuristics/
expert opinion
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Diagnostic testing
✓
✓
✓
User research
✓
✓
✓
Research studies
✓
✓
✓
Stage in design cycle
Research may be a part of the design process or conducted with finished 
products (i.e. design outcomes). This distinction between process and 
outcome testing is referred to in Adams (1999) with particular reference to 
usability testing. In relation to the categories above:
•	 diagnostic testing and user research form part of the process and 
research studies assess the outcomes;
•	 heuristic evaluations are typically formative, i.e. part of the design 
process, but may also be applied to existing artefacts;
•	 frameworks are normally used to analyse design outcomes. Although 
the results might lead to inferences about the design or production 

Information design research methods / 439 
processes, and potentially inform practice, the research focuses on 
final designs. 
Participants
The research approaches can be clearly divided into those which involve 
users, and those which rely on the classifications and judgements of 
researchers and practitioners; other stakeholders would also fall into one 
of these two groups. The more theoretical the analyses, i.e. where the pur-
pose is to make reasonably general statements about design practice, the 
more likely these will be conducted by researchers. 
Focus
The focus of the evaluation is determined primarily by the involvement 
of users (i.e. the participants) except where experts make assumptions, 
based on their experience, of how users will interact with the artefacts.
Breakdown of methods 
In order to examine the methods in more detail, the way in which the 
research is conducted is broken down into components. A method can be 
considered in terms of general practices (what may be typically thought of 
as the research method); variations within these practices (techniques); 
hardware, software, or documents which are used to collect data (tools); 
and the nature of what is collected (data type and specific measures). The 
particular terms introduced to describe the components are a convenient 
way of organizing the descriptions.
The more theoretical approaches of frameworks, heuristics, or expert 
opinion do not offer much scope for varying components of the methods; 
essentially the categories or classification schemes that are selected or 
developed for data collection are the tools or instruments (see application 
of frameworks). In other research categories, there can be some scope 
for choosing among the practices, techniques, and tools. Examples of the 
components are:
•	 general practices (e.g. interviews, performance tasks, observation, 
think-aloud protocols)
•	 variations within these practices (e.g. different techniques for 
interviewing based on structured, semi-structured, or open-ended 
questionnaires; formal or informal task completion)
•	 tools for collecting data, either hardware/software (e.g. diaries, 
eye-tracking equipment, interaction logging, video recorder) or 
instruments (e.g. rating scales, checklists, heuristics), or procedures 
(e.g. note-taking)
•	 type of data, with a broad distinction between qualitative and 
quantitative. Qualitative can be broken down according to the nature 

440 / Mary C. Dyson
of the data (e.g. verbal transcripts; summaries). Within quantitative 
data, measures can range from individual data, such as time on 
task or number of errors, to the number of people who consider 
one prototype easier to use than another. Quantitative data may 
therefore originate from objective practices (e.g. performance tasks) 
or subjective views (e.g. from structured interviews). A distinction 
can be made between process and outcome measures (Dillon 2004), 
which correspond to particular tools for collecting data. Whether 
the tool measures process, how a user interacts (e.g. navigation path 
through a document, eye movements), or what the results of that 
interaction are (e.g. amount recalled) will depend on the material, 
the circumstances of use, and the purpose of the evaluation. 
Cases from information design research
The following summarizes cases from information design research pub-
lished in peer-reviewed journals, illustrating each of the research catego-
ries to elucidate methods. The cases have not been selected in a rigorous 
manner to characterize either the category or method. Instead they are 
intended to illustrate a diversity of approaches, discuss practical applica-
tion of methods, and provide illustrations of pointers to carrying out well-
founded research. The bold numbers in square brackets identify specific 
methodological points which are listed on pages 447–448. 
Case 1: framework
An analysis of the organization and structure of information in websites 
(González de Cosío and Dyson 2002) involves several levels of analysis, 
from simple observations to more complex descriptions. The specifica-
tion of the sample of 50 sites [3] includes all URLs and the dates when the 
analysis was conducted, a relevant detail in research on digital media. The 
rationale for selecting sites is to cover different types of activities so that 
diversity in design solutions might be identified [4]. This is important as 
the aim of the research is to explore whether conventions were emerging 
which might define genres. The work builds on an early exploration of 
this topic, research published by Dillon and Gushrowski (2000), which 
found that, at the time, personal web pages were the only uniquely digital  
genre.
The framework used to analyse graphic elements and navigation in-
cludes lists of items with a range of options for each item, where appropri-
ate [2]. For example, menus can be classified as:
•	 vertical verbal;
•	 vertical verbal + picture;
•	 horizontal verbal;
•	 horizontal verbal + picture;
•	 number;

Information design research methods / 441 
•	 whereas with other items (e.g. search tools), recording the presence 
or absence is sufficient. The sites’ structures are analysed according to 
classifications of information defined by Wurman (1989) and Shedroff 
(1999) [8]. 
With websites, a decision needs to be made as to how many levels within 
a site are analysed. In this study, the selection of pages was ‘somewhat arbi-
trary’ (p. 166) as a nonlinear information structure has many pages at the 
level down from the first page [1]. 
The analyses of graphic elements and navigation produce quantita-
tive data, summarized in tables in an appendix. This provides a concise 
summary avoiding a  tedious narrative describing numerical data. The 
discussion within the body of the article makes observations about pat-
terns emerging from the data and illustrates some of these with annotated 
examples of sites. 
Case 2: framework
A more recent application of a framework (Desnoyers 2011) analyses the 
use of visuals in a set of ergonomic journal articles using the author’s own 
‘taxonomy and nomenclature’ (p. 157). The details of the taxonomy are 
published elsewhere, in another journal, which is a  conventional and 
acceptable practice. The rationale for selecting the journals which contain 
the articles for analysis using the taxonomy is clearly laid out: the selection 
represents the diversity of article types [4]. The sampling is unbiased by 
choosing one year and analysing all articles [4], creating a large corpus of 
295 papers [3]. 
The hypothesis underlying the analysis is that there is a correspond-
ence between visual type and paper genre (i.e. review, enquiry, methodol-
ogy). The frequencies of visual by genre are tabulated and the percentages 
are given in the narrative, which lacks the clarity of tabular representa-
tion. However, the relationships are also visualized using one example of 
a visual which plots three classes of visual types against the paper genre 
using polygons, i.e. a multidimensional graph. 
These results have theoretical significance but potential uses are also 
included in the conclusions. The author suggests that the results can be 
used to train scientists to use ‘relevant and efficient visuals’ (p. 169) and to 
develop guidelines for authors publishing their research in journals. The 
author’s experience in training graduate students (mentioned in his biog-
raphy) may have provided the motivation for the research.
Case 3: heuristics 
A study by Hart, Chaparro, and Halcomb (2008) evaluates a set of 40  
‘senior-friendly’ websites [3]. The guidelines are based on research into 
age­ing, cognition, human factors, and print materials and published by the 
National Institute on Aging and National Library of Medicine (2001) [9]. 

442 / Mary C. Dyson
In addition to looking at the methodological issue of the relationship 
between adherence to the guidelines and user performance, satisfaction, 
and preference [10], the research has a more practical aim of determining 
how well websites designed for older users comply with the guidelines. 
The procedure used to select the 40 websites which target older adults 
is described: searching using keywords; in top 10 search results; statement 
on home page concerning target audience of 50-year-olds or above [4]. 
Four evaluators [5] applied 25 guidelines and the extent to which evalua-
tors agree is determined statistically (inter-rater reliability) and found to 
be high [6]. Each of the guidelines is rated on a 4-point scale: 1 = never; 
2 = sometimes; 3 = frequently; 4 = always; and the scores for frequently 
and always, collated across evaluators, are presented as a table. The dis-
cussion highlights the nature of guidelines that are generally followed and 
contrasts these with guidelines that are not followed (e.g. textual content 
and formatting). 
The data is then divided into three groups of websites, varying in their 
overall level of compliance (i.e. across all types of guidelines) and one site 
chosen from each category for the usability study [4]. Whilst varying in 
compliance, care is taken to ensure that the three sites are as similar as 
possible in other respects (i.e. type of site, structure, and content) [13]. 
This selection diminishes the effects of confounding variables, where the 
validity of the results can be questioned. In this case, comparing sites with, 
for example, different structures alongside different levels of compliance 
would lead to ambiguity in interpreting the source of any measured dif-
ferences in usability. User research based on existing artefacts, rather than 
material designed specifically for testing, inevitably precludes researchers 
from pinpointing precisely what may have influenced usability. 
Case 4: heuristics
The research by Wallace et al. (2013) asks which of two types of heuristics 
are better, using overall usability as the measurement tool, defined by ISO 
9241 [9]. The standard specifies three criteria for usability: effectiveness, 
efficiency, and satisfaction; these are translated into specific measures by 
the authors [2]. The study compares general heuristics, choosing a com-
monly used set developed by Nielsen and Molich (1990) with heuristics 
specific to a specialized domain (in this case technical documentation) 
[8, 9]. 
Eight technical writers [5] completed both heuristic evaluations. The 
potential problem with this procedure is recognized by the authors and 
some steps taken to avoid the confounding effect of the first set on the 
subsequent evaluation; one of these precautions is to vary the order of the 
two sets across evaluators [14]. 
Although the results do not clearly support one set of heuristics over the 
other, feedback from the evaluators provides guidance on the format of 
the checklists [11]. For example, abstract categories, such as ‘presentation’ 

Information design research methods / 443 
or ‘dynamics’ are more difficult to interpret than more detailed heuristics; 
questions are preferred over statements. 
Case 5: expert opinion
An evaluation of websites by Dyson and Moran (2000) to inform future 
design of a web interface to museum collections implements a variation 
on heuristic evaluation, using a single experienced evaluator, referred to 
above as an expert critique. Although the purpose of the evaluation is sim-
ilar to research conducted within the discovery phase of a design cycle, the 
use of frameworks position the method in this category.
A two-tier evaluation tool is created, varying in formality, and applied 
to 7 sites [3], which are looked at in detail. The formal evaluation covers 
general aspects of the site and then focuses on access to collections. The 
framework for the informal evaluation, adapted from Garzotto, Matera, 
and Paolini (1998) and Walker, Reynolds, and Edwards (1999) proposes 
a technique for structuring and explicating the selected measures [8]. The 
dimensions, which represent rather abstract categories, are translated into 
one or more questions, and then broken down further through prompts 
[1]. Although this was implemented by only one evaluator, the detailed 
description of the measures should improve the reliability of subsequent 
uses of the framework [2]. 
Case 6: diagnostic testing
In designing and testing graphs of social mobility in Mexico, González de
Cossío (2009) incorporates various forms of user feedback at different 
stages in the design process. One of these methods generates qualitative 
data using a small number of participants who are asked to look for answers 
to questions in the graphs, and give their opinions of the graphs [11]. The 
first of three informal testing sessions identifies what is difficult to grasp 
and modifications are made before the next session of testing with differ-
ent participants. The sequential nature of these tests facilitates a diagnosis 
of problem areas and avoids further testing of the same problems, which 
would have wasted participants’ time, which is an ethical issue. If this were 
a research study collecting quantitative data across three sessions for com-
parison, the modifications would have invalidated the study [13]. In the 
context of this research, the modifications enhance the study. 
Case 7: diagnostic testing
A study by van den Haak, de Jong, and Schellens (2004) is introduced 
as an example of diagnostic testing as each of three individual techniques 
are used to identify problems with an online library catalogue. However, 
this is a research study with the objective of comparing the reliability and 
validity of the techniques [10], using measures of the number and type 
of problems detected; their relevance; overall performance; participant 
experiences. The three techniques are concurrent think-aloud protocol, 

444 / Mary C. Dyson
retrospective protocol, and constructive interaction, which might all be 
considered variations on the method of verbal protocols. The concurrent 
technique requires participants to describe their thoughts whilst doing 
tasks; when retrospective, participants view a video recording and recall 
their thoughts; constructive interaction involves two participants work-
ing together who describe their thoughts whilst interacting. 
Eighty participants [5] with experience in using online catalogues are 
divided among the three techniques and carry out the same 5 search tasks; 
none has previously used this particular catalogue [15]. The authors point 
out that the tasks are not representative of real-life search tasks, but were 
chosen to ensure that the usability of the catalogue is evaluated and suc-
cessful task completion can be measured, i.e. the measures are valid. An 
alternative viewpoint is that introducing artificial tasks is not an appropri-
ate way to measure usability as the method is not ecologically valid [12].
Case 8: user research
Dickinson et al. (2010) focus on medicine package leaflets and aim to 
demonstrate that good information design affects people’s use. The re-
search method relates to the regulation of medicine package leaflets in 
Europe which requires consultation with target patient groups (European 
Commission 2009, 5) [9]. 
The study creates two versions of a leaflet for a hypothetical medicine 
and compares the good design (based on the authors’ views of best prac-
tice) to a version with the same landscape layout but without many typo-
graphic or graphic distinctions. The methods are described as semi-struc-
tured interviews, based on a  questionnaire. However, participants are 
asked to find the answers to specific questions in one or other version of 
the leaflet, which may also be described as a performance task. The perfor-
mance aspect is emphasized by the consideration given to the order of the 
questions: two different orders are used to control for the effects that the 
sequence of questions may have on the speed at which answers are located. 
As the search for one question may locate cues to the answer to a subse-
quent question, changing the sequence can counteract this facilitation, to 
some extent [14]. 
The measures are whether the answer is located, how easily it is located 
(according to the judgement of the interviewer), the accuracy of the 
answer, and the search time. The reliability of the judgements of ease of 
location is supported by providing the interviewer with a set of behaviours 
to observe, e.g. if participant looks at contents list or scans through the 
leaflet, this is classified as located easily [2]. The search time would proba-
bly produce a more accurate record of ease of location, but this measure is 
not part of the method outlined in the European Commission’s readability 
guideline. Also, as pointed out by the authors, explicit timing using a stop-
watch requires an assistant to the interviewer, and can put pressure on the 
participants. 

Information design research methods / 445 
Case 9: user research
A study which goes beyond the more usual evaluations of usability looks at 
user response to documents experienced as part of everyday life (Black and 
Stanbridge 2012). The outcomes provide pointers on how to improve doc-
uments, as well as raising more general issues of communications between 
organizations and consumers, and methods of user testing. A diary is used 
as a tool for collecting participant’s reactions to paper documents received 
over a one-month period, which is followed up by an interview. The diary 
is structured to elicit feedback according to particular headings (e.g. how 
the document is received or used), includes rating scales of attractiveness 
and ease of understanding, and invites open-ended comments. As such, 
it functions in a similar manner to a questionnaire, but is completed over 
a longer time period. 
The study produces a rich set of data which is analysed in a rigorous 
manner in order to generate reliable, substantiated statements on docu-
ment perceptions. Analyses are both quantitative and qualitative; com-
ments made by participants are grouped into themes and this is done by 
two separate judges, and results compared [6]. Without this checking pro-
cedure, the validity of interpretations of qualitative data can be questioned. 
In this article, the themes generated from comments are also supported by 
illustrations of example documents from those provided by participants. 
These provide the reader with further opportunity to examine the basis 
for the authors’ interpretations, as well as a graphic overview of document 
designs.
Case 10: research study
Research by van Mulken and Hornikx (2011) claims to be the ‘first inves-
tigation of the effects of scientese in ads for beauty products’ (p. 93). 
Scientese is defined as scientific jargon that may be expressed in statistical 
and/or verbal form. Two hypotheses are stated explicitly, based on review-
ing past literature; this contrasts with the more applied angle adopted by 
Dickinson et al. (2010) which draws on craft knowledge. The hypotheses 
are that ads with scientese are more credible than ads without scientese, 
and ads with scientese are less well-liked than ads without scientese. 
Attention is given to the authenticity of the beauty ads, increasing the 
ecological validity of the study [12], by basing constructed examples on 
real ads and then pre-testing with 13 participants (presumably collecting 
judgements of authenticity).3 The ads have no scientese or one of three 
forms of scientese: verbal, statistical, and combination. The aim is not 
to compare the three forms, but to see whether results generalize across 
them. This is an efficient means of checking for differences and increasing 
the generality of the results. As no differences are found, the results are 
  3	 The paper does not describe how the pre-test was conducted.

446 / Mary C. Dyson
combined thereby increasing their reliability. This is a comparable situa-
tion to using a set of heterogeneous participants whereby the differences 
within the group are not analysed, but the variation ensures that the results 
are not limited to specific types of people [16]. 
Participants are provided with a questionnaire with two statements on 
ad credibility and two on ad liking and a 7-point scale to indicate their 
level of agreement. Another form of pre-testing ensures that the two 
statements with different wordings (e.g. ‘This ad appeals to me.’ ‘I think 
this ad is attractive’) both of which are intended to measure liking, do so; 
a statistical measure referred to as ‘internal consistency’ is used for this 
purpose [7]. 
Another component of this study is the comparison of Dutch and Wal­
loon people, two homogeneous groups [16]. However, in keeping with the 
focus of information design research, the objective is to explore whether 
the two cultures are influenced in a different way by scientese, i.e. the 
material. The results are similar in both cultures: ads with scientese are 
more credible but less liked than ads without scientese, thereby demon-
strating the robustness of the effects. 
Pointers to good practice 
The choice of method is heavily dependent on the context in which the 
research is planned and the resources available. Having determined the 
method, some pointers to good practice as to how research is conducted 
can be identified from the cases above. These encompass formulating the 
study, carrying it out, analysing the outcomes, and writing about the work 
and are summarized below. I start with general issues and follow with 
more specific methodological points, listed under the headings of relia-
bility or validity of the research outcomes. These points denote what can 
be done to improve and demonstrate (through reporting) reliability and 
validity. The lists have cross-references to the cases above which mention 
these points.4
General pointers
•	 Identifying and reporting the objectives, research questions and/
or hypotheses of a study clearly positions the work. The origin 
of hypotheses within user research or research studies might be 
knowledge gained from practice, research literature, or their 
combination. 
•	 There are ethical considerations in conducting research with 
human participants which includes questionnaires, interviews as 
  4	 The lack of a particular point within a case does not imply that this aspect of good 
practice was not followed. The details within summaries are selected to cover a range 
of points, rather than to be comprehensive. 

Information design research methods / 447 
well as performance tasks. When carried out within an institution 
such as a university, approval must be obtained from a Research 
Ethics Committee before starting the research, using an established 
procedure. A key aspect of ethical approval is gaining informed 
consent from participants which requires that they are told what they 
will be asked to do, what will be measured (if applicable), and how 
(e.g. audio/video recording, note-taking) before asked to give their 
written consent to taking part. In performance tests, the researcher 
can reassure participants that they are not being tested, the material 
is being tested, and individual data should be anonymized. From the 
researcher’s perspective, the focus is the interaction between users 
and material (Table 1) and the variable of interest is how the design of 
the material affects use. This contrasts with experimental psychology 
research where the design of test material is frequently overlooked 
because it is not regarded as relevant; the focus tends to be on how 
people process information in different contexts. 
•	 Qualitative data derived from tools which enable open-ended 
comments, such as questionnaires, interviews, and verbal protocols 
generate valuable, unconstrained responses, but they can require 
investment of a substantial amount of time to analyse the data. 
A systematic and rigorous analysis often requires involvement of 
additional people to ensure reliability. 
•	 When reporting results, the researcher can be mindful of good 
practice in information design. Many aspects of a study can be 
clarified by illustrating the test materials used. Quantitative data is 
more succinctly communicated through tables, rather than narrative. 
Making a connection between the objectives of the research and the 
results is often facilitated by identifying and discussing patterns from 
tabulated or illustrated data. 
Reliability 
1	 Frameworks require precise specifications, which are usually 
developed through iterative application of the framework (cases 1, 5)
2	 Make explicit the criteria for inclusion in categories (cases 1, 4, 5, 8) 
3	 Report the number of examples analysed (cases 1, 2, 3, 5)
4	 Explain how examples or test materials are chosen so as to be 
representative and unbiased (cases 1, 2, 3)
5	 Report number of participants: experts or users (cases 3, 4, 7)
6	 Consider inter-rater reliability, where subjective judgements are made 
by researchers (cases 3, 9)
7	 Consider consistency of measuring instrument (case 10) 

448 / Mary C. Dyson
448 / Mary C. Dyson
Validity
8	 Consider adopting or adapting an existing scheme (cases 1, 4, 5)
9	 Be informed about standards (e.g. ISO) or established guidelines, 
heuristics, or regulations (cases 3, 4, 8)
10	 Consider triangulation of methods to validate approach (cases 3, 7)
11	 Consider including qualitative data alongside quantitative (cases 4, 6)
12	 Assess the relevance of ecological validity (cases 7, 10)
13	 Be aware of confounding factors (cases 3, 6)
14	 Vary order within test material where this may affect outcomes (cases 
4, 8)
15	 Consider characteristics of participants (case 7) 
16	 Decide between a homogeneous or heterogeneous group of 
participants (case 10)
Concluding remarks
Information design is multidisciplinary which provides opportunities for 
selecting among research methods from various sources, but complicates 
the practice of conducting the research. This chapter introduces criteria 
for selecting methods and some guidance on what to attend to in carry-
ing out the research. The questions of why, when, who, what, and how 
cannot be answered independently, but addressing each of these may aid 
decision-making. 
References
* indicates the studies used as cases within the chapter.
Adams, Austin. 1999. ‘Usability testing in information 
design.’ In Visual information for everyday use, 
edited by H. J. G. Zwaga, T. Boersema, and 
H. C. M. Hoonhout, 3–20. London: Taylor & 
Francis.
*Black, Alison, and Karen Stanbridge. 2012. 
‘Documents as “critical incidents” in organisation 
to consumer communication.’ Visible Language 
46 (3): 246–281
*Desnoyers, Luc. 2011. ‘Visuals and text in scientific 
articles.’ Information Design Journal, 19 (2): 
155–171.
*Dickinson, David, Jane Teather, Suzy Gallina, and 
Emily Newsom-Davis. 2010. ‘Medicine package 
leaflets – does good design matter?’ Information 
Design Journal 18 (3): 225–240.
Dillon, Andrew. 2004. Designing usable electronic text. 
2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Dillon, Andrew, and B. Gushrowski. 2000. ‘Genres 
and the web: is the personal home page the 
first uniquely digital genre?’ Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science 51 (2): 
202–205.
*Dyson, Mary C., and K. Moran. 2000. ‘Informing 
the design of web interfaces to museum 
collections.’ Museum Management and 
Curatorship 18 (4): 391–406.
European Commission. 2009. Guideline on the 
readability of the labelling and package leaflet of 
medicinal products for human use, Revision 1. 
Brussels: European Commission.
Garzotto, F, M. Matera, and P. Paolini. 1998. ‘To use 
or not to use? Evaluating museum web sites.’ In 
Proceedings Museums and the web 1998, edited 
by J. Trant, and D. Bearman. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Archives and Museum Informatics. 
*González de Cossío, Maria. 2009. ‘Social mobility 
in Mexico: graphs that help in understanding the 

Information design research methods / 449 
Information design research methods / 449 
relation between education and socio-economic 
level.’ Information Design Journal 17 (3): 246–260.
* González de Cosío, María, and Mary C. Dyson. 
2002. ‘Identifying graphic conventions for genre 
definition in web sites.’ Digital Creativity 13 (3): 
165–181.
*Hart, T. A., B. S. Chaparro, and C. G. Halcomb. 
2008. ‘Evaluating websites for older adults: 
adherence to “senior-friendly” guidelines and 
end-user performance.’ Behaviour & Information 
Technology 27 (3): 191–199.
National Institute on Aging and National Library 
of Medicine. 2001. Making your web site 
senior friendly: a checklist. Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing Office.
Nielsen, Jakob. 2000. ‘Why you only need to test with 
5 users.’ Acesed 5 May 2014. <http://<www.nngroup.com/articles/
why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users/>.
Nielsen, Jakob. 2012. ‘How many test users in 
a usability study?’ Acesed 5 May 2014. <http://www.nngroup.com/
articles/how-many-test-users/>.
Nielsen, Jakob, and Rolf Molich. 1990. ‘Heuristic 
evaluation of user interfaces.’ In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems, 249–256. New York: ACM.
Nielsen, Jakob, and Thomas K. Landauer. 1993. 
‘A mathematical model of the finding of 
usability problems.’ In Proceedings of the ACM 
CHI 93 human factors in computing systems 
conference, edited by S. Ashlund, K. Mullet, 
A. Henderson, E. Hollnagel and T. White, 206–13. 
Amsterdam: ACM.
Rogers, Yvonne, Helen Sharp, and Jenny Preece. 
2011. Interaction design: beyond human–computer 
interaction. 3rd edn. Chichester: John Wiley.
Shedroff, N. 1999. ‘Information interaction design: 
a unified field theory of design.’ In Information 
design, edited by R. Jacobson, 267–293. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sless, David. 2008. ‘Measuring information design.’ 
Information Design Journal 16 (3): 250–8.
Thomas, Keith. 2010. ‘Diary.’ London Review of Books 
32 (11): 36–37.
*van den Haak, M. J., M. D. T. de Jong, and P. J. 
Schellens. 2004. ‘Employing think-aloud 
protocols and constructive interaction to 
test the usability of online library catalogues: 
a methodological comparison.’ Interacting with 
Computers 16 (6): 1153–1170.
*van Mulken, Margot, and Jos Hornikx. 2011. ‘The 
influence of scientese on ad credibility and ad 
liking: a cross-cultural investigation of ads for 
beauty products.’ Information Design Journal 
19 (2): 92–102.
Walker, Sue, Linda Reynolds, and Viv Edwards. 
1999. Interactive multimedia in primary schools: 
children’s use and understanding of information 
texts on CD-ROM, and implications for teachers and 
designers. London: British Library Research and 
Innovation Centre.
*Wallace, Steve, Adrian Reid, Kang Jin-Su, and 
Daniel Clinciu. 2013. ‘A comparison of the 
usability of heuristic evaluations for online help.’ 
Information Design Journal 20 (1): 58–68.
Wurman, Richard Saul. 1989. Information anxiety. 
New York: Doubleday.


451
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 451–462
Methods for evaluating 
information design
Will Stahl-­Timmins
The chapter presents some principles for the evaluation of information design. 
The position of the paper is that the success of a design should be measured 
through how effectively it conveys understanding in a particular context of use. 
The chapter introduces some general concepts and terminology for the evalu-
ation of information design, including both formative evaluation (the foundation 
of iterative/participatory design) and summative evaluation (proof of concept/
quantification of benefits).
There are many approaches to evaluation available to information design-
ers as well as opinions on best practice. Those beginning to explore the 
field of data visualization often encounter Edward Tufte’s preferences for 
simplicity and clarity (Tufte 2001), but may also hear the proponents of 
embellishment such as Nigel Holmes (Heller 2006; Holmes 2009). The 
position of this paper is that both of these perspectives, and many others, 
are perfectly valid for different contexts of use. For an audience, such as 
financial analysts, that is already motivated to look for information, a sim-
pler visualization approach may be appropriate. For a data journalist or 
science communicator aiming to attract the attention of the less-­engaged 
reader, more visual embellishment may be required. The key point in 
both of these situations is whether the information is understood or not 
by a particular audience.
There are many ways of testing whether different designs have the 
potential to improve understanding. Due to time and budget limitations 
perhaps the most common kind of evaluation carried out on most infor-
mation design work is an informal test. A colleague, friend, or perhaps 
someone from the intended audience for the design is asked: ‘What do 
you think of this?’ While such simple tests can give quick responses and 
useful suggestions, the results are limited, particularly if the person asked 
is bound by rules of politeness and does not wish to offend. Another com-
mon method of evaluation is ‘trial by fire’. A design is deployed, and web 
analytics or sales figures are used ‘after the event’ to determine whether 
the design was successful. While such analytics are useful, it can be 
unsatisfactory to learn about poor performance at this late stage, leading 
potentially to customer frustration and even reputation damage. There 
are many opportunities for more formal evaluation throughout an infor-
mation design project. Designers can employ evaluation methods used by 
social scientists, or collaborate directly with experts in marketing and/or 
29

452 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
psychology (Wright 2009). Such methods are quite common in advertis-
ing, where persuasion and behaviour change is the primary objective, but 
can also be adapted to information design. 
Selecting methods
David Sless recommends the use of evaluation before, during, and after 
an information design project (Sless 2008). Carrying out evaluations on 
the performance of documents before and after a redesign project can be 
useful to show the effectiveness of design to a range of stakeholders. This 
can be described as ‘summative’ evaluation. This kind of research is char-
acterized by the use of ‘quantitative’ (numerical) data such as web metrics 
or time trials. It can be useful to demonstrate the performance of a design, 
but often does not suggest the reasons for poor (or good) performance, or 
how it might be improved. 
In the early stages of a project, evaluation is more commonly used to 
refine and develop the design approaches. This more ‘formative’ kind of 
evaluation is the foundation of iterative/participatory design (Simonsen 
and Hertzum 2012). It is often more ‘qualitative’ resulting in rich data such 
as video, audio, or free text responses. This kind of research aims to find 
how designs are used and understood and can reveal unexpected use pat-
terns or other potential issues that could influence the design. However, 
because of the time investment needed to process such complex research 
data, the number of people taking part in such research will usually be rel-
atively small and therefore generalizations about larger populations may 
not be so accurate.
Choosing the kind of research methods to use may be driven by consid-
ering the kind of information presented, the audience, the context of use, 
and the practicalities of time and budget available.
Planning an evaluation study
The main aim of most information design studies will be to determine 
effectiveness. This could be by comparing two different design approaches 
or a new approach to the existing one sometimes referred to as ‘A/B test-
ing’. Alternatively, responses from people using a new design may be com-
pared to a control group of people that are not shown the design). There 
are several different ways of making such comparisons some of which are 
introduced below.
In much scientific research, such as medical trials, the gold standard of 
study design is the randomized controlled trial. A group of participants is 
recruited and these people are randomly assigned to the different ‘condi-
tions’ of the study (often different information presentations). Ideally, this 
should be a truly random selection to avoid both known and unknown 
‘confounders’, or differences between participants that could affect the 

Methods for evaluating information design / 453 
outcomes. This kind of study design is useful for larger, ‘summative’ 
design evaluation, but ‘formative’ tests should also be randomized if pos-
sible. There can, however, be some practical barriers to randomization 
in information design studies. For example, for summative evaluation of 
a new large-­scale signage system it would be impossible to randomize par-
ticipants to view different versions of the signs, although virtual reality sys-
tems can be very useful for this kind of test (Lundberg and Nyström 2012). 
If preference data for one particular design over another are required, 
a ‘randomized cross-­over’ approach can be used in which participants see 
two (or more) designs, but in a random order. It is generally helpful if the 
same questions are asked of both groups in the same order with just the 
designs to be tested changing in order of presentation. Alternatively, and 
assuming there is a large group of study participants, the order of ques-
tions asked could also be randomized (such as by shuffling cards with 
questions on).
As mentioned above, in some situations it can be difficult to control 
which people see which design. The example of a  large-­scale signage 
system is one such situation. Also, in studies to find out which of a range 
of designs best attract attention, a live ‘in situ’ trial in which participants 
only see one of the design alternatives is often the most appropriate. An 
advantage of such evaluations is that they represent a real context of use, 
with multiple sources of competing information, noise, other people, etc. 
One way of testing in this kind of situation is a ‘cohort study’ in which 
the different design approaches are shown to non-­randomized ‘cohorts’ of 
people. For example, the same location could be used to display different 
designs on different days. The disadvantage of this is that different kinds of 
people might visit the space on different days, potentially introducing bias. 
Alternatively, different design approaches could be tested at the same time 
but in different (but comparable) locations. While sometimes necessary, 
this kind of evaluation is generally regarded as a weaker test than a ran-
domized study, as different days/places could have other confounding 
differences that could affect the evaluation. 
Sometimes, however, there is no readily available comparator. There 
may only be time or other resources available to develop one design, and 
there may not be an existing design with which to compare. In this case, 
a ‘pre-­post’ design may be possible. For example, if an information leaf-
let is being designed, study participants may be given an initial test, then 
are exposed to the design, and then tested again. This is often regarded 
as the weakest study design, since no comparator is used, and the effects 
observed may be due to something other than the experience of viewing 
the design (such as being asked the same questions twice, or the perceived 
expectations of the interviewer). Design studies that compare different 
solutions have the advantage of assessing the performance of alternative 
ways that information could be displayed.
Many of these approaches to evaluation can be extended to follow 

454 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
participants over time (known as ‘longitudinal’ studies). This can be 
useful when a design is not intended as a one-­off design intervention, 
but something that people will refer to regularly. The main problem with 
longitudinal studies is participant retention. It is quite common to lose 
track of people through changing contact details or lack of enthusiasm, for 
example. This can also bias the results of a study as it may be that specific 
segments of people from a group are lost because the design is not meeting 
their needs and they lose interest, or they simply have busier lives than 
those who remain in the study.
Other forms of bias can be countered using more sophisticated research 
techniques. For example, it is generally a good idea to use ‘blinding’ when-
ever possible. In blinded studies the person running the study does not 
know which design approach a participant has been shown. Even with 
the best of intentions they could otherwise subtly influence responses. 
Researcher blinding can be organized by a third party coding the responses 
with a letter or number and only revealing which is which after the analy-
sis is complete. The principles of ‘double-­blinding’ often used in medical 
research (where neither the participant or the person running the study 
knows which group the participant is in) are more challenging to apply 
to design research – it is normally quite evident to the person running 
the study what the participant has seen. However, some principles can 
be useful. For example, if the designer is the person running the test, this 
should be concealed from the participants to avoid the ‘politeness’ issue. 
Or, better still, a neutral third party should run the study. 
Sampling
It is of course important to think carefully about who will take part in 
a research study. In design research one of the largest influences will be 
the intended audience of the design. It is of course usually impossible to 
test a design solution with every potential user (a ‘census’). For this reason 
a ‘sample’ of the population of all possible users is used for a research study. 
In an ideal world, sample study participants would be selected randomly 
from a list of all people in the target population. In this case (as long as the 
sample is large enough) it would be reasonable that the study results would 
be reflected in the entire population. Large web services, such as Google, 
often use randomization of their users, and show new versions of a web 
page to a small percentage of their total users to evaluate a new design. 
This method is purely quantitative and there is no direct contact with the 
participants, the data that can be gathered are limited. In many cases the 
designer will not be sure exactly who will be in this population that will use 
their design and what their characteristics will be. 
Other techniques can be used to sample populations. In an ‘ordered’ 
sample, every 100th user could be selected until a particular number is 
reached. The problem with this method is that the resulting sample could 

Methods for evaluating information design / 455 
consist of those who respond most quickly to an invitation to participate, 
and not typical of the overall population; for example, the ones with the 
most time to respond. 
‘Purposive’ or ‘quota’ samples may be used to improve representative-
ness of a larger population. Participants will be asked some initial qualify-
ing questions before they can take part in a study. For example, a quantita-
tive study might choose to run a quota sample based on national statistics 
on age, gender, and region to get a sample that is ‘representative’ of the 
national population.
The number of respondents required for the study can differ greatly 
depending on the kinds of data being collected. For qualitative studies, 
particularly those aimed at ‘formative’ evaluation during a project, around 
six to ten people are commonly used per design option tested (Preece 
2002). Beyond this number, users tend to come across the same mistakes 
and the data reaches ‘saturation’ (Sless 2008). Quantitative studies tend to 
be much larger. Estimating the sample size needed to detect differences in 
responses to design approaches can be challenging. For more information 
on calculating sample sizes for quantitative studies, see Real world research 
(Robson 1993).
Measurements
The kind of data collected by a design study will largely depend on the 
information being presented, and the reason for the information design 
work being carried out. Many studies use three key metrics: time, accur-
acy, and preference. Other parallel metrics may also be gathered.
Time
In many cases the reason for an information design project is to provide 
time-­saving solutions. For example, e-­health websites are often designed 
to allow patients to get quick access to information. Similarly, public infor-
mation, such as transport timetables may be redesigned in order to enable 
a person to find the time at which a bus or train departs as quickly and 
efficiently as possible.
In such situations a task-­based study is often the most appropriate way 
of determining the effectiveness of different design approaches. Study 
participants could be asked to find particular information in a timetable, 
and then the time to find this information can be measured and compared 
across design approaches. Care should be taken in this kind of study to use 
a range of test tasks, typical of real-­world use. For example, a timetable 
could be used to find the time of the next bus, or to find how long it takes 
a bus to travel between two stops. Different information presentations 
could make different kinds of information within them easier or harder 
to access.

456 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
Accuracy /knowledge / memory
It is not always appropriate to test the speed at which a person can find 
information; for example, if the goal of a design project is informing or 
educating people. Testing what kind of information is transferred, or how 
long this information is retained is likely to be more important. This is 
often assessed by asking questions after a participant has viewed a design. 
What is really tested in this kind of study is short-­term memory for infor-
mation. This can, of course, change over time. If the information needs to 
be retained over a longer period, a follow-­up may be necessary (i.e. a lon-
gitudinal study).
Sometimes, such studies can be confounded by previous knowledge 
so it is particularly important to test designs using either a control group. 
Alternatively, some kind of pre-­test can help establish that viewing the 
design does in fact explain the knowledge levels recorded. It is also prob-
lematic to record accuracy or knowledge when a ‘correct’ response is not 
known, when the information presented is not clear-­cut or covers contro-
versial issue, about which participants may hold pre-­existing beliefs.
Preference and confidence
To measure preference some kind of comparator is required. For this rea-
son participants may have to view more than one design, such as in a ran-
domized, cross-­over study. Preference metrics are often used in market 
research for advertising, but for information design research preference 
can be a problematic metric. Participants could ‘prefer’ a less efficient 
design for reasons other than its communicative properties – they might 
like the colour or type more, or they might just be familiar with an older 
design. Preference metrics are therefore of limited use for determining 
differences between an already established presentation and a redesign. 
An alternative to testing preference may be to test how confident people 
feel when using particular designs. In many situations the level of accuracy 
(if this can be known) should be recorded as well, since false confidence is 
usually not desirable. 
Insights / opinions / attitudes
Another metric that has been used for data visualization studies is the 
number of insights gained from looking at a design. This is often useful 
when seeking to determine the impact of a  design, when ‘knowledge’ 
levels might require leading questions that could bias responses. Insights 
can be counted or recorded qualitatively. Insights can also be measured 
against time to find them. However, simply counting the number of 
insights gained while using a design can be misleading. Insights may be 
profound or trivial, and one profound insight might be considered more 
useful than five trivial ones. It may be possible for a researcher to rate the 

Methods for evaluating information design / 457 
quality of insights although care is needed here as they are at risk of their 
own biases influencing such quality ratings.
Behaviour / intentions
Data visualization and other educational materials intended to affect 
people’s opinions or attitudes could also be measured. As with preference 
studies, a comparator of some sort is very important in order to control 
established opinions that may not be influenced by the design being tested.
However, behaviour change is notoriously challenging to measure. It 
can be measured through questionnaires which ask participants about 
their own recollection of their behaviour, but this may not be accurate, 
either because respondents do not remember their behaviour accurately 
or may not wish to disclose it. Other people (family members, carers, etc) 
can be asked, but behaviours can be hidden from them. There are also 
many situations in which a behaviour changed in the short term may not 
last. For this reason, longitudinal studies may be required for behavioural 
measurements. Intentions can be used as a proxy for behaviour, accord-
ing to the theory of planned behaviour (Fishbein and Asjen 1975). This 
suggests that if a person states that they intend to do something, this will 
correlate to their actual behaviour. 
Response capture
There are many different ways of capturing and recording research data. 
The kind of data needed will influence capture method. For example, 
to measure how much a participant knows about an area after brows-
ing a website, one could ask them to fill out a questionnaire about their 
knowledge, interview them, or even ask them to keep a diary over time 
to see how the knowledge affects their everyday lives. In a different con-
text, time to find information could be measured by an online survey or 
a one-­on-­one session with a researcher giving questions and recording 
response times. The latter option allows the time data to be supported by 
a video recording or even eye-tracking to assess how participants are using 
a design, or interviewing participants after each trial to understand more 
about how their responses were formulated. 
It is advisable to pilot data capture with a small number of participants to 
iron out practical issues in a study. If a questionnaire is being used. Piloting 
provides an opportunity to refine unclear items in questionnaires, iron out 
software bugs in online capture systems, and check that participants are 
able to do what is required of them.
Informal tests
Informal tests are often the only methods available to designers who often 
don’t have time or budget for substantial evaluation studies. However, it 
is still important to think about the design’s intended audience and con-
text of use. It may still be possible to carry out an informal test in situ, for 

458 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
example asking someone to use a navigational aid to find a destination, or 
to use your informational aid in a busy, noisy environment. 
When showing a design to someone as an informal test specific ques-
tions allow you to focus your investigation. For example, you could ask 
someone not only whether they like the design (preference, opinion 
data), but also ask them to find particular information (as in a time study), 
or to summarize the information that is being communicated (knowledge, 
memory). Other metrics such as people’s confidence, or the insights are 
appropriate, even to informal tests.
Questionnaires
Often one of the quickest and cheapest methods of gathering research 
data is with a questionnaire. A structured series of written questions can 
potentially reach the large numbers of people needed for statistical anal-
ysis. They can be conducted online, via telephone, post, or in a particular 
location (shopping malls are a  favourite). Online and telephone ques-
tionnaires allow people from a large geographical spread to be contacted 
easily. Because of their potential reach and relative ease of administration, 
questionnaires are often used for summative evaluation.
There are a number of disadvantages to questionnaire-­based research 
Response rates are often notoriously low and may often deliver a biased 
sample (for example, those with more time to complete the question-
naire, or with a particular interest in the area that is being researched). 
Questionnaires can also be frustrating for participants if questions are 
badly structured. Piloting is particularly important in questionnaire-­based 
studies.
Interviews
More formal one-­on-­one test sessions can be useful for assessing individ-
ual use of information design, across multiple people, in a comparable 
manner. Such interviews can be conducted in person or over the phone 
(or with internet-­based voice services such as Skype, or similar. The data 
recorded from such interviews can then be transcribed and analysed in 
depth at a later date. This kind of data can be particularly useful for forma-
tive evaluation of a design and also to understand participants’ knowledge 
their suggestions and improvements.
A useful technique for understanding how participants interact with 
an information presentation is cognitive interviewing, which was devel-
oped for evaluating questionnaires (Drennan 2002). This method has two 
main techniques, ‘speak aloud’ and ‘probing’. The ‘speak aloud’ protocol 
places a higher burden on the interviewee, but may be suitable for less 
experienced interviewers. Participants are encouraged (and reminded) to 
talk through their thought process aloud, as a ‘stream of consciousness’ as 
they use the information they have been presented with. For example, in 
a task-­based interview, they might say: ‘I’m now looking down the column 

Methods for evaluating information design / 459 
of names to find one beginning with B, then looking across to see which is 
the largest value . . .’. The second technique, ‘probing’, places more burden 
on the interviewer but can be more natural for the interviewee. The inter-
viewee is asked to carry out specific tasks. The time completed to carry 
out the task may be recorded. After the task is complete the interviewer 
will ask participants to recall how they found information during a task. 
For example, they might ask: ‘How did you find the correct data point?’ or 
‘What were you looking for after you had found the right category?’ This 
has the advantage that participants can carry out the task uninterrupted 
although runs the risk that they may not recall the details of task comple-
tion accurately.
Video can be a particularly useful way of recording task-­based inter-
views, allowing participants’ words to be captured. Video can also be used 
to record time and accuracy, which can later be read from the time stamp 
on the recording.
Observation
The process of observing behaviours can be a powerful and useful data 
capture method, particularly for ‘in situ’ research in signage/wayfinding 
or other public information displays. Frequent measures recorded in 
observational research are time and behaviour.
Caution is needed regarding the ethics of recording such information. 
Informed consent always must be given by participants in a research study. 
However, obtaining this before observing a participant in a public setting 
could influence their behaviour. In many information design studies it is 
better to seek informed consent from participants after the observation 
and allow them to opt out of the study if they wish. Even so, a strong case 
must be made for the benefits of such research to the participants in ques-
tion for such research to meet the requirements of research ethics boards. 
Observation can also be employed in more controlled lab studies. As 
mentioned in the discussion of ‘cognitive interviewing’, video-­recording 
can be used to track participants’ actions while using information to carry 
out a task, although transcribing and analysing such recordings can be 
laborious. Eye-tracking cameras that record where participants are look-
ing are sometimes used in information design studies. In other research 
areas, physiological responses that may indicate participants’ stress levels 
are sometimes used; for example measuring heart rate, body temperature, 
and galvanic skin response. Such methods are relatively unexplored in an 
information design context, but could potentially be employed to measure 
frustration or stress in intense, time-­pressured situations. Brain imaging 
may be another area with future potential for exploration although is not 
yet a developed enough technology to provide the kind of detail that infor-
mation designers would find helpful and cannot yet be set up in a way that 
might allow testing in a context that approaches the contexts or normal 
reading.

460 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
Focus groups
While questionnaires and interviews are good ways of recording data 
about information displays that are intended for single users, different 
techniques are required when information displays are intended for use 
by multiple people simultaneously, such as museum exhibits aimed at 
whole families. For this kind of situation, interviewing the relevant users 
as groups may be more useful that individual interviews, allowing partici-
pants to interact with each other. 
Focus groups can also be used to evaluate designs intended for individu-
als. Focus groups can collect a lot of data in a short time (Freitas et al. 1998). 
Since participants can interact with each other, focus groups allow for 
discussion and may reveal differences of opinion that might not be raised 
in individual interviews. So focus groups can be useful for controversial 
subjects, although the group dynamics of a focus group can also hide dif-
ferences that might be revealed by individual research; for example, some 
people tend to ‘go along with’ a consensus (or, conversely, have a natural 
tendency to oppose such agreements.) Hence focus groups require careful 
management and other methods, if feasible, may be preferred as a more 
reliable way of gathering feedback. 
Applying results
Research data from formal tests can be used both to inform design process 
and to demonstrate performance. The results of well-­conducted research 
are frequently complex and/or surprising. Some of the best research 
comes from keeping an open mind and not expecting a particular con-
clusion. While a clear message may or may not come through, subtle and 
previously unknown issues can be revealed. Particular groups of people 
might use an information display in different ways, or perhaps one part of 
a design document or display could be shown not to work as intended. The 
first step towards understanding some of these relationships is to analyse 
the research data that has been collected. 
Quantitative data may be suitable for statistical analysis. Software pack-
ages such as SPSS (<http://www-01.ibm.com/software/uk/analytics/
spss/>), Stata (<http://www.stata.com>), and R (<http://www.r-project.
org>) are designed to perform common statistical tests. Statistical testing 
may be used to find out the probability that the results observed in a study 
would have happened by chance, given the number of people that have 
been tested. A  ‘statistically significant’ result of analysis indicates that 
the data from a study are unlikely to be due to chance, suggesting there is 
a difference due to the materials being tested. The results of a quantitative 
assessment generally tell a researcher whether a design is performing well 
or not, but not why. Therefore this kind of research is most often useful 
for more summative evaluations, for example, to demonstrate a level of 

Methods for evaluating information design / 461 
confidence in a particular design. More information on how to perform 
statistical tests can be found in manuals for common statistical analysis 
software (Field 2005; Acock 2014).
Qualitative data is perhaps more natural to most designers in that the 
insights it delivers can be useful for refining design concepts and imple-
mentations (as in iterative/participatory design). However, the chal-
lenges of using qualitative data to inform the design process should not be 
underestimated. Even just a few 30-minute interviews can produce a lot 
of data, and significant effort will be required to transcribe and analyse 
such rich information. Interviews and focus groups are often audio- or 
­video-recorded, and transcripts of these can be useful for analysis. There 
are many structured strategies for analysing qualitative data. One of the 
most widely known is called ‘grounded theory’ analysis, which involves 
multiple researchers coding the statements in research transcripts accord-
ing to their fit with underlying (and pre-­established) theory (Glaser and 
Strauss 1968). However, there are more practical approaches that may 
prove more suitable for information design research, such as the frame-
work approach (Ritchie and Spencer 1994). In the framework approach, 
transcripts are analysed both on the basis of pre-­established theory but 
also according to themes deriving from the transcripts themselves. So, 
although both analysis techniques require systematic methods of coding 
transcripts according to different themes, the framework approach is 
more sensitive than the grounded theory approach to the issues emerging 
within a particular piece of research, as it happens. Software tools are also 
available to assist with this kind of thematic analysis, for example, QSR’s 
Nvivo (http://www.qsrinternational.com/products_nvivo.aspx).
After data has been analysed, the results need to be summarized and 
acted upon. Often they will need to be presented to stakeholders (other 
designers, funders, managers, etc.) A clear summary of the results of eval-
uation work can help to show the benefits (or lack of benefits) of a new 
design, and to suggest improvements that could be made in future. 
While many commercial information design projects may not have 
time or resources to undertake the most sophisticated research studies, 
there are opportunities for collaboration with university-­based research 
teams in order to research the impact of design work. Academic partners 
may be interested in such collaborations, particularly if they feel that it 
would significantly add to understanding in their subject area. Formally 
analysed and published results in information design could contribute to 
a body of evidence that could lead to significant advancement of the field.
Conclusion
Investigating the impact of a design can provide insights about how suc-
cessfully information is being transferred, and highlights ways in which 
improvements can be made. This chapter has identified some of the 

462 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
462 / Will Stahl-­Timmins
methods information designers use to obtain feedback about their work. 
In the end, the only way to know whether a project is working is to meas-
ure how it affects your intended audience’s understanding.
References
Acock, A. C. 2014. A gentle introduction to Stata. 
College Station, TX: Stata Press.
Field, A. 2005. Discovering statistics using SPSS. 
London: Addison-­Wesley, Sage Publications Ltd.
Fishbein, M., and I. Ajzen. 1975. Belief, attitude, 
intention, and behavior: an introduction to theory 
and research. Reading, MA: Addison-­Wesley. 
Glaser, B. G., and A. L. Strauss. 1968. The discovery of 
grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research. 
London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Freitas, H., M. Oliveira, M. Jenkin, and O. Popjoy. 
1998. ‘The focus group, a qualitative research 
method.’ Working paper ISRC no. 010298. 
Baltimore, MD: Merrick School of Business, 
University of Baltimore.
Heller, S. 2006. Nigel Holmes: on information design. 
Bethesda, MD: Jorge Pinto Books.
Holmes, N. 2009. ‘A short film about the place 
for humour and wit in information graphics.’ 
Paper presented at DD4D (Data Designed for 
Decisions), Paris, 18–20 June. < https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=vetdvFXR-Zc>.
Lundberg, J, and T. Nyström. 2012. ‘The use of 
virtual reality for high fidelity signage prototyping 
in wayshowing course modules – benefits, 
limitations and student pre-requisites.’ In 
Proceedings of ICERI2012 Conference, 4935–4942. 
Valencia: IATED. < http://liu.diva-portal.org/
smash/get/diva2:576499/FULLTEXT01.pdf>.
Ritchie, J., and L. Spencer. 1994. ‘Qualitative data 
analysis for applied policy research.’ In Analyzing 
qualitative data, edited by A. and B. R. G. 
Bryman, 173–194. London: Routledge. 
Robson, C. 1993. Real world research: a resource 
for social scientists and practitioner-­researchers. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Simonsen, J. and M. Hertzum. 2012. ‘Sustained 
participatory design: extending the iterative 
approach’, Design Issues, 28 (3): 10–21.
Sless, D. 2008. ‘Measuring information design.’ 
Information Design Journal 16 (3): 250–8.
Tufte, E. R. 2001. The visual display of quantitative 
information. 2nd edn. Cheshire, CN: Graphics 
Press. 
Wright, P. 2009. ‘What if . . . ? Designing tools to help 
the public make difficult decisions.’ Information 
Design Journal 17 (3): 202–10.

463
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 463–476
Public information documents
Understanding readers’ perspectives 
Dana P. Skopal
Citizens often need to read documents produced by government organizations 
that relate to the regulation of their communities. This regulatory information 
can be presented in different formats, using a range of document designs. 
Yet the effectiveness of such documents may depend upon how each reader 
responds to different layouts and how each reader is able to locate the neces-
sary regulatory information within a text.
In this study of three public information documents in Australia, a multi-­
perspective framework was adopted to triangulate data from three sources: 
author interviews; readability testing with members of the public; and analyses 
of the documents’ macro-structure, design features, and wording. The data 
reveal that while the authors considered that they wrote their documents for 
the general public, the majority of the reader-participants did not find the 
documents easy to navigate and understand. The chapter explores the findings 
in relation to the principles of information design and plain language, and 
discusses a number of document features that reflect users’, that is the public’s, 
priorities when reading regulatory information. 
Citizens are faced with a range of written regulatory information in every-
day life, but often they struggle to read all of it or, indeed, fully under-
stand it (Kimble 2012; Shuy 1998). According to the principles of good 
governance, regulatory information should be accessible and written in 
a style that can be understood by the public (Cheek 2011; Foucault 1991; 
Kimble 2012). This chapter examines the relationship between the design 
of public information documents produced by Australian public sector 
organizations and readers’ perceptions of their readability and usability. 
This relationship between writers, readers, and the text is described from 
a  linguistic perspective, with discourse and text analysis providing an 
understanding of information design. Information design is taken in its 
broadest context, and refers to the intricate blending of content structure, 
appropriate wording and visual formatting, used to convey messages to 
the audience. 
Three public information documents (PIDs) were selected as the focus of 
this study, from the three levels of government in Australia: federal, state, 
and local council. The PIDs reflected the diversity of information that is 
made available to the Australian public, and dealt with topics of social 
interest: taxation, hospitals, and the environment. These documents 
were lengthy informative texts that a citizen would refer to if needing to 
30

464 / Dana P. Skopal
understand a regulation or system, and, as a genre, are different to govern-
ment forms or utility bills (see Sless 2004).
Investigating different perspectives of PIDs
The production and accessibility of the documents were investigated 
according to the multi-perspective approach of linguists, Candlin and 
Crichton (Candlin and Crichton 2011; Crichton 2003, 2010). The interre-
lated perspectives within Candlin and Crichton’s (2011) multi-perspectival 
research framework (MPRF) link the context of a PID as a text, and the text 
creator(s) coupled with the text receiver(s), within the broader context of 
the related social practices (see Figure 1).
In applying the MPRF to the creation of meaning in organizational com-
munications five perspectives were considered:
1	 The text creator(s) were first examined through an institutional 
perspective, enabling analysis of the context of the government 
organizations as well as the text creators’ discourses and practices.
2	 The text receiver(s), i.e. members of the public, were the study 
 
 
Shared
meaning
3
Public information
documents
5
Analyst’s 
perspective
2
Members
of the
public
4
Social 
practices
1
Government 
organizations and
writers as agents
Figure 1
A multi-perspective 
approach to 
investigating the 
context surrounding 
PIDs (Based on 
Candlin and Crichton 
2011, 9).

Public information documents / 465 
participants, enabling analysis of readers’ interpretations of the 
regulatory discourses in the PIDs. 
3	 The PIDs, as texts, formed the semiotic resource, enabling analysis of 
the design and wording of the printed PIDs. 
4	 The social action, although not discussed in this chapter, enabled 
data collection during the social practices and social interactions that 
occurred as the community responded to the PIDs.
5	 The analyst’s perspective, necessarily encompassing these four 
interrelated research perspectives, considered the ‘motivational 
relevancies’ of the researcher and the practical relevance of the 
research (Candlin 2006, 25; Sarangi and Roberts 1999). My motivation 
for the research arose through my experience as a communications 
consultant working in government and private organizations in 
Australia.
In the context of PIDs, the central intersecting area, i.e. where these 
different perspectives meet, represents the shared meaning of that regula-
tory information.
Research methods 
Materials
The investigated documents, selected to represent a cross-section of regu-
latory information available to citizens, were: 
•	 federal level: a how-to guide on taxation, Document A, see Figure 2, 
overleaf (Australian Tax Office 2011);
•	 state government level: a report on hospital programmes, Document 
B, see Figure 3, overleaf (The Audit Office of New South Wales 2008);
•	 local council level: a set of procedures for volunteers, Document C, 
see Figure 4, overleaf (City of Ryde 2007). 
Data gathering
The text creators’ perspective was gathered by interviewing two authors 
in each organization to understand their drafting and writing processes 
and their view of the declared purposes of each document. Interview data 
were analysed through discourse analysis (Candlin 1997; Fairclough 1992; 
Sarangi and Candlin 2011). 
The understanding by the public (i.e. ‘text receivers’) of three docu-
ments’ articulated purposes and the ease of reading selected text extracts 
from each document were tested through questionnaires and think-aloud 
protocols (Black et al. 2013; Schriver 1997). The questionnaires included 
open-ended questions to capture readers’ responses in their own words. 
Participants were also asked to mark text sections that they found dif-
ficult to read, as well as sections that they re-read or did not read. Test 
participants were from a broad range of backgrounds, with educational 

466 / Dana P. Skopal
Figure 2
Document A: Page 7 of You and your shares 2011, 
illustrating a two-column format and use of 
examples in text boxes. The section title in capital 
letters is lime green and Example 5 has a green 
background.
Figure 3
Document B: Page 3 of Delivering health care out 
of hospitals, illustrating subsection titles printed 
in bold and positioned as a left column.
Figure 4
Document C: Page 11 of Bushcare policies and 
procedures manual, illustrating use of text boxes 
and lists.
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
yOU AND yOUR SHARES 2011 
www.ato.gov.au 
7
The franking tax offset can be used to reduce your tax 
liability from all forms of income (not just dividends), and 
from your taxable net capital gain. Example 4 on the 
previous page shows you how this works.
Any excess franking tax offset amount is refunded to 
eligible resident individuals, after any income tax and 
Medicare levy liabilities have been met.
exAmple 5: impact of franking tax offsets
$
Tax payable on taxable income 
2,000
less other tax offsets 
1,500
Net tax payable 
500
plus Medicare levy
200
700
less franking tax offset 
1,000
Refund (of excess franking credits) 
300
(Amounts are for illustrative purposes only.)
claiming your franking tax offset when  
you do not need to lodge a tax return
If you are eligible to claim a franking tax offset for  
2010–11 but you are not otherwise required to lodge 
a tax return, you should read the publication Refund 
of franking credits instructions and application for 
individuals 2011 (NAT 4105). If you need further 
information, phone 13 28 61.
when you Are not entitled to  
clAim A frAnking tAx offset
your entitlement to a franking tax offset may be affected 
by the holding period rule and the related payments rule. 
The general effect of the holding period rule and the related 
payments rule is that even if a dividend is accompanied by 
a dividend statement advising that there is a franking credit 
attached to the dividend, you are not entitled to claim the 
franking credit. your entitlement to a franking tax offset 
could also be affected if you or your company undertake 
a dividend streaming or stripping arrangement, or you 
enter into a scheme with the purpose of obtaining franking 
credits (referred to as franking credit trading).
holding period rule
The holding period rule requires you to continuously hold 
shares ‘at risk’ for at least 45 days (90 days for certain 
preference shares) to be eligible for the franking tax offset. 
However, under the small shareholder exemption this rule 
does not apply if your total franking credit entitlement is 
below $5,000, which is roughly equivalent to receiving 
a fully franked dividend of $11,666 (based on the current 
tax rate of 30% for companies).
This means that you must continuously own shares 
‘at risk’ for at least 45 days (90 days for certain preference 
shares) not counting the day of acquisition or disposal, 
to be eligible for any franking tax offset.
Days on which you have 30% or less of the ordinary 
financial risks of loss and opportunities for gain from 
owning the shares cannot be counted in determining 
whether you hold the shares for the required period.
The financial risk of owning shares may be reduced 
through arrangements such as hedges, options and 
futures.
If you acquire shares or an interest in shares and you 
have not already satisfied the holding period rule before 
the day on which the shares become ex-dividend* (the 
day after the last day on which acquisition of the shares 
will entitle you to receive the dividend), the holding period 
rule commences on the day after the day on which you 
acquired the shares or interest. you must hold the shares 
or interest for 45 days (90 days for certain preference 
shares) excluding the day of disposal. For each of these 
days you must have 30% or more of the ordinary financial 
risks of loss and opportunities for gain from owning the 
shares or interest.
* A share or interest in a share becomes ex-dividend on the day after the last 
day on which you can acquire the share or interest in a share so as to entitle 
you to a dividend or distribution in respect of that share or interest.
you have to satisfy the holding period rule once only for 
each purchase of shares. you are then entitled to the 
franking credits attached to those shares, unless the 
related payments rule applies – see the next page.
11 Dividends
$
,
V
.
Unfranked amount
Tax ﬁ le number amounts 
withheld from dividends
Franked amount
Franking credit
If you are a non-resident make sure you have printed your 
country of residence on page 1.
$
.00
,
S
,
$
.00
,
T
,
$
.00
,
U
,
0
0
2
0
0
7
0
0
3

Public information documents / 467 
attainment from high school certificates to Master’s degrees. Twenty-five 
participants each read one text (75 participants in total); for details of par-
ticipant demographics see Skopal, 2014. This user-testing was conducted 
in community locations or by email. 
The documents themselves were analysed for their macro-structures: 
•	 the organization of information within a text (Hoey 1983, 1991, 1994; 
Swales 1981, 1990)
•	 the use of design features or multimodality to structure the text (Black 
and Stanbridge 2012; Delin, Bateman, and Allen 2002; Kress 2010; 
Sless 2004).
In addition, the lexicogrammatical features (micro-features) of the text 
(Halliday and Matthiessen 2004) were examined. 
I noted where document content entailed ‘moves’ (Swales 1981), i.e. 
­distinct stages or organization of information, whether sequential or hier-
archical. Moves do not necessarily need to correspond to titles or para-
graphs (Bhatia 1993, 56), or a design feature, but are a change in topic, 
where a  reader would require a  link or rationale for the change. The 
lexicogrammatical analysis focused on the semantic connections within 
and between the sentences, as well as sentence length and information 
positioned in nominal groups.
The three analytical perspectives provided a  functional base from 
which to examine the effectiveness of each text; that is, did the public’s 
responses match the authors’ declared purposes of these texts?
Data and analyses
The data revealed a mismatch between authors’ and readers’ perceptions 
of the ease of document navigation and comprehension. Participants’ 
responses, integrated with the text analyses, indicated that a range of doc-
ument features both facilitated and hindered their comprehension.
The text creators
Several of the text creators stated that the documents were written for ‘the 
man or woman in the street’, with one writer stating her focus was ‘mainly 
about what question the public will want answered’. 
The authors described the complex organizational writing processes 
that were used to produce the PIDs, although, where possible, they 
relied on their previous work experience when planning and editing. For 
example, the author of Document C explained that he used bold text inside 
a shaded box when explaining insurance as he
wanted it to stand out from everything else, so that it drew people’s attention 
to it . . . because it is quite an important point. 
For Documents A and B, the authors spoke about adopting plain English 
and writing for their audience; Document B was in fact produced after the 

468 / Dana P. Skopal
organization had held plain English writing workshops for its staff. One of 
Document B’s authors stated 
We all have had the plain English training . . . It all helped. But the major 
change was the structural changes in elevating the importance of criteria. 
The text receivers
Overall less than half of the readers stated that the documents were easy 
to read. Ratings of ease of reading ranged from 20% (Document A) to 56% 
(Document B). Further, although some readers marked a document as 
‘easy’ or ‘easy to some extent’, their qualitative comments suggested they 
had had difficulties in understanding and using the information. Their 
comments included 
some sentences were very long and contained jargon that had to be read sev-
eral times to piece together the structure of the sentence, so as to understand 
its meaning. (Document A) 
very dry . . . hardly inspiring for a potential volunteer. (Document C)
Many participants marked sections of text as difficult to read and/or 
marked text sections that they re-read. They gave different reasons for 
re-reading. Some stated they re-read when the meaning was not clear, 
while others re-read when they considered the information to be impor-
tant. One reader explained that he re-read the sections that were written 
in the grey text boxes because he thought that the layout 
meant that they really wanted you to read that, so I read it a couple of times.
The textual analysis
The text sections were analysed for their macro-structures (organizational 
structure), their design features, and their lexicogrammatical features. 
The organizational structure of the PIDs was established by mapping 
moves and organizational breaks (Hoey 1983, 1991, 1994). The moves and 
organizational breaks were usually, but not always, indicated by (a) the 
placement of headings/subheadings and the semantic links between those 
headings, or (b) by information positioned within design features such as 
text boxes. Document A consisted of 9 major moves within 11 sections, 
which comprised of 42 subsections. In contrast, Document B’s excerpt had 
the simplest structure, consisting of 5 major moves, which were made up 
of 12 subsections. The move-structure of Document C was complex, and 
consisted of four major moves with two additional levels of sub­sections, 
each containing a further three moves.
The design features of the three PIDs varied (see Figures 2, 3, and 4), 
and the analyses focused on the features raised by the authors and the 
readers. In Document A the main section titles were printed in lime green 
and in capital letters, while the subsections headings were in bold. The text 
was set in two columns, and coloured text boxes were used for examples. 
Document B featured main titles printed in bold, while the subsection 

Public information documents / 469 
titles were in bold and positioned as a left column with the text indented 
3.8 cm. In Document C all titles were printed in bold, while some key 
information was marked in grey-coloured text boxes. Document C also 
incorporated an owl image and coloured organizational flow chart.
The lexicogrammatical analysis highlighted differences between 
sections that the readers marked as difficult-to-read and the unmarked 
sections. Of the three documents, Document B was considered to be the 
easiest to read. The data indicated that the greater readability related to 
a combination of shorter nominal groups, an average sentence length of 
around 20 words, and the use of pronouns to refer to the organization 
and the reader. Document A, which only 20% marked as easy to read, had 
numerous lengthy nominal groups, for example ‘the day after the last day 
on which acquisition of the shares will entitle you to receive the dividend’, 
and sentence-lengths greater than 40 words. For Document C, the text 
included lengthy nominal groups, for example ‘Authority to work on 
Council land or land under its care, control and management as a Bushcare 
volunteer’, and a high ratio of embedded clauses per sentence.
The readability data are summarized in Table 1 and a comparative view 
of the documents’ textual features is given in Table 2.
Table 1  Summary of the documents’ purposes and readability data
Authors’ 
objectives
Readers’  
purposes
Readers’ responses 
 
Found text easy to 
read overall  
(% of readers)
  
 
Text marked as 
difficult to read 
(% of text)
 
 
Text marked as 
re-read  
(% of text)
Document A
tax obligations
tax obligations
20%
65%
76%
Document B
effectiveness of 
programmes
current 
programmes
56%
68%
100%
Document C
roles and 
responsibilities
volunteer roles
40%
59%
76%
Table 2  A comparative view of the documents’ main design features
Macro-structure
Multimodality
Lexicogrammar
Document A
9 moves
42 subsections
two-column format
bold headings
coloured text boxes
lengthy nominal groups
sentence lengths >40  
  words
Document B
5 moves
12 subsections	
bold headings
subsection titles set in left  
  column
text indented 3.8 cm
use of pronouns
average sentence 20 words
Document C
4 moves
11 subsections
6 additional moves
bold headings
grey text boxes
owl image
lengthy nominal groups
high ratio of embedded  
  clauses per sentence

470 / Dana P. Skopal
Linking perspectives
The intersection of these different perspectives (the authors’, the readers’, 
and the text analyses) represents the shared meaning of the regulatory 
information, and demonstrates to what extent the authors’ intentions, as 
contextualized in the texts, were understood by the readers. The shared 
meaning of the three PIDs existed in part, but the readers faced a range of 
obstacles when reading the texts. The readers’ responses to the texts, com-
bined with the text analyses, indicated that while in some cases design fea-
tures guided them through the content, specific arrangements of features 
hindered their comprehension. After reading Document A, the taxation 
how-to-guide, and Document C, on bushcare procedures, many partici-
pants indicated that they would not use the information as intended, i.e. 
would not independently complete their tax return, nor volunteer.
For Document A, only 20% of the readers stated that the document 
was easy to read, with 65% of the text marked as difficult to read and 76% 
as being re-read. The organization’s adopted design features were evalu-
ated positively by the majority of the readers, particularly the signposting 
that was evident in the headings and the use of text boxes. However, the 
two-column page layout was difficult for some readers, with one partici-
pant stating
I didn’t like how some information . . . breaks up and some information runs 
up to the next column. 
Though the organization had edited and approved the text, as part of 
ensuring technical accuracy and adopting some plain English features, 
many readers stated that the language was too complex. A third of the 
participants stated that they did not feel confident of independently com-
pleting the taxation return after reading the document and would still seek 
assistance from a professional.
Just over half the readers thought Document B was easy to read, with 
68% of the text marked as difficult to read and 100% as re-read. The organ-
ization’s main design features for Document B received a mixed reception 
from readers. They responded positively to the macro-structure evident 
in the headings. However, an equal number of readers stated that they 
liked and disliked the subsection titles being positioned to the left. The 
length of the titles and the number of lines of print appeared to be an issue; 
one reader commented 
[I] didn’t like the layout of the sub titles off to the left as I found it a little off 
putting as it was over a number of lines rather than one. 
Though several readers liked the wording of Document B, as it ‘didn’t 
use jargon or legal speak’, other readers indicated that they were reading 
in order to understand the policies but that the policies needed to be 
more clearly expressed. This is in spite of the authors explaining that their 

Public information documents / 471 
organization had been conducting plain English writing workshops for 
staff for several years before the document was produced.
For Document C, just 40% of the readers stated that the document was 
easy to read, with 59% of the text marked as difficult to read and 76% as 
re-read. The design features of Document C were evaluated positively by 
many readers. Many referred to their reading strategy of surveying bold 
text and grey-coloured text boxes located in the excerpt. Though they 
generally liked the bulleted lists, some readers disliked the longer and 
multilevel bulleted lists; this was described by one reader as 
too many bullet points on page 12. It goes all over the place. 
After reading the procedures, several participants stated they would 
not join the bushcare programme because of the document’s emphasis on 
regulations instead of the positives of volunteering. Other readers stated 
that they were interested in the volunteer programme, but the text had dis-
illusioned them. User-testing of Document C had resulted in the opposite 
response to the one the organization had planned for.
Testing a revised version
In response to the readers’ feedback after reading Document C, the text 
was rewritten and redesigned by an independent plain-language practi-
tioner in order to investigate further what document features may assist 
readers. The revised text incorporated all the main subject matter, but it 
omitted the organizational flow chart and definitions (which one-third of 
readers skipped reading in the original text). The practitioner used a range 
of structural and design features to clarify the content, such as signposting 
five major moves and adopting bold for highlighting key words within the 
text. An extract of the revised text is set out in Figure 5 (overleaf). This 
revised text is referred to as Document CR.
The revised version of the bushcare procedures was given to the same 
group of readers who had read the original because they had responded 
negatively to the objectives of the original text. Eighteen of the 25 par-
ticipants responded to this additional testing, providing valuable user 
feedback. Note this occurred several months after the initial testing of 
Document C. All the respondents who read Document CR stated the doc-
ument was easy to read. Even acknowledging that, on this second read-
ing, respondents had some familiarity with the document content, this 
compares favourably to the 40% of the respondents who stated that the 
original text was easy to read. The sentiment of the participants was that 
Document CR was user-friendly, with comments including 
the document is encouraging & positive; 
seems to be a good example of less is more. By condensing the document it 
makes it easier and quicker to read and digest.

472 / Dana P. Skopal
The two texts (original and revised) differed in their macro-structures, 
the use of document design features, and their lexicogrammatical features. 
A comparative view of the different design features of the original text and 
the revised version is given in Table 3.
The first major difference between the two documents was the num-
ber and positioning of the moves. In Document CR the practitioner re-­
ordered the information to establish five major moves. The moves were 
clearly signposted as: programme, location, roles, communication, and 
expenses, with a new subheading to advise the readers of the dismissal 
procedures.
The second difference was the use of visual design features. One reader 
Figure 5
Document CR: Page 2 of the 
revised text, illustrating use of 
shading for lists and black banners 
with white print for marking 
subheadings.
Table 3  A comparative view of the original and revised design features
Macro-structure
Multimodality
Lexicogrammar
Document C
4 moves
11 subsections
6 additional moves
bold headings
grey text boxes
owl image 
lengthy nominal  
  groups
high ratio of  
  embedded clauses  
  per sentence
Document CR
5 moves
12 subsections	
bold headings
grey text boxes
black banners
key words in bold
owl image
shorter nominal  
  groups
low ratio of  
  embedded clauses  
  per sentence
use of pronouns we  
  and you

Public information documents / 473 
stated that the different layout ‘made navigation of [the] document easier’. 
Document CR incorporated the original text’s features such as bulleted 
lists and grey-coloured text boxes, but these were modified and features 
were added: black banners with white print for subheadings, bold for 
highlighting key words within the text, and ticks or arrows as cues for bul-
leted lists. 
In addition to the clearer macro-structure and visual design, Document 
CR had a lower average sentence length, lower ratio of embedded clauses/
phrases per sentence, and shorter nominal groups than the original text. 
Further, in Document CR, the pronouns we and you were used to refer to 
the organization (regulatory body) and the volunteers (readers) respec-
tively. In their comments on the text, the readers used terms such as ‘not 
complicated’, ‘friendly’, and ‘warmer’.
Document CR was revised by an experienced plain-language practi-
tioner, and one issue raised by this exercise is whether the different struc-
tural and design approaches described above illustrate the transformations 
between administrative language and plain English practices. I refer to 
a definition of plain English provided by an independent Australian gov-
ernment body and cited by scholars such as Kimble (2012) and Watson-
Brown (2009). The Law Reform Commission of Victoria (1990, 1) defined 
plain English as ‘ordinary English, expressed directly and clearly to convey 
a message simply and effectively’. However, how do we define the elem-
ents of information design, incorporating content structure and appropri-
ate wording that convey messages ‘simply and effectively’?
Document design features that assisted readers 
The findings from this study suggest some key design features that influ-
ence the ease with which citizens read regulatory information. Readers’ 
comprehension and ease of use of the regulatory information were depen­
dent upon a combination of:
•	 a document’s macro-structure; its content structure;
•	 the use of multimodal design features; its visual structure;
•	 lexicogrammatical features; appropriate wording.
The majority of readers preferred Document B and Document CR. In 
these documents a coherent macro-structure supported by both visual 
structure and appropriate wording contributed to the shared meaning of 
the PIDs, so that the authors’ intentions were understood by the readers.
In the study the readers responded positively when the following fea-
tures were combined: 
•	 clear sequential or hierarchical moves;
•	 headings and subheadings as macro-structural signposting;
•	 multimodal design features, such as use of bold text for headings and 
key terms in sentences;

474 / Dana P. Skopal
•	 an average sentence length of 20 or less words;
•	 shorter nominal groups (average 6 words in length);
•	 a low ratio of embedded clauses/phrases per sentence;
•	 the use of personal pronouns to refer to the organization and reader(s).
These data support the theoretical frameworks and research embraced 
by scholars such as Bhatia (1993, 2000), Hoey (1983, 1991), Kress (2010), 
and Schriver (1997), as well as researchers investigating plain-language 
texts such as Bonk (2009) and Zethsen and Askehave (2010).
Plain English, or plain language, is a broad term, yet it needs to be 
synonymous with clear information design as adopted for public admin-
istrative language. The Plain Writing Act of 2010 became law in the USA 
and stipulates that government agencies are to communicate in a language 
that the public can understand (Cheek 2011). In Australia there is no such 
legislation, and many organizations produce their own writing guides (e.g. 
Government of South Australia 2009). The US Guidelines provide the 
writing-production criteria that government administrators are to follow 
when communicating with the public; principally, use pronouns to speak 
directly to readers, write short sentences, use lists and tables, and use bold 
and italics to highlight important concepts (Plain Language Action and 
Information Network 2011). These features closely align to my research 
findings. It is, however, the combination of features that assists a reader, 
from the macro-structure right through to the composition of nominal 
groups. For example, if one feature creates difficulty for the reader, such as 
the long sentences in Document A, that one feature invariably has a bear-
ing on the combination and usability of the other features within that text.
Practical relevance 
The data show how the readability of PIDs can be improved by atten-
tion to their content and structure (see also Renkema 2009). To ensure 
the effectiveness of PIDs in their role of informing the public, document 
producers need to put themselves in the readers’ shoes. Usability testing 
with the intended readers (not just testing with staff members within the 
organization) can provide valuable feedback that can be incorporated into 
an appropriate redesign of the information (Black et al. 2013; Renkema 
2009). If such testing is not feasible, document producers need to focus 
on the relevant information (without the detailed narrative background) 
that a reader would need to take from the text, and position that infor-
mation in a navigable format. One possible strategy is to plan a two-page 
summary of points that are fundamental for the public’s comprehension, 
and subsequently design the document to meet those requirements. For 
each document, information design requires blending content structure, 
appropriate wording, and visual formatting appropriate for that specific 
audience. 

Public information documents / 475 
Acknowledgement
The author is grateful to the staff at the Australian Taxation Office, The Audit 
Office of New South Wales City, and City of Ryde for access to the documents and 
their writing processes, and to Julie Shannon for the revised text.
References
Australian Tax Office. 2011. You and your shares 2011. 
Canberra: Australian Tax Office.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 1993. Analysing genre: language use in 
professional settings. London: Longman.
Bhatia, Vijay K. 2000. ‘Discourse of philanthropic 
fundraising.’ New Directions in Philanthropic 
Fundraising 22: 95–110.
Black, Alison, Annette Gibb, Clare Carey, Sarah 
Barker, Claire Leake, and Luke Solomons. 2013. 
‘Designing a questionnaire to gather carer input 
to pain assessment for hospitalized people with 
dementia.’ Visible Language 47: 37–60.
Black, Alison, and Karen L. Stanbridge. 2012. 
‘Documents as ‘Critical Incidents’ in organization 
to consumer communication.’ Visible Language 
46: 246–281.
Bonk, Robert J. 2009. ‘Complexity versus 
comprehension: a content analysis of the US 
Medicare prescription drug plan.’ Journal of 
Communication in Healthcare 2: 119–130.
Candlin, Christopher N. 1997. ‘General editor’s 
preface.’ In The construction of professional 
discourse, edited by Britt-Louise Gunnarsson, 
Per Linell, and Bengt Nordberg, viii–xiv. Harlow: 
Longman.
Candlin, Christopher N. 2006. ‘Accounting for 
interdiscursivity: challenges to professional 
expertise.’ In New trends in specialized discourse, 
edited by Maurizio Gotti and Davide S. Giannoni, 
21–45. Bern: Peter Lang Verlag.
Candlin, Christopher N., and Jonathon Crichton. 
2011. ‘Introduction.’ In Discourses of deficit, 
edited by Christopher N. Candlin and Jonathon 
Crichton, 1–22. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cheek, Annette L. 2011. ‘The Plain Writing Act 
of 2010: getting democracy to work for you.’ 
Michigan Bar Journal 90: 52–53.
City of Ryde. 2007. Bushcare policies and procedures 
manual. Sydney: City of Ryde.
Crichton, Jonathon. 2003. ‘Issues of interdiscursivity 
in the commercialisation of professional practice.’ 
PhD dissertation, Macquarie University, Sydney.
Crichton, Jonathon. 2010. The discourse of 
commercialisation. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Delin, Judy, John A. Bateman, and Patrick Allen. 
2002. ‘A model of genre in document layout.’ 
Information Design Journal 11: 54–66.
Fairclough, Norman L. 1992. Discourse and social 
change. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1991. ‘Governmentality.’ In The 
Foucault effect: studies in governmentality, edited 
by Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter 
Miller, 87–104. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Government of South Australia, 2009. Plain English: 
good practice guide. Adelaide: Government of 
South Australia.
Halliday, Michael A.K., and Christian M. I. M. 
Matthiessen. 2004. An introduction to functional 
grammar. 3rd edn. London: Arnold.
Hoey, Michael. 1983. On the surface of discourse. 
London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Hoey, Michael. 1991. Patterns of lexis in text. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Hoey, Michael. 1994. ‘Signalling in discourse: 
a functional analysis of a common discourse 
pattern in written and spoken English.’ In 
Advances in written text analysis, edited by 
Michael Coulthard, 26–45. London & New York: 
Routledge.
Kimble, Joseph. 2012. Writing for dollars, writing 
to please: the case for plain language in business, 
government, and law. Durham, NC: Carolina 
Academic Press.
Kress, Gunther R. 2010. Multimodality: a social 
semiotic approach to contemporary communication. 
New York, NY: Routledge.
Law Reform Commission of Victoria. 1990. 
Appendix 1. Guidelines for drafting in plain English. 
Melbourne: Victorian Government.
Plain Language Action and Information Network. 
2011. Federal plain language guidelines. <http://
www.plainlanguage.gov/howto/guidelines/
FederalPLGuidelines/FederalPLGuidelines.pdf>
Renkema, Jan. 2009. ‘Improving the quality 
of government documents.’ In Professional 
communication: collaboration between academics 
and practitioners, edited by Winnie Cheng and 
Kenneth C. C. Kong, 173–190. Hong Kong: Hong 
Kong University Press.
Sarangi, Srikant, and Christopher N. Candlin. 
2011. ‘Professional and organisational practice: 
a discourse/communication perspective.’ In 
Hand­book of professional and organisational 
communication, edited by Christopher N. Candlin 

476 / Dana P. Skopal
476 / Dana P. Skopal
and Srikant Sarangi, 3–58. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Sarangi, Srikant and Celia Roberts. 1999. ‘The 
dynamics of interactional and institutional orders 
in work-related settings.’ In Talk, work and 
institutional order. Discourse in medical, mediation 
and management settings, edited by Srikant 
Sarangi and Celia Roberts, 1–57. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter.
Schriver, Karen A. 1997. Dynamics in document 
design: creating texts for readers. New York: John 
Wiley.
Sless, David. 2004. ‘Designing public documents.’ 
Information Design Journal + Document Design 12: 
24–35.
Shuy, Roger W. 1998. Bureaucratic language in 
government and business. Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press.
Skopal, Dana P. 2014. ‘Exploring the concept of 
communicative expertise: the relationship 
between features of the written text and 
perceptions of readability.’ PhD dissertation, 
Macquarie University, Sydney.
Swales, John M. 1981. Aspects of article introductions. 
ESP research report, (1). Birmingham: Aston 
University.
Swales, John M. 1990. Genre analysis: English in 
academic and research settings. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
The Audit Office of New South Wales. 2008. 
Delivering health care out of hospitals. New South 
Wales: Audit Office.
Watson-Brown, Anthony. 2009. ‘Defining ‘Plain 
English’ as an aid to legal drafting.’ Statute Law 
Review 30: 85–96.
Zethsen, Karen K., and Inger Askehave. 2010. ‘PIL of 
the month: a study of best practice in EU patient 
information leaflets.’ Journal of Applied Linguistics 
and Professional Practice 7: 97–120.

Part 4
Practical 
applications


479
Choosing type for 
information design
Paul Luna
While typeface choice is popularly seen as reinforcing the atmosphere value 
of a document, there is real value in assessing and selecting the right typeface 
for each job, so that clarity can be maintained at small sizes or on screen, and so 
that document hierarchies can be made visually explicit. The availability of web-
fonts and fonts that can be embedded in applications has extended this choice 
into areas of screen-based design that were, until recently, restricted to the use 
of widely available core fonts for the web. This chapter outlines the ­principles 
that should be considered when choosing type for complex material in print and 
on line, and in applications such as forms and signage.
Information design requires typography that is highly legible, that can 
clearly display the necessary hierarchy of information, and is appropri-
ate for the medium, reading distance, and reading conditions envisaged. 
Factors that can compromise the choice of the best typeface to use are the 
need to preserve a common appearance across print and screen media, 
the need for particular character sets or language support, and pressure 
to comply with corporate design guidelines that are based on marketing 
needs rather than information needs or sound research.1
How typefaces differ
Typefaces are designed with a particular use in mind. They are designed 
to be read at different sizes, and at different distances, and therefore have 
different characteristics. For our purposes we can ignore the more eccen-
tric and decorative display types, and script or ‘handwriting’ fonts, and 
consider the characteristics of practical typefaces for different uses.
Typefaces for continuous reading
Typefaces for books tend to be seriffed, and the serifs are usually relatively 
light. The overall weight of the type will be moderately light, to produce 
an even, grey feel to a page of text. There may be reasonable stroke con-
trast, so that there is a pronounced difference between thicks and thins. 
For books, a low x-height and longer extenders are an advantage, allowing 
quite generous white space between lines, so that the horizontal flow of 
reading is maintained (Figure 1). For the same reason, typefaces for books 
are never over-condensed.
  1	 For criticism of traditional legibility research see Lund (1997, 1999). For recent 
typeface legibility research see Beier (2012) and Dyson and Suen (2016).
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 479–486
Foolishly, she had se 
died tomorrow. If it 
seemed possible. Ev
last, she thought, dis
were all talking abo
Foolishly, she had s
remedied tomorro 
Everything seemed 
(but this cannot las 
Figure 1 a–b
Type attributes. 
a. For books 
(10.5/12 pt Arno).
b. For newspapers 
and magazines 
(9/10 pt Tisa).
31

480 / Paul Luna
Typefaces for newspapers and magazine text, while also usually ser-
iffed, tend to be heavier, and their serifs are stronger. They may be nar-
rower so that they work well on multi-column pages. In particular, they 
will have larger x-heights. The characteristics that make newspaper 
types work well tend to match those required for on-screen use. A good 
example is Guardian Egyptian Text, used for print, website, and mobile 
versions of The Guardian (Figure 2; see also illustration on page 180). This 
typeface has a large x-height, strong serifs, and is relatively monotone in 
appearance, with low contrast between thick and thin strokes. This allows 
its identity to be maintained across platforms: in contrast The New York 
Times uses the core web font Georgia for body copy on its website rather 
than its custom print font, Imperial.
For on-screen reading, where identification and navigation may take 
precedence over extended continuous reading, sans serif typefaces are 
equally valid (see Figure 18 and also page 212).
Optical scaling
Optical scaling refers to the adjustment of weight and spacing necessary to 
make letters clear at different sizes (Carter 1937; Shaw 2009). A necessity 
in metal typefounding, optical scaling was only partially implemented in 
photomechanical and digital type. While some typefaces offer a range of 
optical size variants (Figure 3), it is often easier to select different typefaces 
(or variations of a typeface) for use at different sizes, so that each one is 
chosen to perform best at the size at which it is used (Luna 1992, 22–23).
Typefaces for use at small sizes
Typically open and with large x-heights, type for use at very small sizes 
eschews elegance for absolute clarity. While the sharpness of digital type 
has reduced the need to compensate for the image degradation that was 
a feature of mechanical printing methods, type for use on small labels and 
instructions should still be carefully chosen (Figure 4). Relatively wider 
types will perform better than condensed types (see Waller 2007). 
Typefaces for use at large sizes
Typically lighter and more closely spaced, display types used for book-
work will look flimsy if set in too small a size. Display types for newspaper 
headlines (e.g. Franklin Gothic) can be extremely powerful at large sizes. 
cocaine through a rolled-
lished in the Mirror last w
however hard you looked
couldn’t find evidence to
she was actually human.
The 31-year-old model 
filmed taking drugs with 
Pete Doherty, in a recordi
west London, which as ex
University library
University library
Figure 5 a–c
Types for book display, headline, 
and signage, 30 pt.
a. Garamond Premier Pro Light 
Display.
b. Franklin Gothic No 2.
c. Wayfinding Sans.
Figure 2
Guardian Egyptian 
Text, 9/9.5 pt.
Light Display 
Display
Subhead
Regular
Caption
Figure 3
Optical variants 
(Garamond 
Premier Pro).
Figure 4
Nimrod (top) 
appears larger 
than Times New 
Roman PS when 
both are set at 7pt.
Reporting side effects
If  you get any side effects, 
talk to your doctor, pharma-
cist, or nurse. This includes
Reporting side effects
If you get any side effects, talk to 
your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. 
This includes any possible

Choosing type for information design / 481 
Alphabets for signage, although used at large sizes, share features with type 
designed for use at small sizes: they are strongly drawn without fine detail, 
are usually low-contrast, and have wider character spacing (Figure 5).
Typefaces with variant weights and widths
A typeface with a family of systematically related variant fonts of differ-
ent weights and widths allows you to select exactly the tonal and contrast 
values required to make a document’s hierarchy clear to the reader. In 
large families, contrast is best achieved by juxtaposing fonts that are not 
adjacent in weight (Figure 6). Letterforms with open apertures, low con-
trast, and flattened horizontal strokes are relatively easy to condense and 
expand (Figure 7). Super-families, such as Skolar, combine related serif 
and sans serif designs (Figure 8).
Support for Latin and non-Latin scripts
Globalization and its counterpart, the desire for local cultural identity, 
have led to an increasing demand for quality digital typefaces for non-Latin 
scripts that are no longer limited by mechanical constraints (outlined in 
e.g. Nemeth 2014). The cultural as well as graphic appropriateness of non-
Latin letterforms should always be taken into account (Ross and Shaw 
2012; Twardoch 2001). For information design it is essential that Unicode-
compliant fonts are used, so that text can be re-purposed easily. OpenType 
‘Pro’ fonts have the largest character sets, offering both extensive Latin 
script language support, and allowing the integration of Latin and non-
Latin scripts into a single font, removing the need to specify separate fonts 
for separate languages. 
Harmonization has long been a requirement for mixed language type-
setting, but approaches to harmonization differ because documents are 
divergent in their typographic requirements. For continuous reading, 
harmony in style, tonal density, and appearing height are necessary, while 
dictionaries require differentiation to create hierarchy and ease of naviga-
tion (Ross and Shaw 2012, 149–150). 
Examples of recent well-designed non-Latins include Nassim (Arabic, 
with a range of regional script variants, Figure 9; Rosetta 2014), and Adobe 
Devanagari (Hindi).
Figure 6
Weight variants 
(Argo).
Skolar Regular
Skolar Italic
Skolar Sans
Skolar Sans Italic
Figure 8
Related serif and 
sans serif designs 
(Skolar).
[ كبيرkabīr], pl. [ كبارkibār] u. [ كبراءkubara] groß, 
bedeutend; alt, bejahrt; [ ~ السنsinn] alt; 
 :~ المهندسينChefingenieur m;  ,~ ةpl.  كبائر
[kabāīr] schwere Sünde f.
[ كبيسkabīs], eingemacht, konserviert; s. .سنة
[ كتابkitāb], pl. [ كتبkutub] Buch n, Schreiben 
n, Schriftstück n, Brief m; ~ أهل الChristen u. 
Juden (als Besitzer der hl. Schrift).
+ [kuttab] pl. [ كتاتيبkatātīb] Koran- od. Ele-
[ كتابيkitābī] schriftlich, Schreib-; 
[ كتافkitāf], pl. كتف [kutuf] Hand
[ كتامkitām], Verstopfung f, Konst
[ كتانkatān], Lein m, Flachs m;
[ كتبkatāb (jaktub)], i schreiben, 
verfassen; ii Gott: bestimmen
 ;)على , لiii [katāb] korrespond
[aktāb] schreiben lassen; dikti
[takatāb] miteinander in Brief
Figure 9
Harmonization of 
Arabic and Latin, 
using a typeface 
supporting both 
scripts (Nassim).
By permission of Titus 
Nemeth.
Figure 7
Comparison 
of apertures 
(Frutiger Neue, 
top, more open) 
and Helvetica 
Neue, bottom, less 
open).
aes
aes
agenda
agenda
agenda
agenda
agenda

482 / Paul Luna
Typefaces in use
Corporate typefaces
Corporate typefaces are generally optimized for marketing purposes, 
making them suitable for display headlines and simple copy, but less 
effective in presenting information in forms and billing documents, or 
for presenting hierarchical or tabular matter in print or on screen. For 
example, punctuation designed for use at large sizes may be unclear at 
small text sizes (Figure 10). Before customized type design became wide-
spread, businesses used their preferred type in the print environment, but 
accepted Microsoft core fonts for the web. The increasing ease with which 
customized type designs can be commissioned and webfonts implemented 
has changed the situation, often for the better, as typeface pairs can be 
implemented to provide a distinctive headline version and a workaday 
text version. This is the approach adopted in 2015 by Channel 4 television: 
Horseferry is a quirky sans serif with eccentric angular details and the 
occasional added serif; Chadwick is the related text font, a more-normal 
grotesque. Designers Brody Associates refer to Chadwick as the ‘informa-
tion’ font (Figure 11; Williams 2015).
Book publishers rarely impose a corporate typeface, but journals often 
do. Interesting examples are the eponymous typeface used by Brill (Brill 
2011), and Elsevier’s use of Gulliver (Figure 12), which works well in print 
and on screen. IR Modena, commissioned by the UK tax authority HMRC, 
works well in printed and downloadable forms (Figure 13).
Cueing animations: Dynamic signaling aids information extr
comprehension
Jean-Michel Boucheix a,*, Richard K. Lowe b, Dian K. Putri a,c, Jonathan Groff a
a Lead-CNRS, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France
b Curtin University, Perth, Australia
c Gunadarma University, Jakarta, Indonesia
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 10 June 2011
a b s t r a c t
The effectiveness of animations containing two novel forms of a
between event units rather than individual entities was compare
Figure 11
Chadwick and Horseferry.
By permission of Channel 4.
Figure 10
Problematic 
punctuation 
(Effra Light, 
top) and clearer 
punctuation 
(Vesta, bottom).
Figure 12
Gulliver in the 
journal Learning 
and Instruction.
By permission of 
Elsevier.
‘Effra.,:;’
‘Vesta.,:;’

Choosing type for information design / 483 
Operating system fonts
Operating system fonts have to perform in a variety of screen environ-
ments. Microsoft’s Segoe UI and Apple’s San Francisco fonts are plain and 
efficient. Segoe UI is a careful rethinking of Frutiger, with open-aperture 
letterforms; Non-Latin scripts are supported by matching fonts such as 
Nirmala UI (Figure 14). San Francisco is a font family based on DIN and 
Akzidenz Grotesk with a number of variants. Apple uses the DIN-like, 
slightly condensed version for promotional uses, and for the interface of 
Apple Watch; there are display and text fonts. A rounder, Akzidenz-like 
version is used for the OS X and iOS interfaces, again with more tightly 
spaced display fonts and more open text fonts (Figure 15; Cavedoni 2015). 
The Ubuntu font family for Linux is rather more eccentric (Figure 16).
Typefaces for complex text
Dictionary design provides good case studies of typefaces chosen because 
they are legible, appropriate for reproduction size and reading distance, 
and reinforce the information hierarchy of the text. Dictionary entries 
are structured hierarchically, with subentries nested within main entries. 
Within each subentry, items are typically arranged in a standard sequence, 
so that the headword is followed by pronunciation, variant spellings, ety-
mology, grammatical category, and finally senses and examples or illustra-
tive quotations. A dictionary entry can be thought of as a set of list items 
that, instead of being presented vertically, are run on sequentially. Instead 
of vertical separation by space, typographic variation indicates the bound-
aries between the list items. 
Traditional dictionaries relied on the five-font family of metal type 
(roman, italic, bold, bold italic, small capitals). While it was possible to 
encode every element within an entry, a one-to-one mapping of elements 
to unique styles was impossible, and duplication in what was signified by 
each font was necessary. Italic often had to represent both grammatical 
categories (noun, verb, adjective, etc.) and subject field labels (military, 
सूचना डिजाइन
ছাপাখানার বিদ্যা
Segoe UI
Figure 14
Nirmala UI, 
which integrates 
scripts such as 
Devanagari (top) 
and Bengali 
(middle) with the 
Latin characters of 
Segoe UI.
San Francisco 
Display
San Francisco 
Text
Figure 15
San Francisco as 
implemented on 
Apple Watch.
1   Payments to registered pension schemes where basic 
rate tax relief will be claimed by your pension provider 
(called ‘relief at source’). Enter the payments and basic 
rate tax
£
0
0
•
2   Payments to a retirement annuity contract where basic 
rate tax relief will not be claimed by your provider
£
0
0
•
3   Paym
dedu
£
4   Paym
UK-re
not d
£
Figure 13
IR Modena. This 
strong, slightly 
condensed sans 
serif works well in 
printed forms.
Contains public sector 
information licensed 
under the Open 
Government Licence 
v3.0.
Ubuntu
Italic Bold
Bold italic
Figure 16
Ubuntu system 
font for Linux.

484 / Paul Luna
medicine, etc.), and sometimes usage examples as well (Figure  17). The 
same bold font often functioned as both the main headword and any deriv-
ative or subsidiary headword within the body of the entry.
The ability of digital typesetting to combine any number of fonts finally 
allowed one-to-one mapping of typography to semantic elements. In the 
edition shown in Figure 18, only actual definitions are in the base serif 
font. Various sans serif fonts are used for the dictionary’s structural elem-
ents. The largest sans serif bold is used for headwords and sense numbers, 
which are the main navigational items in each entry; different sans serif 
fonts, lighter and condensed, are used for etymologies, grammatical cat-
egories, and subject field labels. This thorough mapping of typography to 
structural elements reinforces the lexicographical concept of the diction-
ary entry for the reader, and provides useful redundancy in navigation. 
Using a large number of variant fonts can help mapping hierarchical 
structures in complex dictionaries, but for a straightforward school dic-
tionary a simpler approach may be sufficient. Figure 19 shows how colour 
and strong weight-contrast provide the main articulation of entries, so 
that the bulk of each entry is set in various fonts of the sans serif type, while 
explanations and usage examples are set in the smaller serif type. The pupil 
can thereby clearly distinguish the meanings of words from the supporting 
grammatical information.
In the dictionaries shown in Figures 18 and 19, the formal characteristics 
of the typefaces, Swift and Argo (serif and sans serif respectively), were 
fundamental to their selection. The two typefaces have visual affinities 
Figure 17
Shorter Oxford English 
dictionary, 4th edition, 
1993, set in Plantin.
By permission of Oxford 
University Press.
Figure 18
Shorter Oxford English dictionary, 5th edition, 2002.
By permission of Oxford University Press.
daughter
 noun daughters
 
a girl or woman in relation to her 
parents
 word family an adjective to do with 
daughters is 
: She was anxious to do her 
 word history from Old English dohtor
daughter-in-law
 noun daughters-in-law
 
the wife of your son
Figure 19
Proposal for a school dictionary.
By permission of Oxford University Press.
vector /£v1kt3/ n. e18. [L = carrier, traveller, 
rider, from vect- pa. ppl stem of vehere carry, 
convey: see -or.] † 1 Astron. = radius vector s.v. 
radius n. Only in 18. 2 a Math. A quantity 
having direction as well as magnitude, denoted 
by a line drawn from its original to its final 
position. Cf. scalar. n. m19. b Math. An ordered
vector /"vEkt@/ noun e18. 
[Latin = carrier, traveller, rider, from vect- pa. ppl stem of vehere 
carry, convey: see -or.] 
 † 1  astronomy = radius vector s.v. radius noun Only in 18. 
2 a  math. A quantity having direction as well as 
magnitude, denoted by a line drawn from its original 
to its final position. Cf. scalar noun m19.  b  math. An 
ordered set of two or more numbers (interpretable as 
the coordinates of a point); a matrix with one row or  
one column. Also, any element of a vector space. e20. 
 c  aeronautics. A course to be taken by an aircraft, or 
steered by a pilot. m20. 
 d  computing. A sequence of

Choosing type for information design / 485 
(both are designed by Gerard Unger), and their stroke structure, par-
ticularly the low angle at which curves join verticals, allows for a greater 
degree of horizontal condensing than is normally acceptable.
Typefaces for signage
Starting with Edward Johnston’s design for the London Underground in 
1916, alphabets developed for British transport signage in the twentieth 
century were typographically more sophisticated than the geometrically 
constructed alphabets used for road signs in Germany (based on DIN) and 
the in USA. More recent designs include the Dutch road-sign alphabet and 
the digital font Arrival (Figure 20), respectively a careful improvement 
of the original DIN style and a humanist sans serif developed for signage 
(Village 2016). The Wayfinding Sans family has many weights and widths, 
and includes symbols. Very narrow letters should be used with care: Waller 
(2007) demonstrates that condensed type on signs reduces legibility, and 
that a smaller size of non-condensed type achieves the same result.
Typefaces in an online environment
The UK government website (<http://gov.uk>) uses a typeface (New 
Trans­port, Figure 21) adapted from the one used on British road signs, 
demonstrating the overlap of features between type design for on-screen 
use and for reading at a distance. The straightforward sans serif style is also 
suited to a website which is carefully written in plain language (Terrett 
2012; see also Walker, Black, and Carey 2013).
Typefaces for accessibility
Disability discrimination legislation places a responsibility on designers to 
design inclusively (Coleman et al. 2007). Guidelines have been produced 
by the UK Association for Accessible Formats (UKAAF) on minimum 
standards for clear print (UKAAF 2012). While the overall guidance is 
sound (ask the end-user what they need, use plain typefaces, avoid light or 
coloured text), the guidelines have been criticized because the minimum 
text sizes they recommend (12–14 pt) can make documents unwieldy, and 
their advocacy of larger, bolder type for body text means that the use of 
Figure 20
a. Alphabet for 
Dutch road signs, 
1996, by Gerard 
Unger.
b. Arrival, by Keith 
Tam.
c. Wayfinding 
Sans, by Ralf 
Herrmann and 
Sebastian Nagel.
Figure 21
New Transport 
used on the gov.uk 
website.
Contains public sector 
information licensed under 
the Open Government 
Licence v3.0.

486 / Paul Luna
carefully graded type weights and sizes to signal hierarchical significance 
is more difficult to achieve. Documents that abide by the guidelines can 
lose the visual differentiation of text elements that would make them more 
easily navigable (Waller 2011).
Claims of improved readability for dyslexic readers are made for type-
faces such as OpenDyslexic which can be selected on the Amazon Kindle 
(Figure 22). These claims are problematic, as some typefaces have features 
that may hinder other readers. The British Dyslexia Association notes that 
there is no consensus reported by users on typefaces, other than a prefer-
ence for sans serif designs (British Dyslexia Association [2015]).
References
Beier, Sofie. 2012. Reading letters: designing for 
legibility. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers.
Brill. 2011. ‘Introducing the “Brill” typeface to 
scholarship: unrivalled completeness and 
typographical sophistication.’ < http://www.brill.
com/sites/default/files/brill_typeface_2011_for_
author_use.pdf>.
British Dyslexia Association. [2015]. ‘Typefaces for 
dyslexia.’ <https://bdatech.org/what-technology/
typefaces-for-dyslexia/>.
Carter, Harry. 1937 ‘Optical scale in 
typefounding.’ In Typography 4: 144–148. 
<https://issuu.com/letterror/docs/
harry_carter_optical_scale_in_typefounding>.
Cavedoni, Antonio. 2015. ‘Introducing the new 
system fonts.’ Presentation at Apple Worldwide 
Developer Conference. <https://developer.apple.
com/videos/play/wwdc2015/804/>.
Coleman, Roger, John Clarkson, Hua Dong, and 
Julia Cassim, eds. 2007. Design for inclusivity: 
a practical guide to accessible, innovative and user-
centred design. Aldershot: Gower.
Dyson, Mary C., and Ching Y. Suen, eds. 2016. Digital 
fonts and reading. London: World Scientific.
Luna, Paul. 1992. Understanding type for desktop 
publishing. London: Blueprint/Chapman & Hall.
Lund, Ole. 1997. ‘Why serifs are (still) important.’ 
Typography Papers 2: 91–104.
Lund, Ole. 1999. ‘Knowledge construction in 
typography: the case of legibility research 
and the legibility of sans serif typefaces.’ PhD 
thesis. Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication, University of Reading. 
Nemeth, Titus. 2014. ‘Simplified Arabic: a new 
form of Arabic type for hot metal composition.’ 
Typography papers 9, 173–189. London: Hyphen 
Press.
UKAAF. 2012. ‘Creating clear print and large print 
documents: guidance from UKAAF.’ <https://
www.rnib.org.uk/sites/default/files/UKAAF%20
creating%20clear%20print%20and%20large%20
print%20documents.pdf>.
Rosetta. 2014. ‘Nassim.’ <https://www.rosettatype.
com/microsite/current/Nassim/files/Nassim_
specimen.pdf>.
Ross, Fiona, and Graham Shaw, eds. 2012. Non-Latin 
scripts: from metal to digital type. London: St Bride 
Library.
Shaw, Paul. 2009. ‘Scale and spirit.’ Eye 18 (71): 62–69.
Terrett, Ben. 2012. ‘A few notes on typography.’ 
Government Digital Service blog.  
<https://gds.blog.gov.
uk/2012/07/05/a-few-notes-on-typography/>.
Twardoch, Adam. 2002. ‘Picked herring and 
strawberry ice cream.’ In Language Culture Type, 
edited by John D. Berry, 148–157. New York: 
Association Typographique Internationale and 
Graphis. 
UKAAF. 201.2 ‘Creating clear print and large print 
documents.’ <https://www.rnib.org.uk/sites/
default/files/UKAAF%20creating%20clear%20
print%20and%20large%20print%20documents.
pdf>.
Village. ‘Arrival.’ <https://vllg.s3.amazonaws.com/
font_families/pdfs/14/original/vllg-Incubator-
Arrival.pdf>.
Waller, Robert. 2007. ‘Comparing typefaces for 
air­port signs.’ In Information Design Journal 15 (1): 
1–15.
Waller, Robert. 2011. ‘The Clear Print standard: 
arguments for a flexible approach.’ <http://www.
robwaller.org/SC10ClearPrint_v5.pdf>.
Walker, Sue, Alison Black, and Clare Carey. 2013. 
‘GOV.UK content principles: conventions and 
research background.’ Gov.uk website. <https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/govuk-
content-principles-conventions-and-research-
background>.
Williams, Eliza. 2015. ‘Channel 4 rebrands, with 
help from Jonathan Glazer and Neville Brody.’ In 
Creative Review, 30 September. <https://www.
creativereview.co.uk/cr-blog/2015/september/
channel-4-rebrands-with-help-from-jonathan-
glazer-and-neville-brody/>. 
OpenDyslexic
Italic Bold  
Bold italic
Figure 22
OpenDyslexic, 
promoted as 
more readable for 
dyslexic readers.

487
Indexing and information design
Complementary disciplines 
Glenda Browne
Information design is the practice of presenting complex information so that it 
can be easily understood and used. Indexes are pointers to content, and guide 
users through complex works. Indexing can make information products more 
usable, and the application of information design principles can make better 
indexes. Information design principles that are applied to the creation of indexes 
include a focus on analysing the needs of users, the provision of an appropriate 
structure with a suitable amount of detail, a clear legible design, emphasis as 
required, and consistency throughout. Indexes of the future have the potential 
to include more visual displays of information and options for user-generated 
content. Indexes have much to offer for information products, and their use of 
information design principles will make them more effective. 
Information design is the practice of presenting complex information so 
that it can be easily understood and used. Indexes are pointers to content, 
and guide users through complex works including books, bibliographic 
databases, collections, and websites. Indexing can make information 
products more usable, and the application of information design princi-
ples can make better indexes. 
Human-created indexes still play a  role in digital products through 
their traditional functions – grouping similar information; distinguishing 
between different concepts; and leading users from the entry points they 
have selected to others with additional content. 
Many information design principles are applied to the creation of 
indexes. These include a focus on analysing the needs of users, the pro-
vision of an appropriate structure with a suitable amount of detail, a clear 
legible design, emphasis as required, and consistency throughout. The 
indexer should keep aesthetic and cognitive principles in mind at all times.
Book indexes of the future will have more features than their equiva-
lent print indexes. The new EPUB Indexes specification (<http://www.
idpf.org/epub/idx>) enables better display of contextual information, and 
indexes for e-book apps have taken new approaches. Indexes of the future 
will have the potential to include more visual displays of information and 
options for user-generated content. 
Indexes have much to offer for information products, and their use of 
information design principles will make them more effective. 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 487–502
32

488 / Glenda Browne
Index types
Indexes are pointers to content in any format. This chapter focuses on 
book indexes, and also mentions database and website indexes. It does not 
include fully automated large-scale ‘indexing’.
Closed-system and open-system indexing 
Human indexing is divided into closed-system and open-system indexing 
(Klement 2002). Closed-system indexing refers to indexing of discrete 
units such as books, usually by one person over a short period of time. 
Open-system indexing refers to the indexing of collections that are reg-
ularly added to, where the indexes are usually updated by more than one 
person, over a long period of time. Open-system indexing often uses a con-
trolled vocabulary of some sort (for example, an information retrieval 
thesaurus) to ensure consistency over time and between indexers. For 
simplicity in this chapter, closed-system indexing is referred to as book 
indexing, and open-system indexing is referred to as collection indexing.
Digital indexes – e-books and EPUB
Until recently, nearly all book indexes were provided in print format; early 
electronic books were either PDF versions of the print book or HTML 
website-type content. Now, however, portable reading systems such 
as dedicated e-readers, tablet computers, and smart phones can display 
re-flowable text – that is, e-books where there are no fixed pages, and the 
user simply sees the content that will fit on their screen. Indexes for print 
books can be transferred to PDF format relatively easily, as the page num-
bers of the print book are retained in the PDF document. Links are often 
simply made to the page as a whole, rather than to specific locations within 
the page.
EPUB is the international standard for e-books. It is a free and open 
e-book standard developed and maintained by the International Digital 
Publish­ing Forum (IDPF; <http://www.idpf.org>). EPUB provides a stan­
dard for encoding e-books, but it is up to publishers and reading system 
developers to make use of it. The proprietary Kindle formats (mobi and 
KF8) from Amazon are the other major e-book formats (<http://wiki.
mobileread.com/wiki/KF8>, 
<http://www.devblog.avdi.org/2014/04 
/02/why-does-amazon-hate-ebook-authors/>). Single-use e-book apps 
also provide a range of individual options.
In the early days of e-books many were provided without indexes, or 
with unlinked indexes, i.e. static lists of terms that did not link to con-
tent (Bosschieter 2010). Improvements in technology, including the 
output of linked indexes from InDesign documents to EPUB documents 
(Concepcion 2013) and the development of a standard for EPUB indexes 
(<http://www.idpf.org/epub/idx/>) should lead to an improvement in 
the number and quality of e-book indexes. 

Indexing and information design / 489 
Hybrid indexes – custom books, extracts, and mashups
Some publishers create custom books, whereby content from a number of 
smaller books is combined into one larger work; alternatively, individual 
chapters can be extracted from a large work and sold separately. These can 
both present a problem for indexing.
Indexes for a number of standalone books can be combined to give one 
entry point to all of the works. For example, Kevin Broccoli has created 
a mashup index to five books by Seth Godin (<http://www.indexmasher.
com/online/Linchpin-AllMarketers-PurpleCow-Tribes-Dip.html>) and 
the American Society for Indexing has created a mashup index to some 
of its most popular books about indexing (<http://www.asindexing.org/
publications/asi-books>). 
Digital indexes – collections and websites
Most collection indexes are created, stored, and accessed in digital format. 
Searches of these indexes often include both free-text, full-text content 
(that is, all of the textual content of the collection) along with indexing 
terms that have been added. Non-textual collections such as images have 
also been effectively indexed (for example, Picture Australia, <http://
www.trove.nla.gov.au/general/australian-pictures-in-trove>).
Indexing of websites has used elements of both closed- and open-system 
indexing. Some A to Z book-style indexes have been created to websites. 
These have the appearance and structure of book indexes and need reg-
ular updating. Examples can be seen on the websites of various societies 
of indexers (<http://www.anzsi.org>, <http://www.indexers.ca/site-in-
dex/> (bilingual), <http://www.indexers.org.uk/index.php?id=217>, and 
<http://www.asindexing.org/a-z-index/>). Several software packages 
have been developed for the creation of A to Z website indexes (Browne 
and Jermey 2004).
Websites and repositories have also employed subject metadata, akin 
to the keywords used in other collection indexing. This can be easier to 
maintain than a standalone index, and the indexing can be harvested and 
shared (OCLC Digital Collection Services 2013). Website metadata may 
use standards such as Dublin Core (<http://www.dublincore.org/>), 
which provide a consistent approach for creating bibliographical informa-
tion (for example, author, title, publisher). 
Access to information on websites also depends on their information 
architecture, or browsing structure (Rosenfeld, Morville, and Arango 
2015). This structure may be based on a taxonomy, and developed and 
refined using systematic user testing (see e.g. <http://www.w3.org/wiki/
Information_Architecture_-_planning_out_a_web_site>, <http://www.
iainstitute.org/en/learn/resources/what_is_ia.php> and <http://www.
steptwo.com.au/category/papers/usability-information-architecture>). 

490 / Glenda Browne
XML, structured content, and semantic coding
EPUB 3 and other e-books are encoded using XHTML5, the XML flavour 
of HTML5. XML is important because it enables semantic coding, that is, 
coding of meaning separate from coding for display. For example, an index 
subheading can be coded as a subheading, rather than as text that has to 
be indented five spaces. The display preferences are provided separately 
using a cascading style sheet (CSS; <http://www.universalusability.com/
access_by_design/document_structure/separate.html>). 
Semantic coding provides flexibility, as the same content can be dis-
played in different ways, and the preferred display can be easily changed 
(by publishers, users, and reading device developers) without editing the 
core content file. Responsive design refers to the creation of style sheets for 
the same content file to be accessed on different devices including smart 
phones and tablets held both horizontally and vertically (Daly 2012).
Semantic coding is important for accessibility, as it means that users 
with vision impairment are able to derive the meaning of content with-
out being able to see the display. If you say ‘the example is highlighted in 
green’, that means nothing to a blind user, but if you code that content as 
‘example’ it is then meaningful. Semantic coding can also help users with 
other print disabilities, including physical dexterity problems (as it can 
reduce the number of keystrokes used to move around a document), and 
learning disabilities (as it provides options for refining content, and makes 
the type of content explicit). 
Structured content refers to content that has been broken down into 
its distinct parts and classified using metadata; it can be used to create 
different output formats from the same core document. This is known as 
single sourcing or parallel publishing. Writing and indexing are usually 
optimized for the major format and reused in the other formats.
Book metadata
Metadata about books is another form of collection indexing. It forms the 
basis of library catalogues, and is also important for the discoverability 
of e-books. EPUBs must include title, identifier (for example, ISBN), and 
language along with the date modified using the Dublin Core standard. 
Copyright information is also important, as is subject metadata, which is 
encoded with BIC, BISAC, and Thema (Panthema) subject codes (book 
trade subject headings) using ONIX for Books, an XML-based standard for 
book metadata (<http://www.editeur.org/83/Overview>).
Complementary navigation options
Search systems, tables of contents, and indexes are complementary infor-
mation navigation systems, each providing features not available from the 
others. The key differences are the level of detail and the means of access 
(Browne and Coe 2012).

Indexing and information design / 491 
Tables of contents provide a broad overview of the content of a work, 
while search systems provide access via every word in the text. Indexes, 
in general, provide an intermediary level, with access to selected, specific 
topics. They are, however, very flexible and can cater to macro and micro 
levels (Zimmerman 1997), with broad terms at the chapter level, interme-
diate terms for major chunks of information, and narrow terms for specific 
topics. 
Indexes provide a structure that helps users to better understand the 
scope of the material – indexes are explorable documents. Important 
functions of indexes include: grouping similar information; distinguish-
ing between different concepts; and leading users from the entry points 
they have selected to others with relevant content (Browne, Wright, and 
Combs 2013). 
Indexing processes and term selection
There is only space in this chapter to briefly mention some common 
approaches to indexing. For more on book indexing see Fetters (2013) and 
Booth (2001), and for book and database indexing see Browne and Jermey 
(2007). 
Indexing processes – books
In general, professional book indexers work by reading (or skimming) the 
book, selecting index terms including subheadings and cross-references, 
entering those terms into dedicated indexing software (such as SKY Index, 
CINDEX, or Macrex), and editing the index for consistency and usefulness. 
An alternative approach, and one that may become more common, is to 
embed the index entries in the text (for example in InDesign or in an XML 
editor). The embedded entries can be reused if the text is revised, and live 
links can be created for e-book indexes. 
Indexing processes – collections
The process for indexing collections is different to that for indexing books 
(Diakoff 2004). There will usually be more documentation, and more 
division of labour. Steps include:
•	 Deciding on the scope, policies, and procedures;
•	 Selecting items for inclusion according to defined criteria;
•	 Entering bibliographic entries into a template (name, title of journal, 
citation)
•	 Entering subject keywords (usually taken from a controlled 
vocabulary) into a template. Indexers usually have a role in the 
creation and updating of the controlled vocabulary.
The general principles of collection indexing have spread beyond 
biblio­graphic databases and are now also applied to the creation of web-

492 / Glenda Browne
site metadata (<http://www.searchenginewatch.com/article/2300239/
Metadata-You-Best-Practices-Benefits-Implementation-Made-Easy>).
Index term choices – books
Pettersson (2012, 159) discusses ways in which design shapes information, 
including grouping and selecting or omitting. Grouping/chunking is 
important in indexes, and all content on the same topic should be accessi-
ble through the same term. 
If the usage in the book is consistent, or if a word in the book has no 
synonyms, this is easy to do. If the same topic is discussed using different 
words, the indexer groups all entries and makes see references from the 
unused terms. 
In addition to selecting relevant content, an index also omits passing 
mentions (places where a word is mentioned, but the topic is not dis-
cussed). Inclusion decisions depend on the detail expected in the index, 
and assumptions about user requirements. 
For a discussion of see references go to the Cross-references and double 
entry section below.
Index term choices – collections
Collection indexers are usually obliged to choose terms from a controlled 
vocabulary. This ensures consistency between indexers and over time, 
but also means that indexers may not be able to select the term that they 
think best suits the content. For example, an article on ‘acid snow’ has to 
be indexed as ‘acid rain’, and one on ‘body language’ has to be indexed as 
‘kinesics’ if those are the terms in the controlled vocabulary. These terms 
might not be familiar to all users, so cross-references should be included. 
With web-based indexes it is possible to use ‘did you mean’ questions to 
lead people from incorrect spellings to the appropriate form, for example, 
‘You searched for accomodation . . . Did you mean accommodation?’ A bib-
liographic database such as Medline can lead users from natural language 
terms to controlled vocabulary terms.
It depends
Indexers have two favourite sayings: ‘There are no rules, only contexts’ 
and ‘It depends’. It is interesting that the latter is the title of a book on 
information design by Pettersson (2012) who writes: ‘Too many factors 
influence design. That is why it is considered an art as well as a science’ and 
further ‘What should you do? It depends . . . on the learner, the content, 
the task, the environment, other elements in the visual, and your level of 
skill.’ The same is true about indexing. 

Indexing and information design / 493 
Structure of indexes 
Indexes are relatively flat structures with terms in a meaningful sequence 
– usually organized alphabetically. Main headings may have subheadings, 
and occasionally sub-subheadings, and so on. Connections are made 
between related terms using see and see also cross-references, and users 
are directed to required content using locators (page numbers and their 
equivalents). Index entries are provided as ordered lists, usually in col-
umns. The structure and format of indexes varies between countries, for 
example, Germany (Fassbender 2006), Japan (Matsuura 2013), and China 
(Wang and Hou 2009).
Main headings and subheadings – book indexes
Book indexes are made up of main headings and sometimes subheadings. 
Subheadings are used to show aspects of the main heading or to break up 
long strings of page numbers (Browne 2010a). There is no limit to the 
number of levels of subheading, but indexes with more than two levels are 
harder to use. 
Subheadings should not usually be used for narrower (child) terms, 
which should be indexed in their own right. Indexing all topics specifically 
under their own names (rather than classified under a broader topic), with 
references from broader (parent) terms, ensures that they can be readily 
found (Berson 2007; Browne 2010b). 
Classified entries in indexes make information inaccessible when people 
don’t have the same mental model of the field as the indexer. Green (1989) 
reported on an experiment in which six Law School lecturers were given 
six topics that were found at different levels of subdivision in an index. 
None were able to find all of them. So pity the poor beginner who doesn’t 
know that the topic ‘defective premises’ is to be found at the four-level 
entry: ‘Torts: negligence: duty of care: defective premises’.
The novelist Anne Tyler understands the challenges of finding the right 
degree of specificity, and the impossibility of pleasing all users. Her char-
acter Rose likes things organized in alphabetical order.
In the kitchen, Rose stood on a stepstool in front of a towering glass-fronted 
cupboard, accepting the groceries that Charles and Porter handed up to her. 
  ‘Now I need the n’s – anything starting with n,’ she was saying. 
  ‘How about these noodles?’ Porter asked. ‘N for noodles? P for pasta?’
  ‘It’s E for elbow macaroni. You might have passed those up earlier, Porter.’ 
(Tyler 1992, 90)
Main headings and subheadings – collection indexes
Collection indexes also use main headings and subheadings, either pre-­
coordinated or post-coordinated. With pre-coordination, groups of terms 
are joined by the indexer, and are searched as an entity, for example, 

494 / Glenda Browne
‘breast neoplasms–therapy–Australia’. With post-coordination, stand­
alone keywords are created for each document and are combined by the 
user at the time of searching. Pre-coordination provides greater specificity 
and is better for browsing, but post-coordination is simpler.
Excessively hierarchical organization of information can be a problem 
with website organization as with book indexing. Alternative approaches to 
the use of hierarchies are to initially present all dimensions as options with 
equal weight (for example, allowing selection by season or region, and then 
allowing users to further explore according to their individual interests) or 
to rely on search backed up by an index that reflects all of the potential 
search terms (for example, to allow searching for ‘fall’ or ‘autumn’) (<http://
www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg_id=0002H9>).
Cross-references and double entry
The cross-reference structure of an index is one way in which indexers 
share their mental model of the subject matter, and guide users through 
the index. 
‘See’ references lead users from terms that are not used to the equivalent 
terms that are used, for example, ‘IDPF see International Digital Publishing 
Forum’; while ‘see also’ references lead to related (but not synonymous) 
terms, for example, ‘chickens 15, 34 see also eggs’. The unused terms for 
‘see’ references include alternative terms used in the book, and alternative 
terms that the indexer thinks users may look for.
At the editing stage a ‘see’ reference is usually converted to a double 
entry if this will take no more space in the index. For example, instead of 
having ‘emissions-intensive and trade-exposed industries see EITE man-
ufacturing businesses’, if there were only a few page numbers you would 
repeat the same page numbers at each entry.
With collection indexes that use a controlled vocabulary, the cross-ref-
erence structure is set, and guides indexers as well as users to the terms 
they should use. 
Locators/page numbers
Locators are the links from index entries to content. They are often page, 
paragraph, or section numbers, but can be anything that clearly indi-
cates the place the desired content is to be found. One index may contain 
different types of locators. For example, a  legal loose-leaf service may 
include locators for legislation (for example, ‘GMTA Sch 2 A cl 4’ and ‘RCA 
Sch 2 Pt 7 cl 50’) and commentary (for example, ‘[10.1000 to 10.1860]’ 
and ‘[30.20260]’). These are then provided in a set order throughout the  
index.
In an electronic index (for example, e-book or website) the ‘locator’ may 
simply be a link from the entry text. Page numbers may be included in 
e-books to match the pagination of print copies and for citation purposes, 
but they do not control the user’s viewing experience. If they are used they 

Indexing and information design / 495 
may be displayed with the text, or they may be coded and hidden from 
view. The links in the examples below would not necessarily be under-
lined in a real e-book.
An index entry in an e-book may appear as:
circuses	
	
[with a link from the word ‘circuses’]
or 
circuses 26	 	
[with a link from the number ‘26’]
or 
circuses *	
	
[with a link from the ‘*’, if no page numbers are used]
If there is more than one locator (page number equivalent) for ‘cir-
cuses’, the first option is not available. It is possible to provide a number 
of links after the word ‘circuses’, but a more useful (although longer, and 
more time-consuming) option is to provide an individual subheading for 
each locator. Both of these options are shown below:
circuses 26, 53	
[with links from the numbers ‘26’ and ‘53’]
or 
circuses *, *	
[with links from the two ‘*’s]
or 
circuses
 
animals in		
[with a link from the words ‘animals in’]
 
travelling with	
[with a link from the words ‘travelling with’]
In collection indexes, locators may either lead users to items of interest 
or their surrogates (for example, to full-text journal articles, or to abstracts 
with citation details) or indicate where the content can be physically found 
(for example, in a filing cabinet or on a bookshelf). 
Organization / filing order
Indexes are usually presented in alphabetical order, but may use any log-
ical order, for example, page number order (that is, the order the topics 
are mentioned in the book), or chronological order. There are two major 
rules for alphabetizing entries – letter-by-letter (where only letters are 
taken into account in filing) and word-by-word (where a space files before 
any letters). In addition, there are special rules that may be applied with 
respect to initial articles, contractions, names of people and places, and 
numbers. Generic references can be used to help readers find all index 
entries no matter which rule has been followed, for example, ‘Mc . . . see 
also Mac . . .’ and ‘Mac . . . see also Mc . . .’
Tufte (1990, 103) has written about a timetable for the railways of China 
that combined a route map and index, praising the ‘directness and clarity 
of organization’ that maintained the full spatial relationships of towns, 
which he considered was usually reduced to a ‘witless alphabetical order-
ing’ in a conventional typographical index. This criticism fails to allow for 

496 / Glenda Browne
alternative user approaches, for while the map might work well for people 
who know where a town is located, it doesn’t work at all well for visitors 
who only know what the town is called. It misses the point that indexing 
‘cuts across the grain’ and often uses a different means of organization to 
that of the core content. 
Visual design 
The visual design of book indexes is usually the responsibility of book 
designers and editors, with indexers having little input. 
While entries for collection indexes may be displayed, there is no 
standard format or approach, and many are only available for searching 
not browsing. The search interface used depends on both the creator of 
the index and its distributor. Because of this variation, I have not discussed 
collection indexes in this section.
For a discussion of data visualization see the Future of index design sec-
tion below. 
Aesthetic and minimalist design
Good indexes should not contain information which is irrelevant or rarely 
needed, as every piece of information competes for the user’s attention 
with other units of information and diminishes their relative visibility.
There is no consensus, but those who follow a minimalist approach 
avoid excess punctuation (for example, commas between the entry and 
the first page number), omit redundant words (for example, function 
words such as ‘of’ and ‘and’ in subheadings) and use initial lower case let-
ters throughout, except for proper names and acronyms. 
Examples of a more-cluttered and a less-cluttered display are shown 
below. 
Note that the words ‘in’ and ‘of’ have been ignored in filing.
Visual hierarchies
Visual hierarchy approaches (Jones 2011) that are used in indexes include 
alignment, proximity, and the use of emphasis.
More cluttered: 
Home offices, storage in, 199, 203
Jones, Jennifer, 209
Kitchens, storage in, 15, 203–205
Storage
  in bathrooms, 15 
  in bedrooms, 14, 23–25 
  of disks and tapes, 99–101, 103, 105  
  in home offices, 199, 203 
  in kitchens, 15, 203–205 
  of wine, 210
Less cluttered:
home offices  199, 203
Jones, Jennifer  209
kitchens  15, 203–5
storage
  bathrooms  15 
  bedrooms  14, 23–5 
  disks and tapes  99–101, 103, 105 
  home offices  199, 203 
  kitchens  15, 203–5 
  wine  210

Indexing and information design / 497 
White space is used to align indented subheadings and turnover lines 
(used where an entry is too long to fit within the column). If the indents 
are too small it is difficult to distinguish subheadings from main headings; 
if they are too large it is harder to fit subheadings on one line and the index 
is more spread out and difficult to navigate. Occasionally a typesetter fails 
to use indents at all and the index becomes almost unusable. When an 
index has many levels of subheading the turnover lines can be difficult to 
interpret. 
White space may also be used between alpha groups (for example, 
between the As and the Bs) and between entry blocks (main headings 
with all their associated subheadings) to clearly identify the groupings.
Main headings may be emphasized by presenting them in bold font. 
When a number of bold headings are displayed together in an index it is 
easy for users to miss some entries. This can be avoided by ensuring that 
every main heading has at least one subheading. 
geographic names  64–65
  fictitious places in library catalogues  151
  filing ‘The’ in  107
  place subheadings  90
Germany
  Deutsches Netzwerk der Indexer  4
  German language indexes  46
Attempts to emphasize main headings by making them larger than sub-
headings are visually distracting. 
The EPUB Indexes specification enables the progressive display of 
information. Users can browse through lists of main headings, without 
being distracted by subheadings; when they find a main heading of inter-
est they can expand it to see its subheadings (Browne and Wright, with 
Combs 2013). 
Differentiation
Index entries usually use plain text, with italics for entries that are italicized 
in the text. Indexes to complex materials may use different typography in 
main headings to indicate the type of entry, for example, small capitals for 
author names and bold for article titles. This distinguishes between the 
different types of entries, but can be confusing to user. 
Bold, italic, or coloured text may be used on locators to indicate refer-
ences to content in tables, figures, or boxes, or to indicate major discus-
sions on a topic. Alternatively, ‘decorators’ may be used, for example, ‘t’ 
to indicate a table. 
The EPUB3 Indexes Specification allows for index filtering, whereby 
the user can restrict the index view, for example, to show only figures, or 
only tables (Browne and Wright, with Combs 2013).

498 / Glenda Browne
Index typeface and format
For print indexes, one of the aims of indexers and designers has been to 
keep the size of indexes down or to fit indexes to a set number of pages; this 
has usually been done by adjusting the number and length of entries, the 
type size, and the number of columns. 
Often a type size one or two points smaller than the main text will be 
used; occasionally the type size is reduced even more to fit an index into 
a too-small space. The advent of e-books makes it easier for users to have 
the type size that works best for them. 
Indexes usually use two or three columns, but may use any number. If 
the columns are too narrow, more lines will run over to the next line. This 
makes the index harder to use.
Minimizing cognitive load
Indexes should facilitate attention, facilitate perception, facilitate process-
ing, and facilitate memory (Pettersson 2012, 140). 
Publishers and indexers often underestimate the complexity of indexes, 
or overestimate the skills of users. Users are at the forefront of decisions 
that indexers make. There is, however, little empirical research about the 
way people use indexes, and book indexers rarely have contact with the 
potential users of their indexes. Indexing research has been discussed by 
Coe (2014). 
There are trade-offs in most decisions. Shorter entries are quicker to 
read, and less likely to require an extra line, but may be less clear. A filing 
order that is familiar to users (for example, through use in telephone direc-
tories) may not be the best for the content being presented. Variation in 
fonts can be useful to indicate different types of topic or content, but can 
also add clutter and increase visual distraction. 
Indexers make up for the lack of knowledge about their users by index-
ing for a broad range of potential readers at different levels of specificity, 
using both commonly used and technical terms, while considering a range 
of information needs.
Information specialists as well as users may find indexes and controlled 
vocabularies such as Library of Congress Subject Headings difficult to 
use (Karisson et al. 2007). It is much more difficult to address usability 
issues in collection indexes where there are many users and huge existing 
collections. 
Accuracy, precision, and consistency
Accuracy is fundamental to good indexing – all page numbers must be cor-
rect, and entries must be spelt correctly and must clearly describe the con-
tent they are leading to. For collection indexing, terms should be selected 
and structured according to the rules developed for that index. 

Indexing and information design / 499 
Terms should be precise, with a meaningful word as the first word in the 
main heading (for example, ‘biology’ rather than ‘introduction’) and with 
qualifiers when required, for example, ‘Mercury (planet)’ and ‘bitcoin 
(digital currency)’.
Consistency within and between indexes minimizes cognitive load. 
Indexers aim for consistency with respect to depth of indexing and the 
wording of entries. Because book indexes are closed-system indexes there 
is usually no guarantee of consistency between publications. Exceptions 
to this include series where the same style and approach is followed across 
all books, indexes to different versions and different books by the same 
indexer, and indexes that copy terms or references from existing indexes. 
Fretz (2014) has discussed the importance of indexes as an integral part of 
content, and a possible method for moving towards consistent publish-
er-wide indexing. 
The use of controlled vocabularies in collection indexing ensures some 
consistency of terminology, although there is still wide inconsistency 
between indexers in approach and interpretation.
Accessibility 
Accessible e-books are those that can be used effectively by people with 
print disabilities. This includes people with permanent or temporary vis­
ual, cognitive, and physical impairment.
Selection of e-books that use the EPUB3 standard will enhance ac­
cessibility for people with print disabilities (Enis 2013; Garrish 2012). 
Features identified by the Association of American Publishers (2013) as 
being important for accessibility include: navigation, optional mapping 
to print pages (for example, to enable textual references to page numbers 
in indexes), and use of accessibility metadata to let users know in advance 
what accessibility features are available.
Personalization and localization 
If indexes are semantically coded (for example, tagged using XHTML) they 
can provide features such as personalization (adaptation by users) and 
localization (variants for specific locations or user groups). For example, 
an Australian pharmacology textbook index could say ‘paracetamol’, while 
an American one could say ‘acetaminophen’. 
EPUB Working Groups have addressed the coding requirements of 
books for different purposes, including educational publications (<http://
www.idpf.org/epub/profiles/edu>), and comics and scripts that are read 
from right to left (Advanced Hybrid Layouts, <http://www.idpf.org/char-
ters/2012/layout/ahl.html>). The indexing needs for particular groups of 
users may also be different – in a discussion about metadata for comics, 
people mentioned that Character and Universe were more important 
than Title for many readers (<http://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/
epub-working-group/FQ4ckUM8Nns/PraDUfG91OgJ>).

500 / Glenda Browne
Offloading tasks 
There are not many opportunities to offload tasks in book indexing, as 
indexes are concise documents containing just the information that users 
need for decision-making. There are, however, some helpful approaches 
when indexing for children, and semantic tagging of indexes enables some 
simplification. 
Research into the use of indexes by children resulted in a number of rec-
ommendations including displaying both upper and lower case letters at 
the top of each letter group in the index (for example, writing ‘Aa’ and ‘Bb’ 
at the top of the entries starting with ‘a’ and ‘b’ respectively), and display-
ing the whole alphabet at the bottom of each page, to help children find the 
right place in the index (Bakewell and Williams 2000). The authors also 
recommended using ‘5 to 9’ rather than ‘5–9’, as some children read the en 
dash as a minus sign.
Electronic indexes (e-book and website) allow for direct links from 
cross-references; this saves the time of the user, and means they don’t have 
to understand the reference and manually follow the link. 
The EPUB Indexes specification allows for the highlighting of target 
ranges within the text, meaning that a user can quickly see where the rel-
evant discussion starts and ends. With a print book if the range is ‘66–68’, 
the user receives no prompt when they reach the end of the relevant 
content. 
The EPUB Indexes specification enables the coding of generic cross-ref-
erences using term categories. This means the index entry can be a brief 
reference (for example, ‘battles see names of specific battles’) and an 
intermediate step can show the user a list of all the battles that have been 
included in the index (Browne and Wright, with Combs 2013). Without 
this feature, either the index has to provide a long list of battles, or the user 
has to guess which battles have been included. 
Search interfaces for collection index databases can be designed to 
assist users in finding the best terms to search with by incorporating rela-
tionships from the thesaurus. Features such as ‘Search for similar’ also 
help users expand their searches. 
Future of index design
Fundamental features of index design have changed little over the last cen-
tury or two. The EPUB Indexes specification enables the coding of indexes 
that look and work like traditional book indexes, while also providing for 
features not possible with print; it will be interesting to see how much the 
fundamental features change in the next few decades.
Ebook indexes of the future will allow for more social interaction includ-
ing commenting, reviewing, sharing, and saving (Kroski 2007). Some 
users add entries to indexes of books that they use; it may be possible to 

Indexing and information design / 501 
gather these annotations to progressively enhance indexes and to provide 
feedback to indexers. 
Other ways of navigating indexes may also be developed. These take 
varied approaches, as shown by the following examples:
•	 Chi et al. (2004) have developed an index that can ‘reorganize 
conceptually’, showing a subset of its content in response to an initial 
search. 
•	 Some e-book apps have experimented with different design and access 
methods. The index to the iPhone app edition of The Fry chronicles: 
an autobiography by Stephen Fry provides a circular wheel of ‘spines’ 
each representing a section of text, with content tagged according 
to four themes: People, Subjects, Emotions, and ‘Fryisms’ (<http://
www.­stefanieposavec.co.uk/myfry>). The book is written in a way 
that allows easy access from many entry points, so the approach might 
not be easily transferable to other books.
•	 The ‘X-ray’ feature in newer Amazon e-readers is innovative in its 
display and automated generation of index content, but does not yet 
provide consistent access to information (Wright 2012). 
•	 Boyd and Wade (2012) have written on the possibilities for encoding 
indexes as data structures and using computer graphics techniques to 
create EPUB3-compatible index visualizations which can then ‘reveal 
or emphasize relationships between topics that are obscured in the 
traditional presentation of indexes’. 
•	 Thinkmap, Inc. has explored different ways of presenting relationships 
between words and concepts, as seen in their Visual thesaurus (­http://
www.­visualthesaurus.com>). Hovering over a node lets you see 
a definition, and clicking on a node makes it the centre for further 
exploration. 
Conclusion
The IDPF EPUB Indexes Working Group and software developers have 
improved tools for creating and using e-book indexes. When designing 
indexes, we will continue to apply core principles, enhance user person-
alization, enhance accessibility, and facilitate social sharing. Publishers 
will explore new approaches, indexers will adapt to new technologies and 
requirements, and users will learn different ways to navigate content. This 
is a very exciting time for index design.
References
Association of American Publishers. 2013. ‘EPUB 3 
implementation project white paper.’ <https://
nfb.org/images/nfb/documents/html/
aapepub3implementation.xhtml>.
Bakewell, K. G. B., and Paula L. Williams. 2000. 
Indexing children’s books. Occasional Papers 
on Indexing. Sheffield: The Society of  
Indexers.

502 / Glenda Browne
502 / Glenda Browne
Berson, Joel. 2007. ‘The “sin of classification” and an 
example thereof.’ The Indexer 25 (3): 187–190.
Booth, Pat. 2001. Indexing: the manual of good 
practice. Munich: K. G. Saur.
Bosschieter, Pierke. 2010. ‘The Kindle (TM) and the 
indexer.’ The Indexer 28 (3): 116–118.
Boyd, Ceilyn, and Mitch Wade. 2012. ‘Visualizing 
back-of-book indexes.’ The Indexer 30 (1): 25–37.
Browne, Glenda. 2010a. ‘Headings in indexes: 
revisiting the relationship between mains and 
subs.’ The Indexer 28 (3): 104–107.
Browne, Glenda. 2010b. ‘Classification versus specific 
entry in book indexes.’ The Indexer 28 (1): 6–11.
Browne, Glenda, and Mary Coe. 2012. ‘Ebook 
navigation: browse, search and index.’ Australian 
Library Journal 61 (4): 288–297.
Browne, Glenda, and Jonathan Jermey. 2004. Website 
indexing: enhancing access to information within 
websites. 2nd edn. Adelaide: Auslib Press. <http://
www.webindexing.com.au/website-indexing-
2nd-edition-self-published-2004/>.
Browne, Glenda, and Jonathan Jermey. 2007. The 
indexing companion. Melbourne: Cambridge 
University Press.
Browne, Glenda, Jan Wright, with Michele Combs. 
2013. ‘EPUB3 indexes and the future of indexing.’ 
The Indexer 31 (3): 110–121.
Chi, Ed H., Lichan Hong, Julie Heiser, and Stuart K. 
Card. 2004. ‘eBooks with indexes that reorganize 
conceptually.’ In Proceedings of the human factors 
in computing systems conference (CHI 2004) 
conference companion, 1223–1226. New York: ACM 
Press.
Coe, Mary. 2014. ‘Where is the evidence? A review 
of the literature on the usability of book indexes.’ 
The Indexer 32 (4): 161–168.
Concepcion, Anne-Marie. 2013. ‘New EPUB features 
in InDesign CC include linked indexes and object 
style support.’ InDesign Secrets. <http://www.
indesignsecrets.com/epub-features-indesign-
cc-include-linked-indexes-object-style-support.
php>.
Daly, Liza. 2012. ‘Create rich-layout publications in 
EPUB 3 with HTML5, CSS3, and MathML.’ <http://
www.ibm.com/developerworks/web/library/x-
richlayoutepub/index.html>.
Diakoff, Harry. 2004. ‘Database indexing: yesterday 
and today.’ The Indexer 24 (2): 85–96.
Enis, Matt. 2013. ‘Accessibility upgrade: EPUB, 
libraries, and ebook accessibility.’ Library Journal 
138 (7): 31–33. <http://www.lj.libraryjournal.
com/2013/04/technology/ebook-accessbility/>.
Fassbender, Jochen. 2006. ‘German indexing: some 
observations on typographical practice.’ The 
Indexer 25 (2): 79–82.
Fetters, Linda K. 2013. Handbook of indexing 
techniques: a guide for beginning indexers. 5th edn. 
Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Fretz, Mark. 2014. ‘Indexing across titles.’ <http://
www.scribenet.com/blog/2014/02/27/
indexing-across-titles/39>.
Garrish, Matt. 2012. Accessible EPUB 3: Best practices 
for creating universally usable content. Sebastopol, 
CA: O’Reilly/Tools of Change.
Green, Andrew. 1989. ‘Some issues in legal indexing.’ 
Law Librarian 20 (1): 7–14.
Jones, Brandon. 2011. ‘Understanding visual hierarchy 
in web design.’ <http://www.webdesign.tutsplus.
com/articles/understanding-visual-hierarchy-in-
web-design--webdesign-84>.
Karisson, Deborah, Royce Kitts, Marlene Lerner, 
and Cadie Maas. 2007. ‘Library of Congress 
subject headings.’ <http://www.slideshare.net/
roycekitts/library-of-congress-subject-headings>.
Klement, Susan. 2002. ‘Open-system versus closed-
system indexing: a vital distinction.’ The Indexer 
23 (1): 23–31.
Kroski, Ellyssa. 2007. ‘Information design for the 
new web.’ <http://www.masternewmedia.
org/information_design/information-design-
principles/web-20-design-simple-social-design-
components-20071017.htm>.
Matsuura, Takashi. 2013. ‘Japan’s indexing practice’, 
paper presented at 2013 ANZSI Conference: 
Intrepid indexing: indexing without boundaries, 
Wellington, New Zealand, 13–15 March. 
<http://www.anzsi.org/UserFiles/file/2013%20
Conference%20-%20Matsuura.pdf>.
OCLC Digital Collection Services. 2013. Best 
practices for CONTENTdm and other OAI-PMH 
compliant repositories: creating sharable metadata: 
version 3.1. <http://www.oclc.org/content/
dam/support/wcdigitalcollectiongateway/
MetadataBestPractices.pdf>.
Pettersson, Rune. 2012. It depends: principles and 
guidelines. 4th edn. Tullinge: Institute for 
Infology.
Rosenfeld, Louis, Peter Morville, and Jorge Arango. 
2015. Information architecture for the world wide 
web: designing for the web and beyond. 4th edn. 
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
Tufte, Edward R. 1990. Envisioning information. 
Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Tyler, Anne. 1992. The accidental tourist. London: 
Vintage Random House.
Wang, Yage, and Hanqing Hou. 2009. ‘Wan Guoding 
(1897–1963), indexing pioneer.’ The Indexer 27 (3): 
102–106.
Wright, Jan. 2012. ‘The devil is in the details: 
indexes versus Amazon’s X-Ray.’ The Indexer 
30 (1): 11–16.
Zimmerman, Beverly B. 1997. ‘Applying Tufte’s 
principles of information design to creating 
effective web sites.’ SIGDOC ’97: proceedings of the 
15th annual international conference on computer 
documentation, 309–317. New York: ACM.

503
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 503–507
When to use numeric tables and why
A tutorial
Sally Bigwood and Melissa Spore
There is a popular belief that the numeric table is now outdated and has been 
superseded by charts and data visualizations. The facts do not bear this out: 
a well-­designed numeric table, given the right circumstances, can be the most 
effective and powerful way of showing the data. To achieve this, the right type 
of table must be chosen and the table should be designed simply and should 
emphasize the numbers. 
In this age of advanced information graphics and digital data visualization, 
the humble numeric table faces strong and often ill-­informed opposition. 
Many believe that tables are intrinsically less interesting than the alterna-
tives. However, those with an interest in (or a compulsion to learn about) 
a subject are interested in relevant numbers. You don’t need to trick people 
into looking at them. ‘If the statistics are boring, then you’ve got the wrong 
numbers’ (Tufte 1993, 80). A justifiable criticism though, is that tables are 
often poorly designed and difficult to read and interpret. This is true, but 
the charge equally applies to the alternatives. 
The challenge is to be brave enough to resist the lure of fancy charts,1 
and when appropriate, put your faith in a good table. By ‘good’ we mean 
a table that communicates with ease. If a table does not communicate with 
ease, then it fails in its fundamental purpose. The principles and ideas in 
this chapter are based on well-established best practice. We would first 
of all direct readers to British Standard BS 7581:1992 Guide to presentation 
of tables and graphs. The following publications are also highly relevant: 
Patricia Wright and Kathryn Fox ‘Presenting information in tables’ (1970), 
Andrew S. C. Ehrenberg A primer in data reduction (1982), Edward R. 
Tufte The visual display of quantitative information (1983), Myra Chapman 
and Cathy Wykes Plain figures (1996), Howard Wainer ‘Improving tabular 
displays’ (1997), Yateendra Joshi Communicating in style (2003), Stephen 
C. Few Show me the numbers (2004), and Jane E. Miller The Chicago guide 
to writing about numbers (2004).
To start at the beginning 
Tables are one of a number of tools to communicate numbers, each devel-
oped to meet specific needs. Obviously, choose a table when it is most 
  1	 We use the term ‘chart’ to mean bar charts, line graphs, pie charts, scatter plots, and 
histograms. 
33

504 / Sally Bigwood and Melissa Spore
efficacious to do so – which is frequently the case. Table 1 sets out which 
‘tool’ to use when. 
Instances when tables ordinarily outperform charts are:
•	 Reference material (see below under table types).
•	 When readers need to know the numbers (data labels clutter charts 
and tiny numbers dotted around a chart are difficult to read and 
compare).
•	 Where the data includes more than one unit of measure. For example, 
Table 2 contains two units of measure: thousands in population, 
and numbers in employment and with a limiting long-term illness. 
Graphical depictions of two units of measure require two ‘Y’ axis 
labels – always messy and prone to misinterpretation.
•	 Data with a wide range (small quantities evident on a table may be lost 
on a chart).
BS 7581:1992 goes even further, stating: ‘Graphs are preferable for 
showing trends or relationships that would be difficult to detect within 
a table’ (p. 4). In other words, tables are the default position. Alternatives 
work best when they will express your ideas more clearly than a table. 
Table 1  Effective use of tables and charts
Each ü indicates functionality 
Comparing 
quantities
Parts of 
a whole
Trends  
over time*
Correlation 
of two 
variables
Reference 
material
Explanation/comment
Bar
ü
ü
ü
Line
üü
Pie
ü
Communicates most 
effectively if kept to 
two or three slices
Histogram
ü
Show the distribution 
of data in a series of 
progressive ranges
Scatter plot
üü
Indicates if there is a 
relationship between 
two variables
Table
üü
üü
üü
* or over other continuums, for instance, accidents per miles driven.
Design is crucial
Poor design is off-­putting and can confuse and mislead readers. The essen-
tials for designing a readable table are, first, choose the correct type of 
table and, second, use a layout that emphasizes the numbers. These are 
explained below.

When to use numeric tables and why / 505 
Table types 
There are two types of numeric tables: demonstration tables and reference 
tables. Demonstration tables are short and designed to make a particular, 
succinct point. 
Reference tables, on the other hand, are used to organize and store 
raw data. Examples include government statistical tables, bus timetables, 
football result tables, and sales or performance statistics. One function of 
reference tables is to provide a source of data for demonstration tables. 
Parenthetically, the best charts (those that communicate with ease) are 
like demonstration tables: they tell an explicit story by selecting a few rel-
evant numbers.
A demonstration table
The demonstration table below is succinct and purposeful. The data is 
ordered by population size for convenient comparison. This allows pat-
terns to be identified: in this case, the greater the population, the more 
people in employment and the more with a limited long-term illness. The 
exception is, of course, Barchester which has the second largest popula-
tion of the four wards, but has the highest number of people in employ-
ment and the lowest number with a limiting long-term illness. 
Table 2  Selective ward statistics, 2011 Census, Barchester County Council
Ward
Population/
thousands 
Number of people
aged 16–74 in 
employment
with a limiting 
long-term illness
Wroxeter
17
6,500
2,600
Barchester
16
8,100
1,300
Hallam
14
5,900
1,600
Silchester
13
5,500
1,600
Figures have been rounded.
Reader-­friendly tables 
The second essential in good table design is to emphasize the numbers. In 
other words, keep the layout as plain as possible. Below are design tips for 
tables. 
•	 Use space rather than lines to direct readers. Try to avoid gridlines 
that clutter and make the numbers more difficult to see. As long as you 
align to the right within a cell, numbers take on their own shape which 
readers will anticipate and recognize.
•	 Avoid bold typefaces and shading. Both distract the reader from seeing 
the numbers; compare Table 3 and Table 4 below.

506 / Sally Bigwood and Melissa Spore
•	 Single space rows and keep tables narrow. Artificially stretched tables 
make comparisons difficult. 
•	 Order columns and rows logically. Size (largest to smallest) is often 
the most sensible and convenient way of ordering demonstration 
tables. For instance, the data in Table 2 is ordered by population size, 
allowing readers to compare the four wards quickly. Reference tables 
are typically ordered alphabetically or chronologically. 
•	 Items to be compared should ideally be in columns rather than rows. 
In the examples below, see how much easier it is to compare items in 
Table 4 than in Table 3.
•	 Round data for comprehension and convenient comparison.
Use order and layout to help readers understand and compare
Tables 3 and 4 have the same data but, because of its plain design, Table 4 
looks simpler. 
Table 3  Heavily formatted table 
Branch data 2013/2014
Berlin
London
Mumbai
Tokyo
Other
Total
Turnover  
£ million
874.6
6401.6
980.0
1,646.8
913.9
10,816.9
Gross profit  
£ million
168.3
891.6
221.8
312.2
123.2
1717.1
Number of 
transactions 
(millions)
321.1
748.4
150.7
246.8
77.3
1544.3
  Table 4 contains the same data as in Table 3 but without gridlines, shad-
ing, or bold. It is single spaced, narrow. Notice that numbers have been 
rounded and items to be compared are in columns. Data is ordered by size. 
Table 4  Branch data 2013/2014
Turnover 
£ million
Gross profit 
£ million
Number of 
transactions 
(millions)
London
6,400
890
750
Tokyo
1,700
310
250
Mumbai
980
220
150
Berlin
880
170
320
Other
910
120
77
Total
11,000
1,700
1,500
Figures have been rounded so columns may not equal total.

When to use numeric tables and why / 507 
Conclusion
Less is often more, especially in communication. Although seemingly 
unfashionable, tables represent surprisingly often the most coherent way 
of displaying numeric data. Keep in mind the difference between refer-
ence and demonstration tables. For both types of tables, keep the layout 
simple and logical, while focusing on the numbers. Be brave, be modern. 
Communicate. 
References
Bigwood, Sally, and Melissa Spore. 2013. The 
designer’s guide to presenting numbers, figures, 
and charts. New York: Allworth Press.
British Standard BS 7581:1992. Guide to presentation 
of tables and graphs.
Chapman, Myra, and Cathy Wykes. 1996. Plain 
figures. 2nd edn. London: Stationery Office.
Ehrenberg, Andrew S. C. 1982. A primer in data 
reduction: an introductory statistics textbook. 
Chichester and New York: John Wiley.
Few, Stephen C. 2004. Show me the numbers: 
designing tables and graphs to enlighten. 2nd edn. 
Burlingame, CA: Analytics Press.
Joshi, Yateendra. 2003. Communicating in style. New 
Delhi: The Energy and Resources Institute.
Miller, Jane E. 2004. The Chicago guide to writing 
about numbers. Chicago and London: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983: The visual display of 
quantitative information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics 
Press.
Wainer, Howard. 1997. ‘Improving tabular displays: 
with NEAP tables as examples and inspirations.’ 
Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 
22 (1): 1–30.
Wright, Patricia, and Kathryn Fox. 1970. ‘Presenting 
information in tables.’ Applied Ergonomics 1 (4): 
234–242.


509
Wayfinding perspectives 
Static and digital wayfinding systems:  
can a wayfinding symbiosis be achieved?
Colette Jeffrey
Wayfinding is an activity that has been essential for the survival of animals and 
humans throughout history. It relies on a range of strategies aided by different 
sources of information. This chapter explains how people navigate through 
different environments and explores how information, both static and digital, 
influences human wayfinding behaviour. 
Developments in digital technology have created new ways to access and 
use information and have led to new wayfinding strategies. Global navigation 
satellite systems provide positioning information in external environments and, 
when linked to an accurate map-­base and wayfinding device, a journey can be 
made very easily. Inside buildings, however, where satellite signals are unreliable 
and detailed building plans are not openly available, effective digital wayfinding 
systems are less common. Indoors, static information remains the dominant 
source of information, but is this going to change? 
The role of information designers in wayfinding has evolved as the uptake of 
digital technology has increased. Static information, whether printed, wall-­
mounted, or freestanding, still exists in most built environments, but will this 
information be replaced by digital solutions that provide personalized, journey-­
specific, inclusive information? Will digital system developers make wayfinding 
information designers redundant, or will they develop a mutually beneficial 
wayfinding symbiosis?
Humans explore unfamiliar places and have found ways to navigate 
through different environments – land, sea, sky, and more recently virtual 
worlds. Some people plan their journey in detail using information such 
as maps, journey planning websites, and spoken directions. Others rely on 
environmental features, landmarks, artworks, and their sense of direction 
to find their way. In unfamiliar environments, people are likely to pre-­
plan their journey and to use a combination of information sources in the 
environment to help them to navigate. 
Human navigation or wayfinding is a multi­disciplinary field of research. 
The use of information to guide, orientate, and inform people has been 
tested in multiple studies (Levine 1982; Butler et al. 1993; Hölscher et al. 
2007; Porathe 2008; Willis et al. 2009; Mei­linger et al. 2014a). Studies of 
brain function during navigation (Woollett and Maguire 2011) as well as 
the effect of brain injury on navigation and orien­tation have been pub-
lished (Antonakos 2004; Head and Isom 2010; Spiers and Maguire 2007), 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 509–526
34

510 / Colette Jeffrey
and digital wayfinding systems have been studied and reviewed (Fallah et 
al. 2013; Taher et al. 2009; Willis et al. 2009). 
This chapter focuses on human rather than animal navigation and 
considers three environments that humans commonly navigate through 
– natural environments, outdoor built environments, and inside build-
ings. Studies of human navigation in other environments include aircraft 
pilots experiencing spatial disorientation in the sky (Previc et al. 2004) 
and scuba divers using acoustics for underwater navigation (Hollien et 
al. 1982). Extensive research into animal wayfinding behaviour has been 
undertaken including many observation studies of rats (Benhamou & 
Poucet 1998; Frost and Mouritsen 2006; Dudchenko 2010), insects and 
bees (Von Frisch 1973; Judd et al. 1999; Collett and Collett 2000; Dyer 
et al. 2002; Cheeseman et al. 2014), and homing pigeons (Verbner et al. 
2005). Research methods used for studying animals, such as displacement 
of honey bees (Dyer et al. 2002; Cheeseman et al. 2014) have been used for 
human navigation studies (Baker 1987). 
Humans are unique in our ability to design information to aid naviga-
tion. To determine how humans use wayfinding information, both static 
and digital, it is first necessary to understand the process of wayfinding.
What is wayfinding? 
Understanding how people find their way in natural and built environ­
ments enables designers to identify appropriate ways to provide infor-
mation that is useful and in an appropriate format. Many books have 
been published on wayfinding, each with a slightly different definition of 
wayfinding, but all the authors agree that information is a key influenc-
ing factor affecting wayfinding success. In 1960, Kevin Lynch introduced 
the concept of ‘way-­finding’ in his widely cited book The image of the city 
(1960). His study of three North American cities found that people’s abil-
ity to interpret information and find their way was linked to an ability to 
create an environmental image: 
In the process of way-­finding, the strategic link is the environmental image, 
the generalized mental picture of the exterior physical world that is held by 
an individual. This image is the product both of immediate sensation and of 
the memory of past experience, and it is used to interpret information and to 
guide action. (Lynch 1960, 4)
Most wayfinding books cite Lynch’s book, and a review of his study fifty 
years after it was published found it is still ‘highly topical and relevant’, 
particularly for urban planners and people marketing a city (Hospers 2011, 
2073). 
In Wayfinding: people, signs and architecture (Arthur and Passini 1992, 
25), the authors describe wayfinding as a  three-­stage, spatial problem-­
solving process: decision-­making, decision executing, and information 
processing. In ‘Towards a taxonomy of human wayfinding tasks’ (Wiener 

Wayfinding perspectives  / 511 
et al. 2009, 6), four different processes linked to successful wayfinding are 
defined: decision-­making processes, memory processes, learning pro-
cesses, and planning processes. In Design that cares (Carpman and Grant 
1993) with its emphasis on hospitals, five simple wayfinding stages are 
described:
Wayfinding involves five deceptively simple factors: knowing where you are, 
knowing your destination, knowing and following the best route to your 
destination, recognizing your destination upon arrival and finding your way 
back out. (p. 66)
In Wayshowing > wayfinding (Mollerup 2013, 27) the author describes 
a different three-­stage process: to seek, to decide, and to move – or search, 
decision, and motion. Mollerup also introduces the concept of ‘wayshow-
ing’ as the ‘professional activity of planning and implementing orientation 
systems in buildings and outdoor areas’ (Mollerup 2013, 6).
Wayfinding and wayshowing relate to each other as do writing and reading 
. . . or cooking and eating. One activity deals with sending, the other with 
receiving. The purpose of wayshowing is to facilitate wayfinding. (Mollerup 
2005, 71)
Mollerup’s definition and distinction makes perfect sense, and the term 
wayshowing defines the activity of designing information to help the activ-
ity of wayfinding, but the term has not yet been adopted extensively either 
in the UK or globally – wayfinding is commonly used to describe both 
activities.
In Wayfinding: effective wayfinding and signing systems: guidance for 
healthcare facilities (Miller and Lewis 1999, 16), the authors studied wayfin-
ding systems in nineteen UK hospitals and eight other built environments 
including three international transport terminals, three conference and art 
centres, and two shopping centres. Their study identified three key factors 
that influence wayfinding: personal or people factors, environmental factors, 
and the understandability of information. The book was first published in 
1999 and there is no mention of digital information at any of the study sites. 
Digital technology was costly and connections were slow and unreliable. 
Twelve years later, the author published a study of wayfinding systems 
at three UK hospitals (Jeffrey 2011). The study found that sites were not 
using digital technology in any cohesive or effective way for wayfinding 
purposes. Information such as site maps and building diagrams, designed 
to be printed in colour, on standard sized paper were being used on hospi-
tal websites as static, low resolution, small-­sized images, or as poor quality 
photocopies. 
The interaction of people and information in physical and virtual envi-
ronments is dynamic, interactive, and evolving at a rapid rate. The infor-
mation design boundaries are expanding and blurring and effective infor-
mation planning and design is central to the success of digital wayfinding 

512 / Colette Jeffrey
solutions. Figure 1 shows how information content and design is central to 
both static and dynamic wayfinding systems. 
Wayfinding strategies and behaviour 
In 1999, a group of academics from around the world met to discuss human 
and non-­human wayfinding behaviour, and specifically the role of cognitive 
maps in navigation. Speakers included a number of psychologists, but also 
a biologist, a neuro-­scientist, a cognitive scientist, a computer scientist, 
and a geographer, and resulted in a collection of research papers pub-
lished as Wayfinding behaviour (Golledge 1999). The conference brought 
together two previously disconnected research areas – human and animal 
wayfinding behaviour – that until then had not shared ideas or literature so 
closely or comprehensively. They discussed whether the creation of a cog-
nitive map was central to wayfinding behaviour in rats, insects, birds, and 
humans. Kitchin (1994) found twenty-­two different phrases used in litera-
ture that relate to the concept of cognitive maps, including spatial memory, 
spatial representations, and mental maps, highlighting both the difficulty 
of defining cognitive maps and the complexity of wayfinding behaviour 
research. 
The ability to create a mental map or cognitive map of an environment 
has been identified as an influencing factor in the wayfinding process 
(Allen 1999; Kozlowski and Bryant 1977; Maguire and O’Keefe 1999). 
A study of indoor wayfinding found:
The maps that human geographers design are enduring, geocentric and all 
embracing in their scope and flexibility, [but] the internal representations that 
Static 
wayﬁnding
information
+ Fixed signs 
+ Printed maps
+ Printed leaﬂets
+ Appointment 
   letters
Digital 
wayﬁnding 
information
+ Dynamic displays 
+ Interactive kiosks
+ Digital maps
+ Smartphone apps
+ Screen-based
         information
Environmental 
wayﬁnding features
+ Buildings & entrances 
+ Roads & junctions
+ Landmarks & artworks
+ Footpaths & bridges
Static
digital
wayﬁnding
information
Static
info-based
features
Digital
info-based
features
Information
content &
design
Figure 1
Information content and 
design is central to both static 
and dynamic wayfinding 
systems.
Image: Colette Jeffrey 2016.

Wayfinding perspectives  / 513 
guide human navigation have none of these properties . . . Humans navigate 
primarily by representations that are momentary rather than enduring, ego-
centric rather than geocentric, and limited in the environmental information 
that they capture. (Wang and Spelke 2002, 376–380)
In 1960, Kevin Lynch had identified the environmental image as crucial 
in wayfinding and believed it was used to interpret information. He identi-
fied five distinct elements in people’s mental maps: 
•	 paths: the distinctiveness or pattern of different routes along which 
people move, e.g. streets, rail tracks, forest trails, and other channels 
people move along.
•	 edges: boundaries between two areas and breaks in continuity. 
•	 districts: areas with common characteristics and neighbourhoods.
•	 nodes: strategic focus points for orientation, like a town square or 
a distinctive road or corridor junction. 
•	 landmarks: a point of orientation or reference, usually an easily 
identifiable physical object that may be distant such as a spire or tower. 
More recent studies have identified the same elements in other cities 
(Nasar 1990; Šiđanin 2007; Carmona et al. 2003; Dijksterhuis 2008), and 
in The wayfinding handbook (2009), David Gibson describes the ‘hidden 
logic’ of wayfinding systems and explains four wayfinding strategy models 
that reflect Lynch’s thinking: the connector model, the district model, the 
landmark model, and the street model:
Designers use these frameworks to structure a system of signs that will help 
people navigate, depending on the strategy, from district to district, along 
streets or corridors, or between landmarks. (Gibson 2009, 44) 
A recent study (Meilinger et al. 2014b) describes the wayfinding strategy 
‘when in doubt follow your nose’ (first proposed by Dalton 2003). People 
follow a  visible path, street, or corridor and only memorize decision 
points, turns, or nodes. Otherwise they walk straight, reducing working 
memory load and the amount of information they need to remember. This 
approach is seen in vehicle satellite navigation systems (satnavs), in which 
the driver assumes they should travel straight on unless a turn is indicated 
either visually on screen, or through spoken directions. Research into 
whether the use of satnavs has affected human wayfinding ability, par-
ticularly when digital information unexpectedly becomes unavailable is 
difficult to find but Meilinger, who has studied the effects of maps on navi­
gation, states in a newspaper interview ‘if somebody doesn’t care to learn 
the environment, that’s fine but they shouldn’t complain if their mobile is 
not working and they are completely lost’ (Oliver 2012).
The need for wayfinding information strategies arises in complex built 
environments with multiple floors, entrances, and destinations that cannot 
all be listed on every static sign. Strategies aim to reduce the amount of text 
on signs, help people understand the ‘hidden logic’ of the environment, 

514 / Colette Jeffrey
and enable people to create a mental map to help them navigate. Often 
a few of these strategies will be applied in one environment. Examples 
of Gibson’s four models being applied to complex sites in the UK, and an 
example of a nodes model, are shown in Figure 2.
These strategies inevitably introduce another layer of information 
to be remembered and processed. The wayfinding problems caused by 
­information overload are especially prevalent in large hospitals. The fol-
lowing hospital journey scenario is typical: Instead of simply seeing the 
Foot Clinic sign from a  parking space outside the entrance, a  person 
will have to find a car park, find an empty parking space, find a building 
entrance, and then look for a sign saying Foot Clinic. If a Foot Clinic sign 
is not present, she shows her hospital admission letter or email print­out 
to a receptionist. It says go to the Department of Podiatry. At this stage of 
her journey she is told the clinic is on level 5, in the South Wing, and that 
the nearest site entrance is the South Entrance, but that she has entered 
through the North Entrance. Her journey will therefore be long and com-
plicated. When she eventually hobbles her way to the South Wing, she 
can’t find the lift. And the signs don’t say Foot Clinic, they say Podiatry, 
Figure 2
Wayfinding strategy models 
for complex buildings in the 
UK, with a new Nodes model.
Image : Colette Jeffrey 2016 (derived 
from Gibson 2009, 45).
Connector model
The ‘connector’ is called
the Central Route at 
QMC, Nottingham.
Landmark model
‘Landmark’ exhibits are 
used on maps and signs 
at the Natural History 
Museum, London.
North Wing
South Wing
North Corridor
South Corridor
Link Corridor
East 
Wing
Pilot 
Wing
West 
Wing
District model
The ‘districts’ are called 
Wings at Charing Cross 
Hospital, London.
Street model
The ‘streets’ are named 
Corridors at Hammersmith 
Hospital, London.
Node model
Junction numbers/letters 
at ‘nodes’ link to corridor 
names at Nottingham City 
Hospital.
W3
W2
W1
North Corridor
West Corridor
N4
S9
N3
S8
South Corridor
Central Route
Central Route
Central Route
Lifts

Wayfinding perspectives  / 515 
or Bluebell Clinic, or South Clinic 5. Looking at the signs with a confused 
expression, someone passing by reassures her it is the right place. Still 
unsure, she arrives at the clinic tired, anxious, and late. In this complex 
but very common hospital journey scenario, the benefits are clear for 
having a  personalized, journey-­specific, digital wayfinding information 
system, providing visual and audio directions straight to a handheld or 
worn device. If the indoor system is linked with an external navigation 
system people could have a seamless journey from home, along the most 
direct external and internal routes to their destination inside a building. So 
why aren’t indoor digital wayfinding system widely available? To answer 
this question, it is necessary to understand the differences in wayfinding 
through natural and built environments. 
Wayfinding in natural environments 
Wayfinding has always been an essential skill for human and animal sur-
vival in natural environments. Finding a safe place to shelter, finding good 
hunting grounds and sources of food, and safely finding the way back 
home, has historically relied on natural features with some human inter-
vention. Man-­made wayfinding solutions including arrows created from 
twigs or stones, trail marker trees (Downes 2011), stiles and gaps in walls, 
and footbridges are shown in Figure 3. Sign systems, you-­are-­here maps 
and information boards have more recently been installed in some natural 
environments to give people information about which way to go, or to 
mark a route.
These natural wayfinding solutions are simple but effective in indicat-
ing a particular route, direction, or crossing, where only a few directions 
and destinations exist. Planning and making more complex journeys 
through natural environments requires more detailed information. 
Traditionally a printed map has been used and is still used (and preferred) 
by many people, but the navigator must know where she is on the map for 
Stone arrows temporarily 
indicates which route to take.
Trail marker trees trained
to indicate a particular 
direction (Downes 2011).
Stiles and gaps in 
stonewalls indicate 
where a route continues.
Footbridges indicate 
routes across rivers and 
signs provide information.
Figure 3
Examples of man-
made wayfinding 
solutions, 
in natural 
environments.

516 / Colette Jeffrey
it to be of use for navigation. Digital technology offers alternative ways 
to access information and maps and has the distinct benefit of knowing 
a person’s location if the use of a global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) 
is possible, and then using her position to provide location-­specific digital 
information. A constellation of twenty-four satellites have provided global 
positioning information for armed forces since 1995, and for civilian and 
commercial use since 2000 when the USA government decided their 
Global Positioning System (GPS) would be made freely available. Other 
countries have satellite systems that are planned or partially operational 
including Russia, the Europe Union, Indian, Japan, and China. Mobile 
devices using interactive mapping and positioning technologies, accessed 
on-­the-­go using a smartphone, or a computer at home, show accurate 
route options, travel times, distances, and other real-­time information 
used for navigation. However, maintaining a global navigation satellite sig-
nal in mountainous, heavily wooded, or densely built up environment can 
prove very difficult, making digital devices unreliable and requiring the 
use of other navigational information such as a printed map and natural 
features to support digital navigation systems. 
Wayfinding in built environments 
Wayfinding in towns and cities can be a complex task because there are 
often many alternative routes through built up areas, with multi-­entrance 
buildings and an intricate network of roads, pathways, and green spaces. 
54% of the world’s population lives in urban areas but this is expected 
to grow to 66% by 2050 (United Nations 2014). These figures are much 
higher for England and Wales where 81.5% of the population lived in an 
urban area in 2011 (Office of National Statistics 2013). Wayfinding solutions 
for built or urban environments have evolved from hand-­painted banners, 
flags, and signs identifying shops, pubs, and other public services, to inte-
grated city wayfinding systems for both vehicles and pedestrians. Figure 4 
shows examples of man-­made wayfinding solutions consistently used in 
built environments. 
Figure 4
Examples of man-
made wayfinding 
solutions, in built 
environments.
Maidstone
Dover
A229
Felixstowe
Painted arrows on roads indicate 
the direction of traﬁic, and which 
lane to take.
Road signs indicate a 
particular direction.
Pedestrian crossings
indicate a safe place 
to cross a road.
Footbridges indicate 
where people can cross 
a road safely.

Wayfinding perspectives  / 517 
An audit of signs to guide pedestrians in London found there are many 
conflicting systems:
[There are] at least 32 separate wayfinding systems for pedestrians in the 
central Congestion Charging Zone alone. These systems come with sharp 
differences in information, design and quality. Destination names are 
inconsistent. So are indications of distance. Designs vary in colour, shape, 
typeface, materials and branding. Some aren’t maintained properly, leading 
to graffiti and vandalism. There is no common standard for the positioning 
of street signs. By contrast, our road signage for motor vehicles is consistent, 
clear and accepted right across the country – it tackled these issues decades 
ago. (Transport for London 2007, 13)
Designed by Jock Kinneir and Margaret Calvert from 1957 to 1967, 
the road sign system in the UK has been consistently installed across the 
country, with standardized signs, pictograms, and road markings. On 
motorways, Kinneir’s original static directional signs are supplemented 
with digital dot matrix signs displaying temporary messages, often giving 
real-time traffic information. Changeable digital advertising displays posi-
tioned next to city centre roads promote products and services. Satnav 
displays show digital mapping and give auditory instructions for drivers. 
Such devices have dramatically changed the wayfinding behaviour of some 
drivers (Axon et al. 2012; Dalton et al. 2013). Mapping apps, accessed using 
a smartphone, are increasingly being used for wayfinding on foot and by 
vehicle. But these apps can only guide people to building entrances, not to 
a destination inside the building. 
Bristol was the first UK city to fully embrace the concept of being 
a legible city with a consistent on-­street system. The city council worked 
with a team of designers to create innovative wayfinding information and 
products. The approach to pedestrian signage and mapping has been 
applied to many cities in the UK and globally. In a review of the Bristol 
legible city project, the influence of Kevin Lynch’s study in 1960 is directly 
acknowledged:
Successful cities will be those that connect people, movement and places 
efficiently.
They will be engaging, welcoming, accessible and easily understood (Kelly 
2001, 7).
Cities generate a fog of content overload – tourist books, timetables, maps, 
road signs, pedestrian guides and advertisements. Too much and too much 
that is inappropriate, out of date and inaccurate. (Kelly 2001, 18)
Legible London built on the knowledge gained from the Bristol project 
and the city audit identified two types of navigator – a strider and a stroller 
(Transport for London 2007, 4). A stroller seeks memorable experiences 
by drifting and wandering through a new city focusing on the environ-
ment, not on the information (Figure 5, overleaf). 

518 / Colette Jeffrey
A strider wants to get to their destination as quickly and efficiently as pos-
sible and their strategy is often to get near, then use information and the 
environmental cues to find their destination (Figure 6). 
The Legible London system provides information for both striders and 
strollers, using digital and static platforms for wayfinding and transport 
information with the aim of creating a seamless journey (Transport for 
London 2007, 4). The different static and digital information provided at 
a typical decision point are shown in Figure 7 (Transport for London 2007, 
24). Transport for London are currently trialling a touchscreen map and 
information panel at a bus stop in Piccadilly Circus to provide real-time 
travel information and access to Legible London maps, but it has taken 
eight years to develop this interactive display since the first static signs 
were installed. A key issue that delayed digital solutions being launched 
was the use of Ordinance Survey (OS) data for creating the base map. At 
the time of the launch, OS would not allow the maps to be used for on-­
screen applications. Other cities have avoided this digital data usage prob-
lem by using aerial photography to create base-­maps, but even though the 
cost of digital hardware and software has reduced, there is still a need to 
find funding for the installation and on­going maintenance of the signs and 
the information. Transport for London commissioned an evaluation of 
the Legible London scheme in 2013 and responses highlight interesting 
changes in human wayfinding behaviour, users’ perceptions, and the inter-­
relationship between digital and static information:
User comment 1: I’m a lot happier knowing [the signs] are there – in case my 
phone died or something. 
User comment 2: I would assume that I would have to rely on my smartphone 
or ask for directions [if the signs weren’t there] – I would feel reticent about 
having to do that.
Start
Finish
Finish
Finish
Finish
Here?
Where shall 
we go?
Here?
Here?
Here?
Or here?
Start
Finish
I'm here
I'm there
Figure 5
A stroller needs information that 
allows them to drift, wander, and 
have the confidence to get lost. 
Their journey is conceptually like 
‘ripples in a pond’.
Image: Applied Wayfinding (in Transport for 
London 2007, 26).
Figure 6
A strider’s strategy is to get near, 
then find wayfinding information. 
Their journey is conceptually like 
‘stones skimming across a pond.
Image: Applied Wayfinding (in Transport for 
London 2007, 26). 

Wayfinding perspectives  / 519 
User comment 3: The signs are not in every neighbourhood so you can’t rely on 
them to always be there.
User comment 4: Sometimes the Legible London maps give you more detail 
than Google Maps and sometimes Google tells you that you are in the wrong 
place if you have a poor signal. (Steer Davies Gleave 2014, iv–v)
In Brighton, royalty-­free aerial photography was used to create the 
map-­base, enabling the design company to develop a  more integrated 
system, with downloadable maps and a smartphone app, as well as the 
on-­street signs and maps, right from the launch. The city has the Royal 
National Institute for Blind People’s REACT radio frequency identification 
(RFID) digital system, providing real-time public transport information 
installed at bus stops. However, REACT requires people to have obtained 
a fob to trigger the information messages, significantly reducing the acces-
sibility of the system, and it also provides a limited range of information. 
The WalkBrighton app used a smartphone to receive information and the 
phone’s inbuilt compass and GPS to enable the app to be location aware, 
telling people where they are in the city and indicating where they need 
to go, similar to an in-­vehicle satnav. It used the same base map as the 
static signs and maps for consistency in the content, style, and detail of 
information. The WalkBrighton app is included as an example of digital 
wayfinding in Wayshowing > wayfinding (Mollerup 2013, 161). However, 
a different app using different mapping is now being promoted by Visit 
Brighton, highlighting the problem of keeping digital information and 
apps up-­to-­date, and venues wanting their apps to offer more than just 
wayfinding information. Mollerup describes the burdens and benefits of 
wayfinding apps for venues and visitors:
•	 venue benefits: self-­service, branding, experience economy, hidden 
advertising.
•	 venue burdens: initial costs, updating costs.
Bus shelters link bus 
routes with walking 
choices
Arrival signs on the 
street establishes 
orientation in a wider 
context and sets 
walkers oﬀ in the  
right direction
Printed walking 
maps give users 
portable information 
in the pocket
Mobile devices can 
situate a user in the 
street, providing a 
wider context and 
search capabilities
Figure 7
Legible London 
aims to provide 
continuity of 
information, for 
pre-planning 
and information 
on-the-go 
connected to 
on-street signs.
Image: Applied 
Wayfinding (in Transport 
for London 2007, 52).

520 / Colette Jeffrey
•	 visitor benefits: portable information, often updated, treasure hunt.
•	 visitor burdens: download takes time, updating takes time, must be 
watched all the time, hinders studying the environment, hinders 
creation of cognitive map, small type may demand use of two pairs of 
glasses. (Mollerup 2013, 161) 
Despite these burdens, it cannot be ignored that mobile phones are ubi-
quitous in many countries, with phones grasped firmly in hand as people 
walk through streets, travel on buses, and enter buildings. It makes sense 
to explore how best to use mobile phones as an information provider, trig-
ger, and receiver for digital wayfinding in outdoor urban environments. 
Wayfinding inside buildings
Wayfinding inside buildings, especially multi­level, interconnected build-
ings can be difficult and designing wayfinding information is often chal-
lenging. Studies of wayfinding in hospitals (Carpman and Grant 1993; 
Miller and Lewis 2000; Mollerup 2008), airports (Fewings 2001; Kishnani 
1999), exhibitions (Peponis et al. 2004), and museums (Passini 1999), 
highlight a variety of wayfinding information issues:
Signs are a last minute thought . . . a necessary evil to be watched so as not to 
disfigure a building. (Arthur and Passini 1999, 241)
The standard cure for wayfinding problems is more signage. Signs are used 
as medicine to solve wayfinding problems. Sometimes, however, it pays to 
take a look behind the apparent problems before prescribing more signs. 
(Mollerup 2008, 112)
An Architect’s Journal article supports these opinions:
Wayfinding, one of the more charming neologisms to enter architectural 
discourse in recent years, is a topic which sits comfortably with floors, stairs 
and lifts and, as it’s a newcomer, we’ll discuss it first. Although many archi-
tects regard signage as an admission that a building has failed to communicate 
by architectural means. (Mara 2012). 
There are many excellent examples of imaginative static signage and 
environmental graphics inside buildings, particularly successful where 
architects have clearly worked collaboratively with information designers. 
Recently published books (Victionary 2013; Graphic Design Group 2012; 
Mollerup 2013) present hundreds of photographs of creative static infor-
mation with text, pictograms, images, and three-­dimensional solutions 
creating fascinating signage inside buildings, but there are still very few 
examples of effective, innovative digital-­only wayfinding solutions. 
A key problem for digital wayfinding inside buildings is that satellite 
signals do not work – so providing accurate positioning information 
for indoor or underground environments is difficult. A comprehensive 
review of indoor navigation systems (Fallah et al. 2013) provides details 

Wayfinding perspectives  / 521 
of technique and describes the advantages and problems with each. The 
study concludes:
Indoor navigation systems have not achieved large-­scale deployment due to 
issues pertaining to cost, accuracy and usability . . . Future navigation systems 
need to primarily lower the installation cost, by minimizing the amount of 
infrastructure augmentation that is required for localizing the user, or by 
using low-­cost sensors. (Fallah et al. 2013, 30)
Creating a seamless outdoor to indoor wayfinding journey using digital 
technology is therefore not going to be straightforward. It is important 
that digital wayfinding solutions are the result of people who understand 
the wayfinding process and who are able to identify information needed at 
each stage of the journey, and able to create solutions fitting these needs – 
i.e. not solutions primarily prescribed by technical developers limited by 
current technology.
Miller and Lewis (1999, 17) identified four key journey stages when 
travelling to a new destination. A summary of the information needed at 
each stage, showing where static wayfinding information or digital infor-
mation is most appropriate is illustrated in Figure 8. 
Many studies of wayfinding behaviour inside buildings have tried to 
determine what information is used and how it is used (Levine 1982; Butler 
et al. 1993; Hölscher et al. 2007, 2006; Kishnani 1999; Passini 1999; Dogu 
and Erkip 2000; Miller and Lewis 2000; Fewings 2001; Willis et al. 2009; 
Rui and Klippel 2010; Carlson et al. 2010; Fallah et al. 2013). These and 
other wayfinding studies give interesting insights, but do not provide con-
sistent, definitive findings as to how static information should be designed. 
There is no agreement on how digital information should be developed, 
what indoor positioning system is the most effective, how people navi-
gate through unfamiliar buildings and what they do and feel when they 
get lost. Research in this field continues to develop new knowledge that 
will inform the design of combined digital and static indoor wayfinding 
systems in the future.
Pre-Travel
Static information
Leaﬂet & Letter
Printed map
Written directions
Spoken directions
   Digital information
Email - text only
Email with attachment
Map - phone or web 
Website information
Internet search
En-route
Static information
Road signs
Site entrance signs
Printed road atlas
Written directions
   
Digital information
In-car satnav system
Smartphone map
Digital road signs
On-site
Static information
Directional signs
Locational signs
Directory & site map
Spoken directions
   
Digital information
Information displays
Digital site map 
Digital directory
Site speciﬁc app
Destination
Static information
Locational sign
Reception desk
Floor lines to follow
Spoken reassurance
   
Digital information
Information displays
Digital locational sign
Site speciﬁc app
Plan and prepare 
to make a journey
From start point 
to site entrance
From site entrance
to destination
Arriving at the 
ﬁnal destination
Figure 8
Four key journey 
stages with four 
information 
types – static and 
digital.
After Miller and Lewis 
1999, 17.

522 / Colette Jeffrey
Digital wayfinding information: is wayfinding symbiosis  
the future?
Wearable information and navigation devices such as smart glasses (e.g.
Google Glass), smart watches (e.g. from Apple, Sony, or Samsung) and 
even smart shoes (cf. Lechal) are being prototyped. If the devices are 
linked to a digital map base and a positioning system they can provide 
personalized wayfinding information, but none have been universally 
adopted for navigation yet. People are still relying on their phones or in 
vehicle satnavs that are portable rather than wearable devices:
There is an important distinction between wearable devices and those that 
are merely portable, the classic examples being the pocket watch and the wrist 
watch. You have to pull out the pocket watch and open it to see the time, while 
the wristwatch enables you to see the time instantly, even while working with 
both hands. (Pentland 2001, 12).
The technology has evolved to a point where it can now be synthesized with 
clothing . . . it will be mind-­blowing five years from now . . . you’ll go to the 
store and buy a shirt or an undergarment and you’ll expect it to be a con-
nected object. (Walker 2015)
The following extract from a fictional story describes a concept of mobile, 
wearable footwear for wayfinding, but what happens when there are five 
different directions and a change of level on the route:
His left shoe started vibrating, so he turned left. As he walked to the restaurant 
for the first time in his life, he thought funny how quickly you get used to 
this stuff. Three months ago, when my shoes first started vibrating, my first 
impulse was to kick them off. Now I’m not even aware of them. I just turn left 
or right because that’s where I need to go . . . both his shoes vibrated indicating 
he had arrived at the restaurant, just as planned. (Van Der Drift 2009)
The vibrating insole concept has been prototyped as a shoe-­integrated tac-
tile display (Velázquez et al. 2009) and tested by twenty undergraduate 
students aged between 18 and 25, to see if they could determine direction 
(north, south, east, or west, fourteen times in a varying sequence) using 
sixteen vibrating sensors in their shoes. The study found the success rate 
ranged from 64% identifying south and 83% identifying east correctly. Six 
of the participants performed almost perfectly but four performed very 
poorly suggesting performance may be unreliable. Vibrating insoles and 
other wearable and haptic devices are becoming commercially available 
each year (Coxworth 2014), but will people buy them and use them? Using 
haptic navigation devices could enable people to focus on seeing and lis-
tening to an unfamiliar city or building whilst wayfinding, without being 
distracted by visual or auditory wayfinding information. The devices 
could enable people with visual impairments to navigate without need-
ing to see the environment clearly or read or listen to information. Digital 

Wayfinding perspectives  / 523 
technology could provide individualized wayfinding information, specific 
to a person’s journey, but currently wayfinding information, positioning, 
and mapping systems are not always standardized, reliable, or compati-
ble, so connecting an outdoor and indoor journey seamlessly is proving 
difficult. The Society of Environmental Graphic Design (SEGD) says the 
advantages of a digital wayfinding system are obvious:
Rather than display one layer of information, a digital wayfinding system can 
display multiple layers with almost limitless flexibility in how and when it can 
be displayed. (Reising 2008, 44)
Montello and Sas believe digital technology can potentially provide 
flexibility if wayfinding information is displayed in different forms, and the 
systems enable people to access only the information they need:
Effective wayfinding requires this information to be sufficiently accurate, 
precise, complete, and up-­to-­date. Furthermore, we must be able to access 
this information and reason with it appropriately, according to the situation 
we are in . . . It is important that the information is sufficient but not more than 
sufficient . . . the form and modality of the information is often important to 
the success of wayfinding. (Montello and Sas 2006, p. 2004)
A member of the design team involved in an award winning digital way-
finding system at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History 
in Washington DC suggests a static and digital wayfinding symbiosis may 
develop, and Mollerup agrees:
There’s definitely a misconception that digital wayfinding will replace 
traditional media . . . I believe it is meant to be complimentary, add value, and 
improve the experience. (Reising 2009, 46) 
The new technologies primarily work in outdoor areas while a fair part of our 
wayfinding problems happens indoors . . . not all of us carry a digital way-
finding assistant all the time . . . it is a safe prediction that we will not dump 
the traditional wayfinding media including signage in a foreseeable future. 
(Mollerup 2014)
Digital technology relies on the navigator having a way of receiving the 
information and the information provider a way of sending information in 
a reliable, accessible format appropriate to the journey and journey stage. 
Kiosks and wall mounted digital displays are often accessible but are static, 
i.e. not portable digital information systems. Mobile, wearable devices are 
portable but expensive, and therefore the information system becomes 
exclusive rather than inclusive. It is likely that the first people to experi-
ence integrated digital and static wayfinding information systems inside 
buildings will be shoppers because retail companies want to combine 
wayfinding and product finding with advertising, special promotions, 
and marketing messages. They are already managing complex customer 
information databases, are motivated to keep the product and customer 

524 / Colette Jeffrey
524 / Colette Jeffrey
information up-­to-­date and they want to influence customer wayfinding 
and purchasing behaviour.
Innovative modes of communication, transport, and navigation often 
first appear in futuristic movies. In Back to the future part II (1989) the 
actors travel ‘back to the future’ to 2015. Innovations that film viewers see 
include a huge multi­channel television, personally targeted digital adver-
tising, controller-­free computer games, and flying cars. All predictions 
except the flying cars have become ubiquitous. Future wayfinding systems 
are difficult to predict but they will hopefully be personalized, journey-­
specific, accessible, inclusive, accurate, and reliable.
People trying to find the way to a clinic at a complex hospital, the right 
gate at an international airport, or a specific exhibit in a large museum will 
be elated when there is a seamless, intuitive digital information journey 
from home, using the best mode of transport and most direct route to their 
destination. Until digital technology develops and standardizes further, 
and information systems become consistent and cohesive, and everyone 
has access to personal digital devices, a static and digital wayfinding sym-
biosis is inevitable. 
References
Allen, Gary L. 1999. ‘Spatial abilities, cognitive maps, 
and wayfinding: bases for individual differences 
in spatial cognition and behaviour.’ In Wayfinding 
behavior: cognitive mapping and other spatial 
processes, edited by Reginald G. Golledge, 46–80. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Arthur, Paul, and Romedi Passini. 1992. Wayfinding: 
people, signs, and architecture. New York: 
McGraw-­Hill. 
Axon, Stephen, Janet Speake, and Kevin Crawford. 
2012. ‘At the next junction, turn left: attitudes 
towards satnav use.’ Area 44 (2): 170–177.
Baker, R. Robin. 1987. ‘Human navigation and 
magnetoreception: the Manchester experiments 
do replicate.’ Animal Behaviour 35 (2): 691–704.
Butler, Darrell L., April L. Acquino, Alicia A. 
Hissong, and Pamela A. Scott. 1993. ‘Wayfinding 
for newcomers in a complex building.’ Human 
Factors 35 (1,1): 159–173.
Carlson, Laura A., Christoph Hölscher, Thomas 
F. Shipley, and Ruth Conroy Dalton. 2010. 
‘Getting lost in buildings.’ Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 19 (5): 284–289. 
Carmona, Matthew, Tim Heath, Taner Oc, and Steve 
Tiesdell. 2003. Public places, urban spaces: the 
dimensions of urban design. London: Architectural 
Press.
Carpman, Janet Reizenstein, and Myron A. Grant. 
1993. Design that cares: planning health facilities for 
patients and visitors. 2nd edn. Chicago: American 
Hospital Publishing.
Cheeseman, James F., Craig D. Millar, Uwe Greggers, 
Konstantin Lehmann, Matthew D. M. Pawley, 
Charles R. Gallistel, Guy R. Warman, and Randolf 
Menzel. 2014. ‘Way-­finding in displaced clock-­
shifted bees proves bees use a cognitive map.’ 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
111 (24): E4398.
Collett, Matthew, and Thomas S. Collett. 2000. 
‘How do insects use path integration for their 
navigation?’ Biological Cybernetics 83 (3): 245–259.
Coxworth, Ben. 2014 ‘Lechal haptic footwear 
guides you by buzzing your feet.’ Gizmag, 
21 Feb. <http://www.gizmag.com/
lechal-haptic-feedback-navigation-shoes/30939/>.
Dalton, Ruth C. 2003. ‘The secret is to follow your 
nose: route path selection and angularity.’ 
Environment and Behaviour 35 (1): 107–131.
Dalton, Polly, Pragya Agarwal, Nick Fraenkel, J. 
Baichoo, and A. Masry. 2013. ‘Driving with 
navigational instructions: investigating user 
behaviour and performance.’ Accident Analysis 
and Prevention 50: 298–303. 
Dogu, Ufuk, and Feyzan Erkip. 2000. ‘Spatial factors 
affecting wayfinding and orientation: a case study 
in a shopping mall.’ Environment & Behaviour 
32 (6): 731–755. 
Downes, Dennis. 2011. Native American trail marker 
trees: marking paths through the wilderness. 
Chicago: Chicago’s Books Press.
Dudchenko, Paul. 2010. Why people get lost: the 
psychology and neuroscience of spatial cognition. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Dyer, Fred C., Micah Gill, and Jennifer Sharbowski. 

Wayfinding perspectives  / 525 
Wayfinding perspectives  / 525 
2002. ‘Motivation and vector navigation in honey 
bees.’ Naturwissenschaften 89 (6): 262–264.
Fallah, Navid, Ilias Apostolopoulos, Kostas Bekris, 
and Eelke Folmer. 2013. ‘Indoor human navigation 
systems: a survey.’ Interacting with Computers 
25 (1): 21–33.
Fewings, Rodney. 2001. ‘Wayfinding and airport 
terminal design.’ Journal of Navigation 54 (2): 
177–184. 
Frost, Barrie J., and Henrik Mouritsen. 2006. ‘The 
neural mechanisms of long distance animal 
navigation.’ Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
16 (4): 481–488. 
Gibson, David. 2009. The wayfinding handbook: 
information design for public spaces. New York: 
Princeton Architectural Press.
Golledge, Reginald G., ed. 1999. Wayfinding behavior: 
cognitive mapping and other spatial processes. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Graphic Design Group. 2012. Wayfinding. Hong 
Kong: DesignMedia Publishing.
Head, Denise, and Marlisa Isom. 2010. ‘Age effects on 
wayfinding and route learning skills.’ Behavioural 
Brain Research 209 (1): 49–58. 
Hollien, Harry, J. W. Hicks, and B. Klepper. 1986. ‘An 
acoustic approach to diver navigation.’ Undersea 
Biomedical Research 13 (1): 111–128.
Hölscher, Christoph, Simon J. Büchner, Martin 
Brösamle, Tobias Meilinger, and Gerhard Strube. 
2007. ‘Signs and maps: cognitive economy in 
the use of external aids for indoor navigation.’ In 
Proceedings of the 29th annual Cognitive Science 
Society, edited by D. S. McNamara and J. G. 
Trafton, 377–382. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science 
Society. 
Hölscher, Christoph, Tobias Meilinger, Georg 
Vrachliotis, Martin Brösamle, and Markus 
Knauff. 2006. ‘Up the down staircase: wayfinding 
strategies in multi-­level buildings.’ Journal of 
Environmental Psychology 26 (4): 284–299. 
Hölscher, Christoph, Simon J. Büchner, Tobias 
Meilinger, and Gerhard Strube. 2009. ‘Adaptivity 
of wayfinding strategies in a multi-­building 
ensemble: the effects of spatial structure, task 
requirements, and metric information.’ Journal of 
Environmental Psychology 29 (2): 208–219. 
Hospers, Gert-­Jan. 2011. ‘Lynch’s The image of the 
city after 50 years: city marketing lessons from an 
urban planning classic’. European Planning Studies 
18 (12): 2073–2081.
Jeffrey, Colette 2011. ‘Hospital wayfinding: whose 
role is it?’ In Include 2011 proceedings. London: The 
Helen Hamlyn Centre for Design, Royal College 
of Art. <http://include11.kinetixevents.co.uk/rca/
rca2011/paper_final/F360_2183.pdf>.
Judd, Simon P. D., Kyran Dale, and Thomas S. 
Collett. 1999. ‘On the fine structure of view-­
based navigation in insects.’ In Wayfinding 
behaviour: cognitive mapping and other spatial 
processes, edited by Reginald G. Golledge, 
229–259. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Kelly, Andrew. 2001. Building legible cities. Bristol: 
Bristol Cultural Development Partnership.
Kitchin, Robert M. 1994. ‘Cognitive maps: what 
are they and why study them?’ Journal of 
Environmental Psychology 14 (1): 1–19. 
Kishnani, Nirmal. 1999. ‘Evaluation of the wayfinding 
system at Stansted Airport.’ In Visual information 
for everyday use: design and research perspectives, 
edited by Harm J. G. Zwaga, Theo Boersema, and 
Henriëtte C. M. Hoonhout, 257–265. London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Kozlowski, Lynn T., and Kendall J. Bryant. 1977. 
‘Sense of direction, spatial orientation, and 
cognitive maps.’ Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
3 (4): 590–598.
Levine, Marvin. 1982 ‘You-­are-­here maps: 
psychological considerations.’ Environment and 
Behaviour 14 (2): 221–237.
Li, Rui, and Alexander Klippel. 2010. ‘Using space 
syntax to understand knowledge acquisition 
and wayfinding in indoor environments.’ 
In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International 
Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI ’10), 
edited by F. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Lu, B. Zhang, W. 
Kinsner, and L. A. Zadeh, 302–307. Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Press.
Lynch, Kevin. 1960. The image of the city. Cambridge, 
MA, and London: MIT Press. 
Maguire, Eleanor A., Neil Burgess, and John O’Keefe.­­ 
1999. ‘Human spatial navigation: cognitive maps, 
sexual dimorphism, and neural substrates.’ 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 9 (2): 171–177. 
Mara, Felix. 2012. ‘Floors, stairs, lifts and wayfinding.’ 
Architects’ Journal, 20 December 2012. <http://
www.architectsjournal.co.uk/spec/floors-stairs-
lifts-and-wayfinding/8640623.article>.
Meilinger, Tobias, Julia Frankenstein, Katsumi 
Watanabe, Heinrich H. Bülthoff, and Christoph 
Hölscher. 2014a. ‘Reference frames in learning 
from maps and navigation.’ Psychological Research, 
november 2014. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00426-014-0629-6>.
Meilinger, Tobias, Julia Frankenstein, and Heinrich 
H. Bulthoff. 2014b. ‘When in doubt follow 
your nose: a wayfinding strategy.’ Frontiers in 
Psychology 5: 1363. <http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.01363>.
Miller, Colette, and David Lewis. 1999. Wayfinding: 
effective wayfinding and signing systems: guidance 
for healthcare facilities. London: NHS Estates and 
Stationery Office.
Miller, Colette, and David Lewis. 2000. ‘Wayfinding 
in complex healthcare environments.’ Information 
Design Journal 9 (2&3): 129–159.
Mollerup, Per. 2005. Wayshowing: a guide to 

526 / Colette Jeffrey
526 / Colette Jeffrey
environmental signage principles and practices. 
Baden: Lars Müller Publishers.
Mollerup, Per. 2008. ‘Wayshowing in the hospital.’ 
Australasian Medical Journal 1 (10): 112–114.
Mollerup, Per. 2013. Wayshowing > wayfinding: basic 
and interactive. Baden: Lars Müller Publishers.
Mollerup, Per. 2014. Wayshowing and waylosing with 
Per Mollerup. SEGD, 21 April. <https://segd.org/
wayshowing-and-waylosing-mollerup>.
Montello, Daniel R., and Corina Sas. 2006. 
‘Human factors of wayfinding in navi­ga­tion.’ 
In International encyclopedia of ergonomics and 
human factors, 2nd edn, edited by W. Karwowski, 
pp. 2003–2008. London: CRC Press, Taylor & 
Francis. 
Nasar, Jack L. 1990. ‘The evaluative image of the 
city.’ Journal of the American Planning Association 
56 (1): 41–53.
Office for National Statistics. 2013. 2011 census 
analysis: comparing rural and urban areas of 
England and Wales. <http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/
dcp171776_337939.pdf>.
Oliver, Amy. 2012. ‘Can’t go anywhere without your 
sat-­nav? You might be wiping out your memory: 
we’re losing our mental maps, scientists claim.’ 
Mail on Sunday, 19 January 2012.  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/
article-2088944/Lost-You-rely-sat-nav-say-
scientists.html>.
Passini, Romedi. 1999. ‘Wayfinding: backbone of 
graphic support systems.’ In Visual information 
for everyday use: design and research perspectives, 
edited by Harm J. G. Zwaga, Theo Boersema, and 
Henriëtte C. M. Hoonhout, 241–256. London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Peponis, John, Ruth Conroy Dalton, Jean 
Wineman, and Nick Dalton. 2004. ‘Measuring 
the effects of layout upon visitors’ spatial 
behaviors in open plan exhibition settings.’ 
Environment and Planning B: Planning and 
Design 31 (3): 453–473. 
Pentland, Alex (Sandy). 2001. ‘Guest editor’s 
introduction: wearable information devices.’ 
IEEE Micro 21 (3): 12–15.
Porathe, Thomas. 2008. ‘Measuring effective map 
design for route guidance.’ Information Design 
Journal 16 (3): 190–201.
Previc, Fred H., and William R. Ercoline. 2004. 
Spatial disorientation in aviation. Reston, 
VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics.
Reising, Jenny S. 2009. ‘Digital wayfinding.’ 
segdDESIGN 23. <https://segd.org/
digital-wayfinding>.
Šiđanin, Predag. 2007. ‘On Lynch’s and post-­
Lynchian theories.’ Facta Universitatis: 
Architecture and Civil Engineering 5 (1): 61–69.
Spiers, Hugo J., and Eleanor A. Maguire. 2007. 
‘A navigational guidance system in the human 
brain.’ Hippocampus 17 (8): 618–626. 
Steer Davies Gleave. 2014. Legible London: evaluation 
2013/14: report. Prepared for Transport for 
London. <http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/
documents/legible-london-evaluation-summary.
pdf>.
Taher, Faisal, Keith Cheverst, Michael Harding, 
and Daniel Fitton. 2009. ‘Formative studies for 
dynamic wayfinding support with in-­building 
situated displays and mobile devices.’ MUM ’09 
Proceedings of the 8th international conference on 
mobile and ubiquitous multimedia, article no. 5. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1658550.1658555>.
Transport for London. 2007. ‘Legible London: 
yellow book: a prototype wayfinding system 
for London.’ London: Transport for London. 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/
documents/ll-yellow-book.pdf>.
United Nations. 2014. ‘World’s population 
increasingly urban with more than half living in 
urban areas’, 10 July 2014 <http://www.un.org/
en/development/desa/news/population/world-
urbanization-prospects-2014.html>.
Van Der Drift, Marcel. 2009. ‘A future love story.’ In 
Emotional cartography: technologies of the self, 
edited by Christian Nold, 27–32. <http://www.
emotionalcartography.net>.
Velázquez, Ramiro, Omar Bazán, and Marco Magaña. 
2009. ‘A shoe-­integrated tactile display for 
directional navigation.’ In IROS’09 Proceedings 
of the 2009 IEEE/RSJ international conference 
on Intelligent robots and systems, 1235–1240. 
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press.
Victionary. 2013. You are here: a new approach to 
signage and wayfinding. Hong Kong: Victionary.
Wang, Ranxiao Frances, and Elizabeth S. Spelke. 
2002. ‘Human spatial representation: insights 
from animals.’ Trends in Cognitive Sciences 6 (9): 
376–381. 
Walker, Rob. 2015. ‘Fashion’s big brands follow the 
money to join the wearable tech revolution.’ 
The Observer, 14 March 2015. <http://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/14/
fashion-phones-wearable-technology>.
Wiener, Jan M., Simon J. Büchner, and Christoph 
Hölscher. 2009. ‘Taxonomy of human wayfinding 
tasks: a knowledge-­based approach.’ Spatial 
Cognition & Computation 9 (2): 152–165. 
Willis, Katharine S., Christoph Hölscher, Gregor 
Wilbertz, and Chao Li. 2009. ‘A comparison of 
spatial knowledge acquisition with maps and 
mobile maps.’ Computers, Environment and Urban 
Systems 33 (2): 100–110. 
Woollett, Katherine, and Eleanor A. Maguire. 2011. 
‘Acquiring “the knowledge” of London’s layout 
drives structural brain changes.’ Current Biology 
21 (24): 2109–2114. 

527
Designing for wayfinding
Guidelines for designers and a case study of  
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol
Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
Most wayfinding projects go through the same basic phases: analysis, devel-
oping a way­finding strategy, creating an information inventory, establishing 
an overview of sign types, design development (and testing), production, and 
implementation. The first part of this chapter focuses on the development of the 
wayfinding strategy: what it means, why wayfinding designers should do it, and 
how to do it. The second part of this chapter is a case study of the origination, 
development and maintenance of the wayfinding system at Amsterdam Airport 
Schiphol. 
Can you remember when last you encountered a wayfinding system that 
worked well? Or one which let you down? It is likely you just don’t notice 
when a wayfinding system works as intended. When you are lost, however, 
you look for signs that may not exist – or if they do, they don’t display the 
information you need. While your stress level is rising as you worry about 
missing an important appointment, the train or your flight, you experience 
(whether consciously or not) that the wayfinding system is inadequate. 
When a well-designed wayfinding system is in place, you don’t pay any 
particular attention to the signs: you just find your way through a hospital 
or transportation hub without too much conscious effort. Signs are placed 
where you need them and show the information you require, no more, no 
less. The signs stand out so that you can easily notice them, while at the 
same time fitting in with the architectural environment. The seemingly 
modest goal for wayfinding designers is thus to develop a wayfinding sys-
tem that nobody notices as such, but everybody uses in an effortless and 
self-­evident way. 
Design phases
In order to present a client with a well-designed wayfinding system – that 
is, one that works well and looks good – the wayfinding designer usually 
proceeds through the following phases: 
•	 analysing the users, destinations and environment;
•	 developing a wayfinding strategy;
•	 creating an inventory of which information is needed where;
•	 establishing an overview of necessary sign types;
•	 design development (and testing).
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 527–540
35

528 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
Some phases may run partly in parallel, and work created in one phase 
will influence the work in other phases. The final step is of course the 
actual physical creation and implementation of the newly designed way-
finding system. This is usually not the work of the designer, who how-
ever might still play an important role during this last phase in which it 
all becomes real. After installation, the wayfinding system is ‘ready’. The 
work, however, is not. It is essential that the system is well monitored and 
maintained, in order to keep (or improve) its quality.
Although each phase in the design process is important, the second 
step, ‘developing a wayfinding strategy’, may be considered the most in-
teresting and challenging one. The goal is to create a wayfinding system 
that fulfils the users’ information needs in such a clear and logical way, that 
the process of wayfinding becomes effortless and self-­evident. Naturally, 
some compliance with the client’s wishes, timetable and budget is not 
unimportant either. 
Developing a wayfinding strategy requires specialist knowledge and 
expertise on the part of the designer. It is the basis of the system, where all 
the information gathered in the analysis phase is being put to use. 
What is a wayfinding strategy?
The term ‘wayfinding’ refers to the perceptual, cognitive and behavioural 
processes that are involved in reaching a destination (Passini 1999, 241). 
It thus seems logical to assume that ‘wayfinding strategy’ refers to the 
strategy people use to reach their destination. In the context of this chap-
ter, however, wayfinding strategy refers to the strategy developed by the 
designers: it is the underlying logic of the wayfinding system that is being 
created. Luckily, if the designers do a good job, both kinds of strategies 
will have a lot in common.
The wayfinding strategy is the basis for the success or failure of the end 
result. Basically, what the wayfinding strategy defines for a given environ-
ment (building, park, campus, parking, etc.) is: which kind of information 
is presented where (at which kinds of locations), and how. It is usually 
not a bad idea to include the why as well. The wayfinding strategy should 
describe the underlying logic of the wayfinding system and the way in 
which this logic is implemented in the design. 
The wayfinding strategy and the resulting wayfinding system will often 
make use of ‘traditional’ static, dynamic or digital signs, but may encom-
pass many other wayfinding solutions, for instance architectural interven-
tions, adding artificial landmarks, and changing the interior design. Such 
solutions offer the best possibilities to improve ‘intuitive’ wayfinding in an 
environment, thereby reducing the need for signs. Unfortunately however, 
the possibilities for wayfinding designers in many projects are limited to 
signage. This is the main focus of the paragraphs below. 

Designing for wayfinding / 529 
Why do you need a wayfinding strategy?
A wayfinding system cannot show everything, everywhere (‘everything’ 
meaning every single end destination), since this would be completely 
inefficient and result in information overload. Information overload occurs 
when the information that people are seeking is drowned by competing 
messages (Passini 1999, 254), of which the situation on a road side in Italy 
depicted in Figure 1 is a clear example. A strategy is needed to decide how 
to reduce the amount of information on the signs, while not reducing the 
ease with which people can find their way. 
However, the goal of the wayfinding strategy is not just to reduce the 
amount of information on signs, but to seamlessly match the sign content 
to the users’ information need. Sign content that does not obviously relate 
to their wayfinding questions will be ignored by users. The wayfinding 
strategy also describes how the information should be structured and pre-
sented on signs to match user expectations. This may relate to the infor-
mation hierarchy, language, pictograms, illustrations, colour-coding, etc. 
In addition, a clear description of the established wayfinding strategy 
can serve as a reference work for the wayfinding system, for instance as 
part of a wayfinding manual for maintenance. 
How to develop a good wayfinding strategy
The groundwork for the creation of a solid wayfinding strategy is laid in the 
analysis phase. Let us assume the analysis has been thorough: the result is 
a good understanding of the users, a good understanding of real wayfin-
ding tasks (such as finding the college room or departure gate, exploring 
Figure 1 
A lot of 
information, but 
will drivers find 
what they are 
looking for?

530 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
the museum or park, or finding your car in the airport parking after you 
have been on holiday for three weeks), a good mapping of user flows and 
identification of decision points – as well as anticipating questions that 
will arise at these decision points. 
Although there are many good ways to approach the issue of creating 
a solid wayfinding strategy, in this chapter we propose a rather practical 
and down-­to-­earth action plan, consisting of different steps as described 
below.
Do as the users do
In order to create a system that is well understood by the intended users, 
the designer has to put him- or herself in their place. This is important 
throughout the whole process, from analysis to design. It is essential to 
approach the situation in the same manner as the actual users (your client’s 
clients) are likely to approach it. They do not know the building, they do 
not understand the jargon, and they have other concerns on their mind. 
They may be in a hurry or stressed. Perhaps they don’t know the language 
or are mentally or physically impaired. The wayfinding system is intended 
for all those users, and should as much as possible be based on the ‘design 
for all’ principle – excluding no one.
Define the underlying logic of the wayfinding strategy
As mentioned before, it is neither possible nor desirable to direct to every 
single local destination at each decision point, unless the environment 
consists of very few destinations (in which case a wayfinding system might 
be superfluous anyway). 
To create a system or set of rules that defines which and how destina-
tions will be directed to and identified when reached, consider the options 
below. Each option should be evaluated based on the information and 
insights gained in the analysis phase, always keeping in mind that the user 
point of view should be leading. Note that the different options are not 
mutually exclusive – on the contrary, a combination will probably work 
best. 
Directions based on process steps
With this strategy, the information on the signs directly refers to the steps 
in the users’ process. This strategy is appropriate for a situation where all 
or most users go through clearly defined processes. This is for example 
a good (and therefore often used) strategy for an airport: the primary way-
finding information is related to the basic kinds of passenger processes: 
departing/arriving/transferring (Figure 2). Within each process, the 
main steps are clearly defined and referred to on the signs (for instance: 
­departures > check-­in > gates). This strategy is highly intuitive, since it fol-
lows the processes of users. The wayfinding system at Schiphol, the case 
study explored in this chapter, is a good example. 

Designing for wayfinding / 531 
Group destinations that are similar in function using one overarching term
In an ideal, well-­planned environment, destinations that are similar in 
function are located near each other. If this is the case, using a common 
term can be a very efficient way to direct to many separate destinations by, 
for instance ‘exhibition rooms’, ‘college rooms’, ‘outpatient clinics’. This 
means that the information that needs to be shown in central circulation 
areas and near entrances can be very concise and high-­level, while the 
wayfinding system remains clear and complete. 
Structure the environment, based on location
When similar destinations are located ‘all over the place’, as is for instance 
often the case in (especially older) hospital buildings, a possible solution is 
to direct to locations instead of processes or groups of similar destinations. 
In order to do this, you need to structure the environment, for instance by 
directing to wings and floors within a building, or dividing a campus into 
separate districts with unique names, letters or numbers. This will only 
work well if the environment allows for a logical division into sections. For 
people to understand and notice that they are moving from one section to 
another, there should be an obvious and natural distinction or transition. 
When the names, numbers, or letters that indicate a location (district, 
building, floor, wing, etc.) are chosen well, they help users to quickly 
grasp the layout and organization of the environment. Users need no 
explanation to understand that building G is located in between buildings 
F and H; that room A3.8 is located on the third floor in wing A; and that 
even and odd numbers are located on opposite sides of the same street or  
hallway. 
Figure 2 
The primary 
wayfinding infor-
mation is related 
to passenger 
processes, like 
‘Arrivals’ and 
‘Departures’. 
On the signs 
at Schiphol, 
destinations that 
are directed in the 
same direction are 
visually grouped 
by extended 
oblong roundels, 
called ‘lozenges’, 
instead of mutliple 
arrows in the 
same direction.

532 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
An important advantage of a location-­based strategy is that the result-
ing wayfinding system is robust and scalable and can tackle and withstand 
many changes. For instance, a wayfinding system within a hospital that 
directs to locations rather than actual medical departments can remain 
unaltered regardless of department moves or changes in terminology. The 
only thing that needs to be updated regularly is the overview of all desti-
nations and their location. Of course, for this to work, some explanation is 
needed for users to be made aware of how they can use the system. They 
have to look up their destination and remember its location (‘the dietician 
is in Wing A, floor 3, room 16’) while moving through the building.
Create routes
For some environments, a wayfinding strategy that focuses on the route 
instead of the destination is appropriate. An industrial plot organized 
around a ring road is a good candidate for such a strategy. This strategy 
is also very suited for users that are less interested in getting from A to B 
than in exploring. Take for example the familiar ‘see it all’ route, which 
can work splendidly for a zoo, or even a large furniture store. For instance, 
visitors of the Artis Royal Zoo in Amsterdam, do not have to plan a route 
or bother with maps. By simply following the ‘Artis walk’ banners, they are 
led along all the zoo’s highlights (Figure 3).
Direct from general to specific 
A good wayfinding system presents its users with the right information 
at the right time. Too little is just as bad as too much (Arthur and Passini 
1992, 184). Directing from general to specific means that no more detail is 
provided than what is necessary or useful at a specific location. 
For example, at an airport the information on the signs for departing 
passengers can at first be generic: ‘Departures’. While the passenger is 
Figure 3 
The ‘Artis walk’ 
is signposted 
(with a banner 
at the top) on 
each junction, 
enabling visitors 
to simply follow 
the route along 
the highlights of 
the zoo.

Designing for wayfinding / 533 
moving in the right direction, going through all the process steps, the infor-
mation becomes more detailed and specific accordingly: ‘Departures 1’ > 
‘Check-­in 10–20’ > ‘Gates A–F’ > ‘Gates A’ > ‘Gates A1–A12’ > ‘Gate A4’. 
The closer the passenger gets to his or her destination, the more specific 
the information on the signs becomes.
The same strategy can be applied to location-­based systems as well. 
Visitors looking for ‘meeting room B3.16’ in an office building can be 
directed first to ‘Wings A–D’, next to ‘Wing B’, then to the third floor via 
lift or escalator, and finally to ‘Rooms B3.8–B3.20’. Once within this hall-
way, room ‘B3.16’ is quickly found.
Consider the frequency of use
An important consideration when deciding if and how certain destina-
tions should be directed and identified, is the expected number of visitors. 
Destinations that attract many visitors should be very easy to find and 
reach. This applies especially to first-­time visitors who will rely more on 
a wayfinding system than returning visitors. 
For instance, the main lecture hall, public restaurant, exit and toilets 
in a university building should be easy to find from every location within 
the building. Their names should therefore be shown on directional and 
identification signs for all (new) employees, students and visitors. On the 
contrary, smaller classrooms and individual staff rooms could be directed 
to and identified by room number only. Referring to ranges of room num-
bers is a very efficient and concise way of directing to multiple destina-
tions, but requires an extra effort of the visitors. They have to look up or 
ask for the right room number, and remember it while navigating through 
the building. 
Sometimes the destinations that are considered the most important 
in the eyes of the client are not the same that attract the largest number 
of visitors. Recall that the wayfinding system is intended to help people 
find their way, not to reflect organizational priorities or flatter certain 
departments. 
Classify destinations
By classifying destinations in a  meaningful way for the user, you can 
enhance the intelligibility of the wayfinding system. Visually ordering 
the information in clear categories enables users to quickly focus their 
attention to the relevant subset, reducing the amount of information that 
needs to be examined. For instance, if you are rushing to catch your flight, 
you are not interested in shops and restaurants. A clear division between 
flight-­related versus commercial destinations and facilities, helps you to 
quickly spot your destination on each sign and ignore irrelevant informa-
tion. The different classes of information should become apparent in the 
design of the signage system, for instance in the structure of the layout or 
by colour-­coding (Figures 4 and 5, overleaf). 

534 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
Possible destination categories can be based on:
•	 type of user (e.g. visitor/staff/maintenance)
•	 category of use (e.g. flight-­related/facilities/commercial)
•	 type of information (e.g. directional/instructional) 
What’s in a name
Part of the analysis phase is creating an overview of all destinations within 
the building or environment. Part of the wayfinding strategy is defining 
the right terminology and spelling for each of these destinations. The ter-
minology should be adapted to the users of the wayfinding system: this 
means using terms that are clear, consistent, distinctive and understand-
able. Jargon, unfamiliar abbreviations, long names, or names that closely 
resemble each other should be avoided. For example, people are more 
likely to understand simple terms such as ‘walkway’ and ‘general hospital’ 
than complex and more unfamiliar terms like ‘overhead link’ and ‘medical 
pavilion’ (Carpman and Grant 1993). 
Figure 4 
At Naples International Airport, 
destinations related to the primary 
process are printed on a yellow 
background, commercial destinations 
on a dark red background. 
Figure 5 
The original signage was developed 
by Benno Wissing for wayfinding at 
Schiphol. Some elements were kept in 
the new signage, like the use of colour-
coding to distinguish between different 
kinds of destinations and the use of the 
black arrow in a white roundel.
Amsterdam Airport, Schipol Archive. Total Identity, 
Amsterdam. Used with permission.

Designing for wayfinding / 535 
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol: a case study
About this case study 
The case study is based on the notes and writings of Paul Mijksenaar, who 
was commissioned in 1990 to review the then existing wayfinding system 
and to design a new system – eventually introduced in 2000. Both Paul 
Mijksenaar and Fenne Roefs (the authors of this chapter) are still involved 
in current wayfinding developments at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol 
(henceforth referred to as Schiphol). The case study demonstrates the 
implementation of some of the principles which have been described 
in the preceding part of this handbook chapter – like directions based on 
process steps, group destinations that are similar in function, directions from 
general to specific, and classification of destinations. 
The original wayfinding system by Benno Wissing
In 1967, Schiphol was moved to a brand new building at a location about 
5 km from the existing one (from 1917). The terminal and the five con-
courses were designed by architect Marius Duintjer (1908–1983) and the 
interior design by Kho Liang Ie (1927–1975). Ie hired graphic designer 
Benno Wissing of the Amsterdam based design agency Total Design to 
create the signing system.
Kho Liang Ie most remarkable decision was that colour should only be 
provided by the passengers’ clothing, the shop windows, and the signage! 
All architectural elements like walls, floors and ceilings were executed in 
rather neutral tints like white, grey and black, or with plain surfaces of 
glass and stainless steel. 
Benno Wissing used a  colour-coding scheme to distinguish flight-­
related information (yellow) and information about airport services 
like restrooms and retail (green). This was a revolutionary choice and 
probably the first colour-coded wayfinding system at airports (Figure 5). 
Colour was used for reasons of environmental conspicuousness as well 
as to distinguish passenger processes – a good example of the strategy 
as described in the paragraph ‘Classifying destinations’ above. Another 
strategic choice was made by not using pictograms – like the European 
railways introduced in that same period – but making all signs bilingual: 
Dutch in black and English in white lettering. The use of pictograms was 
considered redundant (which was correct, strictly speaking, but ‘redun-
dancy’ in communication can be part of a wayfinding strategy as we will 
see hereafter). Furthermore, English was considered the lingua franca of 
the modern traveller.
The revised wayfinding system by Mijksenaar
In 1990 Schiphol expanded substantially with a  new concourse (G), 
enlarged Terminal buildings, new parking garages, and an elevated access 

536 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
road system. The management decided to review and – where appropriate 
– revise the existing sign system. Bureau Mijksenaar was selected to do 
the job. The bureau claimed and was allowed extensive freedom for the 
project, while following the maxim ‘test everything, improve weaknesses, 
and keep all that is good’.
The bureau’s first task was a thorough study in three parts. Part one was 
to determine the cognitive ergonomic starting points of two categories: 
communication & information and wayfinding. Among the topics were 
perception, information, colour, images, typography, legibility, messages, 
advertising and architectural aspects. This was followed by a second study 
Ergonomic design recommendations, which contained experimental visual 
examples about type font, use of colour, the layout of signs and flight 
information displays. The third and last part was a complete overview of 
the information flow, including a proposal for standardized terminology, 
named Information planning. The concept of this information flow was 
based on a continuous and consistent information chain. Each link of the 
chain represented a key decision point. The chain started at all entry points 
(access roads, train station) and ended at the individual gates. A simplified 
example of such an information chain in the form of a schematic passenger 
journey is shown in Figure 6. 
Figure 6 
Graphic representation of a departing passenger’s journey, showing different 
important decision points. Appropriate information elements are required at all 
decision points, together forming an information chain.

Designing for wayfinding / 537 
It took almost 18 months to complete all studies. After finishing, the 
results and recommendations were presented in June 1991 to a steering 
group of the Schiphol management. The bureau’s key recommendations 
were:
•	 keep the existing yellow and green colour-coded signs;1
•	 use the same colour contrast for both English and Dutch but create 
a visual contrast (bold versus regular letterforms);
•	 use black text on a light background (like yellow or grey) and white 
text on a dark background (like blue or black);
•	 add international pictograms as an additional (redundant!) support for 
passengers who do not understand Dutch or English (Mijksenaar 1997, 
22–25);
•	 always place arrows at the side of a sign nearest the indicated direction 
(Figure 7); 
•	 keep the unique use of the black arrow in a white roundel (Figure 5);
•	 visually group destinations in signs by employing extended oblong 
roundels, called lozenges (Figure 2);
•	 capitalize the first letter of destinations (instead of using all lowercase 
letters) to increase legibility (Mijksenaar 1997, 22);
•	 replace the typeface Akzidenz Grotesk with Frutiger, a modification 
of the specialized signage font Alphabet Roissy, designed in the 
1970s by Adrian Frutiger for the Charles de Gaulle Airport at Roissy 
outside Paris (see Osterer and Stamm 2009, 224–229, 250–267; and 
Mijksenaar 2008, 41–43). One of the main justifications for this was 
based on the better distinction between numerals, which are used for 
key information such as gate and flight numbers, and departure and 
arrival times;
•	 increase letterspacing of text on signs to enhance legibility from larger 
distances;
•	 internally illuminate all signs;
•	 use multiple clusters of colour-coded flight information displays 
instead of one central huge display wall (which was common in that 
period) .
In order to avoid a subjective or irrational discussion based on personal 
taste, likes, and dislikes, none of these recommendations were presented 
as ‘designs’. Mijksenaar first asked the approval of all basic principles of the 
wayfinding strategy, the design criteria, and their recommendations. Only 
  1	 After a fire at Düsseldorf Airport in 1996 with 17 casualties, it has been decided to 
reserve the colour green exclusively for escape route signs. At Schiphol the signs 
directing to airport facilities were changed to a reverse colour contrast of the yellow 
flight-related signs: yellow text on a black background. Commercial destinations were 
directed using blue signs with white text.
‘Straight ahead’ arrow should 
always be on top of the sign
Arrow alignment 
follows the direction
Figure 7 
A wayfinding 
‘design rule’ is 
to always place 
arrows at the side 
of a sign nearest 
the indicated 
direction.

538 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
after official approval did Mijksenaar set in motion the graphic design pro-
cess of the complete sign system. The office of Kho Liang Ie designed all 
suspended and freestanding elements, like the flight information clusters, 
in order to harmonize with all other interior elements. 
This project confirmed Mijksenaar’s assumption that multiple, even 
overlapping, colour-coding systems can be used simultaneously, provided 
that they occur in clearly distinct contexts like signs, flight information 
schedules, and maps. The colour red for instance is used for fire safety 
messages on signs, as well as for gate changes at flight information displays 
and for ‘you-­are-­here’ and meeting point symbols on maps.
Testing concepts and designs
Several conceptual as well as design options were tested with the help of 
Theo Boersema from Delft University of Technology and Harm Zwaga 
from Utrecht University (1937–2004). Among the issues tested, were:
•	 Changing the background colour of the road signs at the airport from 
blue (the standard colour for Dutch highway signs) into yellow (to be 
consistent with the interior airport signing). Though no significant 
differences were found, the client opted for the blue signs, to be 
consistent with other Dutch road signs. 
•	 The use of text versus symbols – or a combination – for the message 
‘No stopping allowed at the kerbside. Park your car first’. 
•	 Several new or modified symbols like ‘pick up and drop-­off’.
•	 A set of specific airport terminology if there were no existing 
international airport standard terms like ‘Passport control’ instead of 
‘Immigration’, ‘Transfer’ instead of ‘Connecting flights’.
•	 How to best indicate a range: ‘Gates 1 to 50’ or ‘Gates 1–50’.
•	 The suitability of different illustrations (by the artist and cartoonist 
Opland [Robert Wout]) to help people remember where they parked 
their car. The different parking sections were identified by means 
of these illustrations. All illustrations therefore needed to be clear, 
recognizable, distinctive, and nameable. 	
 
Photo-­simulations and text cards were used for these tests, most of which 
were conducted in the test laboratory of Delft University of Technology 
with representative test panels. Legibility tests were performed on site with 
real-­size signs among airport specialists and staff members of Mijksenaar. 
Selection of new symbol signs which were not included among the 
AIGA/DOT2 symbol signs always followed a strict order:
  2	 A system of 50 basic symbol signs designed for use in airports and other transporta-
tion hubs and at large international events, developed in the 1970s by the American 
Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA) for the US Department of Transportation (DOT) 
(see Symbol signs 1993; <http://www.aiga.org/symbol-signs>; and Mijksenaar  
2008).

Designing for wayfinding / 539 
•	 Is an existing ISO public information symbol available?
•	 Does any national standard provide the symbol?
•	 Does any NGO (airport, rail, recreation park) provide the symbol?
•	 Is any similar existing symbol known? 
•	 If a symbol was found, has it been tested according to ISO test 
procedures?
Depending on the outcome of this field research, a new symbol would be 
designed and tested.
One topic of a later study was the possible limitation of the number of 
separate information steps on signs (the key decision links as mentioned 
above), related to the process of departing or arriving travellers. The con-
clusion was that, as a rule of thumb, a division in three steps is adequate 
(for instance: Departures > Check-­in > Gates). This is an example of the 
wayfinding strategy ‘directions based on process steps’ as described in the 
first part of this chapter, using only the most important steps on the signs. 
As a result, directions to Connecting flights, Concourses, Schengen versus 
Non-­Schengen could be eliminated. 
The use of Exit was also eliminated because of its ambiguity: it had 
been used to indicate the exit of the gate, as well as the exit of the Baggage 
hall, the terminal building, and the airport itself. Based on surveys, only 
Baggage hall and Arrivals were chosen. There were still some language 
oddities, caused by a mix of British English and American English usage 
– like the expression ‘Disabled toilets’, which could be interpreted as ‘toi-
lets out of order’. Nowadays the focus is on a contemporary English lingua 
franca, which is a mix of both.
Maintaining and improving the system
Some clients think (or at least hope) that once the wayfinding system is 
finished, the work is done. Unfortunately, the opposite is true: it is only 
the beginning. At Schiphol, a continuous process of annual reviews and 
updates began (Mijksenaar wayfinding experts 1999–2015). New devel-
opments and insights, as well as  changes in passenger processing, are 
reflected in the changing content of the wayfinding system. A wayfinding 
system therefore needs to be flexible. The life span of a building is 20 years 
or longer, but the life span of the particular content or graphics of the sign 
system is often limited to 10 or even 5 years. 
Schiphol never stopped improving its wayfinding system, driven by 
customer satisfaction surveys and its vision about what a contemporary 
airport should look like. Customer satisfaction interviews are carried 
out on a daily base. Every quarter of a year a secret survey is done by an 
independent consultancy, assigned by a joint committee of international 
airports. This is the base of a  continuous process of maintenance and 
improvement, the goal of which is to make sure that Schiphol remains one 
of the best airports in Europe and worldwide. 

540 / Fenne Roefs and Paul Mijksenaar
Of course, smaller organizations like hospitals or museums often can-
not afford this kind of continuous assessment. It is however highly recom-
mended that they do review their sign and information systems regularly 
and act if necessary. Without proper maintenance of the actual signs as 
well as necessary adjustments to the wayfinding strategy, even the best 
wayfinding system may soon collapse.
References
Arthur, Paul, and Romedi Passini. 1992. Wayfinding: 
people, signs and architecture. New York: 
McGraw-­Hill.
Carpman, Janet Reizenstein, and Myron A. Grant. 
1993. Design that cares: planning health facilities for 
patients and visitors. 2nd edn. Chicago: American 
Hospital Publishing.
Mijksenaar, Paul. 1997. Visual function: an 
introduction to information design. Rotterdam: 010 
Publishers/New York: Princeton Architectural 
Press.
Mijksenaar, Paul. 2008. Wayfinding at Schiphol. 
Amsterdam: Mijksenaar.
Mijksenaar wayfinding experts. 1999–2015. Internal 
reports for Amsterdam Airport Schiphol; 
Mijksenaar Archives; open to scholars on request 
and appointment and only at site. 
Osterer, Heidrun, and Philipp Stamm, eds. 2009. 
Adrian Frutiger typefaces: the complete works. 
Basel: Birkhäuser.
Passini, Romedi. 1999. ‘Wayfinding: backbone of 
graphic support systems.’ In Visual information 
for everyday use: design and research perspectives, 
edited by Harm J. G. Zwaga, Theo Boersema, and 
Henriëtte C. M. Hoonhout, 241–256. London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Symbol signs: the complete study of passenger/
pedestrian-­oriented symbols developed by the 
American Institute of Graphic Arts for the US 
Department of Transport. 1993. 2nd edn. New 
York: The American Institute of Graphic Arts. 
<http://www.aiga.org/symbol-signs/>.
Recommended reading
Gibson, David. 2009. The wayfinding handbook: 
information design for public spaces. New York: 
Princeton Architectural Press.
Lynch, Kevin. 1960. The image of the city. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Miller, Colette, and David Lewis. 1999. Wayfinding: 
effective wayfinding and signing systems: guidance 
for healthcare facilities. London: NHS Estates and 
Stationery Office.
Mollerup, Per. 2013. Wayshowing > wayfinding: basic 
& interactive. Baden: Lars Müller Publishers.
Smitshuijzen, Edo. 2007. Signage design manual. 
Baden: Lars Müller Publishers.

541
The problem of ‘straight ahead’ 
signage
When to use up arrows and down arrows
Joan Zalacain
For indicating direction, the arrow is the most common symbol. Arrows are 
a wayfinding must, since they transform information into directional instruc-
tions. An instruction to turn to the left or to the right is commonly done by 
a pointing arrow. However, when it comes to representing forward movement 
there is no uniquely accepted symbol. Both up-­pointing arrows and down-­
pointing arrows are used. 
This chapter focuses on some factors that can explain why both symbols can 
be used for instructing forward movement in a ­wayfinding system. If we look at 
the up arrow from a metaphorical point of view, we can understand why it can 
be a plausible representation of forward movement. Nevertheless, down arrows 
are sometimes used unsystematically together with up arrows, and sometimes 
just as an inappropriate alternative to up arrows. Likewise, up arrows are 
sometimes used as an inappropriate alternative to down arrows. Real-­world 
situations in which the two arrows are used either on their own or together are 
analysed. 
When we are required to change from a straight ahead direction we are 
most often informed by an arrow pointing left or right. However, when we 
are required to continue in the same forward direction, there is no single 
agreed symbol (concept-­related glyph). Generally, for forward direction 
we use either an arrow pointing upwards (most often) or an arrow point-
ing downwards (less often). In multilevel environments, up arrows and 
down arrows can also be interpreted as ‘go up’ or ‘go down’. This adds 
another problem to the issue. It is evident that what is the most common 
direction of movement on earth, albeit not the most signposted one, does 
not have a unique and commonly agreed symbol to represent it.
The space on directional signs is generally constrained. In most cases it 
is not possible to employ many words to convey a directional message. For 
showing direction, an arrow is the most widely understood symbol (Follis 
and Hammer 1979, 59). The arrow transforms information into a direc-
tional command or instruction, thus guiding movement and behaviour 
(Fuller 2002, 239ff). The decoding of information through this symbol 
is based on a long-standing agreement among wayfinding designers, sign 
makers, and users, so the latter can interpret it as an instruction to move in 
a given direction (Nickerson 1981, 11). 
Information 
design: research 
and practice, 
pages 541–552
36

542 / Joan Zalacain
Figure 2
a. Arrow 
developed by 
Paul Arthur and 
Romedi Passini.
(Arthur and Passini 
1992, 176). Reproduced 
with permission of 
McGraw-Hill Education.
b. Optional arrow 
in the typeface 
Wayfinding Sans 
Pro, designed by 
Ralf Herrmann 
and Sebastian 
Nagel. 
c. Arrow in use 
at the Toronto 
subway system. 
Image provided by 
David Kopulos.
Reproduced with 
permission.
a
b
c
The arrow’s meaning, though, is not always clear when we want to 
indicate a straight ahead direction on a flat two-­dimensional sign mounted 
perpendicularly to the earth’s surface (Figure 1). This is opposed to, for 
example, clearly communicating arrows painted on the road surface. 
Arrows on vertically mounted signboards pointing to the left or to the 
right also clearly instruct us to move in those directions. However, indicat-
ing forward movement on vertically mounted signboards presents a prob-
lem. The use of an up arrow or down arrow can be understood literally 
as pointing at an object that is located above or below – or, in the case of 
vertical transport (a lift, stairs, or an escalator), to a direction up or down. 
However, both up arrows and down arrows are used for ‘straight ahead’. 
There is no agreement in practice, and some controversy exists as to 
which should inform the user to move straight ahead (Follis and Hammer 
1979, 70). 
To resolve the problem, that two different arrows can represent the 
same (forward) direction, several designers have attempted to create a new 
symbol. The approach of creating an arrow with a three-­dimensional look 
by introducing a degree of perspective, in order to reinforce the meaning 
of the straight ahead arrow (Arthur and Passini 1992, 176) has been the 
most common one (Figure 2). Toronto’s subway system is an environment 
where such an arrow was used for some time (Figure 2c). This solution, 
though, has had limited success and is rarely used. The flat arrow is almost 
universally used, even though it is obvious that the symbol should not be 
taken literally (Nickerson 1981, 11).
At this point, it is worth taking a step back to consider why both up and 
down arrows can be understood as meaning ‘straight ahead’. 
The destination principle: the future  
is ‘up’ and ‘ahead’
An up arrow to indicate ‘straight ahead’ does not point at the destination, 
but is supposed to be understood metaphorically. Looking at an up arrow 
from a metaphorical point of view can help us understand why it can be 
a  very plausible representation of forward movement. A  down arrow, 
though, can not be considered as an instruction for straight ahead from 
a metaphorical point of view.
Metaphors we live by (1980), by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, which 
popularized the study and understanding of metaphors, explained vividly 
how metaphors abound as cognitive and communicative resources in lan-
guage and everyday life. Based on partial similarity, metaphors obliquely 
transfer meaning from one (source) domain to another (target) domain; 
thus creating or allowing for new meanings or perspectives to become 
associated with the target domain.
In our case, which will be explained below, an up arrow, which can 
be understood as an instruction to keep walking ahead, becomes an 
Figure 1

The problem of ‘straight ahead’ signage / 543 
‘orientational metaphor’ (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 14–21). It is a type of 
non-­arbitrary metaphor that has its basis in the physical and spatial bodily 
experiences of all humans within the earth’s gravitational field – which 
therefore tend to be cross-­cultural, and thus universal or near-­universal. 
Accordingly, James J. Gibson’s classic The perception of the visual world 
(1950, 33–35, 148–150), explains how we perceive the world upwards and 
not downwards. Our everyday natural posture is standing up, and due to 
gravity our bodies are rooted through our feet to the ground and we sense 
the ground under our feet. We stand ‘up’ on earth through our feet, and we 
are reminded of that through stimuli at every step we take. 
However, although orientational metaphors tend to be non-­arbitrary, 
they can also vary from culture to culture (for a detailed discussion about 
metaphors and universality, see Kövecses 2005). 
One of the near-­universal metaphors that helps explain why we can 
associate events that will occur in the future as ‘up’, is that ‘future events 
are up (and ahead)’, since the future is in front of us: 
All up coming events are listed in the paper. What’s coming up this week? I’m 
afraid of what’s up ahead of us. What’s up? (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 16)
As previously suggested, ‘orientational metaphors’ tend to be universal:
Physical basis: Normally our eyes look in the direction in which we typically 
move (ahead, forward). As an object approaches a person (or the person 
approaches the object), the object appears larger. Since the ground is 
perceived as being fixed, the top of the object appears to be moving upward in 
the person’s field of vision. (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 16)
We see things that come towards us as objects ‘growing’ or ‘coming 
up’ (Figure 3). Consequently, when moving forward we can understand 
objects that are ‘ahead’ as likely to be ‘up’ instead of down. We can there-
fore abbreviate the message ‘straight ahead’ in a sign as an arrow pointing 
up, transferring the concept of destinations reached in the near future as 
‘up’. 
This metaphor, that the ‘future is up’, and the fact that moving towards 
Figure 3
a. Object and 
person at a 
distance from 
each other. 
b. Object and 
person close to 
each other, with 
top of object 
appearing to move 
upward. 
Zofia Szostkiewicz. 
a
b

544 / Joan Zalacain
it is also ‘up’, can clearly be understood by looking at the interactive info-
graphic on The Guardian website to illustrate the timeline of events in the 
Arab Spring (Figure 4). The navigation arrows on the left take us forward 
or backward in time. Moving the slider up towards the up-­pointing arrow-
head will take us forward in time as if we were driving along a motorway or 
walking to an emergency exit at the end of a corridor. Conversely, moving 
the slider down towards the down-­pointing arrowhead will take us back. 
The illusion of the timeline being similar to a motorway or corridor is 
enhanced by adding perspective to the two-­dimensional plane. 
James J. Gibson describes movement parallel to the earth’s surface as 
movement towards a point in the horizon; in principle by feet or by wheels 
or by any other means (1950, 117–145). The point in the horizon appears 
as a motionless focus of expansion of radiating optical flow lines that grad-
ually increase in velocity while moving towards us – with the projected 
surface getting increasingly deformed, and with maximal velocity directly 
underneath us (Figure 5). When movement happens on the ground, the 
Figure 4
Arab Spring 
interactive 
timeline. 
Garry Blight, Sheila 
Pulham and Paul 
Torpey, 5 January 2012. 
The Guardian. <http://
www.theguardian.com/
world/interactive/2011/
mar/22/middle-east-
protest-interactive-
timeline>. Copyright 
Guardian News & Media 
Ltd 2016. Reproduced 
with permission.
Figure 5
Flow lines radiating from a motionless 
focus point on the horizon. Note: 
arrowheads are only indicators of the 
direction of the flow lines. The length 
of the flow lines indicates velocity (the 
longer the faster).
Zofia Szostkiewicz, inspired by original drawings 
by James J. Gibson.

The problem of ‘straight ahead’ signage / 545 
focus of expansion (our ‘destination’) will always be perceived as above 
the immediate ground on which movement happens. It therefore makes 
sense, also of this reason, to suggest that an up-­pointing arrow is the most 
appropriate arrow for denoting ‘straight ahead’. 
The access point principle: ‘through here’
If, while moving towards your destination (in parallel to the earth’s sur-
face), you are required to follow an exact path or lane, or to pass through 
an opening or doorway, or any other access point, the down arrow – if 
mounted immediately above while pointing directly at the access point 
– makes obvious sense (Figure 6). This example, in Charles de Gaulle 
Airport outside Paris, clearly illustrates that baggage claim and exit are 
reached through those doors.
To give a general idea of a straight ahead direction, the destination prin-
ciple with its up arrow is more appropriate (the arrow as an indicator of 
the compass direction). On the other hand, if the aim is to denote that the 
destination is reached driving through a precise lane or entering through 
a particular doorway, the access point principle with an overhead down 
arrow is appropriate (the arrow as an indicator of the immediate location 
of the path towards the destination). 
The arrows at work
It follows that up and down arrows can be applied to different wayfind-
ing situations. There are also situations in which they can work together. 
An  example of glaring real-­world inconsistency however, is found on 
motorways in Europe. Driving from Amsterdam to Milan, one will en-
counter several changes in the orientation of arrows on overhead gantry 
signs (Figure 7, overleaf). It is surprising that, in such a safety-­critical 
situation as road transport, there is no agreement among countries as to 
which symbol to use. In some cases, road authorities have changed their 
Figure 6
Down arrow at Charles de 
Gaulle Airport, Paris. 

546 / Joan Zalacain
initial decision about which arrow should indicate ‘straight ahead’. For ex-
ample, the Netherlands’ motorway network and the motorway ring ­road 
around Antwerp have recently switched from using downward-­pointing 
to upward-­pointing arrows (Rijkswaterstaat [2010]; Gazet van Antwerpen 
2014). The lack of agreement seems to stem from different views about 
the message conveyed by an overhead gantry sign. Possibly because na-
tional road authorities haven’t seriously considered which arrow to use, 
or because different national road authorities consciously, right or wrong, 
choose to emphasize different aspects of the sign messages in question 
(‘straight ahead’ versus ‘through this lane’).
The destination principle establishes that an up arrow is generally con-
ceived of as denoting forward movement. As such, it can be used in most 
wayfinding situations. In Figure 8, from an IKEA store, the meaning may 
seem unclear. However, on site we would probably understand that we 
have to go through the opening to the right of the sign to access location 
46–97 (a separate area adjunct to aisle 1). Since we have just established 
that a down arrow is most appropriate for denoting ‘through here’, we 
could easily think that the up arrow should be replaced with a down arrow. 
However, for a down arrow to work, it would have to mounted above the 
opening.
Figure 8
Up arrow to the side of the 
suggested path.
Netherlands
Ahead
Belgium
France
Germany
Switzerland
Italy
Exit
Figure 7
Comparison of straight ahead 
arrow direction on overhead 
gantry signs on European 
motorways.

The problem of ‘straight ahead’ signage / 547 
When the user has to navigate through multilevel environments, the 
use of an up arrow for straight ahead directions is not so clear and can lead 
to confusion (Figure 9). In these examples, in London and Warsaw, the 
user is required to walk straight ahead down a set of stairs, but the arrows 
are pointing upwards. Even if the concept of forward movement as ‘up’ is 
acceptable in this case, a down arrow would probably be clearer. Both the 
literal meaning of a down arrow and the denotation ‘through here’ would 
apply. It is likely that the text ‘straight on’ has been added to the London 
sign to clarify the message.
Where the intention of a sign is to show a general straight ahead direc-
tion and the indicating arrow is both down-­pointing and positioned below 
eye level, the malfunction doubles (Figure 10). In this example, in Tarnów, 
Poland, the sign is trying to show the way to the Jewish cemetery, which 
is straight ahead, and not through any particular access point. The down 
arrow is almost impossible to understand as straight ahead and in this case 
might be taken for its literal sense of pointing downwards, which takes the 
user nowhere. 
Figure 9
Up arrows at an 
Underground 
station in London 
and at an entrance 
to the Warsaw 
metro. 
Figure 10
Down arrow in 
Tarnów, Poland.

548 / Joan Zalacain
The sign in Barcelona Airport (Figure 11) is also an example of mislead-
ing or ambiguous signage. Although the arrows are above eye level, the 
sign is placed in a very wide space and the direction ahead to be followed 
is not through a specific point or along a marked route. The down arrows 
almost seem to be pointing to the bin under the sign, rather than the des-
tinations. Applying the destination principle and thus an up arrow to this 
situation would better indicate forward movement. 
Simultaneous use of up and down arrows 
When navigating through multilevel environments such as transporta-
tion hubs, hospitals, museums, or shopping malls, some situations can 
be demanding for the user – as well as for those planning the wayfinding 
system. Situations in which a decision must be made between ‘keep walk-
ing ahead on the same level’ or ‘keep walking ahead but move to another 
level eventually’ or ‘here, on the side of the main path, you can move to 
another level’, pose a challenge. The two first of the three examples below 
illustrate that up and down arrows can be applied in conjunction with each 
other in some complex situations, while the third example demonstrates 
an alternative solution.
Hoofddorp R-­NET station
Figure 12 shows the platform exit at the Hoofddorp stop for the R-­NET 
bus network in the Netherlands. The platform is elevated, and exiting the 
station or connecting to other public transport is done by descending to 
ground level. The picture shows a destination sign with two alternatives to 
get there: by stairs or by lift. 
In the case of the down arrow, the staircase opening is straight ahead. 
This case follows the access point principle supplemented by the literal 
meaning of pointing down to another level. In accordance with the access 
Figure 11
Down arrow at Barcelona 
Airport. 

The problem of ‘straight ahead’ signage / 549 
point principle it is revealed that exit and connections are reached through 
the only point on the platform where, from this point of view, we can see 
an opening in the ground.
The other arrow on the sign, for passengers exiting the platform via the 
lift located further on along the platform, is an up arrow, which follows 
the destination principle. The access point principle cannot be applied at 
this sign location, partly because the arrow would be pointing downwards 
and users would easily misunderstand and take the stairs just behind the 
sign. In this case the destination principle – although not being completely 
clear, since the up arrow also points to the stairs – creates a differentiation 
from the down arrow and instructs the passengers to keep walking further 
along the platform until they reach the lift. 
The sign is understandable because the two arrows are different. And 
in addition, the iconic pictograms clarify a potentially confusing situation. 
However, in order to help comprehension, the design solution could be 
improved by moving the information related to the lift away from the path 
leading to the stairs. 
Gatwick Airport Skyway
The Skyway bridge that connects two terminals at Gatwick Airport in the 
UK (Figure 13) is similar to the Hoofddorp case. The bridge is elevated to 
allow aircrafts to taxi under it, and when passengers are at either end they 
descend to a passenger terminal level, either by lift or escalator. 
The left-­hand sign, directing passengers to the lift located further along 
the corridor, applies the up arrow according to the metaphor principle for 
forward movement. The down arrow on the right-­hand sign is instructing 
passengers, by means of the access point principle, to focus on the esca-
lator opening in the floor. Unlike the Hoofddorp case, two signs are used. 
They are placed separately, above each path. This helps the passenger to 
understand that, even though the destination is the same, the means by 
which it is reached are different. The case of Gatwick suggests how break-
ing down information in two parts can be more efficient than combining it 
on a single sign as in Hoofddorp. 
Figure 12
Sign at Hoofddorp 
elevated R-­NET 
bus stop.
Figure 13
Up and down arrows in use 
at Gatwick Airport, London. 

550 / Joan Zalacain
Footscray Station footbridge
Footscray railway station in Melbourne, Australia, has an overhead foot-
bridge that connects the platforms located at ground level of the station. 
The pictures (Figure 14) were taken at a decision point on the footbridge 
when the station was in the process of being extended from four to six 
platforms, and construction work was still going on.
This sign is trying to indicate the following:
•	 Straight ahead for:
‘Platforms 1 & 2 with information desk and ticket machine’ 
‘Lift for Platforms 2 & ■’
‘Irving street’
‘Trams’
‘Buses’
•	 At a lower level the passenger will find:
‘Platform ■ with information desk and ticket machine’ 
‘City Platforms 1 & ■’  
(■ = number(s) covered, due to construction work)
•	 To the left and right:
‘Stairs’
The direction to the first group of destinations (‘Platforms 1 & 2’, ‘Lift 
for Platforms 2’, ‘Irving street’, ‘Trams’, and ‘Buses’) is clearly shown by up 
arrows following the destination principle.
Down arrows are perhaps the most interesting part of this example. 
They are not supposed to be understood as denoting forward movement, 
nor forward movement through an access point. In fact, the intention 
of the down arrows on this sign is to inform the passenger what is one 
level beneath them, in this case the second group of destinations (‘City 
Platforms 1 & ■’ and ‘Platform ■ with information and ticket machine’). 
To reach them, the passenger can use the stairs, indicated with arrows to 
the left and to the right. 
Figure 14
Original sign at 
Footscray station, 
Melbourne, 
Australia. 
Photo: Giorgio Goi. Used 
with permission.

The problem of ‘straight ahead’ signage / 551 
From this example it is clear that if both arrows are to be combined, it 
must be done with care. The sign is confusing since it is introducing an 
arrow in its literal meaning (‘below you’) in order to inform about a service 
located below. To sum up: some arrows are used to indicate how to reach 
a destination, and others are used to inform about a location (‘under’). 
These down arrows are not directional instructions indicating the route 
that leads to the destination, neither are they down arrows denoting 
a ‘through here’ access point. They are rather suggesting directions similar 
to ‘as the crow flies’ (the shortest distance between two points), and not 
suggesting the actual route needed to be followed. When using both up 
and down arrows in conjunction with each other, the concepts should be 
clear (which is not the case here), and devised so they are not confusing 
for the passenger.
Once the two new platforms were in place and renovation of the foot-
bridge was finished, new signs were installed. Directing passengers to plat-
forms right below them is now done by using 45° down-­pointing arrows, 
i.e. when the escalator, ramp, staircase, or lift is in immediate proximity 
of the sign (Figure 15). When the passenger is required to move further 
ahead on the footbridge before descending – regardless of which level the 
destination is located on – only up-­pointing arrows are used. The changes 
seem to have solved a problem. A much clearer message is now conveyed 
to the passengers.
Conclusion
The arrow is the most common symbol for giving directional instruction. 
However, when users are being instructed to move forward along a level 
plane, there is no firm consensus as to which type of arrow should be used, 
and up arrows and down arrows are sometimes even mixed inconsistently 
in the very same wayfinding system.
This case study has investigated how both symbols are used, why both 
symbols can be used, and how both symbols should be used. Two princi-
ples (‘destination’ and ‘access point’) have been introduced in an attempt 
to identify sound rationales behind, and heuristics for, the application 
of up and down arrows. The two principles help to anticipate how users 
Figure 15
New sign at 
Footscray station, 
Melbourne, 
Australia.
Photo: Eleonora Egidi. 
Used with permission.

552 / Joan Zalacain
552 / Joan Zalacain
might perceive the two different arrows in different situations, and they 
suggest which arrow is the most appropriate for a particular situation in 
a particular environment. 
The destination principle gives us a better concept of a straight ahead 
direction. Metaphors have provided an explanation to how we can under-
stand an upward-pointing arrow as a displacement towards an event in the 
future, or a destination ahead of us. The user can understand that an up 
arrow is the general concept for ‘direction straight ahead’. Therefore, the 
metaphorical point of view with arrows pointing up can be consistently 
applied through a wayfinding system as ‘straight ahead’. However, its use 
in multilevel environments has to be carefully considered in order to aid 
its comprehension. A user’s interpretation of the meaning of an arrow may 
vary depending on whether the mental map at work is planar or multilevel. 
The use of down arrows is supported by the access point principle. 
When placed immediately above and pointing at clearly marked paths, 
lanes, or doorways, down arrows unambiguously denote ahead ‘through 
here’. 
The examples above demonstrate that up arrows and down arrows 
can be used together in multilevel environments. In such cases a sensible 
placement and appropriate sign for each destination is critical. The use of 
pictograms together with arrows enhances intelligibility. Understanding 
the situation in cases where moving to a location on another level can 
be achieved in different ways, and as a result applying the appropriate 
principles, is of utmost importance. Such an understanding depends on 
whether the stairs or the lift is located in close proximity to the sign or 
located further ahead on the current level. It is important that wayfinding 
designers carefully consider what is the exact message they want to deliver 
at a certain point – and to be consistent about delivering it.
References
Arthur, Paul, and Romedi Passini. 1992. Wayfinding: 
people, signs, and architecture. Toronto: 
McGraw-­Hill.
Follis, John, and David Hammer. 1979. Architectural 
signing and graphics. New York: Whitney Library 
of Design.
Fuller, Gillian. 2002. ‘The arrow – directional 
semiotics: wayfinding in transit.’ Social Semiotics 
12 (3): 231–244.
Gazet van Antwerpen. 2014. ‘Omgedraaide pijlen 
moeten files sterk doen afnemen.’ 8 April 2014. 
<http://www.gva.be/nieuws/binnenland/
aid1566743/omgedraaide-pijlen-moeten-files-
sterk-doen-afnemen.aspx>.
Gibson, James J. 1950. The perception of the visual 
world. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2005. Metaphor in culture: 
universality and variation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors 
we live by. Chicago and London: University of 
Chicago Press.
Nickerson, Raymond S. 1981. ‘Understanding 
signs: some examples of knowledge-­dependent 
language processing.’ Information Design Journal 
2 (1): 2–16. 
Rijkswaterstaat. [2010]. Nieuwe bewegwijzering 
autosnelwegen. Public information brochure. 
<http://www.ambcachterveld.nl/uitzet/
diversen/Brochure_Nieuwe_Bewegwijzering_
Autosnelwegen_tcm174-183277.pdf>.

553
Park at your peril
There’s big money in bad signs
Martin Cutts
Parking enforcement is a hot topic in the UK, with eight million penalties issued 
annually by local councils using statutory powers and two million issued by 
private operators acting under virtually unregulated schemes. Many motorists 
feel targeted by what they regard as money-­raising operations disguised as 
traffic and parking control. This chapter considers the clarity of language and 
layout of some public and private signs. It finds that while public signs benefit 
from the guidance of the Traffic signs manual, certain private-­company signs 
showing contractual terms have unclear wording and layout. Their obscurity 
increases the risk of motorists incurring unfair penalties. The companies usually 
derive much of their income from penalties, which may militate against a desire 
for clarity.
Parking a vehicle in the UK seems such a simple thing. You drive along, you 
see a space for parking on the road or in a car park, and you park. A nearby 
sign may carry details of restrictions. On the highway or council-­owned 
land, signs and road markings are standard and governed by detailed 
Department of Transport regulations. Drivers who breach the rules, 
perhaps by overstaying the time limit or parking outside a marked bay, 
may get a penalty charge notice (PCN). They can either pay the fine or 
challenge it and, if that fails, go to an independent body like the Traffic 
Penalty Tribunal. If it finds the signs inadequate, it may overturn the 
penalty. UK councils impose eight million parking fines a year, at £25–130 
a time. Government guidance says councils should neither give enforce-
ment staff targets or incentives for the number of fines they impose, nor 
use the money for non-­transport purposes. However, there is evidence to 
suggest that several London councils were giving contractors incentives 
to issue as many fines as possible.1 
When you park on private land in England and Wales, a different and 
largely unregulated regime is in place. Private parking comes under the 
law of contract and, to a lesser extent, trespass. The clarity of signs is cru-
cial because in contract law there has to be informed agreement. Private-­
parking companies issue around two million ‘parking charge notices’ 
(PCNs) every year) at £60–100 a  time (Driver and Vehicle Licensing 
Agency (DVLA) figures for 2013/14). The companies generally belong 
to trade associations that bind them to a code of practice requiring clear 
  1	 Inside out, BBC TV programme, February 2014.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 553–560
37

554 / Martin Cutts
signage. But the codes give little guidance on what makes a sign clear, so 
companies largely decide this for themselves. 
As noted above, ‘PCN’ is used with a different meaning in each regime, 
the parking firms having adopted the acronym to paint themselves in the 
colours of their more official cousins. Most drivers mistakenly regard pri-
vate PCNs as fines or penalties. Until November 2015, contract-law prec-
edents meant the amount imposed had to be a genuine estimate of the 
landowner’s loss. But the Supreme Court overturned this in ParkingEye 
v Beavis ([2015] UKSC 67), declaring that the £85 claimed from the driver 
was more of a deterrent contractual charge, which was allowable as com-
mercially justified. 
The business model of many of the parking firms, particularly those 
running shopping-­centre car parks, is controversial. They tender com-
petitively to the landowner to get the rights to manage the car park. So 
they pay as much as they can or accept the lowest fee they can to get the 
business. Inevitably, once contracted, they tend to impose as many PCNs 
as possible for contraventions of the rules they create, because they will 
take all or most of the money raised. So it is not in the firm’s interest to 
erect highly legible signs spelling out the rules in clear language. 
For drivers, the best way of avoiding a contravention is probably to take 
a ticket at an entry barrier and pay on exit. But barriers are expensive to 
install and, because they limit the number and type of contraventions, 
they are far less profitable for the companies. This means open sites with 
signs are the commonest kind of private car park. These entice motorists 
on to the land, often with offers of a free-­parking period. Vehicle keepers 
(usually the drivers/owners) who disobey the rules get a PCN for £70–100. 
Several of the biggest private firms rely heavily on camera surveillance, 
recording vehicle registration plates on entry and exit and sending PCNs 
by post. One company bought 807,201 datasets in 2013/14 (DVLA: FOIR 
3910). At an average of £85 a time, it is chasing £6.86 million, so this is big 
business.
Any lack of clarity in the signs weighs particularly hard on first-­time 
users of car parks, people with weak reading skills, and foreign tourists 
driving hire cars. For all of them, parking can be perilous. At current levels, 
a £100 penalty represents about 14 hours’ work at the minimum wage, 
before tax. Within this often confusing context, it is reasonable to expect 
clear signs that explain parking fees and penalties.
Parking signs on public land
For highway parking signs, regulations prescribe standards for the size 
and style of lettering, the spacing and much of the language, and roadway 
markings. These are set out in minute detail in the Traffic signs manual 
first published in 2006 and regularly updated.2 Its standardization of fonts, 
  2	 <http://www.gov.uk/government/publications/traffic-signs-manual>.

Park at your peril / 555 
colours, sizes, and layout means drivers get used to a particular kind of 
sign wherever they park in the UK. Drivers can successfully appeal against 
penalties issued where the signs break the rules. As road space becomes 
scarcer, though, signposts can get crowded with text about permitted 
parking days and hours, residents-­only permit rules, and other exceptions 
to the norm. However, even the most straightforward-­looking sign may 
require interpretation as shown in Figure 1. It permits on-­street parking 
in the marked bays between 9 am and 6 pm on any day for two hours, and 
parking is free of charge because there is nothing to say it is not. Drivers are 
meant to realize they can also park free outside the stated hours, whether 
in the marked bays or not. The lettering is of a good size (the x-­height of 
‘am’ is 20 mm, in line with the regulations). 
Some public parking signs are much more confusing as seen in Figure 2, 
which shows a pay machine and signs relating to residents-only parking 
bays in Water Street, Buxton, Derbyshire. The road to the right of the 
signpost was for parking by residents with permits only, and the road to 
the left was for pay-­and-­display parking only. Badly marked white lines 
divided the two contiguous areas. A crucial and easily missed detail was 
the direction of the arrows on the signs. After many complaints the council 
intervened and painted ‘permit holders only’ on the road (Figure 3). 
Figure 1
An apparently 
simple parking 
sign on a public 
road.
Figure 2
Signs on the 
public road at 
Water Street, 
Buxton. 
Figure 3
Water Street, 
Buxton, after 
‘Permit holders 
only’ had been 
painted on the 
roadway.

556 / Martin Cutts
Figures available under freedom-­of-­information rules (Table 1) show 
that from February 2009, when the council took over parking enforce-
ment, till July 2010, when the painting occurred, 894 penalty notices were 
issued in Water Street. A remarkable 87% of these – 775 notices – were for 
parking in the permit-­only section. On an annual basis, that’s 540 penalties.
From the time of painting until March 2011 (when the figures were 
released), 181 penalty notices were issued in Water Street. Of these, 111 were 
for the permit-­only section. That’s 61%, or 26 percentage points below the 
previous level. So the number of these penalties was now only 186 a year 
on average, a huge reduction of nearly two thirds. Even this figure was 
high and suggested that much more could be done to stop motorists being 
misled. Further improvements have since resulted in one side of the road 
being wholly set aside for permit holders only. 
Water Street was the council’s biggest single moneymaker from parking 
fines throughout the town. Somebody must have known, from the huge 
amount of cash coming in from this little street, that something was badly 
wrong. Yet nothing was done until drivers started to complain (Cutts 2011). 
In council-­owned off-­street car parks, the signs and their main messages 
– notably ‘pay and display’ – tend to be large and bold. Figure 4 gives a typ-
ical sign from Cheshire East Council, where ‘pay and display’ has a capital 
height of 75 mm. The tariff and penalties are shown on nearby signs and the 
ticket machine. Derbyshire Dales District Council uses a similar approach 
(Figure 5). Here the ‘pay here’ message has a huge capital height of 118 mm, 
the sentence starting ‘A penalty’ has a cap height of 15 mm, and a nearby 
ticket machine sets out the list of contraventions that attract penalties with 
a cap height of 3 mm. Apart from its final contravention, ‘Parking in a park-
ing place for a purpose other than the designated purpose’, the language 
is reasonably clear and the contraventions are what drivers would expect. 
Set out in all caps, though, they are less legible than they would be it set in 
upper and lower case.
Table 1  Penalties issued before and after ‘Permit holders only’ was painted on 
the tarmac in Water Street, Buxton 
Time period
Total penalty notices issued 
in Water Street
Penalty notices for the 
permit-only section (also 
shown as a % of the total  
and annualized)
Before new road markings 
19 Feb 2009 to 26 July 2010
523 days
894
775 
87% 
equivalent to 540 per year
After new road markings 
27 July 2010 to 1 Mar 2011 
217 days
181
111
61%
equivalent to 186 per year

Park at your peril / 557 
Parking signs on private land
Companies belonging to parking trade associations have to comply with 
codes of practice that cover signage. The British Parking Association 
(BPA) guidance on car-­park entrance signs gives a table of sensible mini-
mum font sizes for different kinds of information, and good advice about 
colour contrast between text and background, and about illumination 
during the hours of darkness. 
Beyond that, though, the code prescribes very little. It merely says 
signs stating the parking terms must measure 450 mm × 450 mm and be 
‘conspicuous and legible and written in intelligible language’. This form of 
words is open to wide interpretation. 
An example of a misleading sign is shown in Figure 6 (overleaf). It is 
not easy to see that this notice is proclaiming a pay-and-display car park. 
In deciding a county-court case that hinged on whether this sign was clear, 
the judge found in favour of the motorist:
If I look at the signs, they tell me very little. It is by no means clear, whether 
from the coloured photographs of the signs, nor, indeed, from the inspection 
of the signs that took place by me, that this is a pay and display car park. 
It follows, therefore, that the claimant has not taken reasonable steps to bring 
to the attention of drivers that it is a pay and display car park that they are 
entering. The notice contains a lot of information, which can easily distract 
drivers from the key information. The key information is that it is a pay and 
display car park. (Excel Parking Services Ltd v M. Cutts, 2011, Stockport) 
The parking company, Excel, said 11,498 drivers in the previous three 
years had committed the same ‘offence’ of not paying and displaying, ena-
bling it to claim £364,000 in penalties. The sign is not good information 
design because:
Figure 4
Sign at a public 
car park where the 
main messages 
are clear, despite 
the rather 
legalistic small 
print.
Figure 5
Sign at a public car park. 
Again, the main points are 
obvious enough.

558 / Martin Cutts
•	 The words ‘pay and display’ are a subordinate feature of the 
typography, which is dominated by distracting graphics and a large 
‘welcome’ message that makes the sign look like an advertisement. 
•	 Much of the detailed lettering is in capitals. 
•	 It is not designed for distance viewing. Drivers would need to stand 
close to the 750-word sign and study it carefully to understand 
properly the contract terms. 
•	 The text has a wide line length of about 140 characters and spaces and 
there is little space between the lines of type, making reading difficult.
•	 There are 19 pictograms, many of them meaningless at first sight. 
•	 There is no system of headings and subheadings, which would help 
to split the information into groups of related points. Without this, 
readers are less able to skim-­read effectively and find what is relevant. 
•	 Much of the text has a cap height of about 4.5 mm that is easily legible 
when viewed close up – but the text is virtually illegible for a driver 
passing at 10 mph while concentrating on the roadway and pedestrian 
crossing ahead. 
•	 The key words ‘This is a pay and display car park’ are too small.3 
•	 The sign’s first sentence is hard to understand, even for people who 
know the unexplained acronym ‘ANPR’ (automated number plate 
recognition):
This site may be monitored by ANPR parking enforcement cameras for the 
purpose of ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the car park 
by Excel Parking Services Ltd.
Literally this means that the monitoring will ensure compliance by Excel 
with the rules of its own car park. Presumably, Excel meant to say that the 
cameras help it to monitor vehicles and their drivers.
•	 Some of the sentences are too long. There is, for example, one 
sentence with 64 words, some of which may be difficult for people to 
understand as it uses such words as: ‘attributed’ and ‘aforementioned’. 
•	 Most of the verbs are in the passive voice: ‘may be monitored’, ‘may 
be requested’, ‘if they are found’, ‘will be accepted’, ‘is attributed’, etc. 
Overuse of the passive voice, especially when no agents (‘doers’) are 
stated, militates against clarity. 
In court Excel maintained the sign was clear and legible, though when new 
government rules on access to drivers’ data came in to force in 2012, the 
company updated the sign. It raised the cap height of ‘Pay and display’ by 
615% to 80 mm, reduced the number of pictograms to seven, used mostly 
sentence case, and removed all the distracting graphics. 
  3	 The Watchdog BBC TV programme covered this case on 19 April 2012 and reported 
that at a council-­run town-­centre car park where ‘Pay and display’ was nine times 
bigger, there were four times fewer ‘offences’ of not buying a ticket.

Park at your peril / 559 
Some final thoughts
Much of the plain-­language and information-­design literature of the past 35 
years has assumed that clarification is the universal goal. What if, though, 
a document’s owners are seeking to legitimize an unfair regime or entrap 
the readers in some way? Then any information designers involved with 
the document may well feel they should propose changes that would make 
it more ethical and accurate – but at the genuine and serious risk of losing 
the client’s patronage. 
The Traffic signs manual is widely regarded as a gold standard for sign 
design on publicly owned land. Its model signs seem clear and legible, 
and they generally take account of good practice in information design. 
The manual’s standards are, however, rarely followed in signs erected on 
private land, which therefore compare badly. They tend to be relatively 
Figure 6
Private parking 
sign at the Peel 
Centre, Stockport, 
which a judge 
found unclear.

560 / Martin Cutts
illegible, and the language is often hard to understand. The suspicion 
remains that private companies prefer signs like this because they gener-
ate penalty income. It would be good if these signs were properly clarity-­
checked in advance by readability specialists. Then they might have a clear 
hierarchy of headings and spacing as well as a good size of type (in sen-
tence case, not all caps), short sentences, active-­voice verbs, and every-
day vocabulary – the usual points to be found in plain-­language guidance 
(Cutts 2013; Kimble 2012; Adler 2007). There might also be some testing 
of comprehension with likely users.
Because parking companies derive so much of their income from pen-
alties, they have a disincentive to erect clear signs. Among other neces-
sary changes in the law surrounding parking on private land after the 
Supreme Court ruling mentioned earlier, there is a case for outlawing the 
awarding of contracts that incentivize companies to impose penalties for 
contraventions.
References
Adler, Mark. 2007. Clarity for lawyers. London: The 
Law Society.
British Parking Association. 2014. BPA approved 
operator scheme code of practice, v4. < http://www.
britishparking.co.uk/write/Documents/AOS/
AOS_Code_of_Practice_-_V4,_Feb_2014.pdf>.
Cutts, Martin. 2011. ‘Complaining about bad 
writing: does it achieve anything except 
make me feel better.’ <http://clearest.co.uk/
pages/publications/articlesbyourteam/
plain-language-campaigns>.
Cutts, Martin. 2012. ‘Phoney fines and dodgy 
signs take drivers for a ride.’ <http://clearest.
co.uk/pages/publications/articlesbyourteam/
parking-language>.
Cutts, Martin. 2013. Oxford guide to plain English. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Department of Transport. 2008. Traffic signs manual. 
London: HMSO.
Kimble, Joseph. 2102. Writing for dollars, writing to 
please. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.

561
Indoor digital wayfinding
The impact of new positioning technologies 
Žiga Kropivšek
People have become accustomed to accessing personalized wayfinding 
information anywhere. While outdoor navigation has become common, digital 
wayfind­ing applications have only recently become available for use indoors 
with applications on smartphones, assistive tools for people with special needs, 
and dynamic signage. Because the accuracy and the nature of information 
gathered by these technologies differs, the design of the output given to users 
needs to be considered so that the wayfinding support given is relevant and 
dependable. This chapter provides an overview of existing indoor positioning 
technologies and discusses the information needs of users in indoor spaces. 
There is an emphasis on those with special needs who can benefit greatly from 
the adaptive qualities of digital wayfinding solutions. Concerns about privacy 
when personal location data is collected collection are also considered.
People are being faced with increasing complexity in everyday space-­
related decision-making. Today, they travel more often than in the past 
and make more daily journeys. Together with the strive to increase the 
use of public transport, this has made our travel behaviour increasingly 
multimodal, increasing the chance to encounter complex indoor spaces 
such as intermodal hubs and stations during everyday journeys. Digital 
technologies are becoming increasingly used in supporting this decision- 
making.
For years, digital wayfinding, made available by global navigation satel-
lite systems (GNSS),1 has remained in the domain of drivers and to some 
extent wanderers, unconstrained by the infrastructure of the urban envi-
ronment. However, since mobile devices brought positioning capabilities 
to our pockets and the location-based services2 relying on them became 
part of our daily routine, users’ expectations have raised beyond of what 
  1	 Global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) provide worldwide positioning through 
trilateration, using a constellation of satellites. It should be noted that the most widely 
used system, the GPS (Global Positioning System) is often very liberally used as a 
synonym for GNSS (e.g. in Jiang and Yao 2006 and Kee et al. 2001), however, apart from 
the US-developed GPS, other GNSS are either operational or under development, most 
notably GLONASS (Russia), Galileo (European Union), and Compass (China) (Bouwer 
et al. 2013, 2).
  2	 Location-based services (LBS) are information services, running predominantly on 
mobile devices, that have evolved from online maps and other geographic information 
systems (GIS). Targeted to a wide range of users, LBS support their decision-making 
by utilizing location information data to provide personalized information relevant 
to the context within the users’ current or projected location. Use of LBS ranges from 
way­finding, social applications, utility, monitoring and collecting data to critical 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 561–576
38

562 / Žiga Kropivšek
positioning technology could initially offer. Global positioning that people 
are accustomed to using outdoors, and often perceived as ubiquitous, 
was failing to provide adequate support in indoor spaces and urban areas 
where people spend the majority of their time (Zandbergen 2009, 6).
The GPS (Global Positioning System) signal that most commercial 
positioning services work with is unable to penetrate obstacles such as 
walls. The reach of digital navigation services is therefore mostly held at 
doorsteps; leaving complex indoor environments such as transportation 
hubs, hospitals, or shopping centres not covered. Similarly, the fidelity of 
the GPS signal required for pedestrian navigation is reduced as obstacles 
such as high buildings and trees obstruct the signal. Various technolo-
gies have been employed to overcome the limitations of GPS and several 
companies are introducing their solutions, making indoor digital naviga-
tion a vibrantly developing area of both information technology (Deak, 
Curran, and Condell 2012, 1940) and information design.
This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive view of indoor digital 
wayfinding while taking into account current and emerging positioning 
technologies, information needs, and privacy. These factors affect the 
choice of the spatial model used, the design of the representation of the 
environment and, finally, the kind of wayfinding support that is presented 
to people and the manner of its communication. Specifics of the indoor 
environments are discussed, together with issues regarding integration 
of indoor wayfinding in a broader context of peoples’ information needs. 
Attention is given to the increasingly present phenomenon of ubiquitous 
computing and its impact on indoor wayfinding.
Positioning technology
The technology used to position people and movable objects in an envi-
ronment, along with the context of use, influences the choice of a suitable 
spatial model to be used as the basis to build a location-based service. This 
affects the visualization of spatial information given to users of the services 
(Afyouni, Ray, and Claramunt 2012, 87). A clear understanding of the posi-
tioning technology, along with its limitations, is therefore fundamental to 
the design of digital wayfinding systems.
GNSS (predominantly the Global Positioning System [GPS]) offer a sta-
ble established technological basis to build upon (Zandbergen 2009, 6). 
On the other hand, the area of indoor positioning is still largely un-stand-
ardized (Deak, Curran, and Condell 2012, 1939; Pirzada et al. 2013, 92). 
The range of technologies that are being developed for indoor positioning 
is broad,3 including experimental and commercial solutions:
applications such as emergency response (Jiang and Yao 2006, 713, 718; Raubal 2011, 
159–160).
  3	 Deak, Curran, and Condell (2012) provide a comprehensive description of indoor 
positioning technologies; however readers should also refer to Cheng et al. (2014, 31), 

Indoor digital wayfinding / 563 
•	 based on radio frequencies (WLAN and Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, ZigBee, 
ultra-wideband, TV signals);
•	 using light sensors such as CCD cameras (LED-based positioning, 
computer vision);
•	 using inertial sensors;
•	 based on ultrasound, infrared (IR) light, and others.
Technologies differ greatly in the way they retrieve and process loca-
tion information and compete in coverage and accuracy.4
The accuracy of positioning for pedestrian and foremost indoor pur-
poses needs to be high for indoor wayfinding to give accurate information 
about position and movement: in order for a person to be positioned cor-
rectly within an indoor environment, errors typically need to be smaller 
than individual rooms of a building (Afyouni, Ray, and Claramunt 2012, 
93–94; Kuusniemi et al. 2012, 157). Large inaccuracies may result in the 
user being located within the wrong room, which is especially problematic 
in buildings with complex layouts. The issue of accuracy becomes espe-
cially prominent in multilevel buildings where there is a risk for the user to 
be located on the wrong floor.
While many proposed solutions provide good accuracy and coverage 
in experimental situations, many factors may influence their adoption for 
commercial purposes, such as cost of installation and maintenance and 
other dependencies (Jiang and Yao 2006, 712; Kuusniemi et al. 2012, 157; 
Zandbergen 2009, 7).
Positioning employing ultra-wideband technology, infrared light, 
and ultrasound is expensive to implement (Das and Sadhukhan 2014, 85; 
Deak, Curran, and Condell 2012, 1945) while Wi-Fi and Bluetooth have 
an advantage, as infrastructure is already omnipresent. Features of mobile 
devices such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity, CCD and other sensors 
enable digital wayfinding to be made available to a broader public at lower 
cost.
High dependency on wireless data can be an inhibiting factor as it 
can prevent the system to provide adequate and autonomous support. 
Availability of high-speed wireless data is therefore of crucial importance 
for many indoor positioning solutions. Furthermore, using cellular data 
abroad can be related to high expenses for the user and therefore inhibitive 
for a wide adoption of a system.
Das and Sadhukhan (2014), Deak, Curran, and Condell (2012), Kuusniemi et al. (2012, 
157), The Economist (2012), and Zandbergen (2009, 7) for a more complete overview 
of the topic.
  4	 Butz et al. (2001) distinguish two aspects of the accuracy of a positioning system: 
resolution of orientation (given in degrees; refers to the ability of the system to 
distinguish the orientation of a person) and resolution of location (given in metres; 
describes maximum deviation between pinpointed and actual position of a person). 
This overview of the positioning technology is done in awareness of this, however, 
as resolution of orientation is often overseen in literature, accuracy applies to the 
resolution of location.

564 / Žiga Kropivšek
Similarly, Cai (2014, 471) explains that mobile device users would 
restrain from using positioning services, especially in indoor spaces, in 
order to save battery life.
An overview of indoor navigation systems on the market reveals that 
many of these solutions employ a combination of various technologies 
simultaneously for better performance, accuracy, and coverage (Deak, 
Curran, and Condell 2012, 1940). It is therefore beneficial for wayfinding 
systems to be designed as technologically independent as possible in order 
to allow different technologies to be used together (Tesoriero et al. 2008, 
580).
Global Positioning System (GPS) and pseudolites
Accuracy achievable with GPS depends highly on the complexity of the 
GPS receiver and the calculations it has to perform. Generally, it ranges 
between 1 m and 50 m (Butz et al. 2001, 27; Morgane, Bonnardel, and Le 
Bigot 2009, 509; Stewart Cobb 1997, 3–4); however resolution up to 1 cm 
is achievable with more complex and processing-consuming arrange-
ments (Stewart Cobb 1997, 3–4).
To overcome these inefficiencies of GPS for navigation, many devices, 
including the majority of smartphones, are equipped with assisted GPS 
(A-GPS) (Morgane, Bonnardel, and Le Bigot 2009, 509; Zandbergen 
2009, 6). Information needed to pinpoint the location of a person faster 
is provided from a server over cellular network. This way, an accuracy of 
3–5 m can be achieved and receivers in mobile devices can be kept basic 
and energy-efficient (Zandbergen 2009, 6, 11).
However, this is only true for open areas, as the signal can be con-
siderably weakened in urban and indoor environments and is therefore 
not useful for indoor navigation (Raubal 2011, 162; Butz et al. 2001, 28; 
Zandbergen 2009, 6). Some better indoor performance can be achieved 
using high sensitivity sensors (e.g. High Sensitivity GPS [HSGPS]) which 
can detect very weak signals. Nonetheless, even these have performance 
issues in modern steel buildings (Kuusniemi et al. 2012, 157; Zandbergen 
2009, 6).
As a more local solution, performance of GPS can be improved by the 
use of pseudolites (ground based pseudo-satellite transmitters) which 
transmit GPS-like signals in a local area where the strength of the signal 
transmitted from the GPS constellation does not suffice the needs of the 
application, thus simulating the signal (Stewart Cobb 1997, v, 2, 128; Kee et 
al. 2001). Different pseudolite-based systems allowing indoor positioning 
achieve accuracy of up to 1 cm.5
  5	 With a system for indoor vehicle navigation developed by Seoul National University 
GPS lab in 1999, an accuracy of 1 cm has been achieved (Kee et al. 2001). A commercial 
product by the Australian company Locata employs a terrestrial beacon (pseudolite) 
system that integrates with GPS and is strong enough to function indoors with a resolu-
tion of location of less than 1 m (The Economist 2012; Locata Corporation 2012).

Indoor digital wayfinding / 565 
Due to integration possibilities one can imagine several employments 
of the system to achieve seamless indoor-outdoor navigation, not only 
for pedestrian navigation, but for vehicle navigation as well (e.g. in road 
tunnels and urban canyons [Stewart Cobb 1997, 126, 128]). High cost and 
relatively large equipment have for now limited its use mostly to military 
purposes (The Economist 2012).
Radio frequency identification (RFID)
Radio frequency identification (RFID) is commonly used for tracking 
various objects in industry, transportation, and for security purposes. 
A common RFID system consists of RFID tags that carry information and 
a reader. The reading range of passive RFID tags (without their own power 
source) is usually up to 15 cm while active tags (with their own power 
source) can be read from a greater distance (Deak, Curran, and Condell 
2012, 1941; Willis and Helal 2005, 35–36). Although RFID tags can be cheap 
to produce, the environment needs to be specially marked with tags and 
users equipped with readers (Das and Sadhukhan 2014, 85).
Several arrangements of positioning and navigation using RFID tags are 
possible. Spaces can be equipped with a grid of passive RFID tags that is 
later read by the user’s RFID reader. Tags need to be programmed with 
their location, or, as they can only carry a limited amount of information, 
geospatial information can be stored directly on them, establishing an 
autonomous positioning system, as proposed by Willis and Helal (2005).6
Alternatively, individual objects in the environment can be augmented 
with RFID tags. A combination of active and passive tags can be used to 
control the distance from which the wayfinder is alerted about an object in 
their vicinity, as described by Tesoriero et al. (2008, 581) for indoor navi-
gation in a museum.7
RFID can function at various frequencies and work with other standards 
such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. Companies such as Ekahau and AeroScout 
provide systems employing wearable active RFID tags that communicate 
using Wi-Fi. These systems are employed in healthcare, education, and 
industry to track persons and assets (AeroScout 2014; Ekahau 2014).
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
Wi-Fi connectivity is supported by a high number of mobile devices and 
highly populated places are likely to be covered with Wi-Fi signals. In 
urban areas, Wi-Fi signals commonly overlap and therefore allow seamless 
navigation support that already extends over whole metropolitan areas in 
  6	 In the proposed system, designed for blind people, RFID tags are incorporated in 
a carpet and the reader is integrated in a shoe or walking stick (Willis and Helal 2005).
  7	 In the proposed system, passive RFID tags are used to augment exhibited objects with 
information the user has to retrieve manually (by scanning the tag), while for more 
important artefacts, active tags are proposed and the user is alerted from a greater 
distance (Tesoriero et al. 2008).

566 / Žiga Kropivšek
many cities (Zandbergen 2009, 6). One can claim that Wi-Fi supported 
positioning is forming the current indoor and, more generally, urban posi-
tioning reality.
Wi-Fi positioning works by identifying access points by their unique 
MAC identifier and the signal strength received from them. Two common 
principles of positioning using Wi-Fi signal in use are trilateration and fin-
gerprinting (Cheng et al. 2014, 2–3).
Positioning using trilateration relies on access points with a  known 
position (Zandbergen 2009, 8). As the Wi-Fi signal itself does not carry 
location information, providing reliable positioning based on signal 
strength can be problematic; a weaker signal does not necessarily mean 
a  greater distance between the receiver and the access point. Signal 
strength depends on various factors, such as obstacles in the environment 
like walls, furniture, and people. Successful applications have, however, 
been reported, e.g. by Bizcók et al. (2014).8
Wi-Fi positioning based on fingerprinting can be set up using off-the-
shelf devices and can easily be extended. However, an initial training 
phase has to be employed. During this phase, the environment is analysed 
for available signals on known positions and samples (fingerprints) are 
stored in a database. The survey can be performed by the providers’ own 
teams – or in some cases by users themselves. During positioning, the 
signals picked up by users’ devices are matched up with the fingerprints 
in the database (Cheng et al. 2014, 2; The Economist 2012; Kee et al. 2001; 
Zandbergen 2009, 8–9). This principle is used by many commercial appli-
cations, e.g. SkyHook Wireless, WeFi, and Navizon.
Accuracy achievable by Wi-Fi positioning ranges from 4 to 40 m (Hile 
and Borriello 2008, 33). Nonetheless, it is important to note that some 
papers report substantial differences in accuracy from the ones reported 
by manufacturers (Zandbergen 2009). Performance is largely dependent 
on the characteristics of the building and obstacles within it, the density 
of access points and the quality of the fingerprinting survey (Biczók et al. 
2014; Bouwer et al. 2013, 2).
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE; Bluetooth 4.0) is seen as a prospective 
technology for indoor positioning due to its low power consumption. 
Bluetooth beacons can be used to determine position based on the relative 
strength of the signal and beacons in sight of the device. Similarly to Wi-Fi 
positioning, this is done with unique identifiers of each beacon and their 
signals can be included in the fingerprinting process. The accuracy with 
which a person can be positioned from a beacon is reported to be up to 
1 m (Cai 2014, 468; Deak, Curran, and Condell 2012, 1946; The Economist 
2012). A notable example is the iBeacon technology developed by Apple.9
  8	 Biczók et al. (2014) described a Wi-Fi positioning system used at university campuses 
in Norway which allow an accuracy of 5–10 m using 1,800 access points. Additionally, 
Wi-Fi positioning can be further assisted by GPS.
  9	 Apple’s iBeacon technology that was introduced in 2013 uses Bluetooth Low Energy 

Indoor digital wayfinding / 567 
Seamless transition from outdoor to indoor navigation and accur-
ate indoor positioning can in most cases only be achieved with chipsets 
that gather information from various sources simultaneously (Kee et al. 
2001). A-GPS and cellular positioning have been used together with Wi-Fi 
positioning in consumer mobile devices for some time now, since it was 
introduced to the market with the Apple iPhone 3G (Zandbergen 2009, 
5). More recently, Bluetooth has been added to this equation. Wi-Fi and 
Bluetooth in conjunction are regarded as the basis for the development of 
highly accurate indoor positioning systems by the In-Location Alliance.10
Camera-based solutions
LED lights are expected to gain considerable market share due to their 
low energy consumption and long lifespan. Additionally, LED lights can 
be modulated with a speed that cannot be noticed by the human eye, 
although it can be detected by light sensors (e.g. in a mobile phone cam-
era). This enables LED lights to be used both as a light source as originally 
intended and to transmit data without large investments in infrastructure 
(The Economist 2012; Zheng et al. 2011, 573).
An experimental arrangement with a grid of LED lights was used to 
position a vehicle equipped with a photo sensor by Zheng et al. (2011), 
while a commercial solution developed by ByteLight uses LED beacons for 
location-based communication instead of a grid solution. 11
Computer vision systems that, similarly to people, recognize charac-
teristic features such as landmarks in order to identify spaces, have been 
investigated for indoor wayfinding (Raubal 2011, 163) – in many cases in 
conjunction with augmented reality displays, e.g. as proposed by Chung, 
Kim, and Schmandt (2011), Sonntag and Toyama (2013) and Wecker et al. 
(2013).12
A system proposed by Hile and Borriello (2008, 37) utilizes visual detec-
tion of distinct environmental features together with Wi-Fi positioning to 
position the user with an accuracy of 30 cm, while solutions proposed by 
beacons to create beacon regions. Compatible devices are notified when they enter or 
leave a beacon region and while within the region, a relative distance to the beacon can 
be determined. iBeacons are simple devices; however other Bluetooth-enabled devices 
can act as beacons as well (Apple 2014).
10	 The In-Location Alliance is formed of 20 companies with the aim to stimulate 
development and commercial adoption of indoor navigation and services that build on 
it (In-Location Alliance 2014).
11	 Similarly to Bluetooth-based solutions, the position is determined on the device 
accordingly to the strength of signals detected by the camera with an accuracy of up 
to 1 m. Provided that spatial information is cached on the user’s device, it can function 
autonomously, without an internet connection (ByteLight 2013; The Economist 2012).
12	 In the Guiding Light system proposed by Chung, Kim, and Schmandt (2011), com-
puter vision and a handheld projector are used to provide information about objects 
the user points at, in a flashlight-like manner. Sonntag and Toyama (2013) describe 
a system that works in a similar way employing eye-tracking technology. Wecker et al. 
(2013) experiment with different displays (iPod, iPad, projector) to display augmented 
reality-based navigation for museums. 

568 / Žiga Kropivšek
Serrão et al. (2012) or Wang, Yang, and Tian (2012) are based on the rec-
ognition of distinct objects such as doors, signage, or fire extinguishers. 
Project Tango led by Google tracks movement of a person and simultan-
eously maps a 3D image of the space using two cameras (Google 2014), 
whereas a proposal by Gomez and Sandnes (2012) utilizes a rangefinder.13 
For positioning, computer vision systems rely heavily on the features 
of the environment that can quickly change or can easily be obscured. It is 
crucial that the spaces retain identifiable features, and that objects used as 
landmarks are not being moved frequently (Hile and Borriello 2008, 32; 
Serrão et al. 2012, 66–67). On the other hand, by real-time analysis of the 
environment, computer vision systems can provide wayfinding assistance 
that is less reliant on pre-existent databases. This is especially useful for 
visually impaired persons (Gomez and Sandnes 2012, 219). 
Inertial sensors
Sensors commonly built-in in modern mobile devices, such as accelerom-
eters, gyroscopes, compasses, or thermometers, can be utilized to observe 
changes in the environment and calculate a person’s position or movement 
in space (Kuusniemi et al. 2012, 157; Golding and Lesh 1999). Software 
can be used to calculate an approximate position of a person based on the 
movement captured by these sensors and a known starting position. This 
approach has been investigated mainly for usages where a high level of 
autonomy is required (in cases where other positioning systems are una-
vailable or unreliable), namely for emergency situations and the military 
(The Economist 2012). Information from different sensors can be fused 
for better performance. However, as the position is predicted by math-
ematical algorithms, several movements (e.g. made while not changing 
position) could be misinterpreted thus rendering the positioning inaccu-
rate. Nevertheless, with motion tracking becoming increasingly popular 
in consumer applications (e.g. fitness applications), it is safe to speculate 
that improved motion sensing in mobile devices will gain in its role for 
positioning, such as investigated by Kuusniemi et al. (2011).14
The built-in magnetometer (compass) in mobile devices is able to 
detect small anomalies of the magnetic field in the environment. Buildings, 
particularly concrete and steel structures have a specific magnetic field 
that differs slightly in different areas of the building and as such creates 
13	 Gomez and Sandnes (2012) propose a digital guide dog system designed for visually 
impaired people that rather than pre-existent spatial information relies on real-time 
analysis of the environment and providing speech or haptic feedback. The system 
is intended to expand the autonomy of a visually impaired person by providing 
­accurate information about surroundings, including obstacles and signs. An experi-
mental arrangement using a static rangefinder set-up is described; however, the 
authors mention the usefulness of cheaper off-the-shelf devices such as Microsoft 
Kinnect. 
14	 Kuusniemi et al. (2011) research a system employing high sensitivity GPS, WLAN 
positioning, and self-contained sensors with which they achieved a 6 m resolution of 
location.

Indoor digital wayfinding / 569 
a magnetic pattern that can be surveyed and linked with spatial informa-
tion. An example of indoor positioning based on this principle has been 
developed by IndoorAtlas.15
Design of digital indoor wayfinding
A well-designed indoor wayfinding system can not be achieved without 
a clear understanding of the specifics of the indoor environment, a consid-
eration of how spatial information is presented in digital media, especially 
mobile devices, and how this has affected people’s spatial decision-making.
Compared to traditional wayfinding information (e.g. signage and 
maps), digital wayfinding information can be easily updated and adapted 
to the changes in the environment. Information technology is used in 
travel information to bring dynamic real-time information to people. 
Digital information, e.g. dynamic signage, can be used to complement 
traditional signage in order to increase the flexibility of guidance of people 
through spaces and deliver the most up-to-date information.
Arguably one of the most valuable advantages of digital wayfinding 
systems is the ability to adapt to individual users. This involves both the 
ability to change the display of spatial information according to the users’ 
personal preference, needs, cognitive and spatial abilities, as well as the 
ability of the system to adapt to the users’ current context (Jiang and Yao 
2006, 714; Li 2006, 728; Zipf and Jöst 2006, 785, 794).
Information needs in indoor environments
As opposed to car navigation, pedestrians are not limited by the transpor-
tation infrastructure. Indoor spaces and highly urbanized areas are denser, 
increasing the number and frequency of decision points, thus rendering 
pedestrian wayfinding more complex (Raubal 2011, 162; Nossum 2010, 2). 
According to Montello and Sas (2006, 2005), three environmental factors 
influence wayfinding in a particular space: complexity, visual access, and 
differentiation. In all three aspects, indoor spaces are difficult to navigate 
independently, without support.16
15	 The solution developed by IndoorAtlas includes a software toolbox for the analysis and 
mapping of a building’s electromagnetic field and software support for the LBS applica-
tions to utilize gathered information. The reported achievable accuracy ranges from 0.1 
to 2 m and can be improved by combining with other indoor positioning technologies. 
The technology has been tested and proved to work in underground conditions as well 
(The Economist 2012; IndoorAtlas 2013).
16	 The more articulated a space, the more it adds to the complexity and the more it 
negatively affects the ability of the wayfinder to create a mental map. The walls, the 
ceiling, and other elements of a generally dense environment limit visual access in 
indoor spaces. Good visual access allows people to navigate the environment auton-
omously and without prior spatial knowledge (Hölscher, Brösamle, and Vrachliotis 
2012, 64). Good differentiation of the environment allows people to identify individual 
spaces and therefore eases orientation (Montello and Sas 2006, 2005). In many 
buildings, ­individual parts may have a uniform appearance and are therefore quite 
indistinguishable.

570 / Žiga Kropivšek
Another factor that adds to the complexity, not present in outdoor 
navigation, is navigation in buildings and structures with multiple levels 
(Nossum 2010, 2). This crucially affects the representation of space used 
as the wayfinder now moves in a three-dimensional space.
In some cases the configuration of indoor environments can be less 
permanent compared to outdoor environments. This is especially true for 
temporary arrangements such as exhibitions. Digital wayfinding in this 
regard can eliminate the need for people to consult analogue indexes and 
maps (Bouwer et al. 2013, 1). 
With the complexity of the site and the need to cater for different groups 
with specific needs, the amount of information that need to be displayed 
increases, thus rendering a signage system incomprehensible (Rushe 2012). 
Digital wayfinding in indoor spaces therefore presents a great advantage, 
as spatial information given can be individualized for every single visitor: 
emphasizing important information and omitting information that is not 
relevant in the situation (Zipf and Jöst 2006, 795). 
Digital media allows for a variety of approaches to the visualization of 
spatial information. Apart from using an egocentric frame of reference 
(e.g. egocentrically oriented maps), verbal route descriptions can be 
used and the position of objects in the environment can be given quali-
tatively in relation to the user (Butz et al. 2001). Sufficient information 
must, however, be provided to enable orientation in cases the system is 
not available or fails. In that case the application must respond with an 
appropriate allocentric reference or a signage system must be used (Butz 
et al. 2001, 27–28). This is especially critical as studies have shown that 
relying on digital wayfinding support negatively affects the acquisition of 
spatial knowledge and the creation of mental images of the environment 
(Raubal 2011, 162; Dickmann 2012).
For people with special needs, additional support needs to be set up. 
With the ageing population the number with limited mobility, hearing, or 
sight is increasing and limitations in mobility are causing social exclusion 
(Willis and Helal 2005, 1). Digital wayfinding systems and LBS in general 
represent a major enabler for people with disabilities as their adaptive 
quality allows us to deliver personalized wayfinding support catered to 
their needs in order to achieve greater independence (Raubal 2011, 162).
A different approach is needed – either the ability to show an alterna-
tive route (e.g. for mobility-impaired people) or a different interpretation 
of the information in a way the user can understand. Indoor spaces may 
contain a series of obstacles such as stairs, ramps, furniture, or narrow 
passages (Hine and Grieco 2003, 301) that can prevent mobility-impaired 
persons (e.g. wheelchair users, elderly people) from using routes that are 
otherwise the most efficient (Swobodzinski and Raubal 2009, 1316). This 
must affect the representation of the environment used; as Swobodzinski 
and Raubal (2009) point out, network-based representations are too con-
straining to accommodate obstacle-avoidance efficiently.

Indoor digital wayfinding / 571 
The need for higher detail in GIS databases and alternative routing is 
perhaps even more obvious in adapting wayfinding information for vis-
ually impaired uses who cannot anticipate obstacles in the environment. 
As Montello and Sas (2006) point out, it is difficult for blind people to 
perceive possibilities a space has to offer. This includes information such 
as where to stand in line (Willis and Helal 2005, 1) or where to find a cer-
tain object in a room (e.g. a water dispenser) – information that might be 
regarded as redundant for sighted people. Without this support, however, 
visually impaired people have to rely on previously acquired spatial know-
ledge and on asking people for directions, opening a series of autonomy 
and privacy issues (Swobodzinski and Raubal 2009, 1316; Serrão et al. 
2012, 64, 65; Willis and Helal, 2005).
Information delivery needs to be tailored to the specific needs of the 
person or a disability. This includes persons with visual or hearing impair-
ments as well as people with cognitive disabilities that have difficulties 
navigating spaces and understanding wayfinding directions. For blind 
people it has to be auditory or tactile (Montello and Sas 2006) and the 
system should be designed to be as non-intrusive for the user as possible, 
e.g. incorporated in a walking stick. 
Integration of indoor wayfinding
Personalization of indoor wayfinding is largely manifested through the 
ability of the system to tightly integrate with the users’ personal agenda. 
Two distinct aspects of this integration can be discussed, namely provi-
sion of seamless navigation for all users’ daily journeys and integration of 
wayfinding as support for the completion of specific, individual tasks.
Integrated multimodal journey planners such as Google Maps already 
provide indoor wayfinding support for a number of locations. Benefits of 
such integration are especially important in spaces that have so far repre-
sented gaps in door-to-door navigation such as underground stations and 
other transportation hubs. Provision of support in the segment of the jour-
ney, following the arrival to the destination address is, however, also cru-
cial. As the indoor environment becomes part of a broader spatial context, 
the representation of space needs to be reconsidered. Visual conventions 
used need to be applicable to both outdoor and indoor wayfinding in order 
to provide a uniform user experience. 
Miller and Lewis (1999) propose an approach to providing visit infor-
mation for healthcare environments in which the whole journey is taken 
into consideration, providing the patient with exact and personalized 
information to cope with complexity and multimodality in all stages of the 
journey, ending only when the visitor has achieved their goal (e.g. a doc-
tors’ appointment). Although not directly referring to digital wayfinding, 
the proposed approach is an example of service- and task-oriented, inte-
grated wayfinding.
As proposed by Butz et al. (2001), intelligent systems in buildings might 

572 / Žiga Kropivšek
guide visitors according to their personal schedules or momentary needs, 
e.g. to a boardroom for a meeting or to a coffee machine, respectively. 
Similar to the recommendations by Miller and Lewis (1999), positioning 
and IT technology is in this case used to provide a wayfinding system that 
is not limited to a single site but in a sense provides support for the whole 
journey.
Wayfinding is being integrated in mobile calendar and personal assis-
tance applications such as Google Now which provides journey planning 
according to the users’ appointments. Other examples of task-oriented 
applications of indoor digital wayfinding include solutions for retail envi-
ronments, which guide customers to the items that they have previously 
added to a shopping list (e.g. Point Inside and Aisle 411).
Indoor wayfinding and smart environments
In their proposal, Butz et al. (2001) open the debate of how fine-grained 
or in a way trivial the goal of an individual wayfinding task can be. This 
extends to the question of what entities are present in a representation of 
an indoor space and how the user is made aware of them.
Naturally, the specific context of the space in question needs to be 
considered. Spaces such as transit hubs and underground stations are 
highly transitional, where indoor digital wayfinding primarily fills the gap 
in door-to-door navigation. On the other hand, in spaces as exhibitions, 
supermarkets, and museums, wayfinding is more focused on individual 
objects and activities derived from them.
With the growth of ubiquitous computing (UbiComp), the number of 
objects able to communicate their current status and position is increasing 
(Afyouni, Ray, and Claramunt 2012, 93). This conjunction of ubiquitous 
computing (UbiComp) and geographic information systems (GIS) is 
referred to as UbiGIS (Zipf and Jöst 2006, 785). Augmentation of objects 
in the environment with digital information e.g. with RFID tags, has been 
mentioned earlier in this chapter (in the Positioning technology section). 
The ability of the wayfinding system to be in constant interaction, not only 
with users but the environment as well, opens up possibilities for wayfind-
ing systems to refer to individual, movable objects.
Potential uses of these smart objects in wayfinding include foremost 
museums, libraries, and retail environments, allowing spatial information 
to be detailed and up-to-date as would otherwise not be achievable using 
conventional signage and maps.
Bouwer et al. (2013, 1) emphasize the importance of friend-finder fea-
tures for personal independence in complex environments; in this case, 
the user becomes both the wayfinder and the object of wayfinding.

Indoor digital wayfinding / 573 
Tracking and privacy
Tracking flows of people
Uses of positioning technology for tracking of entities in the environment 
have to some extent already been mentioned. Apart from monitoring 
assets, the technology has high potential in researching spatiotemporal 
behaviour for planning purposes. It enables employing mobile devices 
to track movement of a high number of people, thus data collection that 
would otherwise be very expensive (Jing and Yao 2006, 720; Raubal 2011, 
165; Stanton Fraser et al. 2012, 2).
Dynamic monitoring and control of flows of people is used in road traf-
fic, as well as in complex indoor environments such as airports, where it is 
a crucial component of maintaining a smoothly running system. Infrared 
technology or CCTV equipped with computer vision technologies can 
be used for this purpose. However, more systems that rely on previously 
described positioning technologies are emerging. As an increasing number 
of people carry mobile devices, some systems rely on Wi-Fi and Bluetooth 
positioning to track people, e.g. as offered by Lockheed Martin.17 Dynamic 
signage or LBS on mobile devices can be used to reroute people and 
avoid overcrowding and control queues, even prior to entering an indoor 
environment.
Privacy and trust
Although the use of digital wayfinding assistance can be beneficial for the 
individual, the location information might be reversed, using gathered 
data for unauthorized purposes: tracking the individual’s whereabouts, 
behaviour and habits (Raubal 2011, 159). This phenomenon is described 
in literature as ‘geoslavery’ (Jiang and Yao 2006; Raubal 2011, 166). With 
the emergence of indoor digital wayfinding, the risk of geoslavery is even 
higher due to high fidelity of positioning that allows activities and habits to 
be observed with a higher accuracy.
The potential risk causes mistrust and prevents people from using 
digital wayfinding and other LBS. As Cai (2014, 469) emphasizes, a rela-
tively small share of people use location services on their mobile devices. 
Features that enable location services, such as Bluetooth, are only acti-
vated when there is another practical reason for using them, such as file 
sharing.
Security measures must be taken and are being made available for 
the users such as the ability to anonymize location by using aliases when 
using A-GPS or using restriction and licensing as considered by the EU for 
17	 Lockheed Martin provide a solution for airports that relies on travellers carrying Wi-Fi 
and, more recently, Bluetooth-enabled devices in order to monitor queue lines and 
effectively optimize traveller flows (Deacon 2012).

574 / Žiga Kropivšek
574 / Žiga Kropivšek
Galileo. It is crucial to implement safeguards and find the right balance 
between service and privacy (Jiang and Yao 2006, 722; Raubal 2011, 166).
Unlike GPS, many indoor positioning systems are not primarily designed 
to provide location data but rather to push location-aware information to 
the users (e.g. ByteLight and iBeacon). While benefits of tighter service 
integration and wayfinding have been discussed earlier, the question of 
balance between utility for the user on one hand and spamming on the 
other remains widely open, especially in retail applications where wayfin-
ding is often integrated with vicinity marketing and deal recommendation 
features (Cai 2014, 468–69). As applications providing navigation in retail 
facilities are oriented towards providing higher revenue, the integrity of 
the guidance provided can be questionable (i.e. is the user manipulated 
into higher spending?).
Future outlooks
Innovations in technologies supporting indoor digital wayfinding are 
in high momentum, with high-profile parties such as Apple and the 
In-Location Alliance involved in the development of services that, while 
providing highly personalized wayfinding experience for end-users, prom-
ise high benefits for parties enabling it on their properties as well.
While this chapter has remained focused only on positioning technol-
ogy, new potential display devices are emerging. Within the range of per-
sonal mobile devices, most notably electronic eyewear (e.g. Google Glass) 
is opening new possibilities of wayfinding applications using augmented 
reality. Other devices include different classes of wearables such as smart 
watches, which could not only provide a non-intrusive media to display 
wayfinding information, but also – equipped with inertial sensors – fur-
ther enhance positioning performance as well.
In the current reality, preoccupied with the invasion of our privacy 
through digital media as we are, any encroachment of positioning and 
tracking technology is likely to be challenged. While visions of a converg-
ing future have been discussed (Smitshuijzen 2007, 429) and a gradual 
move of wayfinding support to a mixed reality proposed for some time, 
augmenting the physical world is inevitable and already well in progress.
References
AeroScout. 2013. ‘RTLS solutions for manufacturing, 
mining and security.’ Acesed 29 April 2014. <http://www.aeroscout.
com>.
Afyouni, Imad, Cyril Ray, and Christophe 
Claramunt. 2o12. ‘Spatial models for context-
aware indoor navigation systems: a survey.’ 
Journal of Spatial Information Science 
4 (12): 85–123. <http://dx.doi.org/10.5311/
JOSIS.2012.4.73>.
Apple Inc. 2014. ‘Location and maps 
programming guide: region monitoring 
and iBeacon.’ Last modified 10 March 2014. Acesed 20 April 2014. 
<http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/
documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/
LocationAwarenessPG/RegionMonitoring/
RegionMonitoring.html>.
Biczók, Gergely, et al. 2014. Navigating MazeMap: 
indoor human mobility, spatio-logical ties 
and future potential. <http://arxiv.org/
pdf/1401.5297v1.pdf>.

Indoor digital wayfinding / 575 
Indoor digital wayfinding / 575 
Bouwer, Andreas, et al. 2013. ‘Location awareness, 
orientation and navigation: lessons learned from 
the SmartInside project.’ In Proceedings of the 
third international workshop on location awareness 
for mixed and dual reality, Santa Monica, 
19 March 2013, 1–4. <http://www.dfki.de/
LAMDa/2013/accepted/LAMDa13Proceedings.
pdf>.
Butz, Andreas, Jörg Baus, Antonio Krüger, and 
Marco Lohse. 2001. ‘A hybrid indoor navigation 
system.’ In Proceedings of the 6th international 
conference on intelligent user interfaces (IuI’01), 
Santa Fe, 14–17 January 2001, 25–32. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1145/359784.359832>.
ByteLight. 2013. ‘ByteLight.’ Acesed 15 January 2013 and 25 April 2014. <http://www.bytelight.
com>.
Cai, Jessie. 2014. ‘The less communicated story of 
location based service in retail applications.’ In 
Proceedings of the international multiconference of 
engineers and computer scientists 2014, Hong Kong, 
12–14 March 2014, 468–472. <http://www.iaeng.
org/publication/IMECS2014/IMECS2014_
pp468-472.pdf>.
Cheng, Jiantong, Ling Yang, Yong Li, and Weihua 
Zhang. 2014. ‘Seamless outdoor/indoor 
navigation with WIFI/GPS aided low cost inertial 
navigation system.’ Physical Communication 
13 (A): 31–43. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
phycom.2013.12.003>.
Chung, Jaewoo, Ig-Jae Kim, and Chris Schmandt. 
2011. ‘Guiding light: navigation assistance system 
using projection based augmented reality.’ In 
2011 IEEE International Conference on Consumer 
Electronics (ICCE), 9–12 January 2011, 881–882. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCE.2011.5722917>.
Cobb, Stewart H. 1997. ‘GPS pseudolites: theory, 
design, and applications.’ PhD thesis, Stanford 
University.
Das, Shibani, and Pampa Sadhukhan. 2014. 
‘Performance evaluation of a LBS system 
delivering location-based services using 
wireless local area network.’ In Applications 
and innovations in mobile computing 
(AIMoC), Kolkata, 27 February–1 March 
2014, 85–90. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
AIMOC.2014.6785524>.
Deacon, Alastair. 2012. ‘Making sense of 
“BluFi”.’ Lockheed Martin website, 30 May 
2012. Acesed 3 March 2014. <http://civil.lockheedmartin.co.uk/
transport/insights-(transport)/blog/2012/05/
making-sense-of-blufi/>.
Deak, Gabriel, Kevin Curran, and Joan Condell. 
2012. ‘A survey of active and passive indoor 
localisation systems.’ Computer Communications 
35 (16): 1939–1954. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
comcom.2012.06.004>.
Dickmann, Frank. 2012. ‘City maps versus 
map-based navigation systems: an empirical 
approach to building mental representations.’ 
The Cartographic Journal 49 (1): 62–69. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1179/1743277411Y.0000000018>.
Ekahau. 2014. ‘Ekahau – RFID-over-Wi-Fi tracking 
systems, RTLS and WLAN site survey.’ Acesed 29 April 2014. <http://
www.ekahau.com>.
Golding, Andrew R., and Neal Lesh. 1999. ‘Indoor 
navigation using a diverse set of cheap, wearable 
sensors.’ In The third international symposium 
on wearable computers: digest of papers, San 
Francisco, 18–19 October 1999, 29–36. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISWC.1999.806640>.
Gomez, Javier V., and Frode Eika Sandnes. 2012. 
‘RoboGuideDog: guiding blind users through 
physical environments with laser range scanners.’ 
Procedia Computer Science 14: 218-225. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2012.10.025>.
Google. 2014. ‘ATAP Project Tango.’ Acesed 29 April 2014. <http://www.
google.com/atap/projecttango/>.
Hile, Harlan, and Gaetano Borriello. 2008. 
‘Positioning and orientation in indoor 
environments using camera phones.’ IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications 28 (4): 32–39. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2008.80>.
Hine, Julian, and Margaret Grieco. 2003. ‘Scatters 
and clusters in time and space: implications for 
delivering integrated and inclusive transport.’ 
Transport Policy 10 (4): 299–306. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0967-070X(03)00055-6>.
Hölscher, Christoph, Martin Brösamle, and Georg 
Vrachliotis. 2012. ‘Challenges in multilevel 
wayfinding: a case study with the space syntax 
technique.’ Environment and Planning B: 
Planning and Design 39 (1): 63–82. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1068/b34050t>.
‘Indoor positioning: finding the way inside.’ The 
Economist. Last modified 1 December 2012. Acesed 8 December 2012. 
<http://www.economist.com/news/technology-
quarterly/21567197- navigation-technology-using-
satellites-determine-your-position-only- works>.
Indoor Atlas. 2013. ‘Indoor atlas.’ Acesed 10 April 2014. <http://www.
indooratlas.com>.
In-Location Alliance. ‘In-Location Alliance.’ Acesed 30 April 2014. <http://
www.in-location-alliance.com>.
Jiang, Bin, and Xiaobai Yao. 2006. ‘Location-
based services and GIS in perspective.’ 
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 
30: 712–25. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
compenvurbsys.2006.02.003>.
Kee, Changdon, Doohee Yun, Haeyoung Jun, 
Bradford Parkinson, Sam Pullen, and Tom 
Lagenstein. 2001. ‘Centimetre-accuracy 
indoor navigation using GPS-like pseudolites.’ 
GPS World. Last modified 4 February 2002. 
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.365.872 
&rep=rep1&type=pdf>.
Kuusniemi, Heidi, Jingbin Liu, Ling Pei, and Yuwei 
Chen. 2012. ‘Reliability considerations of multi-
sensor multi-network pedestrian navigation.’ IET 

576 / Žiga Kropivšek
576 / Žiga Kropivšek
Radar, Sonar & Navigation 6 (3): 157–164. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1049/iet-rsn.2011.0247>.
Li, Chao. 2006. ‘User preferences, information 
transactions and location-based services: 
a study of urban pedestrian wayfinding.’ 
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 
30 (6): 726–740. Acesed 5 January 2013. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
compenvurbsys.2006.02.008>.
Locata Corporation. 2012. ‘LocataTech explained.’ Acesed 10 December 2012. 
<http://www.locatacorp.com/technology/
locata-tech-explained/>.
Miller, Colette, and David Lewis. 1999. Wayfinding: 
effective wayfinding and signing systems: guidance 
for healthcare facilities. London: NHS Estates and 
Stationery Office.
Montello, Daniel R., and Corina Sas. 2006. 
‘Human factors of wayfinding in navigation.’ In 
International encyclopaedia of ergonomics and 
human factors, edited by Waldemar Karwowski, 
2003–2008. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Morgane, Roger, Nathalie Bonnardel, and Ludovic 
Le Bigot. 2009. ‘Improving navigation messages 
for mobile urban guides: effects of the guide’s 
interlocutor model, spatial abilities and use of 
landmarks on route description.’ International 
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 39 (3): 509–515. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ergon.2008.10.009>.
Nossum, A[lexander] S[alveson]. 2010. ‘Indoortubes: 
a novel design for indoor maps.’ A special joint 
symposium of ISPRS Technical Commission IV & 
AutoCarto, in conjunction with ASPRS/CaGIS 
2010 fall speciality conference, 15–19 November 
2010, Orlando, Florida. <http://www.isprs.org/
proceedings/XXXVIII/part4/files/Nossum.pdf>.
Pirzada, Nasrullah, M. Yunus Nayan, Fazli Subhan, M. 
Fadzil Hassan, and Muhammad Amir Kahn. 2013. 
‘Comparative analysis of active and passive indoor 
localization systems.’ AASRI Procedia 5: 92–97. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.063>.
Raubal, Martin. 2011. ‘Cogito ergo mobilis sum: the 
impact of location-based services on our mobile 
lives.’ In The SAGE handbook of GIS and society 
research, edited by Timothy L. Nyerges, 159–73. 
London: Sage. <http://raubal.cartography.
ch/Publications/RevBookSections/Raubal_
CogitoErgoMobilisSum.pdf>.
Rushe, Dominic. 2012. ‘Uncharted territory: how 
Google’s Mr Maps has designs on the world.’ The 
Guardian, 8 December 2012, 41. 
Smitshuijzen, Edo. 2007. Signage design manual. 
Baden: Lars Müller Publishers. 
Serrão, M., J. M. F. Rodrigues, J.I. Rodrigues, 
and J. M. H du Buf. 2012. ‘Indoor localization 
and navigation for blind persons using visual 
landmarks and a GIS.’ Procedia Computer 
Science 14: 65–73. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
procs.2012.10.008>.
Sonntag, Daniel, and Takumi Toyama. 2013. 
‘Vision-based location-awareness in augmented 
reality applications’ In Proceedings of the third 
international workshop on location awareness for 
mixed and dual reality, Santa Monica, 19 March 
2013, 5–8. <http://www.dfki.de/LAMDa/2013/
accepted/LAMDa13Proceedings.pdf>.
Swobodzinski, Martin, and Martin Raubal. 2009. 
‘An indoor routing algorithm for the blind: 
development and comparison to a routing 
algorithm for the sighted.’ International 
Journal of Geographical Information 
Science 23 (10): 1315–1343. <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/13658810802421115>.
Tesoriero, Ricardo, José A. Gallud, María Dolores 
Lozano, and Victor M. Ruiz Penichet. 2008. 
‘Using active and passive RFID technology 
to support indoor location-aware systems.’ 
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 
54 (2): 578–583. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TCE.2008.4560133>.
Wang, Shuihua, Xiaodong Yang, and Yingli Tian. 
2013. ‘Detecting signage and doors for blind 
navigation and wayfinding.’ Network Modeling 
Analysis in Health Informatics and Bioinformatics 
2 (2): 81–93. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s13721-013-0027-9>.
Wecker, Alan J., Tsvi Kuflik, Eyal Dim, and Joel 
Lanir. 2013. ‘Different reality modalities for 
museum navigation.’ In Proceedings of the third 
international workshop on location awareness for 
mixed and dual reality, Santa Monica, 19 March 
2013, 13–16. <http://www.dfki.de/LAMDa/2013/
accepted/LAMDa13Proceedings.pdf>.
Willis, Scooter, and Sumi Helal. 2005. ‘RFID 
information grid for blind navigation and 
wayfinding.’ In ISWC ’05 Proceedings of the ninth 
IEEE international symposium on wearable 
computers, Osaka, 18–21 October 2005, 34–37. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISWC.2005.46>.
Zandbergen, Paul A. 2009. ‘Accuracy of iPhone 
locations: a comparison of assisted GPS, 
WiFi and cellular positioning.’ Transactions 
in GIS 13 (s1): 5–26. <http://doi.org/10.111
1/j.1467-9671.2009.01152.x>.
Zipf, Alexander, and Matthias Jöst. 2006. 
‘Implementing adaptive mobile gi services 
based on ontologies.’ Computers, Environment 
and Urban Systems 30 (6): 784–798. <http://
dx.doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2006.02.005>.
Zheng, Dongfang, Kaiyun Cui, Bo Bai, Gang Chen, 
and Jay A. Farrell. 2011. ‘Indoor localization based 
on LEDs.’ 2011 IEEE international conference on 
control applications, Denver, 28–30 September 
2011, 573–578. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
CCA.2011.6044360>.

577
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 577–590
Visualizing storyworlds
An expanded view of exhibition graphics
Jona Piehl
This chapter explores the role of exhibition graphics and their capacity for visual 
storytelling, introducing the concept of the storyworld to critically examine 
the role of graphic design in the exhibition narrative. In doing so, the relation-
ship between graphic design and exhibition content is reframed to extend 
the discussion of exhibition graphics beyond the question of effectiveness of 
communication. The storyworld is understood as articulation of the where, 
when, who, how and why of the narrative; its interpretation is based on cues 
given in the narrative and enables the reader to experience and engage with 
the story. An analysis of the visual cues provided in the temporary exhibition 
Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men at the Museum of London shows how 
exhibition graphics actively contribute to the construction of the exhibition’s 
storyworld, specifically in terms of the narrative’s spatiotemporal location and 
its narratorial perspectives. The chapter argues for a more nuanced under-
standing of the interdependency of verbal and visual storytelling in exhibitions, 
presenting exhibition graphics as an active component of exhibition content.
Graphic design in exhibitions
Graphic design might be used in an exhibition or a museum environment 
in several ways. It plays a distinct role within the mechanisms and strat-
egies of communication and display, including graphic elements that 
express the institution’s identity, or signage that enables orientation and 
navigation through the physical spaces of the museum, as well as exhi-
bition graphics. The latter relate to the content on display; here one can 
further differentiate between elements that appear in the museum or its 
urban or cultural environment and those that are used in the (temporary) 
exhibition (see Figure 1, overleaf).1 
Exhibition graphics may be used to reinforce the museum brand 
alongside wayfinding, branded merchandise, or marketing campaigns.2 
Alternatively, exhibition graphics may be developed as part of the exhi-
bition design, resulting in a  bespoke graphic language relating to the 
respective exhibition content. Here, design elements, for example the 
choice of typefaces or colours, as well as specific graphic objects such 
as environmental graphics, are considered as devices that may respond 
  1	 Of course, graphic design might also appear as artefacts on display. See Camuffo and 
Dalla Mura (2013) for a recent review of graphic design exhibitions.
  2	 For examples, see Rouard-Snowman 1992; Hyland and King 2006. 
39

578 / Jona Piehl
to the respective content, for example to visually express an exhibition’s 
theme or to establish a reference to the historical period associated with 
the exhibition. 
In exhibition making practice the potential of working within a con-
tent-specific design language to support the exhibition’s content is often 
explored very successfully. Conversely, museum studies literature often 
ignores exhibition graphics as a means of content creation and meaning-­
making, despite increasing awareness of the role of design for the overall 
museum experience and as part of different strategies of display (Dernie 
2006). Exhibition graphics are primarily considered in terms of clarity 
and effectiveness of communication as transmitters of content, as a means 
of formatting the verbal content written by experts, content developers, 
and curators in order to make it accessible to the visitors in the gallery 
space. Legibility and physical accessibility of the individual graphic object 
tend to be the main concern, and especially the discussions of typical 
graphic objects such as titles, text panels, or artefact labels are shaped by 
conventions and traditions with regard to their verbal content and visual 
formats.3 As such, exhibition graphics are primarily construed as neutral 
containers at the expense of other roles that they might take on in rela-
tion to the exhibition content. Exceptions are Carter et al. who point to 
the ‘typographic resonance’ (2000, 52) that can figuratively create the 
mood of an exhibition and Hughes (2010) who highlights the potential of 
graphics to act on a visual level as contextual support for the exhibition 
  3	 See for example Dean 1994; Serrell 1996; Screven 1999; Velarde 2001; Dernie 2006; 
Ravelli 2006; Locker 2011.
 
Museum
Website
Advertising
Posters,
banners,
leaﬂets
Invitation 
Exterior signage
Interior signage
Floor plan
Ticket
Exhibition
catalogue
Postcards
Posters
Branded
merchandise
Packaging
Exhibition / Gallery space
 
 
Titles: Exhibition title, subtitle / section title
Panels: Introduction, section information 
subsection information, exhibit 
information
Labels: Artefact caption, extended artefact
information, group caption, exhibit caption
Large print labels
Object numbers
Environmental graphics: Typographic, 
photographic, diagrammatic, decorative
Gallery guide
Exhibition map
Acknowledgements, credits and event 
information
Prohibitions / instructions
Identiﬁcational information
Directional wayﬁnding     
Figure 1
Typical scope of 
graphic objects in 
exhibition graphics 
(adapted from Hall 
1987, 92).

Visualizing storyworlds / 579 
content. Krishnamurthy (2014) analyses specifically the ideological-po-
litical positions constructed through the visual elements in propaganda 
exhibitions, while others focus on the role of visual elements such as dia-
grams and images to change the mode of communication in exhibitions 
(Schäfer 1974; Neurath and Kinross 2009). In these instances, exhibition 
graphics are understood to be in a reciprocal relationship with the verbal 
and material content on display, suggesting that exhibition graphics not 
only contribute to the way in which content is communicated but also 
constitute content in themselves. In order to articulate these potential 
contributions and the relationship between different types of content, the 
following explores how exhibition graphics can be considered to provide 
visual cues that prompt the construction of the exhibition’s storyworld. 
Storyworlds
According to David Herman, one of the key qualities of narrative is the 
power to create worlds, ‘its ability to transport interpreters from the here 
and now of face-to-face interaction . . . to the here and now . . . of the world 
being told about’ (2002, 14). He defines this world created in and through 
the narrative as its storyworld: ‘Storyworlds are mental models of who did 
what to and with whom, when, where, why, and in what fashion in the 
world to which recipients relocate . . . as they work to comprehend a nar-
rative’ (p. 5). More than merely the description of the geographic setting 
of the story, the storyworld shapes how the reader interprets the narrative, 
its context, its temporal and spatial expansion, the nature of the characters 
and events populating this space, and the perspective offered on to the 
content. Through entering the storyworld, readers experience and engage 
with the story. This definition of the storyworld is the basis of the follow-
ing examination of the narrative of Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection 
Men, a recent exhibition at the Museum of London.4
To make sense of a storyworld the reader relies on cues available in the 
text and the inferences that can be drawn from them. These cues are deliv-
ered as the text unfolds, prompting the reader to incrementally construct 
a mental model of the storyworld (Herman 2002). Rather than being con-
veyed as a fully formed world, the construction of the storyworld is an 
interpretive process. The degree to which readers will be able to construct 
this mental model rests on their individual disposition when reading, and 
whether or to what extent cues are recognized, how they are understood 
  4	 The term narrative is widely used in exhibitions and museums practice to address 
a range of aspects of the exhibition itself or its production. Broadly, it can be differen-
tiated between positions that consider the exhibition as a narrative medium and those 
that focus on the nature of exhibition content and its format. The former examine the 
ways in which content is communicated, both to understand what the characteristic 
features of exhibitions are and how they are read and experienced (for example 
Kossmann et al 2012; Hanks 2012; Thiemeyer 2013); the latter are concerned with the 
types of content on offer, whose stories are told and how (for example Macdonald and 
Silverstone 1990; Roberts 1997; Watson 2007). 

580 / Jona Piehl
and what inferences are drawn from them. Equally, while there is more 
than one way to read and interpret a cue, there is more than one way of 
cueing, for example a  spatial setting, through explicit description or 
implicit references. Compared with literary narratives, exhibition narra-
tives are not limited to verbal cues; in addition, they may also communi-
cate their storyworlds through material, spatial, aural, or visual prompts. 
These are delivered through the components of an exhibition: artefacts, 
spaces, media, sound, exhibition design, and graphic design. Examining 
both the visual features of individual graphic objects and their systematic 
constellations, the following focuses on the spatiotemporal setting of the 
storyworld and the expressions of perspectives that are offered on to the 
story.
Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men
Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men was a temporary exhibition at 
the Museum of London, inspired by an archaeological find at the Royal 
London Hospital in 2006 that shed new light on to dissection practices 
and anatomy education in the nineteenth century.5 Figure 2 shows the 
exhibition content as it was encountered in the exhibition space. Following 
an introduction to the topic and its historical context (a) the exhibition 
juxtaposed the story of grave robbers, the so-called Resurrection Men 
(b), with the story of the medical practitioners of the time, who, in need 
of bodies for research and anatomical studies, became the clients of the 
former (c). The next section focused on the archaeological discovery that 
had provided the starting point for the exhibition concept and presented 
it from the perspective of archaeological and medical practice (d), leading 
to the turning point of the narrative, the discussion of the Anatomy Act of 
1832 (e). The exhibition ended with a section that connected the historical 
content with current debates around organ donation, medical research, 
and ethics (f). 
The graphic objects in the exhibition could broadly be divided into two 
groups: the first group comprised small-scale, text-driven repeat objects 
such as the text panels and artefact labels; the second group consisted of 
large-scale, image-driven individual graphic objects. The first group car-
ried the majority of the verbal content. The panels introduced each section 
of the exhibition narrative with a headline and three to four paragraphs of 
text and the labels accompanied the artefacts and provided details such 
as title, date, materials, and maker or owner as well as brief captions with 
contextual information. The features of the graphic language, especially 
  5	 The exhibition ran from October 2012 to April 2013 and displayed more than 200 of 
artefacts including medical equipment, printed matter such as scientific illustrations 
as well as human remains. It was curated by the Museum of London, together with 
Julia Davidson and Museum of London Archaeology. It was designed for the museum’s 
Linbury Gallery by Drinkall Dean with exhibition graphics by Chris Bigg, photography 
by Marc Atkins, and scenic painting by Annie Millar (Museum of London 2012).

Visualizing storyworlds / 581 
the use of the same serif typeface and the use of bold and italic weights in 
headlines and titles, clearly identified the text panels and artefact labels 
as elements of the same design system. As repeat items, their design was 
consistent throughout the exhibition in terms of their graphic language, 
formats, materials, and production; the only variation was in the colour of 
the text panels that changed according to the colour palette of the respec-
tive section of the exhibition. In contrast, the graphic objects of the second 
group responded individually to the respective spatial situation in terms of 
their format, materiality, and production and can be further differentiated 
as four types of wall graphics: section graphics consisting of patterns and 
illustrations applied directly to the gallery walls; floor-to-ceiling photo-
graphic images; large typography in a range of visual formats with content 
ranging from quotes to excerpts from poetry, textbooks, and newspaper 
articles, including the exhibition title; and finally two types of information 
graphics, a map and a timeline. The graphic language of this second group 
was more varied: it introduced additional typefaces and layouts and while 
some features such as the main typeface and colour palettes were carried 
across from the panels and labels, for example in the timeline, other fea-
tures were unique to the respective graphic object, such the typefaces and 
typographic design in the wall graphic with newspaper quotes.
Spaces and locations
Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men was a ‘true story’; it took place 
in a non-fictional world. Its primary geographic location was London of 
different times between the early-nineteenth century and the present 
day. The exhibition graphics and their visual features provided cues that 
served to locate the narrative of the exhibition in several ways. While they 
Introduction: 
Doctors, Dissection and 
Resurrection Men
A Growing 
Demand for 
Bodies
Living 
in Fear
The 
Supply of 
Bodies
Surgeons 
and 
Surgery
The Study of  
Human Anatomy
Case Studies
The Anatomy Act 
of 1832
After the
                Anatomy Act
Today
(a) Introduction
(b) Resurrection Men
(c) Surgeons
(d) Archaeology
(e) Anatomy Act
(f) Today
Figure 2
Doctors, 
Dissection and 
Resurrection Men, 
exhibition content 
as distributed 
across the gallery 
space.

582 / Jona Piehl
supported the interpretation of the geographical setting of the storyworld, 
they also anchored the narrative as an exhibition situated in a museum 
institution, and underlined the local focus of the Museum of London.
As the visitor moved through the exhibition spaces, each section of the 
content was signalled through changes in the graphics not only in terms 
of motif but also visual style and production method. Through establish-
ing contrasts between the different spaces, the exhibition graphics made 
the sequence of content sections visible, and the progression of the story 
was mapped directly on to the physical spaces of the gallery. In addition 
to establishing a structure and sense of narrative development, the visual 
elements of the section graphics successively prompted the setting of the 
exhibition’s storyworld and its sequence of localities, spanning the abstract 
to the particular, from ‘domestic interior’ to a small burial ground at the 
Royal London Hospital. 
The different locations were cued in different ways, both in terms of 
specificity and the relationship between the verbal and the visual. In the 
first rooms, for example, irregular paint splatters in dark brown, red, 
and orange covered the lower third of the dark green walls. On its own, 
this section graphic did not contain any concrete spatial information. 
However, when viewed in relationship with the artefacts, the stories of 
body snatchers and grave robbers as well as the large photographic image 
of a graveyard scene, the scenic painting became suggestive of dark alleys 
and murky graveyards. In other instances, the section graphics were used 
to create architectural spaces: in the archaeology section, a series of styl-
ized, outlined window frames applied as vinyls to the exhibition walls 
turned the gallery space into the interior of a hospital or operating theatre 
(see Figure 3). Throughout the exhibition the section graphics formed 
the backdrop to the verbal descriptions on labels and panels and to the 
material evidence of the artefacts. The visual cues they delivered were 
spatially ambiguous and context-dependent, but while they did not add 
geographic specificity, they elaborated on the locations referred to in the 
written interpretation through the suggestion of atmospheres or spatial  
moods.
Compared with the visual cues provided by the section graphics, the 
map in the introduction section of the exhibition prompted the construc-
tion of the storyworld in a more concrete and detailed manner. It showed 
a cartographic view of central London, using a historical map that was 
overlaid with information indicating key sites featured in the exhibition, 
such as hospitals, medical schools, and graveyards. In terms of its possible 
function as a navigation device for the movement through the narrative, 
the map suffered from its position at the beginning of the exhibition 
and the fact that the linear sequence of rooms did not invite the reader 
to return to the map throughout the narrative. This made it difficult to 
establish the respective importance of the different sites and to use the 
cartographic information to place content that was presented later on. 

Visualizing storyworlds / 583 
However, the map provided a visual introduction to the exhibition nar-
rative, a geographic setting of the scene. While the verbal information on 
artefact labels and the large quotations on the walls gave many indications 
to both the place(s) and time(s) of the story such as these – ‘ “the bodies 
of the deceased patients of the hospitals of this metropolis are BOUGHT 
and SOLD like those of sheep and oxen”, Ann Millard, 1825’ (Museum of 
London 2012, emphasis in the original) – the format of the map drew this 
information together by mapping out the locations of the prospective story 
and visualizing their spatial relationships on plan. In doing so, it presented 
the geographic setting of the storyworld as coherent and complete. It 
appeared coherent in the sense that the map contained no contradictions: 
it presented definite locations of the sites, each was given one and only one 
location, it was spatially logical; further, the map gave the impression of 
showing all sites, or presumably, at least all sites that were important for 
the understanding of the story. Here, the map placed the narrative focus 
on London by showing only those locations of the story set in central 
London and the omitting sites outside of London that were referred to in 
the exhibition, such as for example in the cases of grave robbing in other 
parts of England and Scotland.
Ryan (1991) suggests that a storyworld is understood in its similarities 
and differences to the reference world in which the reader of the narra-
tive resides. While the reader of a  fictional narrative enters a  possible 
world that, depending on the narrative, may or may not be described as 
showing the same characteristics as the reference world, the reader of 
Figure 3
Exhibition 
view Doctors, 
Dissection and 
Resurrection 
Men, archaeology 
section.
Image: © Museum of 
London

584 / Jona Piehl
a non-­fictional narrative enters a version of the reference world that may 
be located in the present or in the past. The introduction of the setting 
through the detailed, cartographic format of a map of the city of London 
established the geographic-urban context of the narrative and allowed the 
audience/reader to construct the storyworld in relation to their reference 
world. 
The map also served as a reminder of the audience/reader’s physical 
presence in London. They were not only invited to enter the storyworld 
of the exhibition and move through the narrative as it was plotted on to 
the gallery space, geographically they were already immersed in the story­
world and only needed to shift from the here and now of reading to the 
here and now of the story (Herman 2002). As such, the map defined the 
site of the story as analogous to the site of the reading; therefore the use 
of the cartographic depiction of place as entry point to the exhibition nar-
rative can also be seen as reiterating the museum’s spatiotemporal focus: 
‘Discover the history of London and its people’ (Museum of London, 
no date). 
Times and chronologies
As the setting in which narratives unfold over the course of events, story-
worlds are structured both spatially and temporally (Herman 2002). The 
content of Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men was not presented 
in a linear chronology: the majority of the artefacts on display dated from 
the nineteenth century, but the narrative started in the present day, moved 
back in time to the early nineteenth century, forward to the time of the 
archaeological excavation in 2006, then back to 1832, the date of the pass-
ing of the Anatomy Act, and finally forward again to the present day. Some 
sections were linked to specific moments in time while others were located 
in more loosely defined stretches of time and the exhibition graphics can 
be seen to establish different constellations between the historical content 
and the present day of the exhibition. While the timeline served as a visual 
link between the past and the present, the map and the section graphics 
presented different views on to the past.
The majority of the section graphics was temporally unspecific, such 
as for example the scenic painting or the stylized window frames. Others 
followed the graphic language of the text panels and artefact labels and 
can therefore be described as expressions of contemporary narration, 
that is, the present day of the exhibition as it was located in the museum. 
More temporally specific were the typographic wall graphics composed 
of quotes from period newspapers and the patterned wallpaper, both of 
which appropriated and reassembled particular visual features to create 
a version of a historical graphic language for the exhibition. While the 
former did so by using typefaces that referenced historic newspaper and 
magazine design, visually positioning the quotations as newspaper head-
lines, the latter subverted the references to domestic wallpaper of the 

Visualizing storyworlds / 585 
nineteenth century by creating a delicate repeat pattern not as per histor-
ical convention with flowers or landscapes but instead with period medi-
cal illustrations of inner organs such as lungs, hearts, and kidneys. 
The map provided the audience/reader with a different set of visual 
cues: following historical cartographic convention in terms of lettering 
and drawing style it was clearly identifiable as an enlarged copy of an ori-
ginal map. It showed a ‘historical London’ even though the map was not 
credited to a particular date.6 As described above, the map was annotated 
to locate key sites of the exhibition narrative; these verbal annotations 
contextualized the map and the information it contained. Rather than 
attempting to imitate the visual language of the map, the annotations 
and the corresponding key were formatted as explicit additions by using 
the same typefaces and colour palette as elsewhere in the exhibition. In 
other words, the graphic treatment of the map presented the historical, as 
expressed in the cartographic artefact, from a contemporary perspective, 
as expressed through the annotations. In omitting information regarding 
its source or origin, a range of possible readings of the map as historical 
artefact was eliminated. Further, using the graphic device of the visually 
explicit annotations to direct the interpretation of the data-heavy carto­
graphic image, the map was appropriated to construct a particular nar-
rative, that of the exhibition Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men. 
Again, the graphics presented a view on to the past from the present day. 
In this case, however, instead of using visual references to evoke the past 
or a sense of the past as exemplified in the section graphic of the wallpaper 
or the typographic treatment of the newspaper quotes, the visual features 
of the contemporary narration were used to actively position a historical 
document in its relationship with the present day.
In comparison, the timeline in the last section could be seen to create 
a different kind of connection between different exhibition times, in this 
case the time after the Anatomy Act of 1832 and the present day. In his 
survey of the use of timelines in exhibitions, Lubar (2013) focuses on the 
timeline not as graphic object but as a strategy for structuring exhibition 
content chronologically. Pointing out both the appeal and the problems 
associated with the image of history as linear sequence that makes the past 
seem ‘obvious, natural, over-determined’ (p. 171),7 Lubar calls for ways 
to complicate the representation of chronologies. Indeed, the timeline in 
Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men presented 200 years in straight 
horizontal lines with only a handful of entries in each of the three thematic 
strands, medical, social, and legal, thus suggesting an uninterrupted logic 
of development and progress (Figure 4, overleaf). However, the timeline 
displayed precisely the stretch of time not addressed in detail by the exhi-
bition narrative. Therefore, rather than serving as a depiction of history 
  6	 The map used was a representation of the second edition of the Greenwood map of 
London by Christopher and John Greenwood, published in 1830.
  7	 See also Rosenberg and Grafton (2010).

586 / Jona Piehl
or a device for contextualizing or summarizing the content on display, the 
timeline fast-forwarded the narrative from the nineteenth century into 
the present day. In doing so, it supported the argument for the contem-
porary relevance of the historic themes of the exhibition by establishing 
clear causal links between then and now, between practices of the past 
and practices of the present day. This fast-forward movement was further 
supported by the scale timeline and its position on the wall that turned the 
perception of time into a physical experience: in reading the entries, the 
audience/reader walked from the past into the present.
Perspectives and voices
So far, the visual information provided by the graphic objects has been 
discussed in terms of its contributions to the spatial and temporal con-
struction of the exhibition’s storyworld. However, the interpretation of 
a narrative and its storyworld is also shaped by the narratorial perspectives 
it offers to the audience/reader.
At the point at which the story moved from the tales of resurrection men 
who dug up fresh bodies from graveyards to those of surgeons and their 
practice, the dark walls and paint splatters of the scenic painting changed 
to a bright blue floor-to-ceiling wallpaper that hinted at elegant domestic 
interior spaces. This contrast was emphasized further in the production of 
the graphics: while the wallpaper pattern was highly symmetrical, cleanly 
drawn and digitally printed, the scenic painting was applied on site, spon-
taneous and with an irregular brushwork. The verbal descriptions of the 
medical practice of the time provided on text panels and artefact labels 
Figure 4
Timeline 
in Doctors, 
Dissection and 
Resurrection Men. 
Image: © Museum of 
London.

Visualizing storyworlds / 587 
delivered a  sense of the harsh reality of nineteenth-century operating 
practices: ‘Surgery in this period was brutal, agonizing, and dirty. There 
was no anaesthetic or antiseptic, so procedures were limited. Even if an 
operation went well, the patient could die from shock, loss of blood, or 
infection’ (Museum of London 2012), and portrayed the relationship 
between doctors and gravediggers primarily as a one of need and supply. 
In contrast, the visual content created a juxtaposition of the two in terms 
of their societal and legal status. Signalling at first a spatial transition from 
the outside to the inside, the change in imagery also suggested a contrast 
between the ‘darkness’ of the low, savage, undisciplined life on the streets, 
and the ‘lightness’ of the highly sophisticated, refined, educated classes 
in pursuit of knowledge and medical research. The visual features of the 
exhibition graphics not only established a sense of the locations of the nar-
rative, they also provided a particular perspective on to the content. Even 
though the importance of medical research was emphasized throughout 
the exhibition, the verbal content nevertheless retained openness in the 
interpretation of a complex historical situation. The visual content on the 
other hand proposed a particular way of looking at the artefacts and the 
protagonists of the story, directing the view towards a particular interpret-
ation of the content on display and, in doing so, narrowed the range of 
meaning that was constructed.
In contrast, the large-scale photography used in the exhibition opened 
up the interpretive potential of the content on display. The photographs 
showed a close-up of a barely visible, blurred hand against a dark back-
ground covered in scratches and mottles, an overexposed romantically 
foreboding scene in a graveyard, curls of smoke against a mono-coloured 
background, and finally a view of a modern dissecting theatre, blurred 
and distorted around the edges. Compared with the documentary photo­
graphs that accompanied the interpretation of the archaeological finds, 
these large-scale photographs remained ambiguous in terms of their rela-
tionship to other content in the exhibition. In their distinctly contempor-
ary visual style the photographs stood out from the other graphic objects 
and were not directly connected to the information given elsewhere in the 
exhibition. The photographs’ spatiotemporal locations were at the same 
time vague and highly specific in relation to the exhibition narrative and 
they did not recreate or illustrate the verbal content. As such, they can be 
seen to constitute an independent layer of visual content, one that offered 
an explicitly intuitive-associative view on to one of the key themes of the 
exhibition, the conceptualization of the human body after death. 
An exhibition’s storyworld is always framed by the institutional con-
text within which the exhibition is located. Bal describes and critiques 
this institutional context in terms of ‘expository agency’ (1996, 7, 16). The 
expository agent does not refer to the curators or other individuals but 
rather to the complex network of subjects, actions, and traditions that 
are identified to authoritatively shape and control the exhibition and its 

588 / Jona Piehl
experience, including the physical/architectural presence of the institu-
tion, its socio-cultural history, and its educational mission. In the case of 
Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men, the institutional frame was 
apparent on several levels. The exhibition space was inside the building of 
the Museum of London and the exhibition could only be entered and exited 
through the museum. In the gallery itself elements such as prohibitions, 
and acknowledgements and events panels gave evidence of the proce-
dural and behavioural structure of the institution. Further, the expository 
agency was expressed through the adherence to display conventions such 
as the presentation of interpretive information alongside the artefacts, and 
the distribution of this verbal content across the typical graphic objects 
such as titles, text panels, and artefact labels. On the other hand, the visual 
features of the graphic objects, the choice of typefaces, typography, col-
ours, and imagery, were not aligned with those of the graphic language 
used elsewhere in the museum. They positioned the exhibition narrative 
as distinct from the museum narrative and, as described above, especially 
the wall graphics introduced a range of visual references specific to the 
exhibition. 
Through the act of exhibiting, museum institutions assert their author-
ity as expository agents, offering a particular interpretation of the content 
on display and Bal (1996) argues for the necessity of museums to find ways 
to reveal these positions and intentions to the reader, in order to allow the 
audience/reader to engage critically with what is put on display. By mak-
ing the contemporary framing of the historical artefact visually explicit, 
the map’s annotations began to reveal mechanisms of exhibiting – the 
ways in which exhibition content is constructed in the act of ordering and 
arranging materials in particular relationships to each other. The active 
representation of the processes involved in the telling of stories, the selec-
tions and omissions, the arrangements in the space and the contextualiza-
tion through further information, can provide a strategy for self-reflective 
exhibiting that acknowledges the possibility of other stories drawn from 
the same artefacts or materials. 
Another strategy may be actively to include a range of voices other 
than that of the institution to complicate the coherence of the exhibition 
narration and open up the range of possible interpretations. For example, 
considering the graphic language of the large photographs as suggestive 
of the visual quality of the ubiquitous images treated with ‘Instagram’ 
filters, then the photographs in the exhibitions could have, in fact, been 
taken by the audience/readers themselves. While the framing the arte-
facts with verbal captions authored by the expert curators could be read 
as expressions of the voice of the museum institution, the layer of content 
introduced by the photographic images remained more ambiguous both 
in terms of their perspective towards the exhibition narrative and in terms 
of the voices they represented. 

Visualizing storyworlds / 589 
Expanded view
This chapter aimed to present an expanded view of exhibition graphics, 
arguing for a conceptualization of exhibition graphics as an active com-
ponent of the exhibition content rather than its container. To this end, the 
exhibition graphics of Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men were 
examined as visual content in terms of their contributions to the exhibi-
tion’s storyworld. Throughout, this visual content was shown to appear 
in different relationships to other forms of content, as independent or 
contextually dependent, as visual repetition, as emphasis, extension, or 
juxtaposition of verbal content, as narrowing down and opening up the 
interpretation of other forms of content. 
This raises a number of questions: if exhibition graphics can be seen to 
provide visual cues which not only support and enhance but may distract 
from, undercut, or contradict the cues delivered elsewhere in the exhibi-
tion, the discussion of exhibition graphics cannot be reduced to questions 
of effectiveness, legibility, and access. This is not to propose neglecting 
questions of clarity and effective communication, but rather to extend the 
engagement with exhibition graphics and to consider them also in terms 
of what meanings they may create for the reader in the context of the exhi-
bition. The acknowledgement of exhibition graphics as visual content also 
leads to reflections on authorship: who creates the visual content and how 
is this content negotiated in the frames of curatorial expertise and expos-
itory agency? Equally, the repositioning of exhibition graphics as part of 
the exhibition narrative has implications for the making of exhibitions and 
the telling of exhibition stories: if exhibitions as ‘books-on-legs’ (Velarde, 
2001) are to be avoided, how can exhibition graphics be understood and 
explored in terms of the medium-specific qualities of exhibition narration? 
References
Bal, M. 1996. Double exposures: the subject of cultural 
analysis. London: Routledge. 
Camuffo, G., and M. Dalla Mura. 2013. ‘Graphic 
design, exhibiting, curating: keeping track 
of a shifting relationship.’ In Graphic design, 
exhibiting, curating, edited by G. Camuffo, and M. 
Dalla Mura, 8–35. Bozen-Bolzano: Bozen-Bolzano 
University Press.
Carter, R., J. DeMao, and S. Wheeler. 2000. Working 
with type: exhibitions. Crans-Près-Céligny: 
RotoVision.
Dean, D. 1994. Museum exhibition theory and practice. 
London: Routledge.
Dernie, D. 2006. Exhibition design. London: 
Laurence King Publishing.
Hall, M. 1987. On display: a design grammar for 
museum exhibitions. London: Lund Humphries.
Hanks, L. 2012. ‘Writing spatial stories: textual 
narratives in the museum.’ In Museum making: 
narratives, architectures, exhibitions, edited by 
S. MacLeod, L. Hanks, and J. Hale, London: 
Routledge.
Herman, D. 2002. Story logic. Lincoln, NE, and 
London: University of Nebraska Press. 
Hughes, P. 2010. Exhibition design. London: 
Laurence King Publishing.
Hyland A. and E. King. 2006. C/id: visual identity and 
branding for the arts. London: Laurence King.
Kossmann, H., S. Mulder, and F. den Oudsten. 
2012. Narrative spaces: on the art of exhibiting. 
Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.
Krishnamurthy, P. 2014. ‘Selling socialism: Klaus 
Wittkugel’s exhibition design in the 1950s.’ The 
Exhibitionist 10 (October): 49–60. 

590 / Jona Piehl
Locker, P. 2011. Exhibition design. Lausanne: AVA 
Publishing. 
Lubar, S. 2013. ‘Timelines in exhibitions.’ Curator: 
The Museum Journal 56: 169–88.
Macdonald, S., and R. Silverstone. 1990. ‘Rewriting 
the museums’ fictions: taxonomies, stories and 
readers.’ Curatorial Studies 4: 176–91.
Museum of London. 2012. Doctors, Dissection and 
Resurrection Men, panel and label texts.
Museum of London, no date. Website of the Museum 
of London. Acesed 16 April 2014. <http://www.museumoflondon.org.
uk/london-wall>.
Neurath, M., and R. Kinross. 2009. The transformer: 
principles of making Isotype charts. London: 
Hyphen Press.
Ravelli, L. J. 2006. Museum texts: communication 
frameworks. London: Routledge. 
Roberts, L. C. 1997. From knowledge to narrative: 
educators and the changing museum. Washington, 
DC and London: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Ryan, M.-L. 1991. Possible worlds, artificial 
intelligence, and narrative theory. Bloomington 
and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Rosenberg, D., and A. Grafton. 2010. Cartographies of 
time. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Rouard-Snowman, M. 1992. Museum graphics. 
London: Thames & Hudson.
Schäfer, W. 1974. Objekt & Bild: Beiträge zu einer 
Lehre vom Museum. Frankfurt am Main: Verlag 
Waldemar Kramer.
Screven, S. G. 1999. ‘Information design in informal 
settings: museums and other public spaces.’ In 
Information design, edited by R. Jacobson, 131–192. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Serrell, B. 1996. Exhibit labels: an interpretive 
approach. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Thiemeyer, T. 2013. ‘Simultane Narration: Erzählen 
im Museum.’ In: Kultur – Wissen – Narration: 
Perspektiven transdisziplinärer Erzählforschung für 
die Kulturwissenschaften, edited by A. Strohmaier, 
479–488. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag.
Velarde, G. 2001. Designing exhibitions. 2nd edn. 
Aldershot: Ashgate.
Watson, S. 2007. ‘History museums, community 
identities and a sense of place: rewriting histories.’ 
In Museum revolutions: how museums change and 
are changed, edited by S. J. Knell, S. MacLeod, and 
S. Watson, 160–172. London: Routledge.

591
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 591–606
Exhibitions for learning
A Mexican case study 
María González de Cossío 
This chapter describes the role of information design in the development of 
a travelling exhibition in Mexico. The exhibition’s aim is to create awareness 
among young people of the importance of education in enabling social mobility. 
Exhibition design concepts developed by Otto Neurath and Herbert Bayer in 
the 1920s and 1930s provide a contextual background. An interdisciplinary 
team established an informative, interactive and didactic exhibition relying 
on complex socioeconomic data. The exhibition works as an ‘interactive 
space’, and a variety of rhetorical means are employed to convey the message. 
The visitors enter in small groups and are led by a well-trained guide who 
poses questions and provokes dialogue among the visitors. The interaction 
environment and the displayed objects are carefully designed to provoke 
questions and to challenge and change visitors’ attitudes, with the aim of 
creating an awareness that a better future is possible and that the best way 
is through education.
Exhibitions – public displays of art or technology – have always been 
vehicles for telling stories, whether implicitly or explicitly. Traditionally, 
that role has been assigned to museums and galleries. Such institutions 
have traditionally been most concerned with the collection, conservation, 
study and display of objects (Miles 1988, 2). However, some museums, 
especially museums of natural science and technology, have gradually 
moved their goals from the collection and scholarly curation of valuable 
objects of the past (and associated storytelling) to provide enhanced 
learning experiences for the visitors. Exhibitions can have different objec-
tives, such as marketing or sale, or to promote individuals, organizations, 
movements or even countries. Exhibitions can also provide visitors with 
learning experiences about historical or political topics.
Two persons have influenced current concepts of museums and exhibi-
tions as environments for learning experiences: Otto Neurath (1882–1945) 
and Herbert Bayer (1900–1985). In 1924, Neurath proposed the foundation 
of a new museum in Vienna where people could learn about, and better 
understand, the social, economic and political realities they lived under. 
His museum would be a place ‘especially prepared to treat the political 
struggle of the working class, the development of revolutions, legislation, 
social policy and much else’ (Neurath, quoted in Burke 2013, 30). The new 
museum opened its doors as the Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum 
in Wien (the ‘Social and economic museum in Vienna’). It presented 
A preliminary version 
of this chapter was 
presented at DUXU 
2014/HCI International, 
Heraklion, Crete, 2014, 
and published in its 
proceedings (González 
de Cossío 2014). The 
writing has been 
sponsored by Fundación 
Espinosa Rugarcía 
(ESRU), <http://www.
fundacionesru.org>.
40

592 / María González de Cossío 
pictorial statistics and charts that explained issues such as housing, pop-
ulation, food consumption, and industrial production. Data about these 
topics were transformed into visual information – as ‘digestible’ as pos-
sible to the common visitor (Neurath 2010). ‘The modern museum should 
be a teaching museum, a means for education, a schoolbook on a grand scale’ 
(Neurath, quoted in Burke 2013, 30). 
Neurath thought of the importance of moving his exhibitions around 
the country in order to reach more people. He and his team therefore 
arranged the statistical charts so they could be mounted on inexpensive 
and easily transported modules. He also devised an active museum where 
films, lectures, guided tours and various relevant publications were on 
offer. And he set up exhibitions in other countries, among them, Germany, 
Austria, the Netherlands and England. Since then, several of Neurath’s 
concepts have influenced exhibition practice in general, and certainly, the 
travelling project presented in this chapter.
Herbert Bayer, student and subsequently a  teacher at the Bauhaus 
school in Weimar and Dessau in the mid 1920s, was a graphic designer and 
typographer, but also photographer, painter, art director, and exhibition 
designer. He was particularly concerned with the structure of exhibitions 
and how to display information most effectively. He acknowledged the 
importance of the contents of displays, of their sequence and of the variety 
of media types involved. He expressed that ‘the subject must be brought 
close to the spectator and leave an impression on him. It must explain, 
demonstrate, and persuade him, and even lead to a  planned reaction’ 
(Bayer 1961, 264).
Bayer’s 1961 article on the design of exhibitions, offers recollections 
about how people’s circulation in space became important to him.1 His 
first initiative to plan the visitors’ pattern of circulation was at the Ger­
man Werkbund Exhibition in Paris in 1930, where he conceived visitors’ 
movement as an ‘organic flow’ (p. 264). Bayer ‘explored the possibilities 
of extending the field of vision . . . this becomes larger by turns of head and 
body, whereby the direction of viewing and the relative position of ex­hibits 
gain new possibilities’ (pp. 268–270). By 1937, the concept of a planned 
pattern of circulation was included as a basic of exhibition design. 
Bayer’s exhibition designs emphasized clear, simple, precise, and direct 
language. Like Neurath, Bayer believed in using a variety of complemen-
tary media types to effectively convey the intended message of an exhi-
bition. He encouraged the use of projections, illustrations, photographs, 
photomontage, etc.
From an educational perspective, it is important that people ‘appro-
priate knowledge’ from visiting an exhibition. ‘Knowledge appropriation’ 
is a developmental social process that entails actively taking part in the 
construction of knowledge for oneself, and it is considered as a process 
  1	 See also Bayer 1939/1940.

Exhibitions for learning / 593 
distinctive from learning or assimilation (Peñalosa and Méndez 2014). 
The appropriation of important concepts is achieved through various 
ways and it can happen when people interact with objects of their interest. 
‘Knowledge evolves through the interaction – reciprocal action – of an 
individual with other entities; information is conceptualised and used in 
an efficient way every time the person is confronted with new situations 
that require such knowledge’ (García Hernández and Espinosa Meneses 
2014). Therefore, knowledge appropriation involves a person, a know-
ledge object, and a context of interaction. When a person is affected in 
some intimate way when interacting with a knowledge object, a particular 
special meaning is appropriated. 
For effective communication, Kosslyn (2006) proposes several princi-
ples for the design of information graphics. Displays should comply with 
three basic goals: to connect with users, to capture their attention, and 
to foster understanding and memory (2006). For effective knowledge 
appropriation, Kosslyn suggests that visitors at an exhibition should be 
offered information that can relate to their own experiences by easy-to-
grasp graphics and a language they are familiar with. For this purpose, it 
is essential that designers anticipate and plan for the type of visitors they 
address, in order to present them with adequate displays that can help 
them make sense of the intended message. Shah, Mayer and Hegarty 
(1999) state that if a visual presentation is not specifically related to the 
visitors’ own life and experiences, it might be difficult to understand, and 
as a result not have the intended effect. An adequate learning environment 
should afford trust and openness, and offer an opportunity for discussion 
and participation.
Exhibitions, as an educational tool for learning about and understand 
the world around us, can deal with almost any topic. This chapter explains 
the design process, and some of the effects, of a Mexican travelling exhibi-
tion about the role of education for enabling social mobility.
Education, the best path to social mobility2
In Mexico, regulations on education have been in constant revision and 
evaluation through the last fifty years. Primary education became com-
pulsory by law in 1917, secondary education in 1993, and by changing the 
Mexican Constitution in 2012,3 preparatory school for higher education 
(like high school or upper secondary) became obligatory for all Mexicans. 
It is, however, quite a challenge for the Ministry of Education to provide 
enough services for the preparatory school study level to the majority 
of young people. Statistics show that this goal is far from reached. For 
  2	 Social mobility can be defined as ‘the easiness with which a person can climb to 
a higher level in the socioeconomic ladder’ (Serrano and Torche 2007).
  3	 Decree by which the Political Constitution of Mexico is reformed, 2012. 

594 / María González de Cossío 
example, 39% of Mexicans from 15 to 19 years old (2,770,665 in 2013), 
do not attend secondary education (OECD 2014) From the 61% of young 
people who do attend secondary education, only 38% finish on time, and 
only 29% of those who finish on time later attend university. Statistics also 
show that the majority of those who drop out, drop out between second-
ary and preparatory school. These intolerable figures of retention rates are 
a major concern in Mexican education today. Although the effectiveness 
of education is key to the development of a country, it is not properly dealt 
with in Mexico.
A  study on intergenerational social mobility in Mexico shows that 
social mobility is very low: 48% of those born in the lowest quintile of 
the Mexican population remain in the same socioeconomic strata one gen-
eration later, and only 4% make it to the top quintile (CEEY 2012, 2014). 
The study also shows that there are reasons why social mobility is not 
achieved: there is a lack of adequate educational infrastructure, the teach-
ers’ level of education tends to be too low, the general quality of education 
is poor, and the implementation of educational reforms is ineffective. The 
family environment and parents’ decisions on behalf of their children also 
play a decisive negative role. For example, in a small suburb of the city 
of Puebla, women would say that ‘girls who attend secondary school get 
pregnant’ and ‘girls who attend university get a divorce’. There is probably 
an element of truth behind such sayings – women who attend university 
are empowered through their education and therefore do not stand an 
unhealthy marriage. However, such examples show how family and par-
ents can negatively influence young people’s education.
The social mobility study also looked at the different roles of men and 
women. It found a pronounced inequality between boys and girls in terms 
of education, as a result of the father’s preference for the son’s education 
and for not allowing daughters to study. Furthermore, men tend to earn 
a lot more than women, even with the same education and the same job 
with the same responsibility (CEEY 2014).
The poor level of social mobility in Mexico is arguably a reflection of 
an ineffective educational system. The widespread notion that a better job 
and better pay is not a consequence of education, and the lack of support 
from parents and family to further their children’s education, especially 
for girls, clearly also hampers social mobility. Looking at the relationship 
between education and social mobility, the Espinosa Rugarcía foundation 
(ESRU) decided to promote social mobility by developing strategies for 
two levels of influence: 
•	 By trying to influence public policies on social mobility, through 
teaching, research, events, and lobbying public officials and 
legislators.
•	 By approaching young people (and their families) who have the 
opportunity to study but who have not yet understood the importance 

Exhibitions for learning / 595 
of furthering their education and complete at least the pre-­university 
preparatory school level.
The strategies are developed through ESRU’s think tank on economic 
issues, the Centro de Estudios Espinosa Yglesias (CEEY). CEEY has organ-
ized meetings with government officials, organized seminars, carried out 
studies, published reports – as well as having supported the development 
of the travelling exhibition about social mobility. 
Social information design
Information design in this chapter refers to the transformation of complex 
data into information that allow people to become aware of and to bet-
ter understand the world around them, and consequently to appropriate 
knowledge which enable them to make decisions for action. Through 
information design, in the form of visual, auditory and tactile communica-
tion, bridges can be built and understanding enhanced – between individ-
uals, associations and institutions. 
Information design principles and thinking provided a  cornerstone 
for the conception and development of the travelling exhibition. Just as 
Neurath perceived Austria as a difficult place to live in, with severe prob-
lems, ‘as a mutilated trunk that bled from every vein’ (Neurath, quoted in 
Burke 2013, 22), ESRU and CEEY perceive Mexico as a country that desper-
ately needs change in order to improve people’s life. The goal of the exhibi-
tion was to address young people and make them think about their future, 
to raise their consciousness about the country’s situation, their family’s 
situation, and their own life. The ultimate goal was to communicate that 
everyone has the right to move upwards socioeconomically – and that that 
is possible through education. It was considered important to make this 
message available outside schools, and in informal situations where young 
students could discuss and eventually get to understand why and how edu-
cation is important. ‘The exhibition could fill the gap left by all that our 
schools systematically neglect’ (Neurath, quoted by Burke 2013, 29).
The information on social mobility consisted of statistical information 
on poverty, inequality, income distribution, and education’s role for eco-
nomic well-­being. The exhibition aimed at enabling the visitors to imagine 
their future in a new way, and to suggest wise decisions about their own 
education. 
The exhibition was called Imagine your future: social mobility. It ad-
dressed young people between 14 and 24 from families of low and medium 
income. The general profile was: young people without training in, or the 
habit of, reading graphs or economic data in any form; their reading and 
language skills are in development; they are attracted to visuals, eager to 
interact with technology, and sensitive to music. Teachers and parents 
were also considered as very important because they directly influence, 

596 / María González de Cossío 
and even make decisions, for the youngsters in question. Therefore, mean-
ingful messages addressing teachers and parents was also included. The 
operational objectives of the exhibition were: 
•	 Visitors should understand the basic concepts about social mobility. 
•	 Visitors should become aware of the implications of the data 
presented.
•	 Visitors should open their minds to new ideas, change attitudes, and 
appropriate knowledge with vital consequences for their own lives.
The point of departure for the design of the exhibition was an inter-
active graph from 2009 (see González de Cossío 2009) that depicted the 
close relationship between education and income levels (see CEEY 2012) 
The graph was tested to find out whether different categories of people 
understood and grasped the importance of studying. The graph proved 
to be informative and to have an emotional effect on ‘ordinary people’, as 
well as on teachers and researchers, museum directors, and policy makers. 
Cognitive structure of the exhibition
The exhibition was structured according to a concept that determined its 
sequential organization. Two different approaches were followed:
•	 Spatial approach: Visitors were taken on a spatial tour in which 
information took them from a national context depicting general 
issues about poverty and inequality, to a closer context where 
visitors could get a grasp of their own situation in their own intimate 
environment.
Figure 1
Interactive graph 
that shows the 
relationship 
between income 
and education 
levels. This was 
the point of 
departure for 
the design of the 
exhibition.

Exhibitions for learning / 597 
•	 Cognitive processes approach: Visitors were encouraged to perform 
mental operations in each of the four exhibition rooms, such as 
developing an awareness of the lack of social mobility in Mexico and 
identifying and questioning their own socioeconomic belonging – by 
sharing thoughts through direct and mediated interaction with other 
visitors.
Design of the exhibition
Visitors at the exhibition should respond to its different messages. The 
exhibition was planned to promote questioning, thought, and change of 
attitudes. It was necessary to generate adequate structures so arguments 
could be eloquent and have coherence between them and relate to the vis-
itors’ own lives (cf. Ehses 2009). Aristotle defines three modes of persua-
sion4 (rhetorical appeals): the appeal to reason and logic (logos); the appeal 
to emotions and feelings (pathos); and the appeal to personality and charac-
ter values (ethos) (Corbett and Connors 1999, 32). Designed objects should 
rely on all three modes in order to provoke a response. Ehses suggests that 
persuasion can have three different forms or styles: 
low, medium and high; the low style’s purpose is to inform and requires 
clarity and accuracy of communications; the middle style intends to please 
the audience and works with friendliness and a moderate use of rhetorical 
figures; the high style aims at the emotions and uses a strong affective mode 
of expression. (2009, 16)
Information design principles are involved in all four exhibition rooms	
; the emphasis on each of the three rhetorical modes varies from room 
to room. The objects were carefully selected and designed to carry a bal-
anced combination of the three rhetorical modes, and for addressing dif-
ferent types of visitors (young people, parents and teachers). To assure 
the involvement of the visitors, a trained guide accompanies and interacts 
  4	 The Greek word for persuasion comes from the word meaning believe.
Figure 2 
Two conceptual structures of the exhibition: the cognitive processes 
approach and the spatial approach. The two approaches are described 
in each room of the exhibition.
Cognitive 
processes
   
Spatial 
approach
Knowledge 
or action
Room 1:
This is Mexico
Room 2:
Social mobility 
& education
Room 3:
Imagine your future
Room 4:
Social mobility 
in community
understand, 
compare, 
become aware
national 
landscape
identify, recognize,
& relate
local & immediate
space
plan, imagine, 
discuss, & share
personal 
& intimate
conﬁrm 
& experience  
connection 
to others 

598 / María González de Cossío 
with each group of visitors.5 Here is a description of how the visitors were 
supposed to react and act in each of the four exhibition rooms:
When visitors arrive at the exhibition, they have to separate themselves 
from the busy outside world and immerse themselves into a new space and 
into a shared reality, here and now. Visitors start their engagement in the 
first exhibition room by viewing a video of Mexico’s contrasts, poverty and 
inequality. They are faced with the crude reality of everyday life’s human 
and physical landscape. They see graphics that show the slow evolution of 
Mexico in comparison to a rich country such as Sweden,6 inequality between 
boys and girls’ education, salary differences between men and women, and 
income inequality between rich and poor Mexicans. During the visit, the 
guide explains and poses questions to promote visitors understanding of, and 
engagement with, the topic. Awareness of the country’s situation is the main 
objective of the information presented. While looking at the different pieces, 
visitors perform various cognitive operations such as: making comparisons, 
questioning issues, contrasting information, creating relations to personal 
situations, and making logical operations such as understanding definitions. 
The first exhibition room is a key space for preparing visitors’ consciousness 
for the next room. 
  In the second exhibition room, visitors are taken from a general depiction 
of the country to their local family situation. They are presented with some 
basic definitions of social mobility, absolute mobility and relative mobility. 
Visitors learn that education has serious consequences for income and living 
conditions. Visitors read quotes addressed to teachers, they see graphs that 
show students’ performance as a function of their teacher’s involvement. 
Visitors have to identify publicly or privately what kind of living conditions 
their grandparents had, and which is their present living conditions. Through 
these selections they figure out whether their family has moved upwards or 
downwards on the socioeconomic ladder. In this room they change their 
focus from Mexico’s general situation to their close and immediate envi-
ronment. The information objects make them understand social mobility, 
identify their home situation, know how education influences income levels, 
and see themselves in relation to the different cases depicted.
  In the third exhibition room, after having established an awareness of their 
own immediate reality, and having familiarized themselves with topics about 
poverty, inequality, education, and social mobility, visitors are invited to go 
through an introspective phase. They are asked to share with the group their 
thoughts about their future. The guide poses four questions to each member 
of the group: about who they are, what they want to achieve, and what the 
obstacles and opportunities they face in order to achieve their goals. Visitors 
are invited to answer one question at a time. They write their answer on 
tablets computers. The answers appear on an interactive touch table, which is 
  5	 Simon (2010) says that the best participatory experiences are achieved in small groups, 
trying to make visitors comfortable and eager to interact. An exhibition needs a good 
balance between structure and flexibility.
  6	 Sweden was in a similar situation as Mexico 75 years ago, but with the government’s 
effort to educate people, Sweden became one of the most equal societies. Source: 
Maddison (n.d.).

Exhibitions for learning / 599 
at the centre of the room. The answers are then shown on a screen as a word 
cloud that expands as words are repeated. The guide’s role is very impor-
tant because he or she encourages the visitors’ confidence in sharing their 
thoughts and in discussing them openly in the group. This is considered the 
heart of the exhibition – where visitors put together what they have learnt in 
the two previous rooms, and where they are supposed to realize that their life 
is in their own hands. After sharing their views and discussing how they would 
like to see themselves in the near future, visitors listen to recorded testimonies 
of people who have gained a better life through education.
  In the fourth and last exhibition room, visitors realize that social mobility is 
easier if it is achieved as a community of people. They go from their intimate 
reflection and examples of people who have reached a higher socioeconomic 
level in the third room, to the importance of considering and connecting to 
‘the others’ in the fourth room. Participation in transforming the public space 
of people’s local environment is the first example they see. People from a small 
local community changed and dignified their street by collectively painting 
their houses. Visitors also witness disciplined and committed teamwork 
shown in a video of a children’s orchestra. Afterwards, they experience 
working together through interaction with a video game trying to imitate 
the children’s musical performance. This game requires working as a team. 
Quotes and graphics remind visitors that education is the key premise for 
social mobility. The visitors leave the exhibition with a positive feeling and 
a wish for a better future. (González de Cossío 2014, 416–417)
The spatial approach and the cognitive process approach are mixed 
together in all four spaces (exhibition rooms). This whole process helps 
visitors to appropriate knowledge, to understand what social mobility is, 
and to realize that they have the right and the possibility to move up the 
social ladder. When leaving the fourth exhibition room, visitors find infor-
mation from institutions that offer scholarships and aid to students who 
are willing to continue their education.
Design concepts
As with any other project, there were design and space constraints, along 
with certain requirements from the sponsors. It was important for the 
ESRU foundation, the main sponsors, that the concept of social mobility 
should be effectively communicated by the exhibition. It must be stressed 
that the concept of social mobility is not generally used in Mexico.
The exhibition should be inexpensive but attractive, easy to pack and 
unpack, and strong and lightweight for easy transportation. Since a vari-
ety of venues would host the exhibition, it was designed so it could be 
displayed in different shapes, i.e. in a square, line, or L shape. Visitors had 
to follow a sequence, an ‘organic flow’, as well as feeling welcomed. Each 
room consisted of independent modules with information that could be 
reorganized and adjusted to space limitations without affecting the con-
tent. The panels should carry their own lighting and electric power. The 

600 / María González de Cossío 
exhibition space should be covered to keep sunlight out and give proper 
conditions for electronic equipment and video projections. 
The concepts and narratives were also assembled in a visual presenta-
tion of the exhibition, which was tested with two focus groups. One group 
consisted of young people studying for a  university degree. The other 
group consisted of young people who had dropped out from school. Both 
groups offered opinions and insights that enriched the exhibition concept 
while being developed.
An interdisciplinary team was organized, with the active participa-
tion of social development economists, industrial designers, information 
designers, graphic designers, marketing specialists, communication spe-
cialists, video specialists, programmers, and editors.
The transformation of statistical data into visual displays of information 
had to take the following into consideration:
•	 The verbal language employed (written and spoken) should be simple, 
clear and concise. 
•	 The overarching narrative should lead people in a sequential order 
through the exhibition. Narratives should be meaningful to the 
different categories of visitors, mainly young people of different 
social and educational backgrounds, but also teachers and parents. 
Storytelling should be included as a means to connect with the 
visitors.
•	 The images displayed should promote knowledge appropriation 
through the presentation of familiar and identifiable issues, with fresh 
images that depicted the real situation of contemporary Mexico.
•	 The technology should be innovative in order to pleasantly surprise 
visitors.
Room 1
Room 2
Room 4
Room 3
Figure 3
The square arrangement of the 
exhibition and the sequential flow 
through the space.
Figure 4
The external walls of the exhibition. Images posed questions 
or thoughts such as, ‘Who wants an opportunity? Can I 
move? What do I want to achieve? We can succeed’.

Exhibitions for learning / 601 
•	 The interaction facilities should enable easy and gratifying 
communication between the visitors. 
•	 The use of music should be included to attract attention, affect 
emotions, and for facilitating memorization of the exhibition’s 
message.
Evaluation of the exhibition
Over a four-month period, the exhibition was hosted by two different 
venues in Puebla, Mexico, and received 6,300 visitors from different 
backgrounds.7 Getting to know people’s reactions to the exhibition was 
indispensable for finding out whether the objectives of the exhibition were 
fulfilled, which corrections should be made, and what to do next.
Two measures were designed for this purpose: a quantitative survey 
(of 4,089 visitors) undertaken by an external consultant, and qualitative 
interviews performed by the author of this chapter. 
The quantitative survey
Visitors answered a questionnaire about the definition of social mobil-
ity (an issue of particular concern to the exhibition’s sponsor, the ESRU 
  7	 The first institution that hosted the exhibition was Universidad Iberoamericana 
Puebla; it is a private university whose doors are not opened to everyone. People had 
to show an identification card to enter the university. The second venue is a public 
university, Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, and the exhibition could be 
accessed through a direct door from the streets of the city centre. This venue received 
many more groups from public high schools, as well as from people spontaneously 
entering the exhibition. By March 2016, the exhibition has been hosted by 7 venues, 
and received more than 70,000 visitors.
Figure 5
Display in room 1 
showing inequality 
of opportunity in 
education. The 
text reads, ‘Of 100 
fathers who did 
not study, only 
9 of their sons 
finished a degree 
and only 3 of their 
daughters did. 
Education should 
not depend on 
social origin.’
Figure 6
Display in room 2 
comparing the 
performance of 
students who 
are supported 
by a committed 
teacher and 
those who are 
not.

602 / María González de Cossío 
foundation), main obstacles for moving upwards on the social ladder, 
main opportunities identified for success, a one-­word definition of the 
exhibition, the likeability of the exhibition, and additional comments.
The quantitative survey (Factum 2014) was answered by visitors of dif-
ferent ages: up to 18 years old (54%), 19–24 years old (19%), 25–34 years old 
(5%), over 35 years old (8%) (14% did not answer). Visitors’ background 
varied: students (59%), teachers (4.4%), professionals and employees 
(7.3%), other background (3.2%) (36.1% did not answer). Many visitors 
had not completed their educational cycle. Many of them reported incom-
plete high school, which is one of the problems reported earlier. The 
answers to the question about the expression ‘social mobility’ show that 
most visitors could define the topic after having visited the exhibition. 
One of the most important aspects of the survey shed information on 
how visitors questioned and thought about their future. Visitors were 
asked about which opportunities and which obstacles they face in their 
lives. The answers confirm that personal decisions and attitudes are fac-
tors that determine the low level of social mobility in Mexico.
When visitors were asked if they liked the exhibition, 99.2% responses 
used words such as: excellent, extraordinary, awesome, educational, in­
formative, good, intelligent, thoughtful, conscientious, provoking, stimu-
lating, inspiring, dynamic, creative, interactive, fun, entertaining, innova-
tive, creative. Only 0.8% of the responses were negative.
The results of the quantitative survey show that the exhibition’s message 
comes through clear and conclusive. Determination is a major incentive to 
education, while apathy is a disincentive (Factum 2014). The results also 
show that the one of the target audiences, students, visited the exhibition, 
including many who had abandoned their studies. Visitors seemed to have 
understood the main topic about the importance of social mobility. In gen-
eral, the visitors liked the exhibition and understood the message.
The qualitative interviews
Twelve visitors gave answers in forty-minutes-long interviews. They 
looked at snapshots from each room of the exhibition and selected the 
three pieces per room that were the most meaningful to them. Visitors’ 
selection varied – almost every exhibition piece was chosen by at least 
one of the participants. However, some pieces were frequently selected. 
The selection had to be in terms of the information presented, of their 
emotional responses, and the credibility of the pieces displayed. In other 
words, the three modes of persuasion (rhetorical appeals) established by 
Aristotle were involved. Visitors also explained their reasons for selecting 
each piece. Table 1 shows the most frequent answers organized by their 
mode of persuasion (rhetorical appeal).

Exhibitions for learning / 603 
Table 1  Selected pieces according to their mode of persuasion (rhetorical appeal)
Rhetorical appeals (modes of persuasion)
Selected pieces
Logos: objective information display that 
impressed participants
Comparison between Mexico and Sweden in 1950
Graphs on goods and services
Graphs on intergeneration mobility
Pathos: emotional display that attracted 
participants
Video about indifference to poverty1 
Video (Girl Effect)2
Video of children’s orchestra3
Ethos: information displays that partici-
pants believed in
Graph on goods and services between generations.
Display that shows that Education is not only for men 
Display that shows inequality between men and women salaries 
Video about indifference to poverty 
  1  The video [Eres] was lent by the Museo de Memoria y Tolerancia in Mexico City (Gruener 2011).
  2  The video We have a situation on our hands was lent by the international association Girl Effect  
<http://www.girleffect.org> and translated into Spanish for the exhibition (Girl Effect 2012).
  3  The video of children’s orchestra called Esperanza Azteca shows children playing the ‘Ode to Joy’ 
by Beethoven. 
Figure 7
Display in room 1 
showing a comparison 
between the lowest 
income level in Mexico 
and in Sweden. The 
text reads, ‘If you 
were in the lowest 
socioeconomic level, 
this would be your 
situation.’
Figure 8
a. Display in room 1 
comparing the 
economies of Mexico 
and Sweden, 1950–
2013. The text reads, 
‘For example, today, the 
income of Swedes is 
almost six times greater 
than ours.’ Most people 
interviewed mentioned 
this and the display in 
Figure 7. 
b. Graph showing how 
goods and services 
have evolved in Mexico 
in two generations.
Si estuvieras en el nivel socioeconómico
más bajo, ésta sería tu realidad.
México 
Suecia 
a
b

604 / María González de Cossío 
Visitors also answered how they would describe and recommend the 
exhibition to other people. Some significant phrases were:
– We were confronted with reality. It is true.
– It made us think, question and share.
– It breaks your usual models of understanding.
– It changes your way of thinking. If you want to be somebody in life, you have 
to study. The interactive table makes you know yourself and realize what 
you want to change.
– Do you want to know what to do with your life? The exhibition will tell you.
– It is a place where you can visualize your life project, where you can talk, 
imagine your life, and it is free!
The interactive table was also mentioned several times. Visitors men-
tioned they were given the opportunity to think about their future, share 
their views and discuss them within the group. Some visitors even sug-
gested visiting the exhibition alone, avoiding being controlled by their par-
ents or grandparents. Some visitors asked the organizers if the exhibition 
could come to their hometown, because they wanted their own people to 
experience it. The exhibition certainly made a strong impression on its 
visitors.
Conclusions
The exhibition proved to be quite a persuasive educational tool and learn-
ing experience. The results are remarkable – possibly as a result of the 
application of some of Neurath and Bayer’s principles for the design of 
exhibitions. The information design system proved to be very effective. 
The quantitative survey results show that a large percentage of visitors 
understood the concept of social mobility and got a  clear idea of the 
Figure 9
People interacting 
with the touch 
table in room 3.

Exhibitions for learning / 605 
importance of education for moving to a higher socioeconomic level. The 
qualitative interviews confirm the survey and shows that the exhibition 
was both meaningful and powerful. Young people realized that before vis-
iting the exhibition they haven’t had the chance to think about their future 
life, to question it, and to plan for it. 
Information design was the key discipline for organising the complex 
range of issues, such as contents, language use, the adequacy of images, the 
main narrative, the organization of the venues, the development of man-
uals, the engagement of institutions that support education, the testing, 
the legal permissions needed, etc. Interdisciplinary teamwork was crucial 
for the concept’s development – involving graphic and industrial design, 
interaction design, film-­making, and the general logistical organization 
of the exhibition. This project shows that it is possible for information 
designers to intervene in social issues of importance. Since the launching 
of the exhibition in Puebla, several institutions have offered to host it and 
provide additional funding for its travelling expenses. The project has also 
led to the design and organization of a particularly light-­weight version of 
the exhibition that will visit schools in remote areas of Mexico. 
Acknowledgements
The interdisciplinary team that worked together for the exhibition was formed by: 
Centro de Estudios Espinosa Yglesias (the study on social mobility, and socioeco-
nomic data, by Roberto Vélez); Abracadabra (graphic design, by Benito Cabañas); 
Core design (Industrial design, by Rigoberto Cordero); Rayya (videos, by Gerardo 
and David Sánchez Yanes); Efectos Digitales Interactivos (interactive design, by 
Ariel Molina); Centro de Estudios Avanzados de Diseño (general coordination, by 
Cecilia Orvañanos and María González de Cossío); Factum (marketing studies, by 
Alberto Martínez de Velasco).
Figure 10
View of room 4 
that shows 
people watching 
the video of 
the children’s 
orchestra.

606 / María González de Cossío 
606 / María González de Cossío 
References
Bayer, Herbert. 1939/1940. ‘Fundamentals of 
exhibition design.’ PM [Production Management] 
6 (2): 17–25.
Bayer, Herbert. 1961. ‘Aspects of design of exhibitions 
and museums.’ Curator: The Museum Journal 
4 (3): 257–288.
Burke, Christopher. 2013. ‘The Gesellschafts- und 
Wirtschaftsmuseum in Wien (Social and 
economic museum of Vienna) 1925–34.’ In 
Isotype: design and contexts 1925–1971, edited by 
Christopher Burke, Eric Kindel, and Sue Walker, 
21–106. London: Hyphen Press.
CEEY Centro de Estudios Espinosa Yglesias. 2012. 
<http://www.ceey.org.mx/site/movilidadsocial/
graficas-interactivas-sobre-movilidad-social-
mexico>.
CEEY Centro de Estudios Espinosa Yglesias. 2013. 
Report on social mobility in Mexico: imagine your 
future. Mexico: CEEY. <http://www.ceey.org.mx/
site/movilidad-social/report-social-mobility-
mexico-imagine-your-future>.
Corbett, Edward P. J., and Robert J. Connors. 1999. 
Classical rhetoric for the modern student. 4th edn. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Decree by which the Political Constitution 
of Mexico is reformed. 2012. <http://
www.dof.gob.mx/nota_detalle.
php?codigo=5233070&fecha=09/02/2012>.
Ehses, Hanno. 2009. Design on a rhetorical footing. 
Puebla: CEAD.
Factum. 2014. Movilidad social: estudio cuantitativo: 
reporte total de resultados Ibero y BUAP, Puebla.
García Hernández, Caridad, and Margarita Espinosa 
Meneses. 2014. ‘Espacio, cuerpo y apropiación 
de conocimiento en los museos.’ In Contextos 
educativos no-­formales: el museo y la apropiación 
del conocimiento científico, edited by Caridad 
García Hernández and Margarita Espinosa 
Meneses, 71–93. Mexico: Universidad Autónoma 
Metropolitana Cuajimalpa.
Girl Effect. 2012. We have a situation on our 
hands. Video: <http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=6R8aOq2w2k4>.
González de Cossío, María. 2009. ‘Social mobility 
in Mexico: graphs that help in understanding the 
relation between education and socioeconomic 
level.’ Information Design Journal 17 (3): 246–260.
González de Cossío, María. 2014. ‘Transforming data 
into information experiences.’ In Design, user 
experience, and usability: user experience design for 
everyday life applications and science, part 3, edited 
by Aaron Marcus, 411–422. New York: Springer.
Gruener, Daniel, director. 2011. [Eres]. 
Video: <http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=rq5QzqmgNzI>.
Kosslyn, Stephen Michael. 2006. Graph design for 
the eye and mind. New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Maddison, Angus. n.d. ‘Historical statistics: Statistics 
on world population, GDP and per capita GDP: 
1–2008 AD.’ Link on: <http://www.ggdc.net/
maddison/Maddison.htm>.
Miles, R. S., compiler. 2001. The design of educational 
exhibits. 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Neurath, Otto. 2010. From hieroglyphics to Isotype: 
a visual autobiography. Edited by Matthew Eve 
and Christopher Burke. London: Hyphen Press.
OECD. 2014. OECD Factbook 2014: economic, 
environmental and social statistics. OECD 
Publishing. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
factbook-2014-en>.
Peñalosa, Eduardo, and Diego Méndez. 2014. ‘La 
apropiación del conocimiento en comunicación 
y educación para la ciencia: una propuesta de 
conceptualización.’ In Contextos educativos 
no-­formales: el museo y la apropiación del 
conocimiento científico, edited by Caridad García 
Hernández and Margarita Espinosa Meneses, 
95–125. Mexico: Universidad Autónoma 
Metropolitana Cuajimalpa.
Serrano, Julio, and Florencia Torche. 2008. ¿Nos 
movemos? La movilidad social en México. Mexico: 
Fundación ESRU.
Simon, Nina. 2010. The participatory museum, 
California: Museum 20.
Shah, Priti, Richard E. Mayer, and Mary Hegarty. 
1999. ‘Graphs as aids to knowledge construction: 
signalling techniques for guiding the process of 
graph comprehension.’ Journal of Educational 
Psychology 91 (4): 690–702.

607
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 607–618
Form follows user follows form
From designing forms to designing services: a tutorial 
Borries Schwesinger
Forms are a means for two-­way communication in very diverse settings. 
Understanding these settings is vital for designing appropriate, user-­friendly, 
and effective forms. There is, for instance, a considerable difference between 
a consumer-­focused company using interactive forms in a sophisticated online 
transaction environment, and a government body using paper forms to gather 
the information necessary to process applicants’ benefit claims impartially and 
fairly. While the first deploys forms to sell things, a government body sees the 
function of a form from quite a different perspective. This chapter presents 
four prototypical settings where forms play a crucial role in facilitating effective 
communication: 
• customer and company 
• citizen and government
• employee and employer 
• business to business
For each setting, specific requirements, challenges, and implications for form 
design are highlighted. Real-life examples illustrate how form design is more 
successful if it takes into account the conditions and potentials of a ­specific 
setting, and the expectations of the actors involved. In this way the chapter 
helps to shift the focus from designing forms to designing services. 
What are forms?
Before looking at the different settings in which forms are used, we need 
to define what a form is. Even if forms are ubiquitous and we recognize 
a form when we see one, how do we define what a form is? A benefit claim 
sheet is clearly a form, but what about a bill? I prefer a broad definition, as 
I think it is not so much the visual appearance of a form that makes a form, 
but the way the information is gathered and presented. This is why I count 
everything as a form which matches the following two criteria:
•	 A form is a means for two-­way communication.
•	 A form includes a fixed part (e.g. questions and prompts) and 
a variable part (e.g. check boxes and blank input fields).
The problem with forms
Most forms share one problem, which is the main reason why they are 
unloved and sometimes even feared: they are a means for communication 
41

608 / Borries Schwesinger
between two parties where one party more or less exclusively defines what 
can be communicated and what cannot. Unlike face-­to-­face conversation, 
a form-filler must adhere to the wording and logic determined by the form 
issuer, e.g. the questions asked and the selection, naming, and sequence 
of tick boxes and fields to fill in. This can cause a lot of friction: issuer and 
form-filler tend to speak separate languages, have different backgrounds, 
and may have different intentions. The issuers are often businesses, gov-
ernment bodies, or large organizations. They tend to use jargon and they 
can be blindly familiar with the complex internal processes in which their 
forms play an important role. The form-filling users, however, are often 
individuals who struggle to be sure they understand the particular jargon 
employed, and who have no idea how the whole process works and what 
is really expected of them.1
Besides, the two parties have different expectations. The issuer often 
needs specific data and information in order to process a request or claim. 
The user, on the other hand, wants a problem solved or a service deliv-
ered. However, the form can easily appear not as a means to get something 
done, but as an obstacle or nuisance. 
Because the issuer of a form asks the questions and strictly defines what 
can be communicated or not, quite often the form does not fit the specific 
situation and demands of the user. The user might feel obliged to fill in 
a form in which he or she is prevented from conveying his or her exact 
intentions.
Everyone has had unpleasant experiences with forms, and this adds 
to the problem. The mere sight of a form evokes mixed feelings in many 
people. They regard forms as bureaucratic, sometime discriminatory, con-
descending, and, above all, incomprehensible – because they often are. 
We will now look into four different settings where forms are used as 
a means for communication, and explore what has to be taken into account 
when designing forms for such settings.
Customer and company
Whenever companies use forms to communicate or exchange information 
with their customers, a form typically represents just one step in a cus-
tomer journey that involves several different touchpoints. The journey 
may start with the customer seeing an advertisement and end with the 
delivery of a product. Forms are a crucial but often neglected part of this 
journey. 
  1	 For an introduction to the problematics of form design, see the classic papers by 
Wright and Bernard (1975), Wright (1981), Barnett (1992), Sless (1999), and 
Jansen (2001). For a historical perspective and examples, see Twyman (2003), Stiff, 
Dobraszczyk, and Esbester (2011), and Schwesinger (2010). For detailed practical 
advice on contemporary form design, see Wroblewski (2008), Jarrett and Gaffney 
(2009), Barnett (2005, 2008), ELMER 2 (2006), and Schwesinger (2010). 

Form follows user follows form / 609 
Forms often play a role at very critical and sensitive moments in a trans-
actional process, such as placing an order or receiving an invoice. If the 
form fails at a critical moment, the whole process might be compromised 
or even end. Imagine having to fill in an order form, online or on paper, 
which is over-long, asks ambiguous questions, is hard to understand, does 
not leave enough space for your name, does not accept your foreign tele-
phone number, or does not work properly on your phone. Many online 
shopping processes are terminated just before checkout because of prob-
lems associated with the interactive forms involved.
The same is true for invoices. If people do not understand their invoice 
and do not manage to easily spot the information they are looking for – 
such as the total amount, the account information, or what the invoice is 
actually for – they are less likely to pay on time and more likely to call the 
company and complain, which may result in substantial extra costs for the 
company (Schwesinger 2010, 270). 
Figure 1
Four examples of 
everyday forms, 
from the notorious 
tax form to the 
prosaic online 
profile page.
a. Council tax bill, 
Oxford City Council, 
UK, 2008.
b. Form 1040, US 
individual income 
tax return, Inland 
Revenue Service, 
Department of the 
Treasury, 2013.
c. Missed delivery 
notice, Royal Mail, 
2008. 
d. Profile page, 
Spotify.
<https://www.spotify.
com/us/account/profile>, 
accessed 15 March 2016.
a
b
c
d

610 / Borries Schwesinger
Even if a badly designed form does not result in customers abandoning 
their transactions in large numbers, it could still compromise the brand 
experience, and as a result damage the brand’s image. Imagine a brand 
which positions itself as uncomplicated and customer-­friendly, while its 
forms are not.
Requirements and challenges for company forms
There are of course some basic requirements for all types of forms – like 
basic typographic legibility, an accommodating environment for entering 
data, a well-­structured sequential layout which by itself guides the user, 
as well as reasonably comprehensible, jargon-­free language. However, 
text should be more than comprehensible – the tone of voice of the text 
must match the particular context of communication and the wider brand 
strategy of the company.2 Furthermore, as forms are involved in a crucial 
brand experience, even the humblest form must consistently convey the 
visual profile associated with the brand, by using the brand’s logo, type-
faces, colours, and overall visual style. Company forms, in particular, must 
be designed with the utmost care to avoid losing customers while they are 
filling in the form. Every lost customer is lost money, and potentially lost 
brand value.
Implications
For a form to become part of a positive customer experience, it is crucial to 
look at the form from a customer perspective. Therefore omit all questions 
that are not absolutely needed in order to get the job done. The challenge 
for company forms is to collect all the data that is needed and not to ask 
for more than is necessary. Even consider avoiding a form altogether and 
gathering information in other ways. Because people are more willing 
to answer questions if they know how the answers will be put to use, tell 
them why this information is needed, and also tell them what happens to 
the information you ask them to provide. 
Try to make life easier for the user by being helpful. Fill in all data that is 
already known or can be guessed, so the user only needs to correct them if 
they are wrong. Make online forms usable across all devices. There is noth-
ing more annoying than fiddling with a complex form on a small screen. 
For online forms there are some special considerations to be taken into 
account. Allow the form to handle incomplete data and allow different 
ways of entering information. For example, allow foreign customers to 
enter postcodes in a variety of formats instead of forcing them to use a 
format with which they are unfamiliar.
In online checkout processes it is especially important that the user 
does not abandon the process before it is completed. One pitfall, still 
very common, is to confront users with a login, or to force them to set 
  2	 For an extensive exposition of the concept of ‘tone of voice’ in the context of forms and 
branding, see Delin 2005.

Form follows user follows form / 611 
Figure 2
A straightforward 
form used by 
Dutch Railways. 
It is used to claim 
back luggage 
lost on trains 
or in stations. 
The upper 
part explains 
clearly what the 
customer can 
do and what the 
company will 
do. This form 
foregrounds 
the need of the 
customer.
Nederlandse 
Spoorwegen, 
Netherlands, 2006. 
Designed by Eden 
Design, Amsterdam. 
Permission granted.
Figure 3
A minimal way 
to set up a user 
account. Name, 
email address. 
and password are 
all that is needed. 
This simplicity, 
together with 
a clean and airy 
design, creates an 
easy and friendly 
user experience.
Dropbox, <https://www.
dropbox.com/register>, 
accessed 5 December 
2014.

612 / Borries Schwesinger
up an account first, before allowing them to complete the ordering. It is 
far better to offer the customer an opportunity to set up an account after 
the successful completion of the initial transaction. The same is advisable 
for all questions which, while relevant, are not strictly necessary, such as 
registering for a newsletter. Even if placing such questions or options after 
the completion of the transaction risks that people ignore them, it is better 
than losing customers earlier because they got annoyed by a checkout pro-
cess which is tedious to complete or not easily understood.
Citizen and government
This is probably the most notorious setting for forms. Forms have always 
been a means for government and public bodies to administer and control 
the life of individual citizens. The need for efficiency in collecting taxes 
was one of the drivers for the invention of the modern form with its table-­
like layout (Schwesinger 2010, 58).
The government and the citizen interact with each other when the citi-
zen has to fulfil certain duties like paying taxes, or when the citizen applies 
for certain government services such as welfare benefits or a licence.
Figure 4
French tax form from 
1790. Note the spaces 
left blank for the user 
to fill in.
Ulsteri QS 675/3. 
Zentralbibliothek Zurich.

Form follows user follows form / 613 
Forms play a crucial rule in such circumstances, and both are situations 
where there is a considerable imbalance of power between the government 
and the citizen. The crucial aspect, in contrast to the other proto­typical 
settings for forms (customer and company, employee and employer, 
business to business), is that the user cannot opt out. At least in theory, 
a customer can opt for the services of another company when not satisfied, 
an employee can quit his job when working conditions are unbearable, 
and a company can choose another supplier if working together proves 
difficult. A citizen has no such choice. He or she cannot choose to pay taxes 
to someone else or apply for a passport in another country if the service 
is poor. It is in the nature of government that people are limited in their 
choices when interacting with it. 
Requirements and challenges for government forms
Government forms must work for everyone, and facilitate fairness. That 
means that form designers have to take into consideration different levels of 
literacy, different levels of language fluency, different languages spoken, as 
well as different expectations, experiences, and motivations. Government 
forms are often part of legal or administrative acts that require conformity 
with the law. This tends to make forms complex, and the processes that 
the forms support hard to understand. Simplifying can be tricky because it 
can result in unintentional legal issues. But this is not an excuse to maintain 
the status quo. It only means that everyone who is involved in developing 
or redesigning government forms has to be sensitive to the many different 
needs of the users of such forms.
Rethinking and redesigning public services and associated forms cost 
money. Even if the cost is relatively low compared to what can be saved 
in the long run – due to more efficient processes and the need for fewer 
staff to answer queries, for example – governments are often reluctant to 
spend money on this. The challenge is to raise the awareness of both the 
immediate and long-­term benefits of better communication.
People often ask themselves why they have to fill in applications again 
and again, and to provide the same information again and again, when 
they already have provided this information earlier to another govern-
ment agency. Despite the widespread notion that governments know 
everything already, there is often, varying from country to country, much 
less data exchange between different parts of the administration than 
people tend to think. Even if the tax authorities know about your income, 
the housing benefit agency may not. While this can be a healthy obstacle 
to mass surveillance by a government of its citizens, the downside is that 
existing data cannot be reused for the convenience of the citizen.
Implications
Maybe the best way to design government forms is to organize as many 
services and processes as possible in a way that does not require forms at 
Figure 5
‘Fix my street’, a 
mobile application 
that allows users 
to report potholes, 
abandoned cars, 
or other problems 
without having to 
know which is the 
relevant authority. 
The user takes 
a photo and it is 
sent, together 
with location 
information 
provided by the 
phone, to the 
relevant authority.
<https://itunes.
apple.com/gb/
app/fixmystreet/
id297456545>, 2014. 
Permission granted.

614 / Borries Schwesinger
all, and thus avoid all the pitfalls that come with forms. This would mean 
that the government is so easily approachable and accessible that in order 
to apply for something you just say what you need and that’s it. 
To get at least a little closer to such a utopia a change of thinking is 
needed. A form is not an end in itself. To make a legally valid application 
you don’t need a form. An application could therefore also be made in 
other ways – for example in person or by an informal letter. Although 
standardized forms have the potential of being a means for providing fair 
and equal treatment, it can be argued that the form is first of all a way to 
make the life of the administration easier. New and innovative situation-­
sensitive ways are needed for gathering and providing information and 
establishing links to the actual needs of, and requests from, citizens.
Employee and employer
Companies use forms not only for communicating with external custom-
ers and business partners. Forms are used extensively within companies to 
organize work processes as well as relations between companies and their 
employees. Think of ‘customer relationship management software’, which 
sales representatives use to manage their business contacts, or an ‘applica-
tion for leave’ form which every employee has to fill in for his or her holi-
days. Both are often part of the dreaded paperwork every employee has to 
deal with. In certain areas, such as back-­office operations, such paperwork 
might even be the main task. In others, such as customer-facing services, 
it is an add-­on. In the latter case filling in a form is often experienced as 
a tedious chore – something that prevents employees from doing their real 
work. In health care, for example, professionals spend up to half of their 
Figure 6
Two pages 
of a voter 
registration form 
(paper version). 
It makes very 
good use of the 
right margin to 
explain questions, 
give examples, 
and tell the user 
what happens 
when. The 
language appears 
remarkably plain.
UK Cabinet Office, 
<https://www.gov.
uk/government/
publications/
voter-registration-
forms-paper-versions>. 
Designed by Robert 
Hempsall, Rob Waller, 
and Isabella Park. Public 
sector information: 
Open Government 
Licence v3.0.
Page 1
Your date of birth (DD MM YYYY)
If you don’t know your date of birth, please tick if you are:
 
Under 18 
18–75 
Aged 76 or over
Your name and address
Forename(s) 
 
Surname
Your address
  
 
 
 
 
 
Postcode
Do you live at another address?
  
No 
Yes
If you also live at another address  
don’t give us the address now, but we 
may ask you for more information later.
Moved in the last 12 months?
 
No 
Yes
If yes, please give any previous address where you have lived during 
the last year.
  
 
 
 
 
 
Postcode
If this address was overseas, were you registered in the UK as an 
overseas voter?
 
No 
Yes
Changed your name?
If you have changed your name, please give us your most recent previous 
name (optional).
Please tell us the date you changed your name DD MM YYYY (optional).
For example, you may have got 
married and changed your name. 
You do not have to give us details of 
your name change but it will help us 
identify you. If this information is not 
given then you may need to provide 
additional identity documents.
Go online
 
www.gov.uk/register-to-vote
Individual Registration Form 
 
Register to vote
Only one person can register to vote using this form. 
Use black ink and write in CAPITALS or go online at  
www.gov.uk/register-to-vote
ITR-E
Don’t know your exact date of birth? 
documents (for example, your passport 
or driving licence) or tick one of the 
be used to call people for jury service.
-

Form follows user follows form / 615 
time doing paperwork, tracking records, and writing reports instead of 
seeing patients (Patients or paperwork, n.d., 3).
So every improvement of the processes and forms will not only improve 
the quality of the service that is delivered. It can also help to improve the 
daily life of the employees because it makes it a little easier. Designing 
good processes with appropriate accompanying forms is therefore part 
of serious efforts in ‘staff engagement’ since internal forms also influence 
how employees experience their employer.3 However, if an ever increas-
ing level of paperwork is the inevitable consequence of an ever growing 
importation of private sector management ideas into the public sector, the 
question of minimizing excessive form-­filling becomes one that can only 
be satisfactorily answered on a political level.
Requirements and challenges for internal forms
Internal company forms tend to be much more complex and dense than 
forms for customer use. And since they are not perceived as business crit-
ical (as customer-­related forms are), they can often be quite challenging 
and time-consuming to fill in, particularly if filling them in is only done 
sporadically. Up to a point, however, forms that are complex can still be 
acceptable if employees are experienced, know the jargon, are familiar 
with the underlying business processes, and gain familiarity with the 
forms through frequently exposure. Nevertheless, if forms are easier to 
use and the better integrated they are into employees’ daily routines, then 
less time need be invested in training, costly errors are less likely to be 
reduced, and employees can focus better on their core tasks. 
  3	 For an exposition of the concept of ‘employer branding’, see Barrow and Mosley 2005.
Figure 7
At Ottawa Hospital it is less the design of the forms, but the way the information is 
accessed and can be modified that improved the lives of staff as well as patients. 
Using tablets to access records, to view X-­rays, and to order clinical tests and 
prescriptions allows doctors and nurses to perform these tasks while they are with 
patients, making it easier for them to spend more time with patients and share 
information with them.
Mobile Clinical App, The Ottawa Hospital, Canada, 2010. Permission granted.

616 / Borries Schwesinger
Internal forms are highly integrated into the organizational structure 
of a company, with specific forms associated with specific processes. This 
means that if you start directly with redesigning the forms, the process is 
likely to result in changes in surface appearance only. Arguably this may 
itself be an achievement, because better typography will make the form 
easier to read, and better layout will help the user to navigate more intui-
tively if it offers better sequencing.
But if you want to enhance the whole process of which the forms 
involved are a facilitating tool, it is not a good idea to start with the forms. 
Changing the process is a task that cannot be done by a lone information 
designer but must be tackled by a team involving process specialists, in-­
house stakeholders, in-­house users, business consultants, copywriters, as 
well as service, interaction, and graphic designers. 
Implications	
When designing internal forms, it is essential to know how the organiza-
tion works internally. What happens before and what happens after a form 
is filled in? Who are the users, what are their responsibilities, and in which 
situations are they confronted with these forms? All relevant stakeholders 
should ideally be involved – from IT and logistics to human resources and 
marketing & communication. Before implementation, user testing should 
be performed, results monitored, and amendments made.
Figure 8
This questionnaire 
is part of a whole 
system of forms 
used to assess the 
insurance risks 
of different types 
of companies. 
Despite its highly 
specialized 
content it features 
a sophisticated 
design solution 
that cleverly 
guides the 
user through 
the 17-page 
document.
Ass Tech GmbH, 2000. 
Permission granted. 
Designed by Kognito 
Visuelle Gestaltung, 
Berlin.

Form follows user follows form / 617 
Business to business
In business-to-business dealings – that is, one company selling to or buy-
ing from another company and not to an end-consumer – companies use 
forms to organize and structure the processes involved. An example is an 
online retailer’s warehouse communicating with a logistics company about 
the shipping and delivery of goods. In such situations companies need 
reliable, fast, and secure ways to communicate, allowing for a hassle-free 
exchange of information. Any failure will impair the whole business by 
making it slower, less reliable, and more costly. In such settings, as with 
internal forms, people tend to be trained and familiar with the content of 
the forms. So the aim for a form should not necessarily be to be as simple 
as possible but as useful as possible. 
Requirements and challenges for business-­to-­business forms
Especially in business-to-business situations, users are often confronted 
with forms that are far from ideal. But even then users get used to them 
and often develop personal workarounds. Unfortunately such individ-
ual practices can be a challenge when improving or redesigning forms. 
Because every improvement means that something changes, and even 
if this change is meant to make life easier, it might cause a lot irritation 
for the people who had learnt how to use the old forms. It changes their 
routine, and they are therefore forced to adopt new patterns of behaviour.
Implications
The implications of such challenges are that any redesign or improve-
ment should not entail starting from scratch. User-­modified workarounds 
should rather be taken advantage of, as a guide to how efficient and user-­
friendly business-­to-­business forms should work.
Conclusion
Forms influence how people interact with governments, businesses, and 
other kinds of organizations. Form design requires a holistic view of the 
interaction environment and the interaction process in which the form 
plays an important role. Form designers need to develop a deep under-
standing of the motivations, backgrounds, and expectations of the parties 
involved. There is never a one-­fits-­all solution. A good form will make the 
user feel understood, helped, and never lost. It provides a clear reason to 
fill in the form and makes it plain that the form is not an end in itself but 
a means for achieving something else. Understanding the situation and 
being compassionate with the form filler is key. Realizing this should lead 
to better forms and more fulfilling interactions between customer and 
company, employee and employer, business and business, and above all, 
between citizen and government. 

618 / Borries Schwesinger
618 / Borries Schwesinger
References
Barnett, Robert. 1992. ‘Understanding forms as 
communication.’ In Designing information for 
people: proceedings from the symposium, edited 
by Robyn Penman and David Sless, 123–143. 
Canberra: Communication Research Institute of 
Australia. 
Barnett, Robert. 2005. Forms for people: designing 
forms that people can use. Belconnen, ACT: Robert 
Barnett and Associates.
Barnett, Robert. 2008. Managing business forms. 
5th edn. Belconnen, ACT: Robert Barnett and 
Associates.
Barrow, Simon, and Richard Mosley. 2005. The 
employer brand: bringing the best of brand 
management to people at work. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley.
Delin, Judy. 2005. ‘Brand tone of voice: a linguistic 
analysis of brand positions.’ Journal of Applied 
Linguistics 2 (1): 1–44.
ELMER 2: user interface guidelines for governmental 
forms on the internet: simplified forms for the 
private sector. 2006. Norwegian Ministry of 
Trade and Industry. <http://www.elmer.no/
retningslinjer/pdf/elmer2-english.pdf>.
Jansen, Carel. 2001. ‘How research can lead to better 
government forms.’ In Reading and writing public 
documents: problems, solutions and characteristics, 
edited by Daniël Janssen and Rob Neutelings, 
11–36. Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins.
Jarrett, Caroline, and Gerry Gaffney. 2009. Forms 
that work: designing web forms for usability. 
Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Patients or paperwork? the regulatory burden facing 
America’s hospitals. n.d. Commissioned report, 
provided by PricewaterhouseCoopers. Chicago: 
American Hospital Association. <http://www.
aha.org/content/00–10/FinalPaperworkReport.
pdf>.
Schwesinger, Borries. 2010. The form book: best 
practice in creating forms for printed and online use. 
London: Thames & Hudson.
Sless, David. 1999. ‘Designing and evaluating forms 
in large organizations.’ In Visual information for 
everyday use: design and research perspectives, 
edited by Harm J. G. Zwaga, Theo Boersema, and 
Henriëtte C. M. Hoonhout, 135–153. London and 
Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Stiff, Paul, Paul Dobraszczyk, and Mike Esbester. 
2011. ‘Designing and gathering information: 
perspectives on nineteenth-­century forms.’ In 
Information history in the modern world: histories 
of the information age, edited by Toni Weller, 
57–88. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Twyman, Michael. 2004. ‘Information design 
and early ephemera.’ In Selected readings of the 
Information Design International Conference 
2003, edited by Carla G. Spinillo and Solange G. 
Coutinho, 11– 27. Recife: Sociedade Brasileira de 
Design da Informação.
Wright, Patricia. 1981. ‘Informed design for forms.’ 
Information Design Journal 2 (3&4): 151–178. 
(‘A special issue [of Information Design Journal]: 
The design of forms and official information’).
Wright, Patricia, and P. Bernard. 1975. ‘ “Just fill 
in this form”: a review for designers.’ Applied 
Ergonomics 6 (4): 213–220.
Wroblewski, Luke. 2008. Web form design: filling in 
the blanks. New York: Rosenfeld Media.

619
Information design & value
Andrew Boag
The idea of ‘design thinking’ has focused attention on the importance of 
design process, and this is also central to information design. Other neces-
sary conditions of good information design highlighted by David Sless in 1994 
include: understanding users and user research; the importance of craft; 
specialist teams; and measured performance. Our economy is now 75% service 
oriented and good customer experience is key to service design. Communication 
design is an essential aspect of customer experience. There are eight communi-
cation ­drivers. Improvement in communication can be measured and categor­
ized according to these drivers. Four case studies demonstrate the impact of 
­measured improvement in information design.
Design thinking, business, and design process
Historically the business world approached design with caution. This is 
in part because designers have tended to stress the creative element of 
what they do more than the problem-solving business-focused element, 
and also perhaps through not being taken seriously and being misrepre-
sented in the media. Design would typically provide the styling of arte-
facts towards the end of the development cycle (which might often get 
squeezed or axed to economize). Designers sometimes overlook the fact 
that without business to employ or commission them design would not 
exist, and historically designers have not embraced the concepts and ter-
minology of business.
Tim Brown’s 2008 Harvard Review paper ‘Design thinking’, and subse-
quent book Change by design – how design thinking transforms organizations 
and inspires innovation (2009), marked a critical point for both design and 
business. Brown argued that trying to innovate using traditional business 
strategies, or by using pure intuition, may result in being ‘overwhelmed by 
new developments at home or abroad’ (Brown 2009, 2) and he argued that 
the early involvement of teams of design specialists is needed to continu-
ally develop innovative design solutions to complex business problems. 
Brown stressed that great design solutions have been the result of hard 
work and a three-phase design process:
•	 inspiration, which involves observation, thinking, reasoning, 
understanding (for example);
•	 ideation, which includes prototyping, testing, customer journeys;
•	 implementation, which is the execution, engineering, and measuring 
effectiveness.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 619–634
42

620 / Andrew Boag
Roger Martin, writing from the business perspective in The design of busi-
ness (2009), stressed that business has traditionally sought innovation and 
the creation of value either by strict analysis of business data and processes 
(deductive and inductive reasoning), or by the direct opposite of this: the 
flash of inspiration that comes from intuitive thinking (Martin 2009, 5).
At the heart of the design-thinking approach to successful innovation 
is a balance of the designer’s ways of matching people’s needs with what is 
technically feasible (requiring a degree of empathy), with an appreciation 
of what is commercially viable for a business. Without empathy, products 
or services will not do their job. And without commercial viability, no 
matter how good the products or services, the business will fail.
Consultancy
Commercial viability, and business success, traditionally meant the crea-
tion of products and services as efficiently and economically as possible, 
in order to optimize a business’s profitability. Management Consulting 
developed as a means of helping businesses do this, by analysing what 
businesses are doing, and making recommendations for improvement. 
Business values the voice of the impartial advisor, and the fact that con-
sultants, through the experience of working for other businesses for 
example, have specialist expertise. (Traditionally consultancies charged 
for their time and materials much like designers do. In recent years they 
have increasingly charged based on their results, the business achieving 
specific objectives, for example, or being paid a percentage of the value 
they generate. This is like the ‘Pay for Performance Advertising’, or PPP, 
model used to a small extent in the advertising industry and which has 
gained momentum recently as digital technologies have made it easier to 
measure a campaign’s success.) 
Some large service agencies (typically employing both consultants 
and designers in their project teams) now take on outsourced business – 
often buying whole businesses – knowing that they will need to measure 
demonstrable improvement over time (e.g. improved customer satisfac-
tion, service call reduction, improved bill payment speeds).
New and Kimbell (2013) suggest there is similarity in what designers 
and business consultants do. Some design studios are encroaching on tra-
ditional consultancy, and they have lots in common. Business consultants 
are rationalist and orthodox, sometimes steered by the prevailing ideo-
logical position. They are paid more, and are characterized by what they 
know that the client doesn’t know. Designers, however, try hard to get 
under the skin of the client and user in order to understand and solve prob-
lems. They are characterized by the process they follow, not by knowledge 
in a field. Designers and consultants both value empathy (Figure 1). New 
and Kimbell also suggest there are obstacles to empathy for consultants 
because: 

Information design & value / 621 
•	 of the traditional power imbalance (the consultant is working for 
top management, but interacting with lower-level colleagues);
•	 to truly empathize requires an ability to accept ignorance (the 
­­consultant generally needs to be a subject expert);
•	 consultancy’s ethics require that the consultant tell the truth  
‘regard­less of what the client wants to hear’ (New and Kimbell 
2013, 9).
Designers sign up to no such code, and design as a profession has no reg-
ulation – ethical good practice is, I would suggest, crucial for the design 
sector.
Information design
In the information design sphere, the importance of process has been 
argued for some time, perhaps most vociferously, by David Sless and col-
leagues at the Australian Communications Research Institute (CRI) (Sless 
1994a). Their information design methodology involved:
•	 defining the problem;
•	 involving all stakeholders;
•	 observing and measuring the current state of things; 
•	 development and testing of prototype solutions; 
•	 iterative development and testing of prototypes until an optimum 
solution is found;
•	 implementation and monitoring of the solution in use.
In addition to this methodology, under the title ‘What is information 
design?’, Sless suggested further necessary conditions of good informa-
tion design including (but not exhaustive): understanding users and user 
research; the importance of craft; specialist teams; and measured perfor-
mance (Sless 1994a, 9).
Figure 1 
New & Kimbell’s 
‘alternative views 
of empathy’. ‘The 
main dimensions 
in which we 
might compare 
the rationalist 
empathy of 
the traditional 
consultant with 
the more aesthetic 
empathy of the 
designer . . . For 
the consultant, 
the key issue 
is analysis and 
isolation of the 
problem; for the 
designer, it is 
seeing problems 
and solutions 
holistically.’
Rationalist empathy
Based on demonstrable method
I try to understand your problem 
by locating it within a universe of 
familiar problems
Reductive
Nomothetic
Focus on diagnosis and prescription
Aesthetic empathy
Based on intuitive response
I try to understand what it would be 
like to be you 
Holistic
Ideographic
Focus on interpretation of 
representation(s) of the situation

622 / Andrew Boag
Understanding users and user research
Making information usable requires an understanding of its users. 
Organizations carry out different kinds of research to understand how 
their customer base is made up (market research, and segmentation), 
what opportunities exist for product or service improvement, how their 
customers react (customer insight), how successful their designs are (usa-
bility testing with prototypes), and to track constant audience change.
Prototypes or finished information designs might be evaluated before 
or as they are rolled out. This is live testing, and when comparing two or 
more approaches A/B testing, or champion challenging. 
When used well, research allows business to understand and demon-
strate the effectiveness of information design. Organizations may want 
research to help them make decisions, or support a  decision made. 
Investing in research does not, of course, mean organizations necessarily 
improve services based on its findings, but it can help support a business 
case being made for change. 
Some designers feel that too much of a focus on research is inappropri-
ate. Google for example carried out A/B testing on different shades of blue 
in advertising links and found the more users liked certain shades the more 
likely they were to click, resulting in $200m additional annual revenue. 
Leaving the company in 2009, their most senior designer Doug Bowman 
blogged: 
It’s true that a team at Google couldn’t decide between two blues, so they’re 
testing 41 shades between each blue to see which one performs better. I had 
a recent debate over whether a border should be 3, 4 or 5 pixels wide, and was 
asked to prove my case. I can’t operate in an environment like that. I’ve grown 
tired of debating such miniscule design decisions. There are more exciting 
design problems in this world to tackle. (Hern 2014)
Craft
Bowman’s blog post also reinforces Sless’s suggestion that ‘Information 
design is a craft more than it is a science.’ Of course, scientific enquiry and 
experimentation is a good thing. However, much science in information 
design reinforces well-known standards of design practice, and ‘Knowing 
about something is not the same as knowing how to do it’ (Sless 1994a, 14).
Teams
Sless suggested that 
the challenge [for information designers] is to . . . manage … the relationship 
between the information and the user . . . this . . . requires a range of techniques 
not usually found within one trained individual. Good information design 
is . . . the result of collaboration between a variety of individuals working in 
a team. (Sless 1994a, 6) 

Information design & value / 623 
These inter­disciplinary teams might include, for example, individuals 
from the communication arts, philosophy, systems analysis, ethnogra-
phy, and negotiation. Similarly, the Design Thinking approach stresses 
the importance of teams of specialists to radical design solutions and to 
innovation where design’s impact may even go so far as to challenge the 
product or service itself.
Measured performance
In 1994 measuring improvement through information design was rela-
tively novel, and Sless’s message was a rallying call: to be good, information 
design requires demonstrable improvement, and therefore measured per-
formance. He stressed the importance of having a measure on an original, 
so that improvement against that could be measured. Many businesses did 
not have that kind of data. 
Services, customer experience, brand
Since 1994 there has been a significant shift in recognition of the import-
ance of services. Banking, for example, has traditionally taken a prod-
uct-centric view of what it offers to customers – a range of current or 
savings account features, bank card, interest rate, etc. As Polaine, Løvlie, 
and Reason note, citing an example of their Norwegian insurance client 
Gjensidige, ‘what the company is really selling is a service. Customers can-
not hold insurance in their hands, and their experience of their insurance 
policy is made up of the service interactions they have with the company’ 
(Polaine, Løvlie, and Reason 2013, 3).
As Kimbell (2015) notes, even physical products like cars are increas-
ingly about the services that we experience – the sales process, the guaran-
tees, the servicing requirement, and the garage experience, for example. 
Seventy-five per cent of our economy is service sector (Polaine, Løvlie, 
and Reason 2013, 28).
As a result both business and design direct a lot of their attention to 
customer experience. They have gradually come to appreciate – and meas-
ure – the role designers can play, and the impact design can have on the 
customer’s experience of the whole service from start to finish: service 
interactions (e.g. the steps involved in opening a bank account), and the 
service ‘touchpoints’ (e.g. a form to be filled in, or a telephone conversa-
tion with a customer service representative). 
Service designers approach customer experience from the service 
experience direction and information design from the direction of the 
touchpoints (Figure 2, overleaf). Information design today may not result 
in traditionally ‘designed’ artefacts or systems at all.
For product brands – chocolate or cigarettes, perhaps – experience of 
the product itself defines the brand. Service brands like utilities and finan-
cial services have little, if any, product to help differentiate one provider 

624 / Andrew Boag
from another. Touchpoints therefore define the brand experience for ser-
vice brands – and their content, language, layout, and interaction features 
are therefore taken seriously by businesses that recognize this. As Waller 
and Delin observe, ‘every communication relating to a company creates 
and redefines the personality customers will attribute to it’ (Waller and 
Delin 2003, 67).
Measuring communication improvement
To paraphrase Karen Schriver, [information] design is about promoting 
the goals and values of the reader whereas advertising is about promoting 
the goals and values of organizations (Schriver 1997, 11). To understand the 
range of potential ways in which organizations measure communica-
tion improvement it will be useful to first categorize how organizations 
communicate.
Bruce Brown wrote about a  communications model which defined 
three basic values used in communication, and three related areas of 
design activity (Brown 1979). (He proposed it as a diagnostic tool and 
used it to highlight contemporary attitudes.) The model is a triangle rep-
resenting three modes of communication: Explanation, Persuasion, and 
Identification. 
Explanation is about factual information, explaining how to take a med-
icine in an information leaflet for example. It operates in a ‘closed’ context 
where there is usually one desired outcome: to take the right dose of med-
icine in the right way.
Persuasion is in complete contrast and more open. There are lots of 
potential outcomes – choices that the user can make – and persuasive 
techniques are therefore about attracting and persuading users that there 
is only one desirable choice.
Identification is the oldest mode. It is about helping people identify and 
distinguish between one thing and another – men’s and women’s toilets 
for example, or which pub is the Star.
Figure 2
Service design approaches customer 
experience from the service 
experience direction and information 
design from the direction of the 
touchpoints.
Service design
Information design
Customer journey
Touchpoints

Information design & value / 625 
Brown suggested that there are three broad areas of design activity – 
resulting from the blending of these values: 
Information design ­–  the blending of Explanation and Identification 
– maps, underground diagrams, and signs sit here.
Educational design –  the blending of Explanation and Persuasion – 
books, visualizations, games, sit here.
And Image building design – the blending of Persuasion and Identifica-
tion – incorporating ‘life-style and corporate identity’ (which today we 
would call brand) (Figure 3).
I have adapted Bruce Brown’s triangle into a circle to include eight key 
­drivers of how and why organizations communicate and interact with 
people (Figure 4; Table 1, overleaf). 
Many communications span more than one category and emphasize 
a tension between an organization’s requirement to Explain (in order to 
be compliant) with its desire to Persuade. For example, UK energy compa-
nies are required to send all customers an annual statement of their energy 
usage. Intended as an explanatory document, energy companies inevita-
bly use the opportunity to promote their brand and persuade customers 
not to switch their supplier. 
Figure 3
Bruce Brown’s graphic triangle: three 
modes of communication and three 
broad areas of design activity (Brown, 
1979, 129).
Reproduced with permission from Information 
Design Journal 1979 1/2: 129.
Explain or instruct
2      Influence
Educate
Entertain
Persuade
Promote & image build
Identify
Transact
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
Identification
Persuasion
Explanation
Image building
design
Information
design
Educational
design
Figure 4
Eight key 
communication 
drivers

626 / Andrew Boag
Since service touchpoints are the brand experience it is crucial that as 
well as explaining where the customer is in the journey, for example, or 
what their recent service usage has been, they also clearly identify and 
promote the brand. In printed customer communications like bills and 
statements, organizations additionally seek to optimize these documents’ 
Table 1  Key communication drivers and potential design improvement measures
Key driver
For example
Why 
Potential measure 
1  Explain or 
instruct
Welcome letters, customer 
service calls, public 
service leaflets & websites, 
energy statements, terms 
& conditions, food labels, 
product manuals, medicine 
information leaflet
Service touchpoint
Regulatory requirement
Drug taken correctly/deaths 
as result of errors
Speed of getting a service 
up-­and-­running
Improved customer 
experience
Energy use (up and down)
Complaints to regulator
2  Influence
Evacuation route signing, 
debtor letters, bills
Encourage a particular 
behaviour – to directly 
influence use of specific fire 
exits for example
Encourage socially acceptable 
behaviour
Volumes of in-­bound calls
Payment speed
Speed of evacuation
Lives saved
3  Educate
Textbooks, investment charts, 
a tax or benefit qualification 
explanation, infographics
Support & explain 
increasingly complex services 
– to help people claim what’s 
due to them
Present meaning in a set 
of values that wouldn’t 
otherwise be evident
Customer understanding 
Information retention
Take-­up of benefits resulting
4  Entertain
Novels, magazines, broadcast 
media
Satisfy users’ desire to be 
entertained
Subscriber volumes 
Viewing statistics
5  Persuade
Advertising, direct mail
Attracting & persuading users 
that there is one desirable 
choice
Offer take-­up
Sales
Product up-­sell
6  Promote & 
image-build
Brochures, web pages, 
political posters, some 
catalogues
Build brand, encourage 
loyalty, raise awareness 
– usually with a marketing 
objective
Customer satisfaction (CSAT)
Net Promoter Score (NPS)
7  Identify
Logos, brand elements, icons
Clearly distinguish products 
& services from each other
Brand awareness
8  Transact 
– this is an 
optional 
bolt-on so 
sits inside 
the circle
Communications that 
additionally support an 
interaction
Utility bills explain how 
much energy you’ve used, 
and might then require a 
mechanism for the payment 
transaction to take place
Catalogues usually have 
ordering & payment 
mechanisms. A magazine 
advert will have a sign-up 
form
Shift from paper to digital 
channels
Form drop-­offs
Speed of bill payment
Print cost/optimization
Billing CSAT

Information design & value / 627 
potential by incorporating tailored personalized content that explains 
other products or benefits, and some level of persuasive content to en-
courage cross-sales (e.g. insurance if you’re taking out a loan) or up-sales 
(e.g. a tariff add-on if you’re setting up a phone contract). Generally re-
ferred to as ‘transpromo’ (i.e. the use of ‘transactional documents’ to ‘pro-
mote’) it can be hard to distinguish between what is appropriate explan-
atory information, and what constitutes promotion. In financial services 
regulations govern prominence of risk warnings, for example, in product  
promotions.
The contexts in which we find persuasive content acceptable vary 
and constantly change – so, a sign-up form might have cross-sales ads, 
but a census or data-gathering form would not. A communication might 
take on features and elements of another in order to enhance credibility, 
like ‘advertorials’ for example, or to better engage with users, such as 
Virgin’s in-flight animated safety film which elegantly takes on the features 
of entertainment in order to instruct and influence in an accessible and 
engaging way (Banks 2014). 
Having categorized how organizations communicate, the ways in which 
design improvement can be measured can be mapped to the eight key com-
munication drivers (Table 1, column 4). Measurement in business goes 
back to leading manufacturers like Henry Ford who developed systems 
for corporate measurement. The shift from product to service culture, 
though, has required both traditional measures – like productivity – and 
measures of customer experience for example. ‘The balanced ­scorecard’ 
first published in 1992 by Kaplan and Norton in Harvard Business Review, is 
the most popular business performance and tracking system (Kaplan and 
Norton 1992). It balances the traditional financial measures (e.g. cash flow, 
sales income – the results of actions already taken) with appropriate non-­
financial operational measures (e.g. customer satisfaction, improvement, 
innovation activity – an organization’s drivers of future performance) 
using goals with measurements attached to them. It requires organizations 
to answer four basic questions (Kaplan and Norton 1992, 72):
•	 How do customers see us? (customer perspective)
•	 What must we excel at? (internal perspective)
•	 Can we continue to improve and create value? (innovation and 
learning perspective)
•	 How do we look to shareholders? (financial perspective).
Each question should then have an associated set of specific goals with 
appropriate attached measures (Table 2, overleaf).
This approach therefore provides a framework for measuring customer 
experience, along with metrics and the ability to continually monitor pro-
gress. Communication design improvement measures can be mapped to 
the four questions.

628 / Andrew Boag
Kaplan and Norton did not use the term but performance measures are 
usually referred to as KPIs or ‘key performance indicators’. Existing KPIs 
can be an excellent starting point for information design improvement. 
For example, many organizations will see reduction in unwanted calls to 
the helpline as a key metric attached to improving customer experience. 
For the information designer this means that a potential improved bill 
design measure effectively already exists, if the new design can be shown 
to reduce unwanted calls. Organizations also use external measures like 
benchmarking with other organizations or specialist industry quality and 
customer satisfaction surveys like J. D. Power (<http://jdpower.com>) or 
they commission their own customer surveys to continually gauge indus-
try and customer perception.
Cases
Example A: Measured improvement in the 
design of customer service touchpoints
David Sless described CRI’s process-driven approach to the redesign of 
Telecom Australia’s telephone bill (Sless 1994b). CRI’s redesign (Figure 5) 
optimized bill printing (thus reducing paper and print cost) and achieved 
measured improvement. Research commissioned by Telecom Australia 
demonstrated a halving of the number of customers not satisfied with the 
billing service. It also showed around 70% of customers were satisfied with 
the new bill. And, overall customer satisfaction with the billing service 
went from 67% in 1989 to 84% in 1990 – 47% of whom volunteered the bill 
as the reason for their dissatisfaction in 1989 but only 4% in 1990.
Specialist information design agencies have developed numerous tele-
com and utility bills since then that demonstrate measured improvement. 
Table 2  Balanced Scorecard typical goals and measures
Balanced Scorecard question
Typical product manufacturer’s 
goals (and measures)
Typical service provider’s 
goals (and measures)
1  How do customers see us?
Trust in product  
(new product sales)
Most helpful organization (cus-
tomer satisfaction, Net Promoter 
Score)
2  What must we excel at?
Highest manufacturing standards 
(cycle time, unit cost)
Best billing experience  
(bill-­related call reduction, 
payment speed)
3  Can we continue to improve 
and create value?
Market-­leading technology 
(length of research & develop-
ment process)
Bring new products and services 
to market quickly  
(time to launch compared with 
competitors)
4  How do we look to 
shareholders?
Surviving through startup 
(cashflow)
Succeeding in a crowded market 
(regular sales growth, market 
share, return on equity)

Information design & value / 629 
One example illustrated in Borries Schwesinger’s The form book (2010) is 
T-Mobile UK whose 2005 redesign increased customer satisfaction with 
billing by 10% over 12 months, and significantly reduced unnecessary 
bill-related calls to customer service (Schwesinger 2010, 270).
Information design improvement in the design of touchpoints like util-
ity bills and statements, for example, can be measured using a Balanced 
Scorecard approach:
•	 customer perspective: increased customer satisfaction with the utility 
service;
•	 internal perspective: reduced payment-plan-related helpline calls;
•	 innovation & learning perspective: optimized document production 
technology, and reduced complaints to the industry regulator;
•	 financial perspective: reduced print and production costs.
Example B: Drug information – where information design 
quality ‘is necessary not just desirable’ (Sless 2013a) 
Drug packaging design is heavily regulated, and it epitomizes the tension 
between a manufacturer’s desire to promote their brand and the need to 
ensure the drugs are used correctly.
Most chemotherapy drugs are administered intravenously or orally, 
and in certain circumstances they are injected via a spinal injection (‘intra­
thecally’). However, one class of these drugs, the vinca alkaloids, if injected 
intrathecally results in death or serious brain damage. Between 1968 and 
2008 across the world 55 people died as a result of maladministration.
After consulting with professionals, including information design 
experts, the UK Medical Health Regulatory Authority (MHRA) issued new 
guidance in 2008 (MHRA, 2008). A specific language and design packag-
ing requirement in the guidance was to include an additional warning on 
drug packs, NOT to use the term ‘intrathecal’ at all on the pack in order to 
avoid subliminal association, and to use colour (Figure 6). The additional 
warning ‘For intravenous use only – Fatal if given by any other routes’ has 
contributed to the elimination of deaths.
In recent years David Sless and CRI has focused on, and carried out much 
valuable work and research in this area – calling for ‘socially acceptable 
Figure 5
Telecom Australia 
bill – CRI’s 
prototype design 
after five rounds 
of testing (from 
Sless 1994b, 93).
This illustration is 
copyright of the 
Communication 
Research Institute 
[communication.org.au] 
and is reproduced here 
with permission.
Figure 6
MHRA 2008 guidance 
for vina alkaloids drug 
packaging additional 
warning (MHRA 2008, 40).
Reproduced with permission of 
MHRA.
Brand X 1mg per ml
solution
vincristine sulphate
Solution for injection.
For intravenous use only
Fatal if given by other routes
2mg in
2ml for 2ml 
presentation

630 / Andrew Boag
standards of performance’, and measurable standards in the design of 
information in contexts like this where a high standard is necessary, not 
just desirable (Sless 2013).
Example C: Health – measuring return on investment 
through improving patient experience
Accident and Emergency departments (A&E) in British hospitals have 
to cope with ever increasing numbers of patients whose stress leads to 
aggression towards A&E staff. The Department of Health partnered with 
the Design Council to understand how violence and aggression could be 
reduced (Design Council 2011).
A consortium led by PearsonLloyd, demonstrated significant return 
on investment. Their team included design strategists, an organizational 
consultant, and an organizational psychologist. The solution included 
guidance materials, people development, and a design toolkit (Figure 7). 
The process they adopted included journey mapping, stakeholder 
consultation, ethnographic research, prototyping, and testing. Informing 
Figure 7
Full-height panel 
‘slices’ and patient 
leaflet from 
PearsonLloyd’s 
informing patients 
in A&E project.
Design Council 2011.

Information design & value / 631 
patients about where they were and what to expect was prototyped and 
tested in a couple of pilot hospitals. Research and measurement were car-
ried out prior to, and one year post-implementation.
As well as improving the patient experience and making patients feel 
better informed (e.g. 78% of patients felt the signs provided helped them 
trust that the hospital staff knew what they were doing), the research 
measured a 50% reduction in threatening behaviour, a 25% reduction in 
shouting, and a 23% reduction in offensive language. It estimated that for 
every £1 spent on implementation of the recommendations, £3 is gener-
ated in benefits.
The research used a  costing model based on the potential impact 
of aggressive behaviour in causing a  psychological stress disorder. 
PearsonLloyd estimated the implementation cost of their recommen-
dations in an average A&E to be £60,000 (Frontier Economics 2013, 37). 
To calculate the benefits, a monetary value for each aggressive act was 
estimated, based on the probability of that act leading to Post Traumatic 
Stress Disorder, and the costs of this to people based on World Health 
Organization and National Institute of Clinical Excellence data. The esti-
mated resulting benefit is at least £180,000. 
This project demonstrates well that measured (information) design 
improvement can also be visually creative and engaging.
Example D: Investing in an up-front business case 
to support improved pedestrian wayfinding
Applied_ developed Legible London, a capital-wide pedestrian wayfind-
ing scheme for Transport for London (TfL) driven by the Mayor’s vision 
for London to be a walking-friendly city (Figure 8, overleaf). The project 
had return on investment measures applied to it and a business case devel-
oped by Colin Buchanan (Davies 2013). The project process involved:
•	 development of an initial Wayfinding study (Central London 
Partnership report, March 2006);
•	 building of a business case and feasibility studies (via a range of 
research pieces: Walkable journeys; Walking Tube study; TfL’s studies 
and attitudes research; TfL’s Legible London initial business case);
•	 workshops, discussions, and communication with wide-ranging 
stakeholder groups (the London boroughs, GLA, accessibility groups, 
etc.);
•	 development of a prototype system (i.e. rapid prototyping).
The business case found, for example:
•	 One in ten Tube journeys and half of all bus trips are less than two 
kilometres.
•	 55% of journeys between station pairs in central London are quicker 
to walk.

632 / Andrew Boag
•	 25% of pedestrians use the Tube map and carry an A–Z to find their 
way around.
•	 66% of Londoners were receptive to walking more, and would be 
more motivated if information and environments were improved.
•	 Estimated saving per trip per person of up to 7 pence when 
pedestrians use the system to take a more efficient route. 
Discussion
In his Design Week review of the 2013 Service Design Network Conference, 
Tom Banks notes the designer’s ‘toughest challenge is . . . being asked 
by clients to justify a business case, or return on financial investment in 
design, before anything has been designed’ (Banks 2013). From a design-
er’s stand point this might seem ludicrous. How can we have any sense 
of the potential improvement before we have started to understand the 
problem and start designing? 
For the design profession, measuring improvement in projects provides 
valuable case studies that can be used both to sell its own design services 
and as a mechanism for estimating the value of similar projects (e.g. in put-
ting together a business case). And the Design Business Association and 
Design Council publish case studies and host annual awards for designs 
that have demonstrable business impact: another valuable source and 
a good reason to support measured improvement. 
Legible London  
Yellow book
54
Legible London  
Yellow book
55
Prototype in the West End
Fitness for purpose
In preparing of a clear picture of  
the city, a set of formats emerge that  
be applied to a range of situations.  
The visual appearance of these formats, 
outlined below, is defined by the 
questions they answer along a journey, 
and the constraints of the media they 
are connected by the consistent naming 
of places and the visual representation 
of content. This speeds up the reading 
and understanding of information 
across different types of media, it 
provides a common linking thread that 
supports the way people learn. 
inhabit – on signs, in-print, spoken  
or on-screen. Evident below are the 
different visual interpretations of the 
same geographic location.  
 
The result of the definition of these 
formats is a coherent array of maps, 
signs, indexes, lists and diagrams that 
London travel 
information
020 
 7222
 1234
Listen 
to London
To hear about 
where you are 
call:
Location 220
0870
240 
6094
Above: Directional 
information, maps for 
Underground stations, bus 
stops and shelters all make  
use of coherent terminology 
and destinations.
Right: Additional connections 
for mobile phone users.
Far right: Use of an index  
and printed maps.
Above: Scales represented  
on signs in the street,  
diagrams of villages, shopping 
maps and Tube exit signs.
Left: Walking connections  
in short-hand.
Right: Future availability  
on mobile devices and online 
is possible.
Exit
MARYLEBONE, St Christopher, MAYFAIR, South Molton
For Oxford Street, New Bond Street
1
2 
&
Exit
MAYFAIR, South Molton, Grosvenor
For South Molton Street, Grosvenor Square
3
4 
5 
&
London travel 
information
020 
 7222
 1234
Listen 
to London
To hear about 
where you are 
call:
Location 220
0870
240 
6094
Above: Directional 
information, maps for 
Underground stations, bus 
stops and shelters all make  
use of coherent terminology 
and destinations.
Right: Additional connections 
for mobile phone users.
Far right: Use of an index  
and printed maps.
Above: Scales represented  
on signs in the street,  
diagrams of villages, shopping 
maps and Tube exit signs.
Left: Walking connections  
in short-hand.
Right: Future availability  
on mobile devices and online 
is possible.
Exit
MARYLEBONE, St Christopher, MAYFAIR, South Molton
For Oxford Street, New Bond Street
1
2 
&
Exit
MAYFAIR, South Molton, Grosvenor
For South Molton Street, Grosvenor Square
3
4 
5 
&
Figure 8
Pages 54 and 
55 from Legible 
London yellow 
book, elements 
of the West End 
prototype for 
Legible London 
(Davies 2013).
Reproduced with 
permission of Tim 
Fendley.

Information design & value / 633 
Information design & value / 633 
There are business case tools to help model return on investment 
from improved customer experience: Forrester Research, for example 
(Burns 2011). When organizations do not have data, or will not make it 
available, the process of measuring in itself can be expensive. The design 
of touchpoints like bills and financial statements is relatively inexpensive 
compared to the cost and time of implementing the design. All of this must 
be factored into a business case. A touchpoint design’s impact is easier 
to measure than persuasive advertising, for example, because the design 
contribution can be isolated more easily. Of course measurement also has 
to be handled carefully: KPIs can be abused, and stakeholders can feel they 
are being judged, or perhaps that design improvement might ultimately 
put them out of a job. But the democratization of data and the increasingly 
collaborative ways in which organizations and their customers go about 
making improvements, mean that measurement can become transparent 
and improvement can then become a common cause (Polaine, Løvlie, and 
Reason 2013, 153).
Information designers understand the importance of design improve-
ment, they also need to value the importance of demonstrating and meas-
uring that improvement. 
Acknowledgements
David Dickinson, Tim Fendley, Tom Lloyd, Karel van der Waarde, Matt Hunter, 
David Sless. And special thanks to David Dickinson and Jan Macdonald for point-
ing me to Example B, and Rob Waller for pointing me to Bruce Brown’s graphics 
triangle.
References
Banks, Tom. 2013. ‘Embedding design thinking in 
business – and making money . . .’ Design Week, 
20 Nov. <http://www.designweek.co.uk/analysis/
embedding-design-thinking-in-business-and-
making-money/3037556.article>.
Banks, Tom. 2014 ‘Virgin Atlantic’s in-flight safety 
video “flies in the face of ordinary”.’ Design 
Week, 25 February. Acesed 27 May 2014. <http://www.designweek.
co.uk/news/virgin-atlantics-in-flight-safety-
video-flies-in-the-face-of-ordinary/3038006.
article>.
Brown, Bruce. 1979. ‘The graphics triangle.’ 
Information Design Journal 1 (2): 123–134.
Brown, Tim. 2008 ‘Design thinking’, Harvard 
Business Review June 2008, 84–92.
Brown, Tim. 2009. Change by design: how design 
thinking transforms organizations and inspires 
innovation. New York: HarperCollins.
Burns, Megan. 2011. Model the ROI of customer 
experience improvement projects: a how-to 
guide, 12 August. <https://www.forrester.com/
Model+The+ROI+Of+Customer+ 
Experience+Improvement+Projects+A+HowTo 
+Guide/fulltext/-/E-res59070>.
Davies, Jim. 2013. Legible London yellow book: 
a prototype wayfinding system for London. 
London: Applied Wayfinding.
Design Council. 2011. Reducing violence and 
aggression in A&E. <http://www.designcouncil.
org.uk/what-we-do/ae-design-challenge>.
Frontier Economics. 2013. Reducing violence and 
aggression in A&E: through a better experience – 
impact evaluation for the Design Council, London: 
Frontier Economics. <http://www.abetteraande.
com/#evaluation>.
Hern, Alex. 2014. ‘Why Google has 200m 
reasons to put engineers over designers.’ 
The Guardian, 5 February. <http://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/05/
why-google-engineers-designers>.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David Norton. 1992. ‘The 
balanced scorecard: measures that drive 
performance.’ Harvard Business Review 70 (1): 
71–79. (Reprint #92105.)

634 / Andrew Boag
634 / Andrew Boag
Kimbell, Lucy. 2015. Service innovation handbook 
Amsterdam: BIS.
Martin, Roger. 2009. The design of business: why 
design thinking is the next competitive advantage 
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
MHRA. 2008. ‘Report to the committee on safety of 
medicines from the working group on labelling 
and packaging of medicines.’ <http://www.mhra.
gov.uk/home/groups/comms-ic/documents/
websiteresources/con007598.pdf>.
New, Steve, and Lucy Kimbell, 2013. ‘Chimps, 
designers, consultants and empathy: a “theory 
of mind” for service design.’ In 2nd Cambridge 
academic design management conference, 
4–5 September, 139–152. Cambridge: Institute of 
Manufacturing.
Polaine, Andy, Lavrans Løvlie, and Ben Reason. 2013. 
Service design: from insight to implementation. 
London: Rosenfeld.
Schriver, Karen A. 1997. Dynamics in document 
design: creating texts for readers. New York: Wiley. 
Schwesinger, Borries. 2010. The form book: best 
practice in creating forms for printed and online use. 
London: Thames & Hudson.
Sless, David. 1994a. ‘What is information 
design?’ In Designing information for people: 
proceedings from the symposium, edited 
by Robyn Penman and David Sless, 1–16. 
Canberra: Communication Research Press.
Sless, David. 1994b. ‘The Telecom bill: redesigning 
a computer generated report.’ In Designing 
information for people: proceedings from the 
symposium, edited by Robyn Penman and David 
Sless, 77–97. Canberra: Communication Research 
Press.
Sless, David. 2013. ‘What is good information 
design? the big shift#7.’ 27 November. <http://
communication.org.au/what-is-good-
information-design-the-big-shift7/>.
Waller, Rob, and Judy Delin, 2003. ‘Cooperative 
brands: the importance of customer information 
for service brands.’ Design Management Journal 
14 (4): 63–69.

635
The LUNAtic approach to 
information design
Robert Linsky 
Robert Linsky works with financial services, insurance, healthcare, utility, and 
telecommunications industries to help them create clear communications, 
­typically with variable data-driven, transactional documents. Many of his 
projects include bank, retirement, brokerage, annuity, mutual fund, and trust 
statements. Others include bills such as loan, lease, utility, telecom, and mort-
gage. He also works with customer-facing forms, such as applications and other 
administrative documents. 
Linsky has developed a design methodology that stresses content before 
design. Content before design because in variable data transactional documents 
the content directs the design. If the design were done first, it would need to 
be reworked to accommodate the final content. It is an iterative process that 
includes a number of steps. It starts with gathering business requirements, then 
content review, which includes both writing and rewriting, approval, and then on 
to design. It also stresses the importance of usability testing, ongoing reviews, 
more testing, and updating.
My wife asked me to go to the supermarket. She said, ‘Get me a bottle of milk 
and if they have avocados, get six.’
  I went to the store and came home with six bottles of milk. She said, ‘Why 
did you get six bottles of milk?’ 
  ‘Because they had avocados,’ I replied.
Clear communication
Information design is about clear communication, whatever the delivery 
method – email, web, document, mobile, tablet. For communication to 
be clear, it must successfully adhere to the three pillars of LUNA – Locate, 
UNderstand, Act.
Stakeholders must be able to locate information easily and quickly.1 
Then they need to understand the information they have found. And, 
finally, once the information is found and understood, the stakeholder 
must be able to act on the information. 
Companies often overlook how information is presented. This leads 
to customer dissatisfaction (sometimes resulting in lost customers), ad-
  1	 Stakeholders are defined as anyone who interacts with the information contained in the 
communication, including readers, users, customers, and clients. They may be internal 
or external to the organization that produces the communication.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 635–641
43

636 / Robert Linsky 
ditional customer service calls, and ultimately higher internal costs. For 
example, some ten years ago the American Institutes for Research con-
ducted a survey of people filling out forms. They found that when people 
had trouble filling out a form because they could not understand it, more 
than half of those consulted stopped using the product or service of the 
company that generated the form. Most companies do not realize how 
much business they are losing due to poor customer communications.
Another aspect of LUNA is simplification. Making information plain so 
that the content is beneficial to all stakeholders. 
Locate
The first pillar in LUNA is Locate. Here we ensure that all stakeholders 
can Locate information quickly and easily. If stakeholders cannot find the 
information that they are looking for easily, then the communication fails. 
Navigation, especially through a long policy, statement, or application is 
extremely important. No one wants to wade through a lot of paper, but if 
they can find and get to specific content quickly and easily, then a better 
customer experience will be achieved (Figure 1).
Every document has one main purpose, and if that purpose is over­
shadowed by other ancillary information, the document loses its impact 
and costs companies money, time, and customers. Our studies over the 
last twenty-five years have shown that most people do not go beyond page 
one in a statement, and that if the same message or messages are repeated 
month after month, they do not get read, even if they eventually change 
(Figure 2). A better solution to this vehicle lease document would be to 
have the billing information first and then add messages as space allows, 
keeping the bill to one page. And since this is monthly bill, the opportun-
ity exists to change messages frequently, keeping them fresh and relevant. 
This would make customers much more likely to read them.
A relevant title, that draws attention to the key message in any docu-
ment, will help in all three areas of LUNA. By using words that identify 
what is in the message, the eye will be attracted to that message and 
stakeholders will be able to Locate information. The title could also help 
in UNderstanding what will be in the message and thirdly, it could also 
lead the viewer to Act on the information. If the title is specific to the 
message, not the section, then it will become more valuable and help the 
stakeholder. Organizing content by putting like information together, and 
using clear headings, can save customers valuable time and create a better 
customer experience. 

The LUNAtic approach to information design / 637 
Figure 1
This insurance application is a good example of clear 
navigation. 
  By reorganizing content, adding clear instructions, 
requiring fewer signatures, eliminating non pertinent 
information, and simplifying the navigation, the 
redesign resulted in fewer errors, a reduction in time 
spent filing out the form, and a three-fold increase 
in agent satisfaction. The wide left-hand margin was 
used for headings and to add notes to help the reader 
fill out the form. 
  As an additional benefit, agents were able to make 
notes or calculations when working with clients in 
filing out the application. 
  This application also has its success in the Act 
principle of LUNA. By grouping some sections in the 
front, we were able to put the ‘action’ of signing in 
fewer places and providing a more straightforward 
application process. 
Figure 2
In this vehicle lease billing statement, the information the reader needs to know 
about the amount due is on the top of the second page (b), because the ‘important 
messages’ take up so much room on the first page (a). 
  First, by having so many messages and forcing the relevant billing information 
to a second sheet of paper, the company is unneccessarily doubling the cost 
of paper and print as well as taking the focus away from the real reason for the 
communication. 
  Second, of the messages on the first page, one, maybe two, may be considered 
important, but certainly no more than two. In this example, the messages consist of 
verbiage around viewing your statement online, suggesting automatic payments, 
accident reporting, payment remitting, and reporting the customer service phone 
number – all good messages, but having so many dilutes the value of any one. 
a
b

638 / Robert Linsky 
Contrast between font weights and a mixture of point sizes will improve 
communication too. Contrast is fundamental to human perception and 
the human eye is attracted to areas of high contrast. So the use of vari-
ous weights and point sizes of fonts aids in readability. Visual separation 
through the proper use of white space adds to the usability of documents 
and is especially important in online viewing on computers, smart phones, 
and tablets (Figure 3). 
UNderstand
The second pillar of the LUNA concept is UNderstand. Once stakeholders 
can locate information easily, they need to be able to understand it. To bet-
ter understand information, clear terminology, plain language, and colour 
are techniques that can be employed. Examples of poor and better use of 
colour are shown in Figures 4 and 5. 
Understanding the needs of all stakeholders and their concerns is key 
to successful communication. Most often organizations focus on external 
stakeholders and disregard internal ones. By including internal stake-
holders problem areas are identified, processes are adjusted to create a 
smoother flow, costs are potentially reduced (paper, printing, postage), 
and best of all, customer service calls are minimized. 
For one insurance company, addressing the problems faced by inter-
nal users not only helped external customers but also was key to reducing 
processing time of forms. When the forms were returned to the company, 
they were then scanned into the system. Operators brought them up on to 
their screen and proceeded to key in the insured’s information. In doing 
a paper trail, we found that these forms were so hard to read that the oper-
ators were enlarging sections two or three times to aid them in reading the 
written information. The lines were too close together and did not have 
enough space to write, hence the handwritten information overlapped 
from line to line. 
By fixing this, both internal and external stakeholders had a better 
experience and the whole process became more efficient. We created a 
document with more space between the lines and a lot more room to write. 
In the redesign effort, plain language helped to reduce the amount of text 
on a page and the number of pages in multipage forms. The resulting forms 
were better organized, fewer came in incomplete, and applications were 
filed more quickly and efficiently. 

The LUNAtic approach to information design / 639 
Figure 3
a. This example shows one 
section of a seven-page hospital 
discharge form with what 
looks like four bullets points all 
referring to a blood clot medicine 
that the patient is taking home. 
Unfortunately, in the fourth 
bullet starting on line five, the 
information is about the next 
appointment – when, where and 
the doctor and contact phone 
number – vital information that is 
buried with different information. 
b. In the redesigned version, 
below, using both regular and bold 
weights, a larger point size for the 
heading and proper use of space, 
the information is easy to find.
Figure 4
In the example on below, the 
colour in the bar chart represents 
performance over the life of 
an annuity, while the pie chart 
shows how assets are distributed 
across various asset classes. 
Unfortunately, the same colours 
are used in both places giving the 
impression that the two charts 
are connected – creating a poor 
customer experience.
Figure 5
This example (showing an 
explanation of benefits for 
healthcare plans in the United 
States), the three colours in the 
pie are identified in the key to the 
left while the lighter blue (part 
of the company’s branding) is 
used for headings throughout 
the document. Each colour has 
a specific purpose resulting in a 
more attractive document and 
clearer communication.
a
b

640 / Robert Linsky 
Plain language uses clear, easy to understand terminology directed at 
all stakeholders. The language needs to match the audience (Figure 6).2
The final pillar of LUNA is Act
Once stakeholders can find the information they are looking for and can 
easily understand that information, the next step is to be able to Act on 
the information, for example, when someone needs to pay a bill, add 
more money to an account, change allocation, or contact customer ser-
vice (Figure 7). Like most communications, LUNA addresses issues in 
more than one of its pillars. In this project, the solution includes both 
UNderstand and Act.
Conclusion
Clear communication isn’t simple. It isn’t just design, or plain language, 
or psychology or usability, but all of these in varying degrees depending 
on the application. I’m not suggesting expertise in all of these areas, but 
expertise in one with a high level of understanding of the others and a 
realization of their importance is desirable. In different applications some 
aspects are more critical than others, but the ultimate goal is the same, 
that of creating clear communications. That’s why Locate/UNderstand/
Act (LUNA) works.
If my wife had said, ‘Buy six avocados if they have them,’ then I would have 
been able to Locate the instructions, UNderstand them, and Act by bringing 
home six avocados!
  2	 In addition, this statement was given a communications seal for excellence and 
rated one of the top ten statements in retirement by Dalbar. Dalbar is a United States 
company that develops standards and measurement systems that improve the quality 
of communications, service, compliance, and websites for the financial and healthcare 
industries.

The LUNAtic approach to information design / 641 
Quarterly Retirement 
Portfolio Statement
September 99, 9999 - September 99, 9999
Welcome to TIAA-CREF! Your Quarterly Retirement Portfolio
Statement will provide you with periodic information about
your retirement portfolio with TIAA-CREF. The enclosed leaflet,
Understanding Your Quarterly Retirement Portfolio Statement
is a step-by-step guide on how to read your statement.
Welcome to TIAA-CREF! Your Quarterly Retirement Portfolio
Statement will provide you with periodic information about
your retirement portfolio with TIAA-CREF. The enclosed leaflet,
Understanding Your Quarterly Retirement Portfolio Statement
is a step-by-step guide on how to read your statement. 
999999 999999 999999
FIRSTNAME LASTNAME XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXX
ADDRESS LINE 1
ADDRESS LINE 2
ADDRESS LINE 3
ADDRESS LINE 4
ADDRESS LINE 5
CITY, STATE  99999-9999
Page 1 of 7
*M000100010501001Z*
For
FIRSTNAME LASTNAME XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXX
Message Board
730 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017-3206
Retirement Income Projection
TIAA-CREF Individual & Institutional Services, LLC distributes
securities products. Data compiled from other entities as noted.
This Period
Year-to-Date
Beginning Balance
$999,999,999.99
$999,999,999.99
Additions
999,999,999.99
999,999,999.99
Reductions
-999,999,999.99
-999,999,999.99
Gain/Loss
-999,999,999.99
-999,999,999.99
Ending Balance
$999,999,999.99
$999,999,999.99
PAL Loan Balance
$999,999,999.99
Portfolio Summary
Additional messages go here. Additional messages go here.
Additional messages go here.
Please refer to the back of this statement for Glossary Terms.
Current monthly 
contribution
$99,999
Increase 
contribution by
$100
Increase 
contribution by
$250
$99,999
$99,999
$99,999
Website:
tiaa-cref.org
Automated 24 hour Information and 
Personal Assistance (Español disponible) 800-842-2252
Hearing Impaired
800-842-2755
Monday – Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. (ET)
Saturday, 9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. (ET)
Customer Service
To view your most current account information, go to our 
website at tiaa-cref.org and log-in with your user ID and 
password or call our 24 hour automated system.
As part of your retirement savings planning, have you 
considered how much you need to retire? Saving a little more
now can add up by the time you retire. These charts are 
purely hypothetical and do not illustrate past or projected 
performance.
To raise your savings rate or further personalize the retire-
ment income projection, visit us online at www.tiaa-cref.org
or call TIAA-CREF at 800-842-2776. Recent changes to your
contribution amounts may not be reflected on this statement.
Sample Lifetime 
Monthly
Contribution
Retirement Monthly
Contribution
Increased by
Income at Age 65
$99,999 
$0
$99,999
$99,999
$100 
$99,999
$99,999
$250  
$99,999
What can you expect from Retirement Income?
Example of Monthly Income at Age 65
Please refer to the disclosures and assumptions at the back of
this statement for more information.
Figure 6
In this retirement statement we used 
section headers such as ‘Portfolio 
Summary.’ This project also included 
creating clear definitions for industry 
terms that were mandated to appear 
on the statement. The result of this 
work included an increase in customer 
satisfaction due to the clarity of the 
statement information something that 
led to a 25% decrease in customer 
service calls saving the company nearly 
3 million dollars in nine months.
a
b
Figure 7
a. A friend received the chemotherapy management card shown and found it very confusing 
and poorly organized. On the front side there is a list of possible side effects, both ‘early’ and 
‘late’, and how the drug is administered. On the reverse side, however, are lists of key issues 
that may require contacting a physician or nurse. In addition, special notes such as notifying 
your doctor if you are going to have dental work, avoiding aspirin, or avoiding taking birth 
control pills are listed. These special notes are more critical to the patient and have been 
relegated to the back. By putting the critical information on the back and making a two-sided 
card, a poor communication tool was created. 
b. After reviewing and rewriting the content, eliminating duplication, and then organizing 
the information, we came up with this result. We created bold section headers to be able to 
quickly see ‘things to avoid’ and ‘special notes’ while putting the content in a logical order so 
that the patient can act on the information easily. Best of all, it is all on one side of the card.


643
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 643–653
Information design as a  
(r)evolutionary educational tool 
Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
Following Rancière, we question the traditional educational method. Instead 
of students being led down beaten paths, we propose an alternative ‘method 
of emancipation’, which we tested in practice. Here ‘the student must see 
everything for himself, compare and compare, and always respond to a three-
part question: what do you see? What do you think about it? What do you 
make of it?’ We argue that change from the traditional to the emancipatory 
method is urgently needed in design. Only thus can designers develop the 
critical ability to recognize and, if necessary, change the existing context. 
In the emancipatory method, change is not merely on one side; the teacher 
must also change. By assuming the role of ‘ignorant schoolmaster’, the teacher 
becomes an active co-participant in the process of asking questions. Through 
our practical seminar, we show that information design (and service design) is 
an excellent starting point for making designers active. Our proposal builds on 
discontinuity, as it breaks with the passive, neutral, self-sufficient, all-knowing 
designer. Only by constantly asking questions and understanding what is seen 
can a designer define the real problem and through numerous iterations and 
collaborations reach a solution – one that becomes a tool for transforming 
society.
The imperative of asking questions
The turn of the millennium saw new thinking in design education.1 Alain 
Findeli set out three priorities for the design field: ‘a discussion on the 
purpose of design’, ‘the reform of design education’, and, as ‘there can be 
no responsible design without a responsible designer . . . the development 
of an individualistic ethics’ (Findeli 2001, 13).2 Hugues C. Boekraad went 
a step further, questioning whether, given the lack of a general theory in 
design, it was possible to teach it: 
Design education has never stood on a very solid ground, but today it seems 
to be floating on particularly precarious shifting sands. There are designers 
employed as teachers who even feel that teaching design is in principle an 
impossibility, because the field of design moves too quickly and develops in so 
many directions at once. (Boekraad 2000, 4)
  1	 The present chapter is based largely on our experiences with an experimental research 
seminar in service and information design titled ‘Designing an agenda, or, How to 
avoid solving problems that aren’t’. These experiences were, to some extent, docu-
mented in a book under the same title (Černe Oven and Predan 2013).
  2	 Here and throughout, italics in the quoted material are in the original.
44

644 / Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
How, then, do we begin to teach design when, at least on the face of it, 
there seems to be constant change and resistance to standardization? 
R. Buckminster Fuller, speaking at the presentation of a design for a new 
campus at Southern Illinois University, challenged an audience of invited 
guests, the dean, professors, and students by saying: ‘The place to study 
is not in a schoolroom’ (Buckminster Fuller 2010, 62) and ‘I have learned 
much; but I don’t know much; but what I have learned, I have learned by 
trial and error’ (p. 36). Both statements pose a challenge even for teachers 
today, as Fuller’s core idea is that formal education does not in itself guar-
antee the level of knowledge we need for later work.
In the traditional method of education, knowledge is passed from 
teacher to student who is then expected to use the acquired knowledge 
and pass it on further. But there is a hidden catch in this model. As Jacques 
Rancière notes in The ignorant schoolmaster (1991), we do not actually 
move forward in this traditional method of learning. The teacher tells us 
what we need to know and how we should interpret it. In other words, 
someone else selects the material on our behalf, which we then master and 
on the basis of the mastered material make what appears to be progress. 
But, Rancière says, in this model knowledge remains fragmentary since 
we are always under the control of someone who directs us and measures 
out the knowledge we still have to master. Once we have done this, we 
reach the stage when we can very quickly forget what we have learned, and 
by forgetting we stop needlessly burdening our memory. And this, he says, 
is ‘the genius of the explicators: they attach the creature they have ren-
dered inferior with the strongest chains in the land of stultification – the 
child’s consciousness of his own superiority’ (p. 22). This is the comfort 
of being a minor, for nothing is easier than walking the beaten path, espe-
cially under the direction of another (Kant 1996, 17).3
The basic problem with this approach is that we deny students their 
inherent ability to choose for themselves and develop their own (individ-
ualistic) ethics. We deny them their capacity for active, critical behaviour. 
Instead of encouraging critical consciousness, as Paulo Freire calls it in 
his essay ‘Education as the practice of freedom’ (2011), the traditional 
method of acquiring ‘knowledge’ is passive. The result is adaptation and 
passive acceptance of what appears unchangeable – in other words, the 
fundamental opposite of conscious critical behaviour. As Freire explains: 
‘The integrated person is person as Subject. In contrast, the adaptive 
person is person as object, adaptation representing at most a weak form 
of self-defense. If man is incapable of changing reality, he adjusts himself 
instead’ (p. 4).
So how do we move beyond the traditional method of education? 
  3	 Kant describes ‘minority’ (Unmündigkeit) as the state one brings upon oneself by 
being unable ‘to make use of one’s own understanding without direction from another’ 
(1996, 17). 

Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool   / 645 
Rancière proposes an alternative: the method of emancipation.4 In this 
method, we try to relate what we learn to everything else we know: ‘The 
student must see everything for himself, compare and compare, and 
always respond to a three-part question: What do you see? What do you 
think about it? What do you make of it? And so on, to infinity’ (Rancière 
1991, 23).
If we connect all these ideas and set them in the context of information 
and service design)5, there is an urgent need to move from the traditional 
to the emancipatory method of educating designers, who need to develop 
a critical ability to recognize a given context and the changes that might 
be needed. As Herbert Simon defined the designer’s work as far back as 
1961: ‘Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing 
existing situations into preferred ones’ (Simon 1996, 111). To achieve an au-
tonomously functioning, integrated Subject, then, we propose the (r)evo-
lutionary position of the teacher as ‘ignorant schoolmaster’. Such teachers, 
instead of leading their students down familiar well-beaten paths, will, 
alongside their students, learn through trial and error, and through endless 
iteration. In this way, students can develop the tools they need for a critical 
consciousness of the context in which they are working and use their in-
herent potential for actively affecting and changing the existing situation. 
We suggest that service design and information design, contribute to 
design methods and tools through emphasis on the user.6 This is turn 
means that students need to learn to observe and understand a selected 
situation and pose the right questions to the stakeholders involved as part 
of the design process. The designer becomes a co-designer, a collaborator 
(co-labourer), and a co-creator. Designers and users share a goal to design 
information and services that users will independently use, maintain, 
build on, and redesign in the changed situation. By changing the way we 
work we also change the role of the tutor or teacher in the information and 
  4	 Rancière introduces the term ‘old method’ while the method of the ‘ignorant school-
master’ he calls ‘universal teaching’. To more easily distinguish the two methods, we 
use ‘method of emancipation’ or ‘emancipatory method’ for the latter. This term is 
based on an idea Rancière explains as follows: ‘Whoever teaches without emancipating 
stultifies. And whoever emancipates doesn’t have to worry about what the emanci-
pated person learns. He will learn what he wants, nothing maybe. He will know he 
can learn because the same intelligence is at work in all the productions of the human 
mind, and a man can always understand another man’s words’ (1991, 18). 
  5	 We first combined the two design fields in the exhibition Service and information 
design: examples of good practice, presented at the Museum of Architecture and Design 
in 2010, and in the accompanying catalogue (Černe Oven and Predan 2010). During 
our research for the exhibition we came across many excellent projects that involved 
both disciplines. We justified combining them on the basis of their similar work pro-
cesses and, in many cases, overlapping methodologies, in which the common element 
is the focus on the user.
  6	 Here we should add that while this extremely important change of focus is finally 
taking place in design, its beginnings can be found in the early decades of the twentieth 
century (for example, in the thinking and work of Hannes Meyer and Otto and Marie 
Neurath).

646 / Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
service design fields. Our view is similar to how Charles and Ray Eames, 
writing in the late 1950s, saw the education of industrial designers:
They should be trained not only to solve problems – but what is more impor-
tant, they should be trained to help others solve their own problems. One of 
the most valuable functions of a good industrial designer today is to ask the 
right questions of those concerned so that they become freshly involved and 
seek a solution themselves. (Eames and Eames 1997, 12)
The attitude brings us directly to our ‘emancipatory method’. No longer 
does the tutor arbitrarily decide which path the student will take or what is 
right and wrong; rather, by constantly asking (with the student) new ques-
tions, the tutor encourages in the student curiosity and desire to further 
investigate and better understand the given situation. Or as the Eameses 
put it, this method makes possible ‘a start towards a real education’ (p. 12). 
The acquired knowledge is in fact a tool that allows students to begin 
thinking about the whole, the system of connections, the relationship 
between the part and the whole, between one user and another (in our 
case, between the one who provides information or a service and the one 
who receives and uses it). The students learn to tackle any problem that 
they and the users identify in a given context, to explore it, solve it, and 
then pass the solution on to users in the form of a tool for subsequent use 
and maintenance.7
The common thread we have so far discussed, then, is critical con-
sciousness of the given context combined with our ability to change the 
existing situation. Although we are focusing only on two fields of design 
(information design and service design), they both typically require the 
student to understand and interpret the broader context. For it is only 
through a critical understanding of the broader context that students, by 
asking questions (‘What do you see? What do you think about it? What do 
you make of it?’), discover what interests and attracts them in the given 
situation. And this, indeed, is the key challenge for the designer’s deeper 
education: an independently demonstrated interest in the given prob-
lems.8 Thus we move from specific knowledge to what Buckminster Fuller 
calls ‘comprehensive thinking’ (2010, 87). Comprehensive thinking is the 
basis on which we expand the boundaries of doing and understanding 
education in the field of design. And this alone allows us to make meaning-
ful transformations – to move away from the position of taking things for 
granted and designing with no consideration of the users’ needs.
  7	 For more on the methods and tools of service and information design, see Černe Oven 
and Predan (2013). 
  8	 Today, when we are concerned with the education of ‘Generation Y’, we must not 
forget that this generation is used to finding every piece of information they need on 
their smart phones, that they grew up – at least in the developed Western world – at 
a time of constant economic growth in a society where everything was available to 
them, and that their upbringing was based on permissive, individualistic principles of 
child-rearing. 

Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool   / 647 
The notion of transformation and the role of the transformer as under-
stood at the Isotype Institute is relevant to this way of designing:
From the data given in words and figures a way has to be found to extract 
essential facts and put them into picture form. It is the responsibility of the 
‘transformer’ to understand the data to get all necessary information from 
the expert, to decide what is worth transmitting to the public, how to make 
it understandable, how to link it with general knowledge or with information 
already given in other charts. In this sense, the transformer is the trustee of 
the public. (Neurath and Kinross 2009, 77–78)
And, as Robin Kinross points out, this method of ‘transformation’ can be 
extended to any field, from visual form to urban planning and even further. 
It can be applied it to any process of ordering and change, as long as the 
‘configuration takes the content and meaning of the material as its main 
guide’ (p. 107). 
Testing the theory in practice
The theoretical approach just described was tested in practice during 
2012–13 with ­second- and third-year students of visual communication 
design and industrial and unique design in a voluntary experimental learn-
ing project titled ‘Designing an agenda’9 at the Academy of Fine Arts and 
Design10 in Ljubljana, Slovenia. Participation in the seminar was voluntary 
and this proved to be a key benefit, since from start to finish the coopera-
tion and collaboration of the tutors and students was based solely on their 
desire to be there and not on the need to acquire academic credits.
During the preparation we identified topics that might present a suf-
ficient challenge for active critical research and treatment and chose the 
areas of health care and sustainable transport. These topics offered poten-
tial for understanding context and collaboration with a number of stake-
holders. Our thinking was guided by the need to avoid the three mistakes 
which, according to Tim Brown, designers too often make:
First, [Brown says,] they often set themselves up for failure right out of the 
gate by ‘asking the wrong question’. Designers, says Brown, must be sure to 
  9	 The experimental research seminar was carried out as part of the wider European 
project Creative Camp. Creative Camp Ljubljana was funded by the Regional 
Development Agency of the Ljubljana Urban Region, which supports development in 
the creative industries through its Regional Centre for Creative Economy.
10	 Students in the Department of Industrial Design and Applied Arts first encounter ser-
vice design through a short assignment in the course on the development and theory 
of design (offered regularly since the academic year 2009–2010). Partly on the basis 
of the success of our experimental project, a new course in service design was offered 
in 2013–2014 as an elective in the department’s master’s programme. Individual 
lectures and projects in the theory of information design, meanwhile, take place in the 
Department of Visual Communication Design, as part of the course on the develop-
ment and theory of design. Other than the occasional project – for instance, in the area 
of wayfinding – practice in the field is not yet sufficiently covered at the Academy of 
Fine Arts and Design in Ljubljana.

648 / Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
pin down exactly what it is they are trying to solve for. Second, designers 
often fail by ‘not getting out in the world and understanding the people they 
are trying to serve’. . . . Third, failed designs usually result from ‘spending too 
long speculating and thinking’, rather than getting immediately to the work 
[of] creating prototypes as soon as possible in order to learn by doing and 
making. (Kolawole 2012) 
We had embarked on this challenge because we believed there were too 
few designers in Slovenia who took it upon themselves to analyse raw data 
with the end-user in mind. In most cases, they are used to accepting pro-
cessed ‘final’ information that comes neatly packaged by people in other 
disciplines. But such information can lead to serious mistakes in recogniz-
ing what the problem actually is.
We asked to seminar participants to be open in how they interpreted 
a problem. We set off on a journey of research and exploration without 
any predetermined path and with only intermediate findings that con-
stantly defined and altered the direction of our work. We faced questions 
for which we had no ready answers and were challenged to change or 
adapt our work methods and procedures.11 We welcomed the students’ 
willingness to participate seriously at every step, and our shared desire 
to construct an equal tutor–student partnership – all of which proved 
remarkably effective motivation for everyone.12 A  key outcome, that 
reinforced the ‘emancipatory method’, was the students’ freedom to 
choose what further steps to take and to assume full responsibility for the  
results.13
We also found that if we were determined to avoid the three typical 
mistakes of the classic design process, we created doubt about established, 
taught knowledge and behaviour. One of our few rules, set down on the 
very first day of the seminar, was: ‘Mistakes are allowed; what is more, 
they are necessary, since mistakes can lead us to good results.’ In our 
search for solutions, we accepted both small (low-budget but meaningful) 
improvements and ‘blue sky’ utopian ideas that offered excellent designs 
for the future. An additional goal in building on mistakes was to acquire 
11	 On a few occasions we went even so far as to use wigs to test the students’ proposals 
for ourselves in situ, all so as to form our own opinions and, as a result, have new 
questions to ask them.
12	 For example, when we were preparing the proposals to be presented at the conclud-
ing international symposium at the Ljubljana City Hall, quite a few of the participant 
groups surpassed our expectations: entirely independently and on their own initi-
ative, they made significant improvements in the presentation of their developed 
concepts.
13	 As it turned out, motivation (a frequently cited problem in Slovenian higher educa-
tion) was remarkably increased by the complexity of certain challenges. The project 
participants spent hours upon hours testing their ideas on site – in retirement homes 
and day centres for dementia patients or around the city documenting traffic – and in 
conversations with experts they had previously not even known existed. Such con-
crete experiences fuelled their enthusiasm for our meetings, discussions, and further 
plans.

Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool   / 649 
the experience of turning to our advantage any possible errors in the devel-
opment process, confronting them head on, and, if necessary, developing 
new tools to enable designers and users to find solutions to the recognized 
problem.
Our additional basic goal relied on the students working in a team – the 
(relatively) new experience for them of collaboration (‘co-labouring’). For 
each research area chosen by the students – such as dementia, arthritis, 
e-health, the use of public transport, wayfinding, diabetes, increasing phys-
ical activity, commuting – we found experts, users, clients, patients, policy 
makers, service providers, and so on. Then, as the next step, we worked 
with these people to recognize problems and, at the same time, search for, 
check, correct, and design solutions. Through the work process it became 
clear that only a comprehensive understanding would enable us to con-
struct a confident conversation with other experts, establish their trust, 
and increase the chances for a bilateral co-creation of a solution. There 
is nothing new about this way of working; other alternative approaches 
to education have argued for it as well. Sugata Mitra, a professor of edu-
cational technology at Newcastle University, underscores the point: ‘We 
need people who can think divergently, across outdated “disciplines”, con-
necting ideas across the entire mass of humanity’ (Mitra 2013).
The outcomes of the seminar, workshops, and lectures were presented 
in a book along with methods and tools for asking questions in researching 
and developing co-design (Černe Oven and Predan 2013). This helped 
to explain complexity of the process: the many arduous and unavoidable 
steps in improving designs for information or services, including analys-
ing, observing, defining, researching, observing, creating, testing, analys-
ing, correcting, testing, observing, etc. (the repetitions are intentional) 
that do not happen in sequence. By providing designers and other creative 
people with a set of questions, tools, and methods, we hoped to make it 
possible for them, when faced with entirely different problems, to ‘become 
freshly involved and seek a  solution themselves’ (Eames and Eames  
1997, 12).
The projects that emerged from the seminar and workshops were 
extremely diverse not only in their content but also in the research pro-
cesses that led the participants to their proposed concepts. One project 
that stood out was titled ‘A set of social games for senior citizens with 
dementia’. The starting point was to find a way, through various stimulat-
ing activities, to make life easier for dementia patients, their loved ones, 
and professional care-givers; the main goal, however, was to influence the 
patient’s mental state and psychomotor condition in positive ways. The 
process revealed that empathy was crucial in developing the activities, not 
only in a more general sense but also in the ability to empathize concretely 
with specific situations. The students, soon after choosing their research 
topic, became regular visitors to day centres and retirement homes – not 
only because of the frequent need to test potential activities for their 

650 / Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
proposal but through observation14 and interaction to acquire a feeling for 
the topic. No tutor could have communicated to them ‘from the top down’ 
the kind of knowledge they received from their direct experiences.
In another project – to develop an online forum ‘I don’t bend to any-
one’ for people with inflammatory rheumatic disease – the collaboration 
process began with a one-day workshop in which the designers worked 
with rheumatologists and people who suffered from the disease. Through 
detailed conversations, the students isolated two problems: the fact that 
rheumatoid patients often encounter stigmatization, and the difficulty 
of getting helpful advice about living with chronic illness. Our research 
showed us that people with inflammatory rheumatic disease are more 
willing to take advice from others with similar experiences than they are 
from a formal authority. The result that emerged, therefore, was to create 
a ‘safe living room’. Here medical knowledge meets human warmth, which 
derived from patient-to-patient communication. Wishing to avoid com-
plex medical terminology, we based the service on an interface in the form 
of a human skeleton. You select the place on the skeleton where the pain 
is and a search engine then filters potentially useful information for you 
through a system of tags (our close collaboration with the rheumatologists 
ensured a high level of medical expertise and worthwhile information). 
The information you get is of various kinds, from medical articles about 
the illness to patient testimonies; you can also exchange experiences with 
others who suffer from the disease, including those who moderate the 
forum.
Another project ‘A to B: Ljubljana’ taught us something quite differ-
ent – namely, if you want to improve the public transport experience in 
Ljubljana, basing your solution on a  collaboration with the local pub-
lic transport provider is not the way to go about it. They are, after all, 
a  monopoly whose business strategy depends on ‘trapped passengers’ 
(people who have no choice but to use their services) and so may not be 
interested in reducing the number of private cars in the city – our project’s 
goal. Consequently, through the research process, the project expanded 
from its initial idea – ‘let’s improve the public bus service’ – to the idea of 
users taking matters into their own hands. The result was a mobile phone 
application called ‘A to B: LJ’ that would allow users to choose alternative 
and/or combined forms of transport (without involving a private car). It 
would offer them all the information they needed to get from point A to 
point B.
14	 Active observation and the recording of information (in oral or written form or on 
video) are crucially important for the emancipated designer. Only in this way – by 
being present – can designers construct their own user-oriented thinking.

Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool   / 651 
Answering the question
Before we began the experiment we have described, we asked ourselves 
whether it was possible to implement a different educational method in 
practice. At the same time, we realized that we were asking this in a world 
permeated by (seemingly) ceaseless change and inundated by (new) infor-
mation – information that, much more than in the past, is accessible at 
every step. In this context – an information-saturated world that, because 
of the quantity and accessibility of information, is continually changing – 
it might seem there was no real value in talking about a different approach 
to education. What, after all, is so new and different here from everything 
design has been taking for granted for decades? Or to put the question 
another way, in a  world permeated by ceaseless change where we are 
exposed to numerous choices every day, is the proposed method a true 
alternative to the existing system of education?
The ideas put forward by such thinkers as Sugata Mitra (2013), Ken 
Robinson (2008), and Jef Staes (2014) suggest that it is high time for 
a change. The argument ‘The school possesses the knowledge, so you 
must learn from a teacher’ is long out of date. As Staes says, we do not 
have to go to school anymore to learn because our access to information 
has changed. If we want to do something well, we must discover our own 
particular talents and passions (2014). Mitra adds: ‘The curriculum would 
have to become questions that have strange and interesting answers. 
Beating children into submission will not solve the problem of educational 
disengagement’ (2013).
Given what has been written and tested, our answer is based on making 
the designer active. The innovation we propose builds on a discontinu-
ity, inasmuch as it breaks with the passive, neutral, self-sufficient, and 
all-knowing designer. It puts designers in the field, where by asking ques-
tions and understanding what they see, they (painfully) break through to 
the real problem and, in numerous iterations and collaborations, arrive 
at a solution. But the solution is not in itself the endpoint; rather, there 
remain constant possibilities for correction and maintenance on the part 
of the users, either on their own or in collaboration with the designer. Our 
proposal also changes what up to now has been the given and apparently 
unchangeable configuration in education: the position of the knowledgea-
ble teacher who evaluates the students’ work on the basis of his or her own 
knowledge and, in many cases, own preferences. By moving the teacher 
from the plane of knowledge to the plane of not-knowing, this new posi-
tion demands of teachers, just as it does of students, an active co-participa-
tion in asking students (and themselves): ‘What do you see? What do you 
think about it? What do you make of it?’
Our proposal is an emancipatory approach that sidesteps the existing 
world of countless choices and opposes it. In today’s world of instant solu-
tions, it may seem strange (if not heretical) to base education and work 

652 / Barbara Predan and Petra Černe Oven
in the design field on the premise expressed by both Rancière and the 
Eameses – namely, that the main task of design is to ask questions of the 
people concerned and thus create tools that users can use independently 
to solve their own problems. But the position of a stranger in the existing 
modus operandi is a necessary condition for conceiving an alternative 
– for a (r)evolutionary educational model in the design field. For if we 
want to talk about making a change in design education (and therefore 
in the profession), we must first change the existing state of the passive, 
disinterested, uncritical, and merely adaptable teacher-student-designer. 
We need a critique of the existing order of things if we are finally to begin 
thinking about a new order. Only by becoming active, understanding the 
broader context, assuming co-responsibility, and exploiting our inherent 
potential (for actively affecting the given context) can we lay the founda-
tion in design education (and in the profession) for building a world that, 
at the moment, seems impossible. And this foundation is: ‘to ask the right 
questions of those concerned so that they become freshly involved and 
seek a solution themselves’ (Eames and Eames 1997, 12). Only in this way 
will design finally move out of its state of minority and begin to fulfil the 
idea of the past, namely, and following Otto Neurath, design as a trustee of 
the public, transforming the existing world into a preferred world. 
Postscript, or, What we made of this
In the ‘Designing an agenda’ project we as tutors assumed a double role 
– not only that of the ‘ignorant schoolmaster’ but also that of the student. 
It seemed logical, then, to continue following the same principle even 
after the project was over. We continued to work on the basis of ‘what 
we saw’ and ‘what we thought’, and we also ‘made something of it’. The 
first step was an exhibition in a public space, specifically, in Ljubljana’s 
City Hall, where the design concepts from the project were presented, 
first and foremost, to the general public and not just to other designers. 
With the acquired knowledge we had gathered during the project’s pre-
paratory phase, we worked out a strategic plan for the future, which we 
published in the book accompanying the project as ‘Recommendations 
for policy planners: The numbers and strategies are on the side of design’ 
(Černe Oven and Predan 2013, 176–213). The good response to the project 
brought us several interesting opportunities: to work with the Slovenian 
public administration,15 to deliver talks at two international conferences 
(on medicine and design, respectively),16 and to conduct new workshops 
15	 We were invited to analyse the state administration’s digital presence and held a 
number of workshops on the topic for the Slovenian Ministry of the Interior.
16	 Specifically, at the 1st International Congress of the International College of Person-
centred Medicine, Zagreb, 7–10 November 2013 (<http://www.icpcmzagreb2013.
com/scientific-programme>) and at the Information Design Conference, London, 
7–8 April 2014 (<http://www.infodesign.org.uk/conference>).

Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool   / 653 
Information design as a (r)evolutionary educational tool   / 653 
for designers, university students, and secondary school students in three 
different countries. Meanwhile, three of the thirteen projects created at 
the seminar and in the related workshops have this year moved into the 
pilot phase of development. 
Acknowledgement
Translated from Slovene by Rawley Grau.
References
Agamben, Giorgio. 1999. The man without content. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Boekraad, Hugues C. 2000. ‘Copy proof: graphic 
design as visual rhetoric: principles for design 
education.’ In Copy proof: a new method for design 
and education, edited by Edith Gruson and Gert 
Staal, 4–14. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.
Černe Oven, Petra, and Barbara Predan, eds. 2010. 
Storitveno in informacijsko oblikovanje. Ljubljana: 
Pekinpah and Muzej za arhitekturo in oblikovanje.
Černe Oven, Petra, and Barbara Predan. 2013. 
Oblikovanje agende ali kako se izogniti reševanju 
problemov, ki to niso/Designing an agenda, or, how 
to avoid solving problems that aren’t. Ljubljana: 
Pekinpah and the Regional Development Agency 
of the Ljubljana Urban Region.
Eames, Charles, and Ray Eames. 1997. The India 
report. Ahmedabad, India: National Institute of 
Design. First published 1958.
Findeli, Alain. 2001. ‘Rethinking design education for 
the 21st century: theoretical, methodological, and 
ethical discussion.’ Design Issues 17 (1): 5–17. 
Freire, Paulo. 2011. Education for critical 
consciousness. London and New York: Continuum 
International Publishing Group.
Fuller, Buckminster R. 2010. ‘Education automation: 
freeing the scholar to return to his studies.’ In 
Education automation: comprehensive learning 
for emergent humanity, edited by Jamie Snyder, 
31–108. Baden, Switzerland: Lars Müller 
Publishers.
Kant, Immanuel. 1996. ‘An answer to the question: 
What is enlightenment?’ In Practical philosophy, 
edited by Mary J. Gregor, 11–22. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. First published in 
German 1784.
Kolawole, Emi. 2012. ‘Clinton Global Initiative 
2012: IDEO CEO Tim Brown on where designers 
often go wrong.’ Ideas@Innovations (blog), The 
Washington Post, 25 September 2012. Acesed September 2012. ­<http://
www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/innovations/
post/clinton-global-initiative-2012-ideo-ceo-
tim-brown-on-where-designers-often-go-
wrong/2012/09/25/f06400aa-071a-11e2-a10c-
fa5a255a9258_blog.html>.
Mitra, Sugata. 2013. ‘Advent of Google means 
we must rethink our approach to education.’ 
The Observer, 15 June 2013. Acesed September 2013. <http://www.
theguardian.com/education/2013/jun/15/
schools-teaching-curriculum-education-
google>.
Neurath, Marie, and Robin Kinross. 2009. The 
transformer: principles of making Isotype charts. 
London: Hyphen Press.
Rancière, Jacques. 1991. The ignorant schoolmaster: 
five lessons in intellectual emancipation. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.
Robinson, Ken. 2008. ‘Changing paradigms: how 
we implement sustainable change in education.’ 
RSA Edge lecture presented at the Royal Society 
for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures 
and Commerce, London, 16 June 2008. Acesed May 2014. <http://
www.thersa.org/events/video/archive/
sir-ken-robinson>.
Simon, Herbert A. 1996. The sciences of the artificial. 
3rd edn. Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press. 
First published 1969.
Staes, Jef. 2014. ‘The naked sheep: Jef Staes at 
TEDxFlanders.’ TEDx. ­Acesed May 2014. <http://tedxtalks.ted.com/
video/The-Naked-Sheep-Jef-Staes-at-TE;search
%3Atag%3A%22belgium%22>.


655
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 655–668
Design + medical collaboration
Three cases designing decision-support aids
Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
Based on long-standing experience of collaboration between designers and 
clinicians working on information design projects in hospital settings, this 
paper, firstly, describes eight distinctive features of successful design + ­medical 
­col­lab­oration. The features range across process, communication, and 
­decision-making practices, within a cross-disciplinary team, each with different 
research traditions. The second section of the paper describes three projects to 
develop support tools for clinical decision-making, highlighting how the features 
of design + medical collaboration, described in the first part of the chapter, 
shaped both the process and outcomes of each project.
Fruitful collaboration
Any good collaboration brings together complementary parties who 
share both common aims and different expertise. Integrating similarity 
and diver­sity benefits both parties. In our experience, medicine + design 
is good collaboration.
Comparatively speaking, information design is a discipline in its in-
fancy. By two measures of disciplinary maturity, a professional associa-
tion and dedicated journal, information design is about 100 years behind 
medicine: the American Medical Association was founded in 1847 and 
the Journal of the American Medical Association was established in 1883 
while the Information Design Association was founded in 1991 and the 
Information Design Journal was established in 1979. Medical education first 
began to adhere to the protocols of science in their teaching and research 
100 years ago (Beck 2004) providing a foundation to evaluate new treat-
ments which has led to extraordinary expansions in medical knowledge 
and influence on the practice of medicine. On the other hand it has not yet 
become standard practice for information designers to adhere to empiri-
cal research, proven principles, or theories to guide practice. We believe 
design can benefit from the equivalent of medical rigour.
While medicine has made wonderful advances, it is not without its chal-
lenges. Healthcare is delivered by professionals working in complex sys-
tems that have many safety and quality gaps (IOM 2001). But efforts to get 
healthcare organizations, clinicians, and patients to work together to pro-
duce innovation to address these areas are still in their infancy. Decision-
support aids are one such innovation. These are patient-centred tools to 
ensure that medical decisions are informed by research evidence, clinical 
45

656 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
expertise, and patient/family goals, values, and preferences. Decision-
sup­port aids are well suited for information design solutions because they 
are situated at the interface between healthcare consumers and healthcare 
providers, where outsiders meet insiders. We believe that in this kind of 
context medicine can benefit from human-centred design innovation.
It goes without saying that design + medicine have different areas of 
expertise: medicine explores ‘what is’ while design brings into being ‘what 
is not yet.’ In addition to different roots of knowledge medicine + design 
have different outputs: medicine deals with life and death and communi-
cation design often deals with ephemera. Tufte’s report of the space shuttle 
Challenger disaster is the exception that proves the rule that while effective 
communication design objects, like reports, are seldom a life and death 
issue, they can have a critical influence on events (Tufte 1997, 38–52). The 
passing and often trivial nature of much communication frees the design 
process to explore widely, iterate continuously, and try dramatic alterna-
tives. Mistakes and failures in medicine are more likely to have grave conse-
quences, perhaps explaining the attendant concern for caution, precision, 
and proven outcomes. These basic differences have cultivated different 
skill sets: design focused on innovation, medicine focused on rigour.
Complementing these differences, medicine + design share a common 
aim: improving the human condition. Herb Simon’s classic definition of 
design can be summarized as converting existing states to preferred ones 
(Simon 1996, 130). Healing, the focus of medicine, can be defined the 
same way.
As we have written previously (Zender et al. 2011), fruitful collabora-
tion is a result of shared aims, diverse expertise, and a clear benefit for both 
partners. Since 2002 designers at the University of Cincinnati (UC) and 
medical professionals at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center 
(Cincinnati Children’s) have worked collaboratively on numerous pro-
jects ranging from data visualizations of longitudinal data for clinicians’ 
pre-visit planning to patient information and decision-support. In the last 
area, decision-support, we have designed decision aids for prostate can-
cer, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), human papilloma 
virus (HPV) vaccination, arthritis, elective repeat caesarean delivery, and 
autism. After working collaboratively on several design + medicine pro-
jects, we can say that the feedback on our collaborations was generally 
favourable and the outcome successful. When asked to reflect on their 
experience of collaborating with designers, medical professionals have 
described working with designers as ‘eye opening’ and ‘fantastic.’ Medical 
professionals and designers both described the collaboration as helping 
them see problems with ‘fresh eyes.’ Designers called the experience ‘life 
changing.’ Designers often had no idea they could make a significant con-
tribution to human well-being through medicine. The outcomes were also 
positive. For the decision aid projects, parents and patients were better 
informed, patients were more involved with the decision, comfort with 

Design + medical collaboration / 657 
the decision was increased (decisional conflict decreased), and chosen 
outcomes were more in line with published recommendations such as 
uptake of recommended vaccines. The collaborations that produced these 
positive outcomes share several distinct features.
Distinct features of fruitful medical + design  
collaboration
1  A rational process
Designers bring into this collaboration fresh perspective. Things medical 
professionals take for granted, designers don’t. But this could be said of 
clowns or auto mechanics or any number of others who might work with 
medical professionals, whereas designers are proving to be particularly 
fruitful collaborators. Why would this be so? Across our experiences we 
have noted that designers and medical professionals both use a rational 
problem-solving process. The codification of the design process in the past 
dozen years and the dissemination of it under the banner of design think-
ing (Brown 2009) has established a foundation for fruitful collaboration 
because a clearly defined process makes medical professionals comfort-
able working with designers. Medical professionals recognize in design’s 
tools and templates for action a similar but slightly different pattern of 
behaviour that is at once familiar and unusual, enabling the construction 
of bridges that designers and medical professionals can comfortably cross 
into unknown territory for both.
2  Shared knowledge
Sharing a similar process provides a bridge to an innovative space, but 
once there, colleagues need specific means to facilitate productive work in 
that space. We have found that as a first step, designers need to be brought 
up to speed with medical knowledge specific to the problem at hand. In 
our experiences medical professionals have provided necessary medical 
background to designers through instruction, demonstration, assigned 
readings, and access for designers to employ ethnographic methods such 
as observation and interview. Designers are trained to quickly assimilate 
new contexts and grasp essential features. Under the tutelage of medical 
professionals designers quickly learn the particular vocabulary and con-
cepts of a medical problem. Without becoming experts they become at 
least conversation partners.
One way we have embodied this is through the use of personas (Cooper, 
Reimann, and Cronin 2007). Designers and medical team members 
analyse data from preliminary research and synthesize patterns into cat-
egories that are embodied as prototypical personas. Collaborative team 
members comment that personas are a good means for coalescing around 
a shared description of the medical context that is informative, fun, and 

658 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
engaging. Personas get medical professionals out of the box and designers 
into the box.
3  Rigour and tools
As discussed above, medicine brings to this collaboration a rigorous tradi-
tion of validated measurement tools and empirically validated knowledge 
that enable doctors to prescribe courses of action to patients in a way 
that designers cannot prescribe to users. But where doctors might pre-
scribe, designers might ask. Designed solutions may work because they 
come from, are not imposed on, patients. The design of medical pro-
cesses/systems has long been clinician-centric, neglecting the patient/
family perspective. This need was recognized in the United States in the 
Affordable Care Act of 2010 (Obamacare) which mandated the creation of 
the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) to advance 
patient-centred research to address this issue. Medicine has struggled to 
systemically engage patients/family in design efforts or, when they are 
engaged, to optimize their contributions. The design process, which is 
grounded in understanding the unique needs of each stakeholder, helps 
address these challenges.
4  Holistic thinking
As described above, in order to collaborate designers must become con-
versant in the issues and dimensions of the medical domain under con-
sideration. But if designers came only to share the medical perspective, 
then much of the benefit of collaboration would be gone – designers 
would have become medical professionals. As much medical practice 
has shifted from a focus on treatment of acute illnesses and injuries to the 
prevention and treatment of chronic diseases, effective communication 
between doctors and patients has become critical. As options for diag-
nosis and treatment of diseases have broadened, communication with 
patients about their options has become more complicated. As the focus 
in medicine has moved from a paternalistic attitude to a patient-centred 
approach, communication has become a focus of good medical practice 
(Charles, Gafni, and Whelan 1997). Healthcare systems have only recently 
started to ­reorganize to better coordinate the care delivered by multiple 
disciplines and to support the care delivered at home by patients and 
families. However, the brief face-to-face interaction of many medical 
visits has worked against doctors’ effective communication with patients. 
Designers, unbound by the daily routine of 15 minute visits and the burden 
of intricate knowledge of diseases treatments and consequences, are free 
to empathize with both doctor and patient in a less constrained way. One 
medical colleague described the doctor’s view of communication with 
patients as seeing a snapshot and the designer’s view of the possibilities 
for communication as seeing a movie. To naïve designers every option is 
on the table.

Design + medical collaboration / 659 
We have often operationalized designers’ coverage of the whole context 
by creating context maps as part of the collaborative process, also called 
an ecology model, or in service design a customer journey (Stickdorn and 
Schneider 2012). This is a schema of the entire context including, work, 
play, family, leisure, money, knowledge, and emotions, not just encounters 
with the healthcare system. When medical professionals join designers in 
this exercise they comment that it is very useful to them as well, getting 
them into observation mode to see things in a new way. After building 
a context map, designers discuss it with medical colleagues. The context 
map and personas are often the first real contribution of the designers to 
the team. Even though a complete picture is painted, it does not mean 
that everything can be repainted. Some things are out of scope. But hav-
ing a whole picture gives the context to knowledgeably select and guide 
design of novel interventions.
5  Agreed content
We have found that unexpressed goals, perhaps goals that are not even 
completely conscious, can be a key obstacle to collaboration, although 
they can be overcome through effective communication. We have found 
that unexpressed goals often surface when developing the information 
content for a decision-support aid. On one project the medical profes-
sional had the stated goal of developing a decision tool for patients choos-
ing a medical intervention to prevent cervical cancer. After repeated con-
versations with designers, the medical collaborator realized there was also 
an unstated goal to educate physicians about common misunderstandings 
in the medical community about the intervention. The designer was un­
aware of the need to provide educational content to physicians and was 
focused on providing content for the patient. Needless to say there was not 
much in common between the type and quantity of information needed 
to inform a well-educated expert and the type and quantity of information 
needed for a complete novice. The designers helped delineate the types of 
information and prioritize the information needed for both clinician and 
patient using the decision tool.
On several projects frank analysis of information content has been 
a key and sometimes lengthy sticking point in the collaboration. Medical 
professionals sometimes have more content and much more technical 
content than designers think will interest patients or be understood by 
them. Reducing content in two cases took months of dialogue and rounds 
of review by patients before acceptable content was distilled. As one 
collaborator said, condensing three thousand words to one hundred is 
challenging.
6  Combined divergent/convergent thinking
Both medical professionals and designers problem-solve, and both use 
a blend of intuitional insight and rational analysis, but whereas medical 

660 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
professionals may, over time, tend to rely more an analysis, designers 
tend to become more attuned to divergent thinking, less constrained by 
the status quo. Add to this design’s historic attention to emotional and 
social/relational needs, in applications such as branding and advertising, 
and the medical-design collaboration combines thinking processes that 
form a rounded approach to a problem. Designers often represent their 
thinking through visualizations: drawings, mind maps, diagrams, flow 
charts, and information visualizations. Medical professionals comment 
favourably on this ability to synthesize and present multimodally. One 
doctor commented on not only how easy designers made this look, but 
how exuberant, aesthetic, and pleasurable it was to experience informa-
tion in this way.
7  Design as a research method
Designers are used to collecting data and creating solution prototypes 
quickly and iteratively, often sharing prototypes with a sample of people 
to gather feedback as part of the design research process. This process can 
stimulate insight into a problem more rapidly than repeated laboratory 
experiments disconnected from real people. This is design as a research 
method. Engaging stakeholders is a proven method to create solutions 
that really work because the attitudes and beliefs of people are integrated 
into the solution as it is created (Black 1998; Leonard and Rayport 1997), 
not stuck on at the end, or forced into practice by power or authority.
Designers and medical professionals often explore prototypes first 
within the collaborative team, usually through presentation of concept 
prototypes by designers to the team, with open critique for evaluation. 
Designers and medical colleagues need to agree that the prototype pro-
cess is iterative and that prototyped solutions are tentative. It can take time 
for physicians to appreciate that this is not a process of approving a design 
concept but of collaborating to push the designers’ work beyond the initial 
prototypes presented. We have found that asking the medical collabora-
tors how they would use prototypes or could envision others using them 
helps communication in these situations. Feedback on design products 
can be informal, through discussion, or in the form of a checklist or matrix. 
Design and medical collaborators need to engage with this process of iter-
ative critique and evaluation so that each discipline can capitalize on the 
other’s perspective.
8  Prototypes
A characteristic of design + medical collaboration is the making of real 
things. Though it is fashionable for design discourse to emphasize thinking 
and de-emphasize objects, medical professionals commented on the value 
of quickly making physical things that can be tried and improved. Due to 
the seriousness and rigour inherent in the practice of medicine getting to 
a finished product can take longer than customary for design, and longer 

Design + medical collaboration / 661 
than ideal for successful development. Exacerbating this, medical collabo-
rators often have multiple competing demands on their time that can delay 
getting feedback and starting testing and evaluation. In addition, the need 
for patient confidentiality and testing of prototypes in the context of a busy 
medical environment necessitates considerable time and thoughtfulness 
to set up evaluation. Patient confidentiality and ethical requirements may 
necessitate specialist training for design collaborators; additionally, in 
some cases, designers may need to provide medical records to the host 
institution, or receive vaccinations in order to be involved in a clinical 
environment. Despite the difficulty in testing, medical collaborators have 
commented on their design collaborations that they wished more focus 
had been on testing near-finished prototypes earlier in the design process.
Effectiveness in specific contexts
Not everyone is open to medical + design collaboration. Our successful 
experiences have been on projects and with groups who have self-selected 
to seek innovation. We are aware some medical professionals see no need 
to work outside their standard model. This is understandable. It can be 
dangerous to tinker with well-established procedures. A  self-selected 
team needs to be certain to demonstrate evidence to sceptical colleagues 
that the approaches they develop work better in every respect than exist-
ing ones.
Our experience with design + medical collaboration has been particu-
larly fruitful in medical areas where focus on information communication, 
motivation, and stakeholder engagement are significant factors; in particu-
lar, chronic conditions where treatment does not end at the office, clinic, 
or hospital door. We have seen good results with medication adherence 
and patient motivation in COPD. Another area of fruitful collaboration has 
been information systems where we have facilitated medical professionals’ 
decision-making through prototype data visualizations to help with pre-
visit planning. However, in the examples below we focus on the creation of 
decision-support aids to stimulate discussion between the patient and the 
medical professional in shared decision-making (SDM). The goal of SDM 
is to develop a treatment plan that is the best fit for the individual patient 
and their family. We will describe projects in ADHD treatment, arthritis, 
and HPV vaccination, to offer more concrete examples of the features of 
fruitful medical-design collaboration described above.
Examples of design-medical collaboration 
in information design: decision aids
Patient decision aids have proven effective at both transferring know-
ledge and increasing doctor–patient interaction (Fulton Suri 2003). They 
have been the focus of the International Patient Decision Aid Standards 
(IPDAS) which has established criteria for judging their quality, including 

662 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
a checklist for their implementation. Such clear definitions of terms and 
parameters for success are common in medicine but rare in communica-
tion design, illustrating the points made in the introduction that design 
lags behind medicine in principles and theories to guide practice.
ADHD treatment options
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is characterized by 
symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsiveness that cause 
impairment of academic, social, and family functioning. There are three 
effective treatment options for ADHD: behavioural therapy alone, medica-
tion alone, or behavioural therapy and medication combined. Each option 
presents pros and cons that must be weighed up in light of family values. 
The project to develop decision support for choice of treatment was initi-
ated by Dr W. Brinkman at Cincinnati Children’s (Brinkman et al. 2013).1 
The research project aimed to:
•	 describe doctor–parent interactions developing a treatment plan for 
children newly diagnosed with ADHD;
•	 implement and optimize a shared decision-making intervention 
through iterative cycles of use and refinement; and
•	 estimate the effect of the intervention by comparing pre- and post-
implementation encounters.
The design and medical team reviewed videos of typical doctor–parent 
interactions and discussed the outcomes (2 Shared knowledge). The med-
ical team had found that doctor–parent discussions of treatment options 
tended to focus on medication, that is whether or not to start medication 
and, if so, which one. Parent involvement in selecting a medication was 
low despite the fact that ADHD medications can differ in ways that are 
important to families, such as their impact on daily routine. In response 
to designers’ questions about the focus on medication medical profes-
sionals explained that by the time parents consult a physician they may 
believe they have exhausted behavioural approaches and must resort to 
trying medication. In addition, physicians may believe themselves to be 
ill-equipped to discuss behavioural therapy because they do not provide 
this treatment directly; or they may limit referrals for behavioural therapy 
due to concerns regarding availability and/or cost. This discussion exem-
plified designers thinking beyond the frame of physicians’ typical consul-
tations (4 Holistic thinking).
The medical team presented a  proposed 24-page information book 
containing their intended content for design consideration. The design-
ers’ immediate response was concern that there was too much over-tech-
nical content for users (5 Agreed content). The medical team thought 
the design team would make their proposed book content accessible to 
  1	 Research funded by a Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (Cincinnati 
Children’s) Place Outcomes Research Award, principal investigator Dr W. B. Brinkman.

Design + medical collaboration / 663 
parents, whereas the design team thought the content would need editing 
and portions eliminated in order to be read by busy parents. The design 
team responded by creating a stakeholder map and timeline similar to the 
context map described above (4 Holistic thinking), then produced four 
conceptual prototypes for initial evaluation (8 Prototypes). None of these 
initial prototypes were considered appropriate by the collaborative team 
(one too much like an advertisement, and another too prescriptive to 
facilitate discussion and so on) but they allowed the team to set objectives 
for the decision aid (1 A rational process) and the eventual design of a three 
part intervention: pre-visit brochure, pre-visit worksheet, and a set of 
encounter cards expressing issues that patients might want to discuss 
during consultations. Due to medical team members’ lingering concerns 
about content, both a long version and short version brochure were devel-
oped for evaluation. These prototype intervention sets were deployed for 
evaluation: the brochure and worksheet sent to patients’ parents prior to 
their office visit, the parents completed the worksheets bringing them to 
the visit, and the cards were used during the consultation (3 Rigour and 
tools). Feedback from the evaluation indicated that changes were needed. 
Videos of the trial consultations showed that doctors literally had their 
hands full juggling both worksheets and cards. In response, the design 
team created a new prototype putting the brochure and worksheet into 
a card format identical in size to the encounter cards (see Figure 1), which 
was deployed for a ‘pre-post’ trial.
Figure 1
ADHD decision aid. Six of 
seven cards sent home 
prior to visit, two cards to 
be completed by parent 
and brought to the visit. 
© 2011, Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center. All rights 
reserved. May not be used for 
commercial purposes.

664 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
Seven paediatricians participated in a pre-post open trial of the revised 
decision aids (Brinkman et al. 2013). The physicians sent patients a packet 
of information and worksheet cards to be read, completed, and brought 
with them to the office visit. We compared 21 pre-intervention with 33 
post-intervention consultations. We video-recorded the consultations 
and surveyed parents using validated instruments proposed by the med-
ical team (3 Rigour and tools). Compared to controls, intervention group 
parents were more involved in shared decision-making (evidenced by 
scores on the validated OPTION scale for patient involvement, Elwyn et 
al. 2005); more knowledgeable (evidenced by pre- and post-intervention 
questionnaires); and less conflicted about treatment options (evidenced 
by scores on the validated decisional conflict scale, O’Connor 1995). Visit 
duration was unchanged (mean approximately 41 minutes in both pre- and 
post conditions). There were no significant differences in the number of 
follow-up visits, nor the proportion of children requiring medication titra-
tion, nor in a parent-completed behaviour rating scale to assess treatment 
response. To enable broad dissemination, the ADHD decision aids are 
being embedded into an internet portal designed to help parents, teach-
ers, and paediatricians work together in caring for children with ADHD 
(Epstein et al. 2013).
HPV vaccination
This study, initiated by Dr. Lea Widdice at Cincinnati Children’s, aimed to 
develop an aid to improve interactions between physicians, patients, and 
parents in decisions about the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination 
(Leyva et al. 2013).2 HPV is the cause of over 99% of cervical cancers. In 
2006, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices recommended vaccination against 
HPV for 11–12-year-old girls and previously unvaccinated 13–26-year-olds. 
However, by 2010, only 50% of 13–17-year-olds in the United States had 
initiated the three-dose vaccine series (CDC 2011). Current practice is for 
clinicians to recommend the vaccine to parents and patients, who either 
accept, decline, or ask questions about the vaccine.
Based on our ADHD experience a research protocol was designed to 
allow multiple interactions between designers and stakeholders using iter-
atively developed prototypes to understand the context and to refine and 
test an intervention (7 Design as a research method, 8 Prototypes). As with 
the ADHD project, the first step was to elicit stakeholder input, this time 
through focus groups. Designers prepared several preliminary prototypes 
to stimulate feedback, including one focused on storytelling and another 
on facts and numbers. While, once again, none of these first prototypes 
were acceptable, valuable input about preferred learning styles and con-
tent qualities was gathered (6 Combined divergent/convergent thinking). 
  2	 Research funded by a Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center Place Outcomes 
Research Award, principle investigator Dr L. Widdice.

Design + medical collaboration / 665 
Again, like the ADHD project, several months were devoted to editing 
and getting the right copy but, unlike the previous project, this content 
included writing personal statements based on those we heard in focus 
group interactions (5 Agreed content).
Three physical prototypes were developed with the aim of increas-
ing parent-patient-physician interaction with the content: a spin wheel, 
a pamphlet with stickers, and a set of colour-coded individual cards (8 
Prototypes). These were evaluated through clinical observations, direct 
interactions with patients-parents-physicians in context, and interviews 
by both design and medical staff (3 Rigour and tools). Responses to all three 
prototypes were generally positive, the most successful being a series of 
small cards with a photo of a parent or patient with a simulated quote, 
question, or objection on one side, and the factual response on the reverse 
(see Figure 2). The pocket-sized cards, held together by a small keyring, 
engaged adolescents in a playful manner and were perceived by both par-
ents and adolescents as having enough information and being faster and 
easier to read than other options. Subsequent evaluation showed that the 
cards significantly increased patient and parent knowledge about HPV and 
HPV vaccination (see Leyva et al. 2013). Additionally, decisional conflict 
decreased significantly among both adolescents and parents, as measured 
with a standardized tool (3 Rigour and tools). An additional positive out-
come was that parents’ and adolescents’ intention to get vaccinated either 
increased or stayed the same and no one’s intention changed to not want-
ing vaccination. The cards are currently being studied for their impact on 
uptake and completion of HPV vaccination in the clinical setting.
Medication for juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Medication options for juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) are increasing. 
Medications differ on a  variety of attributes, including mechanisms of 
action, dosing intervals, modes of administration, safety profiles, and cost. 
Parents of children with JIA sometimes have questions and concerns about 
medications suggesting a need for improved clinician–parent communica-
tion. This third case study describes a project to facilitate communication 
about medication decisions for JIA (Morgan DeWitt et al. 2014).3
As with the previous projects we used multiple development steps 
including qualitative interviews with clinicians and care providers, direct 
observation of clinical encounters, and an iterative design process involv-
ing a graphic designer and a stakeholder panel of clinicians, allied health 
professionals and parents (1 A rational process, 2 Shared knowledge). Based 
on qualitative research with patients, parents, and clinicians, we identi-
fied which medication attributes were most important for stakeholders to 
  3	 Project conducted with the Pediatric Rheumatology Care and Outcomes Improve­
ment Network (PR-COIN). Funded by a pilot grant from the Center for Education and 
Research on Therapeutics (AHRQ 1U19HS021114), principal investigators Drs Morgan 
DeWitt and Brinkman.
Figure 2
HPV vaccine 
decision aid card. 
One of a set of 
thirteen to be 
used in physician–
patient–parent 
consultations. Card 
fronts (top) raise 
patient and parent 
concerns; card 
backs (bottom) 
provide clinicians’ 
answers. 
© 2012, Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital 
Medical Center. All rights 
reserved. May not be 
used for commercial 
purposes.

666 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
discuss including ‘How soon?’ will therapies take effect, ‘How often?’ are 
they given, ‘Side effects’, ‘Cost’, ‘How Long?’ a patient will need to stay on 
the medication, and ‘Other Considerations’ (5 Agreed content) (Lipstein 
et al. 2013a; Lipstein et al. 2013b; Lipstein et al. 2013c). We used these 
attributes to organize issue cards and symbols to convey key concepts (see 
Figure 3). Cards were designed and deployed in clinics participating in 
the Pediatric Rheumatology – Care and Outcomes Improvement Network 
(PR-COIN) using Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles (Langley et al. 2009) 
(7 Design as a research method, 8 Prototypes). 
Intended use of the cards involved clinicians showing the cards to 
patients and parents and asking which card they would like to discuss first. 
By selecting a card the family reveals what is important to them (4 Holistic 
thinking). We elicited feedback to guide card revisions from PR-COIN mem-
bers via weekly electronic surveys and discussions during monthly webi-
nars. A graduate student in design also observed clinician-patient-parent 
encounters using the cards (3 Rigour and tools). After eighteen revisions 
PR-COIN stakeholders at six sites found the issue cards to be acceptable 
for regular use.
PR-COIN issue cards are well accepted by clinicians and families within 
network sites. PDSA cycles continue as part of the process of implement-
ing the issue cards in routine clinical care across the PR-COIN network.
Figure 3
Arthritis decision aid. 
© 2013 Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center. 
All Rights Reserved. May 
not be used for commercial 
purposes. Developed in 
partnership with the Pediatric 
Rheumatology Care and 
Outcomes Improvement 
Network (PR-COIN) <http://
www.pr-coin.org/>. Funding 
provided by the Center for 
Education and Research 
on Therapeutics (AHRQ 
1U19HS021114).

Design + medical collaboration / 667 
Conclusion
These three cases illustrate the features of successful medical + design 
collaboration described at the beginning of the chapter. The case studies 
focus on areas of medicine where design can make a special contribution: 
communication, motivation, and patient engagement.
Design input helped medical practitioners think beyond their initial 
assumptions while the medical context required designers to apply clear 
definitions, principles, and rigorous research methods. These broad 
approaches were brought together through:
1	 A rational process – sharing explicit problem-solving process;
2	 Shared knowledge – including representing knowledge through 
personas and context maps;
3	 Rigour and tools – incorporating the explicit and numerous measures, 
typical of medicine, into the design process;
4	 Holistic thinking – thinking beyond the clinical interaction to the full 
patient context;
5	 Agreed content – resolving disparities in content expectations;
6	 Combined divergent/convergent thinking – including drawing and 
visualizing to facilitate different thinking modes;
7	 Design as a research method – using human-centred methods and 
critical feedback within the collaborative team to stimulate integrative 
thinking;
8	 Prototypes – extensive, iterative prototype development.
The cases also expose the benefit that sharing both substantial common 
ground and divergent skills and knowledge can bring to complex problems. 
The three decision-support aids described above have been well received 
by clinicians and used by parents and patients in various Cincinnati 
Children’s and related clinics, and accessed on the Cincinnati Children’s 
website. The positive outcomes promise further fruitful collaborations.
References
Beck, Andrew H. 2004. ‘The Flexner Report and the 
standardization of American medical education.’ 
Journal of the American Medical Association 
291 (17): 2139–2140.
Black, Alison. 1998. ‘Empathic design: user focused 
strategies for innovation.’ In Proceedings of the 
Conference on New Product Development, 1–8. 
London: IBC.
Brinkman, William B., Jessica Hartl Majcher, Lauren 
M. Poling, Gaoyan Shi, Mike Zender, Heidi 
Sucharew, Maria T. Britto, and Jeffery N. Epstein. 
2013. ‘Shared decision-making to improve 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder care.’ 
Patient Education and Counseling 93 (1): 95–101.
Brown, Tim. 2009. Change by design: how design 
thinking transforms organizations and inspires 
innovation. New York: Harper Business.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
2011. ‘National and state vaccination coverage 
among adolescents aged 13 through 17 years – 
United States, 2010.’ Morbidity and mortality 
weekly report 60 (33): 1117–1123.
Charles, Cathy, Amiram Gafni, and Tim Whelan. 
1997. ‘Shared decision-making in the medical 

668 / Mike Zender, William B. Brinkman, and Lea E. Widdice
encounter: what does it mean? (or it takes at least 
two to tango).’ Social Science and Medicine 44 (5): 
681–692.
Cooper, Alan, Robert Reimann, and David Cronin. 
2007. About Face 3. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley.
Elwyn, Glyn, Hayley Hutchings, Adrian Edwards, 
Frances Rapport, Michel Wensing, Wai-Yee 
Cheung, and Richard Grol. 2005. ‘The OPTION 
scale: measuring the extent that clinicians 
involve patients in decision-making tasks.’ Health 
Expectations 8 (1): 34–42.
Epstein, Jeffery N., Joshua M. Langberg, Philip K. 
Lichtenstein, Rebecca Kolb, and John O. Simon. 
2013. ‘The myADHDportal.com Improvement 
Program: an innovative quality improvement 
intervention for improving the quality of ADHD 
care among community-based pediatricians.’ 
Clinical Practice in Pediatric Psychology 1 (1): 
55–67.
Fulton Suri, Jane. 2003. ‘The experience evolution: 
developments in design practice.’ The Design 
Journal 6 (2): 39–48.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). 2001. Crossing the quality 
chasm: a new health system for the 21st Century. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Langley, Gerald J., Ronald Moen, Kevin M. Nolan, 
Thomas W. Nolan, Clifford L. Norman, and 
Lloyd P. Provost. 2009. The improvement guide: 
a practical approach to enhancing organizational 
performance. 2nd edn. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Leonard, Dorothy A., and Jeffrey Rayport. 1997. 
‘Spark innovation through empathic design.’ 
Harvard Business Review 75 (6): 102–113.
Leyva, C., Mike Zender, K. Staun, A. Heeman, 
William Brinkman, J. Kahn, and Lea Widdice. 
2013. ‘People into practice: design of a medical 
decision aid with repetitive stakeholders’ input.’ 
International Journal of Design in Society 7 (1): 
1–17.
Lipstein, Ellen A., William B. Brinkman, Jessica 
Sage, Carole M. Lannon, and Esi Morgan DeWitt. 
2013a. ‘Understanding treatment decision making 
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a qualitative 
assessment.’ Pediatric Rheumatology Online 
Journal 11 (1): 34.
Lipstein, Ellen A., Daniel J. Lovell, Lee A. Denson, 
David W. Moser, Shehzad A. Saeed, Cassandra 
M. Dodds, and Matia T. Britto. 2013b. ‘Parents’ 
information needs in tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
inhibitor treatment decisions.’ Journal of Pediatric 
Gastroenterology Nutrition 56 (3): 244–250.
Lipstein, Ellen A., Kelly A. Muething, Cassandra M. 
Dodds, and Maria T. Britto. 2013c. ‘ “I’m the one 
taking it”: adolescent participation in chronic 
disease treatment decisions.’ The Journal of 
Adolescent Health 53 (2): 253–9.
Morgan DeWitt, Esi, Ellen A. Lipstein, Katie Staun, 
Linda Scherer, Janalee Taylor, Carole M. Lannon, 
and William B. Brinkman. 2014. ‘Development of 
tools to facilitate shared decision making about 
medications for Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis: 
a project of the Pediatric Rheumatology Care and 
Outcomes Improvement Network.’ Arthritis and 
Rheumatology 66 (Suppl S3): S232–s233.
O’Connor, Anette M. 1995. ‘Validation of a decisional 
conflict scale.’ Medical Decision Making 15 (1): 
25–30.
Simon, Herbert A. 1996. The sciences of the artificial. 
3rd edn. Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press.
Stickdorn, Marc, and Jakob Schneider. 2012. This 
is service design thinking: basics, tools, cases. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Tufte, Edward R. 1997. Visual explanations: images 
and quantities, evidence and narrative. Cheshire, 
CT: Graphics Press.
Zender, Mike, William Brinkman, Jessica Hartl, 
Lauren Rawe, M. Carpenter-Fearing, Gaoyan 
Shi, R. Stuckey, P. FeiFei, and B. Han. 2011. 
‘Design collaboration in medical research: 
designing doctor-patient interaction.’ Paper 
presented at IASDR 2011 4th World Conference 
on Design Research, 31 October–4 November, 
Delft, Netherlands. < https://www.academia.
edu/4756453/DESIGN_COLLABORATION_IN_
MEDICAL_RESEARCH_DESIGNING_DOCTOR-
PATIENT_INTERACTION>.

669
Developing persuasive health 
campaign messages
Carel Jansen
Information designers in the field of mass health communication face great 
challenges in developing persuasive messages to change people’s behaviour. 
Theoretical and experimental research, however, has contributed to our 
knowledge of the determinants of success of persuasive messages. This chapter 
discusses research into three types of messages that may be used in health 
promotion campaigns: puzzling messages that may encourage people to talk 
about the topics that are addressed and may indirectly lead to the intended 
behavioural changes; fear-appeal messages that try to persuade recipients into 
healthy behaviour by picturing horrible things that may happen to them if they 
do not follow the recommendations; and narratives, stories in different formats 
that may persuade readers into more healthy behaviour by reducing their 
resistance to attempts to change this behaviour.
Despite a long history of mass media health promotion campaigns, success 
in persuading recipients into healthy behaviour is far from guaranteed. 
Campaigns may fail to reach target groups and may be hindered by unfore-
seen events attracting adverse attention from the media. Campaign mes-
sages may also be rejected as being too difficult to understand, irrelevant, 
boring, irritating, or just unconvincing. Theoretical and experimental 
research, however, has contributed to our knowledge of the determinants 
of success in mass media campaigns, and has also made us aware of the 
limited persuasive power of health promotion messages, especially if they 
are based on the assumption that recipients will consciously contemplate 
the advantages and disadvantages of maintaining or changing their health 
behaviour. As Maio et al. (2007, 129) contend, unhealthy behaviours are 
often driven by habit, automatic attitudes, and situational limitations that 
may compete with volitional control. 
Mass media health messages nowadays have to compete with a vast 
number of other messages demanding recipients’ attention for unhealthy 
behavioural choices that may seem more attractive. That does not imply, 
however, that investing in mass media health campaigns is futile. In their 
review of the outcomes of such campaigns, Wakefield, Loken, and Hornik 
(2010, 1261) point to their promise to repeatedly disseminate messages at 
a low cost to a large audience. They suggest that although many campaigns 
aim at directly affecting the message recipients’ beliefs, attitudes, and 
behavioural intentions, behaviour change may also be achieved through 
indirect routes, for instance through interpersonal discussions about the 
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 669–684
46

670 / Carel Jansen
topics in the message, which may lead to changes in social norms within 
recipients’ networks (p. 1262). 
Below, three types of messages will be discussed that, according to 
research outcomes, under certain conditions may be used effectively in 
health promotion:
•	 puzzling or cryptic messages, which encourage recipients to talk about 
the topics that are addressed, indirectly leading to the persuasive 
effects that message designers hope to achieve;
•	 fear-appeal messages, that try to scare people into healthy behaviour 
by picturing horrible things that may happen to them if they don’t 
follow the advice in the message; and
•	 narratives, stories that may persuade readers into more healthy 
behaviour by reducing their resistance to attempts to change their 
present behaviour.
Puzzling messages
The billboard from the South African health promotion organization 
loveLife in Figure 1 illustrates that health promotion messages are not 
always straightforward. Youngsters in loveLife’s target group may find it 
difficult to understand that this picture of a loving couple plus the text 
‘Love 100% pure – made to last’ aims at promoting the B-­part from the 
A B C formula (Abstain, Be faithful, Condomize) used in South African 
HIV/AIDS prevention campaigns.
In common with a  growing number of commercial advertisements 
(Figure 2, for instance), designers of health promotion messages some-
Figure 1 
Billboard 
from South 
African loveLife 
campaign. 
© loveLife, 2003.

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 671 
times deliberately want to puzzle the audience to a certain degree, before 
the meaning becomes clear. 
Puzzling messages may provide the audience with a pleasurable experi-
ence when processing their content. As McQuarrie and Mick (1996, 427) 
describe, the reader or listener may ‘experience the pleasure of text’: the 
reward from processing a clever and artful arrangement of signs. Tanaka 
(1992, 1994) argues that solving a pun, for instance, can provide an extra 
reward. If recipients successfully find the interpretation intended (or 
rather, if they think they found that interpretation), they are rewarded 
with the pleasure of having solved the riddle. This way, an intriguing, puz-
zling message may lead to a positive evaluation of the advertisement itself, 
and possibly also of the product and producer (Hoeken et al. 2009, 54–55).
In health communication, an even more important advantage of puz-
zling messages may be that they stimulate conversations about the topics 
the messages refer to (Hoeken et al. 2009; Lubinga, Jansen, and Maes 2014). 
Such discussions may lead to social norm change, which, indirectly, may 
lead to behaviour change (Chatterjee et al. 2009; Durkin and Wakefield 
2006; Snyder et al. 2004; Southwell and Yzer 2007). A study by Van den 
Putte et al. (2011) revealed clear effects of interpersonal discussions about 
anti-­smoking media content on smoking cessation. Evidence was found 
that exposure to media campaigns led to discussions which influenced not 
only intentions, but also to more attempts to quit smoking. 
An interesting question then is how health campaigners can design mes-
sages that could lead to conversations about health topics (Hoeken et al. 
2009; Lubinga et al. 2014). A possible answer is provided by South African 
health promotion organization loveLife, mentioned above. For a number 
of years, loveLife used messages that were intended to be puzzling, with 
the assumption that presenting these messages to their target group (12–17 
year olds) would provoke discussion of HIV, AIDS, and other sex-­related 
topics with peers and elder people (see Figure 1, for example). According 
to Refilwe Africa, the former editor of loveLife’s magazine Uncut, the cam-
paigns were designed to attract controversy and trigger their audiences to 
talk about HIV and AIDS:
We want people to think about our posters. . . . At some point in our campaign, 
we will get people to wonder. This creates conversation between parents and 
children, dialogue between peers. That is exactly what we want to achieve, 
that people talk about HIV/AIDS and sex. (R. Africa, in Hollemans 2005)
In a radio interview from 2006, quoted in Robbins (2010, 226), loveLife’s 
media director Mandla Ndlovu added: 
The billboards are there to spark discussion and thought among people, 
among women, among men, among everybody. What exactly do the loveLife 
billboards mean? Ask your friends.
Although this reasoning may seem plausible, loveLife never offered 
a theoretical or empirical backing for the claim that a lack of (perceived) 
Figure 2
‘Crow’s feet’ 
advertisement for 
Olay skin cream, 
Australia. 
© Procter & Gamble 
Co./Saatchi & Saatchi 
Australia, 2000.

672 / Carel Jansen
understanding of deliberately puzzling health messages would trigger 
conversations about their meaning. Hoeken et al. (2009) raise doubts that 
recipients would tend to talk about messages they do not understand, tak-
ing an opposite position that readers and viewers are only willing to discuss 
messages they think they understand. According to Hoeken et al. (2009, 
58–60), recipients may have two reasons for discussing a puzzling health 
message. Firstly, they may want to show off their (perceived) understand-
ing of the message to their peers, whom they presume will not understand 
it (I am so smart that I understand this message while you probably can’t). 
Secondly, they may want to discuss a message as a way of strengthening 
group identity (We are so smart that we can understand this message, while 
other people probably can’t).
Studies carried out among students and learners in the province of 
Limpopo in South Africa (Jansen and Janssen 2010; Lubinga et al. 2010; 
Lubinga et al. 2014) do not support the assumptions made by loveLife 
or Hoeken et al. (2009). Lubinga et al. (2014) found that willingness to 
talk about puzzling health messages is positively related to perceived own 
comprehension of the messages, perceived comprehension by the conver-
sation partner, perceived comprehension by others, perceived relevance 
of the message, and appreciation of the message. Apparently, recipients of 
a puzzling message only want to engage in a discussion if they think that 
they themselves, their conversation partners, and other people understand 
it, if they like it and if they feel it has some relevance in their own situation. 
Studies also show some negative consequences of puzzling messages, 
especially wrong or dangerous interpretations of intended messages. In 
Lubinga et al. (2010), for example, one of the learners wrongly interpreted 
a message by loveLife, ‘Prove your love, protect me’, as ‘Having sex with 
him means that you will be proving your love for him’ (p. 182). Other 
researchers and critics have also addressed the problem of misunder-
standing loveLife messages and label them as ‘stylish but cryptic,’ ‘abstract 
and nonsensical’, ‘complex’, ‘obscure’, and ‘featuring abstract and seem-
ingly nonsensical images and text’ (Delate 2001; Thomas 2004; Singer 
2005; Parker 2006). Before being able to advise information designers to 
make use of puzzling messages in health communication, more research 
is warranted, for example on willingness to discuss puzzling messages in 
recipients across cultures and age groups, on the content and form of dis-
cussions that are provoked and on the effects that these discussions may 
have on participants. 
Fear appeals
Sixty years of research have produced an abundance of studies of fear 
appeals: persuasive messages designed to scare people into the proposed, 
often health-­related behaviour (see, for instance, the reviews from Witte 
and Allen 2000; De Hoog, Stroebe, and De Wit 2007; Maloney, Lapinski, 

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 673 
and Witte 2011; and Ruiter et al. 2014). Fear appeals are used all over the 
world, for example, to make people stop smoking – or prevent them from 
beginning (Figures 3 a and 3 b), or to promote safe sex (Figure 4). 
The most influential theory aiming to explain and predict the way fear 
appeals are processed is the Extended Parallel Process Model (EPPM; 
Figure 5, overleaf), introduced by Kim Witte (Witte 1992, 1998; Witte, 
Meyer, and Martell 2001). 
According to the EPPM, fear-appeal messages may lead recipients to 
display the recommended behaviour, but only if the threat presented is 
perceived as severe enough and if the recipients perceive themselves as 
susceptible to the threat. If these conditions are met, and hence the recip-
ient experiences enough fear, and if the recipient is also presented with 
a measure that can be taken, then there are two possibilities: the recip-
ient may get into danger control mode or into fear control mode. If the 
perceived response efficacy (effectiveness of the proposed measure) and 
the self-­efficacy of the recipient (the expectancy that he or she will be 
Figure 4
French HIV/
AIDS prevention 
message. The 
caption reads: 
‘Without a 
condom, you’re 
sleeping with 
AIDS. Protect 
yourself.’ 
© AIDES, 2007.
Figure 3
European 
pictorial warnings 
on cigarette 
packaging: 
a. Belgian. 
The text reads 
‘Smoking can 
cause a slow and 
painful death’ in 
Dutch, French and 
German.
b. Latvian. The 
text reads ‘Smoke 
contains benzene, 
nitrosamines, 
formaldehyde and 
hydrogen cyanide’.
© European Union, 
1995.
b
a

674 / Carel Jansen
able to take this measure) are strong enough, then the EPPM predicts that 
the frightened recipient will attempt to avert the danger (danger control 
mode). This is exactly the behaviour that the sender of the fear-appeal 
message is promoting. However, if the recipient’s self-­efficacy is low, or 
if the proposed measure is perceived as inadequate, then the frightened 
recipient will try to minimize the perceived threat and attempt to subdue 
the feelings of fear without fighting the danger (fear control mode). In that 
case, recipients will start defending themselves against the feelings of fear 
that have been aroused by shielding themselves from the communication 
that brought these feelings of fear about (defensive avoidance). 
Although a  number of studies report favourable outcomes of fear-­
appeal messages, the interaction effects between threat and efficacy that 
may be expected from the EPPM are seldom found (Witte & Allen 2000). 
According to Ruiter et al. (2014), self-­efficacy – and to a lesser degree 
response efficacy and also perceived susceptibility – are more important in 
explaining and predicting success of fear-appeal messages than perceived 
severity of the threat. Ruiter et al. conclude that information about the 
severity of the threat may lead to defensive reactions instead of the reac-
tions that the messages aim at. Defensive reactions may be avoided by pro-
viding information about the susceptibility of the recipient and about how 
recommended actions should be implemented (p. 68). In view of these 
conclusions, warnings that only accentuate the severe consequences of 
smoking tobacco, such as those in Figure 3, may have little value. Explicit 
susceptibility information is lacking, as is information on measures that 
smokers could take to fight against the dangers they are confronted with.
The approach of anti-­smoking campaigns in Australia is more in line 
with what Ruiter et al. infer from their research overview. As the examples 
Danger-
control
process
No threat perceived
(no response)
Fear-
control
process
Individual diﬀerences
External
stimuli
Message 
components
Self-eﬃcacy
Response eﬃcacy
Susceptibility
Severity
Perceived 
eﬃcacy
(self-eﬃcacy,
response eﬃcacy)
Perceived 
threat
(susceptibility,
severity)
Fear
Feedback
loop
Protection
motivation
Message processing
(1st & 2nd appraisals)
Outcomes
Process
Message
acceptance
Defensive
motivation
Message
rejection
Figure 5
Extended Parallel 
Process Model 
(EPPM) (Witte 
1998).

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 675 
in Figure 6 illustrate, the front panel of Australian cigarette packages now 
presents verbal and visual information on the threat, in this case that 
‘Smoking damages your gums and teeth’, combined with an illustration 
that specifically addresses male smokers. The back panel of this package is 
more specific about the severity of the danger:
Smoking causes inflammation of the gum and other tissue around your teeth 
(periodontitis). Symptoms can include gum redness, swelling, bleeding, 
infection and pain. The gum, bones and other tissue supporting your teeth 
can be destroyed resulting in tooth loss. 
The back panel shows that not only male, but also female smokers are sus-
ceptible. Furthermore, information is provided on measures that may help 
smokers to quit: 
Want to talk about quitting? Call Quitline 13 7848, talk to your doctor or 
pharmacist, or visit www.quitnow.gov.au. 
The text on the side of the package again refers to the severe effects of 
smoking on blood vessels, body cells, and immune system, and also accen-
tuates each smoker’s susceptibility to these effects; it is about your blood 
vessels, your body cells, and your immune system. 
Critical remarks on the EPPM are made by Popova (2012). She con-
cludes that none of the propositions of the EPPM have been supported 
unequivocally in testing (p. 461). Among other things, she raises concerns 
about the role of individual differences in the processing and the outcomes 
of fear appeals (pp. 465–466). Some studies (Witte and Morrison 2000; 
Ruiter et al. 2004, for instance) suggest that individual differences directly 
or indirectly influence reactions to a fear appeal, whereas other studies 
suggest they do not, or only on rare occasions (Witte and Allen 2000).
It is unclear, for instance, if and how culture may influence the reac-
tions to fear-appeal messages, with only a few studies empirically testing 
the possible interaction between nationality or cultural orientation and 
message characteristics. The results from these studies are equivocal, 
Figure 6
Front and 
back panels 
of Australian 
cigarette 
packaging with 
anti-smoking 
warnings. 
© Australian 
Government 
Department of Health, 
2012.

676 / Carel Jansen
partly due to design limitations of some aspects of the studies and the 
way cultural orientation in participants was measured – or sometimes 
just assumed (see Jansen and Verstappen 2014, 348–349). In a new study, 
Jansen and Verstappen (2014) tried to circumvent the shortcomings in ear-
lier research. In their study, participants from Spain and the Netherlands 
either read a version of a narrative fear appeal that accentuated the misery 
of a girl suffering from chlamydia, or a version that focused on her parents’ 
sorrow. Manipulation checks showed that differences between the version 
accentuating the suffering of the girl and the version accentuating the suf-
fering for her family were indeed recognized as such. Cultural orientation 
of study paticipants was assessed using a scale for measuring individualism 
and collectivism, and a scale for measuring familism. Based on Hofstede 
(2001), Dutch participants were expected to be more individualistic and 
less family-­oriented than Spanish participants. That turned out to be 
the case. Contrary to claims from earlier studies, however, there was no 
interaction between nationality or cultural orientation and the fear-appeal 
version on participants’ response. 
One reason for failure so far to find convincing evidence of an interac-
tion between recipients’ nationality or cultural orientation and differing 
fear messages may be that the messages in these studies were typically 
designed to appeal to basic aspects of culture, such as individualism versus 
collectivism, or familism. Perhaps fear-appeal messages that refer to other 
cultural aspects, such as familiarity with religious themes, or tolerance 
towards depiction of nudity and sexual activities might have effects that 
vary between different target groups. In recipients who are not familiar 
with themes from the Old Testament, for example, a fear appeal such as 
that used to promote HIV and AIDS prevention in Tanzania (Figure 7) may 
be less successful than in recipients who are well acquainted with refer-
ences to Noah’s ark. To give another example, fear-appeal messages that 
Figure 7
Tanzanian AIDS message. The text 
reads ‘Floods!! Board the boats’ 
in Swahili. The boats are labelled 
with the A B C formula (Abstain, 
Be faithful, Condomize). 
© Association Prévention SIDA. La Flotille de 
l’Espoir, 1994.

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 677 
explicitly show nudity and sexual activities may be more convincing in 
most Western countries than in parts of the world where sexual taboos are 
more prevalent (Figure 8; note the ironic and slightly puzzling combina-
tion of text and picture). More research is warranted here.
Narratives
One problem in health communication is that message recipients tend 
to resist any pressure for change they perceive. People want to be free to 
determine their own norms, beliefs, and attitudes, and to choose their own 
behaviour. Persuasive messages aimed at changing health behaviour, there-
fore, are often perceived as a threat to individual freedom and may be met 
with high levels of scepticism or even with immediate rejection (Moyer-­
Gusé 2008, 414). It is important to find ways to overcome such resistance. 
Recent research shows that including persuasive messages in a narrative 
may provide a solution. A narrative may be defined as ‘any cohesive and 
coherent story with an identifiable beginning, middle, and end that pro-
vides information about scene, characters, and conflict; raises unanswered 
questions or unresolved conflict; and provides resolution’ (Hinyard and 
Kreuter 2007, 778; Moyer-­Gusé and Nabi 2010, 29). Moyer-­Gusé (2008) 
presents a theory, depicted in the Entertainment Overcoming Resistance 
Model (EORM), to explain why and how narratives may positively affect 
Figure 8
German HIV/
AIDS prevention 
message. The 
text reads, 
‘Unprotected 
love-making lasts 
forever. Anyone 
infected with HIV 
will die from it. 
Stop the virus. 
Use condoms.’ 
© Michael Stich 
Stiftung 2010.

678 / Carel Jansen
the persuasiveness of messages. The EORM (Figure 9) builds on Bandura’s 
social cognitive theory (Bandura 2002) and Slater and Rouner’s (2002) 
Extended Elaboration Likelihood Model (E‑ELM). 
The EORM is intended to apply to all narratives, including movies, 
dramatic television series, radio plays, etc. As Figure 9 shows, it refers to 
a number of entertainment features positively affecting the adoption of 
story-­consistent attitudes and behaviours by the audience, by reducing 
their initial resistance to possible changes. Entertainment features that 
play an important role in this process are transportation, identification, and 
parasocial interaction.
Figure 9
Entertainment 
Overcoming Resistance 
Model (EORM) (Moyer-
Gusé 2008).
Entertainment feature
Resistance
Outcome
Narrative structure;
Parasocial interaction;
Liking
Transportation;
Identiﬁcation;
Parasocial interaction
Enjoyment;
Identiﬁcation
Perceived similarity;
Identiﬁcation
Parasocial interaction
Perceived similarity 
with an eﬃcacious 
character
Perceived similarity;
Identiﬁcation
reduces
reduces
reduces
increases
increases
changes
changes
Reactance
Counterarguing
Selective
avoidance
Perceived
vulnerability
Perceived
norms
Outcome
expectancies
Self-eﬃcacy
Story-consistent
attitudes and
behaviours

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 679 
Transportation refers to ‘the process by which an individual becomes 
immersed into the story, losing track of the real world as he or she experi-
ences the unfolding events in the story’ (Moyer-­Gusé and Nabi 2010, 29). 
Other labels used for this phenomenon of being swept into the storyline 
(Moyer-­Gusé 2008, 409), are absorption (Slater and Router 2002) and 
narrative engagement (Busselle and Bilandzic 2009).
Identification is defined in the EORM as ‘an emotional and cognitive 
process whereby a  viewer imagines himself or herself as a  particular 
character’ (Moyer-­Gusé and Nabi 2010, 29). This process involves shar-
ing a character’s feelings or perspective, internalizing a character’s goals 
and losing self-­awareness during exposure. Losing self-­awareness clearly 
overlaps with transportation but while identification involves getting 
absorbed through the eyes of one particular character, transportation does 
not require this kind of perspective-­taking. Also important to note is that 
identification is not the same as perceived similarity. Readers, viewers, 
and listeners may readily identify with a character by taking on his/her 
role and experience of fictitious events as if they happened to themselves 
without having anything in common in reality (Moyer-­Gusé 2008, 410; 
Moyer-­Gusé and Nabi 2010, 29–30).
Parasocial interaction (PSI) is understood in the EORM as ‘the seeming 
face-­to-­face relationship between spectator and performer’ (Moyer-­Gusé 
and Nabi 2010, 30). Although recipients may very well realize that they are 
only connected to a story character through a pseudo-­relationship, they 
may experience this character as part of their own social world. Different 
from identification, PSI does not imply that the character’s perspective is 
taken. Experiencing the character as a well-­known acquaintance suffices.
The general idea behind the EORM and its precursors is that transpor-
tation reduces the motivation and ability to counter-­argue the persuasive 
message embedded in the story, because audience members do not want 
to interrupt the enjoyable and immersive process of being transferred 
to another world. Being swept into the story makes them less aware of 
its persuasive intent. Identification and PSI are also assumed to reduce 
counter-­arguing and reactance, respectively. Identification promotes 
adoption rather than criticism of the thoughts and feelings of a character, 
and PSI with a peer will reduce reactance because the peer is perceived 
as less authoritative and controlling (Moyer-­Gusé and Nabi 2010, 31–32). 
A special kind of narrative that is gaining popularity in health communi-
cation and that recently has drawn the attention of researchers, is the foto-
novela. Fotonovelas are small booklets that tell a dramatic story by means 
of photographs and short and easily readable captions (see Figure 10). 
Fotonovelas are especially popular in southern Europe, in South and 
Central America and in the Latino/Hispanic community in the USA. The 
genre originates from Italy, where the first fotonovelas were published in 
the second part of the 1940s, when going to the movies was a form of lux-
ury many people could not afford. Stills from popular films were combined 

680 / Carel Jansen
and captions were added to create a surrogate movie (Schimming 2002). 
Aiming at target groups with low literacy levels, health organizations in 
the USA have recently started to explore the possibilities of fotonovelas to 
transfer relevant knowledge and to persuade readers into adopting spe-
cific healthy behaviours. 
Results reported from studies comparing fotonovelas with more tradi­
tional text formats seem promising. Unger et al. (2013), for instance, found 
that a fotonovela aimed at increasing knowledge about depression and 
reducing associated stigma among low-­literate Hispanic adults in the 
USA outperformed a traditional text pamphlet in a test measuring know-
ledge and attitudes immediately after the intervention. In a follow-­up test 
approximately one month later, positive effects were found again, but 
in this case only with respect to attitudes. James et al. (2005) developed 
a fotonovela on sexually transmitted infection (STI), which they presented 
to secondary school learners in South Africa. They measured the effects in 
comparison to a control group that had not read the fotonovela. A signif-
icant increase was found in knowledge about the spread of STIs and also 
in attitude towards condom use, both immediately after a single reading of 
the fotonovela and six weeks later. Other studies, such as Unger, Molina, 
and Baron (2009), Valle, Yamada, and Matiella (2006) and Lee et al. (2013) 
into the effects of fotonovelas also report favourable results. Some of 
Figure 10
Page from the fotonovela 
Sweet temptations, from 
Unger, Molina, and Baron 
2009. 
© University of Southern California 
2009.

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 681 
these studies, however, lack the experimental rigour needed to draw firm 
conclusions about the superiority of fotonovelas compared with other 
documents. New studies measuring the effects of fotonovelas are needed, 
especially where outcomes can be related to the levels of transportation, 
identification, and parasocial interaction that readers experience. 
An intriguing question for future studies concerns the cultural sensi-
tivity of fotonovelas and other narratives used in health communication. 
Larkey and Hecht (2010), for instance, claim that culturally grounded nar-
ratives are a natural choice for identifying and shaping messages for specific 
audiences (p. 114), and that identification may be fostered by closeness of 
the story to the reader’s own situation or culture (p. 125). Valle et al. (2006, 
72) also advocate developing ‘culturally and linguistically appropriate . . . 
materials’, and Lee et al. (2013) assert that a fotonovela may be effective 
because of its culturally appropriate components such as photos of faces 
and daily dialogues familiar to the community, and storylines drawn from 
common life experiences (p. 695). 
To our knowledge, however, these assumptions have never been exam-
ined, and one may wonder what empirical tests will reveal if they are. As 
indicated in discussion of the EORM model, above, similarity is not the 
same as identification. As all readers of novels and viewers of films about 
fictional characters and situations know, if a well-told story succeeds in 
appealing to basic human emotions, it is easy to get swept into events that 
in reality can never take place in one’s own context. To what extent per-
ceived similarity between readers and characters is a prerequisite of iden-
tification in health promoting fotonovelas is an open question. The same 
applies to the level of subtlety that is necessary when including a health 
education message in a narrative, be it in a fotonovela or in another for-
mat. Conceivably, messages that are hidden deeply may not be noticed, 
while messages that readers regard as preaching overtly (cf. Moyer-­Gusé 
2008, 420) may be experienced as irritating and annoying, and may meet 
resistance. Moyer-­Gusé (2008) also contends that fear appeals embedded 
in stories may result in less defensive avoidance than other fear appeals, 
because the engaging structure of a narrative makes it harder to escape 
from the threatening message (pp. 417–418). New empirical studies would 
be welcome here.
Final remarks
Information designers working in the field of mass health communication 
have to overcome some great challenges when trying to develop effective 
persuasive messages. Both to attract and to convey meaning, approaches 
to communication have to be considered that are often not considered 
in the world of information design. The behaviours that are targeted 
in health communication are frequently performed automatically and 
unconsciously, making it difficult to get recipients to even contemplate 

682 / Carel Jansen
682 / Carel Jansen
changes. Many health messages also have to compete with commercial 
messages that point in the exact opposite direction and may be much 
more attractive in the eyes of the recipients. That is not to say that trying 
to create effective health messages would be a useless undertaking. As the 
saying goes, there is nothing as practical as a good theory. The aim of this 
chapter, therefore, is to raise awareness of current, influential, and empir­
ically ­based theories. Such theories, and their development through future 
research, provide a basis for the design of messages that will help improve 
many people’s health.
Acknowledgements
An adapted version of this chapter was published in Dutch: Jansen, Carel. 2015. 
‘Drie soorten boodschappen in de gezondheidscommunicatie: wat weten we 
over determinanten van succes of falen?’ Internationale Neerlandistiek 53 (2). The 
author would like to thank Jay van Cleef, Daniël Janssen, George Nossent, Joëlle 
Ooms, and the anonymous reviewers and the editors of this book for their helpful 
comments on an earlier version of this chapter. 
References 
Bandura, Albert. 2002. ‘Social cognitive theory of 
mass communication.’ In Media effects: advances 
in theory and research, 2nd edn, edited by Jennings 
Bryant and Dolf Zillman, 121–153. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Busselle, Rick, and Helena Bilandzic. 2009. 
‘Measuring narrative engagement.’ Media 
Psychology 12: 321–347.
Chatterjee, Joyee S., Anurudra Bhanot, Lauren B. 
Frank, Sheila T. Murphy, and Gerry Power. 2009. 
‘The importance of interpersonal discussion and 
self-­efficacy in knowledge, attitude and practice 
models.’ International Journal of Communication 
3: 607–634.
De Hoog, Natascha, Wolfgang Stroebe, and John 
B. F. De Wit. 2007. ‘The impact of vulnerability 
to and severity of a health risk on processing and 
acceptance of fear-­arousing communications: 
a meta-­analysis.’ Review of General Psychology 11: 
258–285. 
Delate, Richard. 2001. The struggle for meaning: 
a semiotic analysis of interpretations of the 
loveLife His&Hers billboard campaign. 
Johannesburg: CADRE. Acesed 8 June 2015. <http://www.cadre.org.
za/node/176>. 
Durkin, Sarah, and Melanie Wakefield. 2006. 
‘Maximising the impact of emotive anti-­tobacco 
advertising: effects of interpersonal discussion 
and program placement.’ Social Marketing 
Quarterly 12 (3): 3–14.
Hinyard, Leslie J., and Matthew W. Kreuter. 2007. 
‘Using narrative communi­cation as a tool for 
health behavior change: a conceptual, theoretical, 
and empirical overview.’ Health Education and 
Behavior 34 (5): 777–792.
Hoeken, Hans, Piet Swanepoel, Elvis Saal, and Carel 
Jansen. 2009. ‘Using message form to stimulate 
conversations: the case of tropes.’ Communication 
Theory 19 (1): 49–65.
Hofstede, Geert H. 2001. Culture’s consequences: 
comparing values, behaviors, institutions and 
organizations across nations. 2nd edn. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hollemans, Ellen. 2005. ‘loveLife gets attitude.’ Mail 
and Guardian, 18 January. Acesed 8 June 2015. <http://mg.co.za/
article/2005-01-18-lovelife-gets-attitude>. 
Jansen, Carel, and Ilse Janssen. 2010. ‘Talk about 
it: the effects of cryptic HIV/AIDS billboards.’ 
Communicatio: South African Journal for Com­
munication Theory and Research 36 (1): 130–141.
Jansen, Carel, and Renate Verstappen. 2014. 
‘Fear appeals in health communication: 
should the recipients’ cultural orientation be 
taken into account?’ Journal of Intercultural 
Communication Research 43 (4): 346–368.
James, Shamagonam, Priscilla S. Reddy, Robert A. 
Ruiter, Myra Taylor, Champaklal Jinabhai, Pepjin 
Van Empelen, and Bart Van den Borne. 2005. ‘The 
effects of a systematically developed photo-­
novella on knowledge, attitudes, communication 
and behavioural intentions with respect to 
sexually transmitted infections among secondary 
school learners in South Africa.’ Health Promotion 
International 20: 157–165.
Larkey, Linda K., and Michael Hecht. 2010. ‘A model 
of effects of narrative as culture-­centric health 

Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 683 
Developing persuasive health campaign messages / 683 
promotion.’ Journal of Health Communication: 
International Perspectives 15 (2): 114–135.
Lee, Sunmin, Hyeyeon Yoon, Lu Chen, and Hee-­
Soon Juon. 2013. ‘Culturally tailored photonovel 
development for hepatitis B prevention in 
Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese American 
communities in Maryland.’ Health Education and 
Behavior 40 (6): 694–703.
Lubinga, Elizabeth, Carel Jansen, and Alfons Maes. 
2014. ‘ “If you care, do not share”. Exploring 
effects of using rhetorical figures in HIV and AIDS 
messages on young South Africans’ willingness 
to engage in conversations.’ Communicatio: South 
African Journal for Communication Theory and 
Research 40 (1): 49–68.
Lubinga, Elizabeth, Margrit Schulze, Carel Jansen, 
and Alfons Maes. 2010. ‘HIV/AIDS messages 
as a spur for conversation among young South 
Africans?’ African Journal of AIDS Research 9 (2): 
175–185.
McQuarrie, Edward F., and David Glen Mick. 1996. 
‘Figures of rhetoric in advertising language.’ 
Journal of Consumer Research 22 (4): 424–438. 
Maio, Gregory R., Bas Verplanken, Antony S. R. 
Manstead, Wolfgang Stroebe, Charles Abraham, 
Paschal Sheeran, and Mark Conner. 2007. ‘Social 
psychological factors in lifestyle change and 
their relevance to policy.’ Social Issues and Policy 
Review 1 (1): 99–137.
Maloney, Erin K., Maria K. Lapinski, and Kim Witte. 
2011. ‘Fear appeals and persuasion: a review and 
update of the extended parallel process model.’ 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass 5 (4): 
206–219.
Moyer-­Gusé, Emily. 2008. ‘Toward a theory of 
entertainment persuasion: explaining the 
persuasive effects of entertainment-­education 
messages.’ Communication Theory 18: 407–425.
Moyer-­Gusé, Emily, and Robin L. Nabi. 2010. 
‘Explaining the persuasive effects of narrative in 
an entertainment television program: overcoming 
resistance to persuasion.’ Human Communication 
Research 36: 26–52. 
Parker, Warren. 2006. ‘Claims and realities in 
programme evaluation: reflections on loveLife 
South Africa.’ XVI International AIDS Conference, 
Abstract no. THPE0580. Acesed 8 June 2015. <https://www.aids2014.
org/Abstracts/A2196703.aspx>. 
Popova, Lucy. 2012. ‘The Extended Parallel Process 
Model: illuminating the gaps in research.’ Health 
Education and Behavior 39 (4): 455–473. 
Robbins, David. 2010. Beyond the billboards: the 
loveLife story. Johannesburg: Porcupine Press.
Ruiter, Robert A. C., Loes T. Kessels, Gjalt-­Jorn Y. 
Peters, and Gerjo Kok. 2014. ‘Sixty years of fear 
appeal research: current state of the evidence.’ 
International Journal of Psychology 49 (2): 63–70. 
Ruiter, Robert A. C., Bas Verplanken, David De 
Cremer, and Gerjo Kok. 2004. ‘Danger and fear 
control in response to fear appeals: the role of 
need for cognition.’ Basic and Applied Social 
Psychology 26 (1): 13–24. 
Schimming, Ulrike. 2002. Fotoromane: Analyse 
eines Massenmediums (Photo novels: an analysis 
of a mass medium). Frankfurt am Main: Lang.
Singer, Rena. 2005. ‘Is loveLife making them love 
life?’ Mail and Guardian, 25 August. Acesed 6 June 2015. <http://
mg.co.za/article/2005-08-24-is-lovelife-making-
them-love-life>. 
Slater, Michael D. and Donna Rouner. 2002. 
‘Entertainment-­education and elaboration 
likelihood: understanding the processing of 
narrative persuasion.’ Communication Theory 
12 (2): 173–191.
Snyder, Leslie B., Mark A. Hamilton, Elizabeth 
W. Mitchell, James Kiwanuka-­Tondo, Fran 
Fleming-­Milici, and Dwayne Proctor. 2004. 
‘A meta-­analysis of the effect of mediated health 
communication campaigns on behaviour 
change in the United States.’ Journal of Health 
Communication 9: 71–96.
Southwell, Brian G., and Marco C. Yzer. 2007. ‘The 
roles of interpersonal communication in mass 
media campaigns.’ Communication Yearbook 31: 
420–62.
Tanaka Keiko. 1992. ‘The pun in advertising.’ Lingua 
87: 91–102.
Tanaka Keiko. 1994. Advertising language: 
a pragmatic approach to advertisements in Britain 
and Japan. London: Routledge.
Thomas, Kylie. 2004. ‘A better life for some: the 
loveLife campaign and HIV/AIDS in South Africa.’ 
Agenda 62: 29–35.
Unger, Jennifer B., Leopoldo J. Cabassa, Gregory 
B. Molina, Sandra Contreras, and Melvin Baron. 
2013. ‘Evaluation of a fotonovela to increase 
depression knowledge and reduce stigma among 
Hispanic adults.’ Journal of Immigrant and 
Minority Health 15: 398–406. 
Unger, Jennifer B., Gregory B. Molina, and Melvin 
Baron. 2009. ‘Evaluation of Sweet temptations, 
a fotonovela for diabetes education.’ Hispanic 
Health Care International 7 (3): 145–152.
Van den Putte, Bas, Marco Yzer, Brian G. Southwell, 
Gert-­Jan de Bruijn, and Marc C. Willemsen. 2011. 
‘Interpersonal communication as an indirect 
pathway for the effect of antismoking media 
content on smoking cessation.’ Journal of Health 
Communication 16 (5): 470–485. 
Valle, Ramón, Ann-­Marie Yamada, and Ana 
Consuelo Matiella. 2006. ‘Fotonovelas: a health 
literacy tool for educating Latino older adults 
about dementia.’ Clinical Gerontologist 30 (1): 
71–88.
Wakefield, Melanie A., Barbara Loken, and Robert 
C. Hornik. 2010. ‘Use of mass media campaigns 
to change health behaviour.’ The Lancet 376: 
1261–1271. 

684 / Carel Jansen
684 / Carel Jansen
Witte, Kim. 1992. ‘Putting the fear back into 
fear appeals: reconciling the literature.’ 
Communication Monographs 59: 329–349. 
Witte, Kim. 1998. ‘Fear as motivator, fear as inhibitor: 
using the extended parallel process model to 
explain fear appeal successes and failures.’ In The 
handbook of communication and emotion: research, 
theory, applications, and contexts, edited by Peter 
A. Andersen and Laura K. Guerrero, 423–45. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Witte, Kim, and Mike Allen. 2000. ‘A meta-­analysis 
of fear appeals: lmplications for effective public 
health campaigns.’ Health Education and Behavior 
27 (5): 591–615. 
Witte, Kim, Gary Meyer, and Dennis Martell. 2001. 
Effective health risk messages: a step-­by-­step guide. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Witte, Kim, and Kelly Morrison. 2000. ‘Examining 
the influence of trait anxiety/repression 
sensitization on individuals’ reactions to fear 
appeals.’ Western Journal of Communication 64 (1): 
1–27.

685
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 685–700
Information design in medicine 
package leaflets
How detailed design and usability testing  
can help medicine users
David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
All prescription medicines in European countries should contain medicine 
­package leaflets: statutory documents that give instructions and advice to 
medicine users. Produced by pharmaceutical companies, the content of 
package leaflets is defined in law; the leaflets are policed by regulators. Several 
studies have suggested that patients are well motivated to find out about their 
medicines, but that many health materials are not accessible to them. 
Can information design make a difference? Our research examines the effects 
of best practice in layout, typography, and translation from technical jargon. 
Leaflets were produced containing identical text in different presentations. 
Using methods described by the European Commission (EC), the leaflets were 
tested by carefully matched sets of respondents. Usability, as measured by 
successful searches for information and correct answers to questions, was 
modestly enhanced by design improvements. Other measures showed larger 
differences between leaflets: time spent searching for answers, and user ratings 
of leaflets. 
Our findings – users’ readiness to read some leaflets rather than others, 
and quicker location of information – are encouraging signs that user-centred 
information design could help to improve uptake of instructions and advice from 
leaflets. 
The role of medicines information
Medicine package leaflets (PLs) are mandatory for packaged medicines 
in European Union member states. European law requires them to be 
‘written and designed to be clear and understandable, enabling the user to act 
appropriately’ (European Parliament 2004). Guidance has been issued by 
European regulatory authorities (European Commission 2009), including 
a model text (EMA 2013), but this does not give specific advice about clear 
design. There is other published advice, but not much that is specific to 
PLs (MHRA 2005; Sless and Shrensky 2007; Raynor and Dickinson 2009; 
Dickinson et al. 2010). 
Many people, professionals included, undervalue PLs as a  source 
of con­sumer information (Vander Stichele et al. 1996; Gustafsson et 
al. 2003). Anecdotally, we are often assured that ‘most people throw them 
47

686 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
away’. Some studies, however, report surprisingly high readership of PLs 
(Waarde 1993), although others suggest the leaflets are not trusted (Raynor 
et al. 2007a). Even when leaflets are not read, people report keeping them 
in case they are needed (Raynor et al. 2007b). 
As information designers specializing in the design of patient informa-
tion leaflets, we have tested leaflets with hundreds of potential users. In 
user interviews, typical negative comments are that the print in leaflets is 
too small; that they contain too much information, expressed in language 
that is too medical, so that it is difficult to determine the key messages; that 
they are designed to cover the company making them, rather than to help 
the medicine user; and that they are printed on inconveniently thin paper, 
multiply folded. 
It is easy to see why these characteristics arise. There is increasing pres-
sure to put a lot of highly regulated information on to a document com-
pact enough to fit inside medicines packaging. The basic, unannotated 
European Medicines Agency template for a standard PL current at time 
of writing is version 9, and contains 1409 words (EMA 2013). In 2004, ver-
sion 6 of the template was 826 words. Regulators clearly want to provide 
as much information as possible. The effect of such enlarged leaflets on 
potential users, however, may be to reduce their motivation to read them. 
As information designers, we aim to help readers by making PLs: 
•	 more usable, using precepts of user-centred information design, and 
usability testing;
•	 easily navigable, so that key messages stand out, by managing 
emphasis;
•	 attractive to read, notwithstanding their legally defined and regulated 
content.
Our basic research method
To find out more about what constitutes a well designed and useful PL, we 
carried out a sequence of studies, using similar methods. For each study, 
we produced two versions of the same fictional but plausible medicines 
leaflet (for a fictitious product, Atenofen). In two studies, the text was 
identical but the layouts were varied. In our third study, the basic layout 
was the same but details, such as method of emphasis and detailed phras-
ing, were varied. 
We then put the twin leaflets through user testing, using a method set 
out by the European Commission (European Commission 2009), based on 
guidance developed by the Communication Research Institute (Sless and 
Shrensky 2007). This method comprises test rounds of 10 ­question-based 
interviews with a range of potential respondents. 
For comparison’s sake, the test respondents for each leaflet were 
closely matched in age, sex, and social and occupational background. We 

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 687 
deliberately recruited more older respondents, who are more likely to use 
medicines. Questions were asked about key actions to be taken by users of 
the medicine. The respondents were told to find each answer in the leaf-
let, and then to explain it to the interviewer, in their own words as far as 
possible. By this method, leaflets are deemed to meet EC guidelines if, for 
each question, at least 90% of respondents are able to locate the relevant 
information and, of those respondents, at least 90% can answer questions 
about leaflet content accurately. 
This process of one-to-one interviewing is a cornerstone of user-cen-
tred information design. Careful observation of respondents, especially of 
those who have most trouble with the documents, can lead to insights that 
would be difficult to arrive at otherwise – because the author or designer, 
however talented, works in a different context to the intended user. 
We used audio recording across all our research to ensure an accurate 
record of what was said. Recording also made it simple to measure search 
times – the elapsed time from the interviewer finishing a question, to the 
respondent beginning a correct answer. Search times are beyond the cur-
rent requirements of the European Commission’s readability guideline; 
we used them as a measure of respondents’ ease in locating information. 
The impact of user-centred patient leaflet design
Preliminary study
In a preliminary study (Dickinson et al. 2010), we used real PL examples to 
compile two test PLs with identical texts. The text of one was presented as 
it had appeared in its original form and was typical of leaflets then in use. 
We designed the other according to our reading of best practice in infor-
mation design (Schriver 1997; Raynor et al. 2007a; Sless and Shrensky 
2007; Raynor and Dickinson 2009). We concentrated on five areas: 
•	 an easy-to-grasp, visible structure
–– strongly defined sections that started at the tops of columns;
–– hierarchy of headings, reflected in spacing and type size;
–– a second colour used to clarify the document structure. 
•	 highly legible main headings to help scanning
–– in upper and lower case, not capitals.
•	 control of line and column breaks, and line spacing
•	 management of emphasis within the text
–– use of bold text and prominent bullet characters. 
•	 visual identifiers for key messages
–– this included warning icons and ‘take action’ arrows.
Our ‘information designed’ leaflet performed better than the original: 
comprehension scores for the original failed to meet the European Com-

688 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
mission’s success criteria on two questions, meaning that the original 
failed overall Commission requirements. Search times for responses to 
questions showed two- or three-fold differences between the two versions 
on some questions. 
Building on preliminary findings
For a follow-up study (Dickinson and Gallina 2012), we again produced 
two contrasting design approaches for a PL text for Atenofen (see leaflets 
A and B in Figure 1). Leaflet A was at the extreme end of current practice in 
real-life leaflet design, but a realistic example demonstrating prioritization 
of the needs of producers, rather than users. The leaflet: 
•	 was laid out in portrait format (tall and narrow);
•	 was printed with text in a single, wide column with little emphasis;
•	 was dominated in the left margin of the front page by production and 
bar codes. 
Leaflet B shows an alternative approach. The design features were in­
tended to help readers to scan information, before starting to read it. This 
leaflet:
•	 prioritized strong sectioning and a prominent hierarchy of 
information;
•	 used a precise layout grid in a landscape (horizontal) format;
•	 used a controlled amount of bold text for emphasis; 
•	 included several typographic cueing devices (warning icon, action 
arrows, turn arrow). 
These two leaflets were tested using the process described in the basic 
research method (above). We recorded:
•	 ability to find information, and any difficulty experienced by 
respondents in their search; 
•	 accuracy of answers to questions about text content;
•	 search time in seconds before a correct answer was given;
•	 participants’ ratings for user-friendliness.
While participant ratings are not a performance measure, we routinely 
collect them and they sometimes cast an interesting light on performance 
scores.
Twenty participants were recruited. As described above, participants 
were deliberately recruited in ‘pairs’ with similar characteristics, matching 
them for age, sex, educational attainment, and past or current occupation. 
We included older respondents and those who had left formal education 
early, as they were most likely to have problems with PLs (Wright 1999; 
Hartley 2004; MHRA 2005).

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 689 
Figure 1
Atenofen 2012 leaflet A, left, and 
B, below. Leaflet A is fictitious but 
realistic for the genre: produced 
in portrait format, with production 
needs such as barcodes close to 
the text intended for patients. 
Leaflet B uses identical text but 
prioritizes ease of reading and 
navigation.
A
B
ATENOFEN tablets
ATENOFEN 50 film-coated tablets
INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR MEDICINE
50AT09GKMX
ATENOFEN 50
Atenolol 50 mg 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using ATENOFEN
In this leaflet
About ATENOFEN
Before you use ATENOFEN
Taking ATENOFEN
Possible side effects
Storing ATENOFEN
More information
Keep this leaflet. You may need to come back to it or read it again. 
If you have any questions or need more advice, ask a doctor, nurse or pharmacist (chemist).
This medicine has been prescribed for you personally. Don’t pass it on to other people – it could harm them.
If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
ABOUT ATENOFEN
ATENOFEN one of a family of medicines called beta-blockers.
What ATENOFEN is for 
ATENOFEN is used to treat high blood pressure or angina.  
What ATENOFEN does 
High blood pressure: ATENOFEN works by slowing down the heart. This lowers blood pressure.
Angina: ATENOFEN slows down the heart. The heart then needs less blood and oxygen and this makes an angina attack less likely.
What high blood pressure is High blood pressure usually causes no symptoms. However, high blood pressure may be damaging
to the arteries and put a strain on your heart. If you lower a high blood pressure, you reduce your risk of developing heart disease, a
stroke, or other serious conditions.
What angina is Angina is a pain around the heart. It is caused by narrowing in the arteries of the heart. It is common in people
over the age of 50. Sometimes it occurs in younger people. It is more common in men than women. 
BEFORE YOU USE ATENOFEN
Don’t use ATENOFEN 
- If you have low blood pressure
- If you are allergic to any of the ingredients (see More information, over the page)
- If you have ever had an allergic reaction to atenolol. Signs of allergy include – breathlessness, wheezing, swollen lips, feeling
faint
- If you have poor circulation
- If you have asthma or breathing difficulties.
If any of these apply to you: Talk to your doctor and do not take ATENOFEN.
Take special care
- If you have low blood pressure and your doctor prescribes ATENOFEN for your angina
- If you have kidney or liver problems (or if you used to)
- If you have Prinzmetal’s angina
- If you have psoriasis 
- If you have Raynaud’s disease
- If you have myasthenia gravis
- If you are taking other medicines, see also, Other medicines and ATENOFEN
If you find these apply to you: Talk to your doctor before you take ATENOFEN.
Other medicines and ATENOFEN
Tell your doctor if you are taking:
- Medicines for general aches and pains (anti-inflammatories), such as aspirin, ibuprofen
- Antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin
- Medicines for arthritis, (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs) such as indometacin
- Any other medicine for high blood pressure or angina such as verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine 
- Medicines for diabetes, such as insulin 
- Oral contraceptives 
- HRT (hormone replacement therapy). 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
If you are pregnant, could be pregnant, or trying to get pregnant, you must: Talk to your doctor before you take ATENOFEN.
If you’re breast-feeding, ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking ATENOFEN. Some of the active ingredients
might be passed on in breast milk.
Driving and using machines
ATENOFEN can make some people drowsy. This applies particularly at the start of treatment. Do not drive or use machinery if
you feel drowsy: it could be dangerous. 
TAKING ATENOFEN Dosage
High blood pressure: Adults – 1 tablet, once a day. Your doctor may increase this to 1 tablet every 12 hours. No more than 2 in 24
hours.
Angina: Adults – 1 tablet every 12 hours. No more than 2 in 24 hours.
Not for children or adolescents under 18.
Swallow the tablets whole, with a glass of water and with food, preferably after a meal. 
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit while taking ATENOFEN. Grapefruit juice is known to increase the blood levels of
the active ingredient, atenolol. This effect can last for at least 3 days.
Don’t take too much
If you take too many tablets: Contact a doctor straight away.
If you forget a dose
If you miss a dose, take the next tablet immediately. Then carry on taking your tablets as prescribed, but wait at least 12 hours
before the next dose.
Atenofen
tablets
About Atenofen 
Atenofen one of a family of medicines
called beta-blockers.
What Atenofen is for 
Atenofen is used to treat high blood
pressure or angina.
What Atenofen does 
High blood pressure: Atenofen works
by slowing down the heart. This lowers
blood pressure.
Angina: Atenofen slows down the heart.
The heart then needs less blood and
oxygen and this makes an angina attack
less likely.
What high blood pressure is
High blood pressure usually causes no
symptoms. However, high blood
pressure may be damaging to the
arteries and put a strain on your heart. 
If you lower a high blood pressure, you
reduce your risk of developing heart
disease, a stroke, or other serious
conditions.
What angina is
Angina is a pain around the heart. It is
caused by narrowing in the arteries of
the heart.
It is common in people over the age of
50. Sometimes it occurs in younger
people. It is more common in men than
women. 
Before you use Atenofen
Taking Atenofen
Don’t use Atenofen 
●If you have low blood pressure
●If you are allergic to any of the
ingredients (see More information, over
the page)
●If you have ever had an allergic
reaction to atenolol. Signs of allergy
include – breathlessness, wheezing,
swollen lips, feeling faint
●If you have poor circulation
●If you have asthma or breathing
difficulties.
If any of these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor and do not
take Atenofen.
Take special care
●If you have low blood pressure and your
doctor prescribes Atenofen for your
angina
●If you have kidney or liver problems 
(or if you used to)
●If you have Prinzmetal’s angina
●If you have psoriasis 
●If you have Raynaud’s disease
●If you have myasthenia gravis
●If you are taking other medicines, see
also, Other medicines and Atenofen c
If you find these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
Atenofen 50
Atenolol 50mg 
Dosage
●High blood pressure: 
Adults – 1 tablet, once a day. 
Your doctor may increase this to 
1 tablet every 12 hours. 
No more than 2 in 24 hours.
●Angina: 
Adults – 1 tablet every 12 hours. 
No more than 2 in 24 hours.
●Not for children or adolescents 
under 18.
Swallow the tablets whole, with a glass 
of water and with food, preferably after 
a meal.
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat
grapefruit while taking Atenofen.
Grapefruit juice is known to increase the
blood levels of the active ingredient,
atenolol. This effect can last for at least 
3 days.
Don’t take too much
If you take too many tablets: 
➥Contact a doctor straight away.
If you forget a dose
If you miss a dose, take the next tablet
immediately. Then carry on taking your
tablets as prescribed, but wait at least 12
hours before the next dose.
If you stop using Atenofen
Do not stop using Atenofen suddenly,
it might, temporarily, worsen your
disease. The dose should be reduced
gradually, then after two weeks you can
stop taking Atenofen.
➥
over
page
Updated
June 2009
1
Read all of this leaflet
carefully before you
start using Atenofen
In this leaflet 
1 About Atenofen
2 Before you use Atenofen
3 Taking Atenofen
4 Possibe side effects
5 Storing Atenofen
6 More information
Keep this leaflet. You may need
to come back to it or read it
again. 
If you have any questions or
need more advice, ask a doctor,
nurse or pharmacist (chemist).
This medicine has been
prescribed for you personally.
Don’t pass it on to other people
– it could harm them.
If any of the side effects gets
serious, or if you notice any side
effects not listed in this leaflet,
please tell your doctor or
pharmacist.
2
3
Other medicines and
Atenofen
Tell your doctor if you are taking:
●Medicines for general aches and pains
(anti-inflammatories), such as aspirin,
ibuprofen
●Antibiotics  such as ciprofloxacin
●Medicines for arthritis, (non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs)
such as indometacin
●Any other medicine for high blood
pressure or angina such as verapamil,
diltiazem, nifedipine 
●Medicines for diabetes, such as insulin 
●Oral contraceptives 
●HRT (hormone replacement therapy). 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
If you are pregnant, could be pregnant,
or trying to get pregnant, you must: 
➥ Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
If you’re breast-feeding, ask your
doctor or pharmacist for advice before
taking Atenofen. Some of the active
ingredients might be passed on in 
breast milk.
Driving and using machines
Atenofen can make some people
drowsy. This applies particularly at the
start of treatment. 
Do not drive or use machinery if you
feel drowsy: it could be dangerous. 

!

690 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
Responses to selected questions analysed 
Among respondents who saw leaflet A, two questions failed to meet Euro­
pean benchmark levels of 90% for successful location of information and 
correct answers. Respondents who saw leaflet B had higher scores, with 
no questions failing. The two questions that proved difficult in leaflet A are 
analysed below.
•	 Q: what to do if you have existing kidney problems.
•	 Leaflet A – 10 respondents found the information but only 6 answered 
correctly.
•	 Leaflet B – 10 found the information and answered correctly.
Using leaflet A, all respondents found the subsection Take special care, 
which listed kidney problems among other medical conditions. Successful 
location of the subsection relies on first level design: navigation through 
headings. Respondents then needed to locate kidney problems in a list and 
find the appropriate action to take. This entails a further level of design 
detail – typographic emphasis of the action point – missing from leaflet A, 
but used in leaflet B. 
•	 Q: what to do in case of a severe allergic reaction to the medicine. 
•	 Leaflet A – 7 respondents found the information and answered 
correctly.
•	 Leaflet B – 10 found the information and answered correctly.
Using leaflet A, three respondents found the relevant information eas-
ily; seven had difficulty (based on search times). Only three respondents 
went directly to the side effects section (on the back page of both leaflets). 
In leaflet B, eight respondents went directly to the side effects section to 
look for the answer. Only two respondents experienced significant diffi-
culty finding the information. 
In leaflet A the serious side effects were presented as continuous text. 
The action point that followed was spaced poorly, positioned closer to the 
heading below than to the side effects to which it related. In leaflet B the 
side effects were expanded as a bulleted list, with one item per line. The 
serious side effects were flagged with a large warning symbol. The action 
point was given sufficient emphasis (by means of line spacing, indent, 
arrow, and bold) to help the reader spot it quickly.
Leaflet A failed to reach the scores required for the EC benchmarks. 
However, the score data, the key criteria for EC benchmarking, showed 
only small differences between leaflets A and B. For example, aggregat-
ing all the scores for a broad measure of overall performance, location 
scores were 113/120 for leaflet A (94% success) against 119/120 for leaflet B  
(99%).

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 691 
Timing data suggest poor readers found leaflet A difficult
When compared with score data, search times gave a more nuanced view 
of leaflet effectiveness for study respondents of differing profiles. 
The most able users of documents were respondent pairs whose social 
backgrounds, education, and occupations indicated that they worked 
in document-heavy environments. There were, correspondingly, pairs 
of respondents whose demographic data suggested they were not fluent 
users of documents. Of these respondents, three pairs (six respondents in 
all) said they were dyslexic.
The disparity between the search times of matched respondents using 
each of the leaflets was least between the most able readers: e.g. students 
awaiting university, a retired headmaster, and a retired senior civil servant. 
The disparity was greatest between the less able readers, particularly for 
those who had described themselves as dyslexic. These results suggest that 
good design brings functional benefit to those who have the most diffi-
culty in reading.
Older readers found leaflet A more difficult than B
A similar picture emerged when search time was analysed by age. Of the 
four respondent pairs with the least disparity in search times across leaf-
lets, three pairs were below the average age of 50. In the four pairs with 
the greatest disparity in search times, three were above 50. The age dif-
ference observed is important since older people use the most medicines, 
are liable to have weak eyesight, and some may have difficulties processing 
complex information (Wright 1999; Hartley 2004).
User ratings and the ‘daunt factor’ 
Following the test questions, respondents were asked to rate both leaf-
lets out of five for ‘user-friendliness’. Although user-friendliness is not 
a  well-defined term, our participants readily accepted it as a  rateable 
quality that differed between the leaflets in the study. They first rated the 
leaflet they had used for the test. They rated the second leaflet on sight 
only, without using it to answer questions. Finally, they were asked again 
for a rating of their first leaflet, having seen the other example. 
Respondents who had used leaflet A gave it a mean rating of 3.9 (range 
of 1 to 5). However, when they were then shown leaflet B, they rated B 
higher (mean 4.9, range 4 to 5), and when offered the chance to revise the 
score, substantially downgraded the rating for A (mean 2.5, range 1 to 4). 
Respondents who used leaflet B gave it a mean rating of 4.25 (range 3 
to 5). When they were shown leaflet A, they gave that a mean rating of 2.25 
(range of 1 to 5) and the mean rating for B was upgraded slightly to 4.45 
(range 3 to 5). 
It is interesting that those who had used leaflet A gave leaflet B a higher 
rating than those who had actually used it. Conversely, those using B gave 

692 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
leaflet A a lower score. It appears that users of leaflet A presumed that leaf-
let B would be easier to use than it actually was. Likewise users of leaflet 
B presumed that leaflet A would be more difficult to use than it was. The 
real experience of actual users proved to be less pronounced in both cases. 
These results suggest readers could be put off a leaflet at first viewing – 
because it looks worse than it is. We call this the ‘daunt factor’. Both sets of 
users recognized a difference in ease of use at first glance. But the apparent 
difficulty of the lower-rated document was worse than the actual difficulty.
Our results suggest that subjective ratings should be treated with cau-
tion as a quality measure, backing up others’ findings that observation of 
actual performance is the most reliable measure of document usability 
(Schriver 1997; Sless and Shrensky 2007). 
EC benchmarks as an indicator of leaflet effectiveness
The different measures in the study showed different degrees of sensitivity 
to leaflet design: information location and answer accuracy yielded a rela-
tively small difference in respondent scores, albeit one that was adequate 
to fail leaflet A on EC benchmarks. Timing data revealed the particular 
difficulties of specific user groups, whereas subjective ratings yielded data 
that were inconsistent – varying according to participants’ experience of 
reading specific versions during the study. The timing data suggest that 
using EC benchmarking alone might lead to failure to detect difficulties for 
audiences who most need the support of good design.
Studying micro-differences in design 
We carried out an additional study to focus on the impact of design detail-
ing on PL comprehension. We drew on the basics of good document 
design, as defined in current literature (Schriver 1997; Raynor et al. 2007a; 
Sless and Shrensky 2007; Raynor and Dickinson 2009) and in our own 
work (Dickinson, Raynor and Duman 2001; Dickinson et al. 2010). 
Our aim was to examine whether, at sentence and paragraph level, we 
could answer such questions as, ‘how much bold is too much?’ and ‘what is 
the ideal heading spacing?’. The particular design devices examined were:
•	 mode of emphasis, comparing italics, capitals, bold and underlining;
•	 use of bullet points and other cues to specific points;
•	 heading spacing: the space above and below subheads in the text;
•	 partial bold in text compared to blocks or lines of text all in bold; 
•	 what constitutes the right amount of bold text;
•	 detailed changes to language and word order to increase clarity.
These are common devices cited often by medicines regulators seeking 
to define good practice in PLs (MHRA 2005; European Commission 2009; 

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 693 
EMA 2013). We believed that some types of detailing would perform better 
than others.
Research exhibits: matched package leaflets and show cards 
Again, we produced two leaflets for our fictitious medication, Atenofen. 
This time each leaflet had the same approach to design (see Figure 2, 
overleaf), typical of PLs designed according to European regulatory 
guide­lines. They were written using disguised text based on current, real-
life leaflets. Each leaflet included several instances of design detailing we 
considered to be best practice, with a counterpart approach we believed 
would be less successful on the alternative leaflet. We made small changes 
to the text from the real-life examples where we believed the original was 
obscure, since it would be perverse to test design approaches using poorly 
worded content.
The leaflets were not as clinically plausible as those used in the previ-
ous studies, although their credibility was not questioned by respondents. 
Each leaflet was tested in 10 interviews with respondents of matched age 
and background. Their answers and search times were recorded. The leaf-
lets were designed to have roughly equal amounts of ‘good’ and ‘bad’, so 
that neither leaflet could be identified as the ‘better’ one. 
We also produced two show cards with sets of identical leaflet extracts:
•	 The first card comprised six extracts, showing five different modes 
of emphasis (capitals, underlining, partial use of bold to highlight 
key words of phrases, full use of bold for lines or sentences, italic) 
alongside an unemphasized original.
•	 The second card included four versions of a list, in which the cues 
were varied (small bullet points, dash points, x-height bullet points 
with a small indent between bullet and text, x-height bullet points 
with a larger indent). 
After being questioned on the leaflets, respondents were shown these 
cards separately and told that the words in each extract were identical. 
They were then asked to use whichever version they preferred to answer 
a single question, and thereafter to tell us which they thought were the best 
and worst versions for clarity. 
Readers’ design preferences
Mode of emphasis
Of the 20 respondents, 15 chose bold text as their preferred mode of 
emphasis. Typical comments were that it made the messages stand out. 
The respondents who chose bold as their favourite were divided in their 
choice of the two bold styles (partial bold e.g. ‘if you have poor circula-
tion’ and full bold e.g. ‘if you have poor circulation’). Seven people stated 
a preference for each style; one liked both equally. 

694 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
2 What you need to know 
before you take Atenofen
3 How to take 
Atenofen
Do not take Atenofen
Don’t take this medicine and talk to your
doctor:
●if you are allergic to any of the
ingredients (see Contents of the pack
and other information, over the page)
●if you have ever been diagnosed
with heart failure. Signs of heart failure
include shortness of breath, cough, and
swelling of the neck or legs
●if you have poor circulation
●if you have asthma or breathing
difficulties
●if you have severe kidney problems.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if you
have severe kidney problems or if you
are on kidney dialysis.
If any of these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor and do not
take Atenofen.
Warnings and precautions
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before
taking this medicine:
●If you have kidney or liver problems 
(or if you used to)
●If you have an inflammatory skin
condition called psoriasis 
●If you have recently had a virus (including
cold or flu)
●If you have anaemia (too little oxygen in
the blood).
If any of these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
Blood tests
Your doctor will test your blood before,
during and after your treatment with
Atenofen. This is done for two reasons:
●So your doctor can decide if you are 
free of viral infections and able to take
Atenofen
●To confirm that the treatment worked.
Always take this medicine exactly as your
doctor has told you. Check with your
doctor if you are not sure.
The recommended dose
High blood pressure: 
●For adults aged 18 and over: the
starting dose is 1 tablet, once a day 
After two days increase this to 
1 tablet, twice a day. 
●Don’t take more than 2 tablets in 
24 hours.
Angina: 
●Adults aged 18 and over: the usual
dose is 1 tablet, twice a day. 
●Don’t take more than 2 tablets in 
24 hours.
●If your angina symptoms do not
improve or are not well controlled,
after 7 days, talk to your doctor or
pharmacist.
Swallow the tablets whole, with water,
after a meal.
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat
grapefruit while taking Atenofen.
Grapefruit juice is known to increase the
blood levels of the active ingredient,
afenolol. This effect can last for at least 
3 days after eating or drinking grapefruit.
If you take more Atenofen than
you should
If you take too many tablets, you must 
contact a doctor straight away.
If you forget to take Atenofen
If you miss a dose, take the next tablet
immediately. Then carry on taking your
tablets as prescribed, but wait at least 
12 hours before the next dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up
for a missed dose.
➥
turn over 
Other medicines and Atenofen
Tell your doctor if you are taking,
have recently taken or might take: 
●Everyday painkillers called anti-
inflammatories, such as aspirin or
ibuprofen
●Antibiotics, especially ciprofloxacin or
metronidazole
●Medicines for arthritis known as non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or
NSAIDs, including indomethacin,
naproxen or parecoxib
●Any other medicines for high blood
pressure or angina including
verapamil, diltiazem or nifedipine 
●Medicines for diabetes including
insulin 
●Contraceptive pills, or other hormonal
contraception (eg coil or implants) 
●Medicines to prevent feeling sick
(nausea) 
●Digoxin, used to treat heart failure
●Cisapride, used to treat bowel spasms
●Phenytoin, used to treat epilepsy.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
If you are pregnant, think you may be
pregnant, or are planning to have a baby,
you must: 
➥Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
If you’re breast-feeding, ask your
doctor or pharmacist for advice before
taking Atenofen. Some of the active
ingredients of this medicine might be
passed on in your breast milk. 
Children and adolescents
Do not give this medicine to children and
adolscents under 18 years of age. The
use of Atenofen in children and
adolescents  has not yet been studied.
Driving and using machines
Atenofen can make some people drowsy.
Do not drive or use machinery if you feel
drowsy: it could be dangerous. 
2 What you need to know 
before you take Atenofen
3 How to take 
Atenofen
Do not take Atenofen
Don’t take this medicine and talk to your
doctor:
●If you are allergic to any of the
ingredients (see Contents of the pack
and other information, over the page)
●If you have ever been diagnosed with
heart failure. Signs of heart failure
include shortness of breath, cough and
swelling of the neck or legs
●If you have poor circulation
●If you have asthma or breathing
difficulties
●If you have kidney problems. Talk to
your doctor or pharmacist if you have
severe kidney problems or if you are on
kidney dialysis.
If any of these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor and do not
take Atenofen.
Warnings and precautions
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before
taking this medicine:
●If you have kidney or liver problems 
(or if you used to)
●If you have an inflammatory skin
condition called psoriasis
●If you have recently had a virus (including
cold or flu)
●If you have anaemia (too little oxygen in
the blood).
If any of these apply to you: 
➥Talk to your doctor before you
take Atenofen.
Blood tests
Your doctor will test your blood before,
during and after your treatment with
Atenofen. This is so your doctor can:
●decide if you are free of viral infections
and able to take Atenofen 
●confirm that the treatment worked.
Always take this medicine exactly as your
doctor has told you. Check with your
doctor if you are not sure.
The recommended dose
High blood pressure: 
●For adults aged 18 and over: the
starting dose is 1 tablet, once a day 
After two days, increase this to 
1 tablet, twice a day. 
●Don’t take more than 2 tablets in 
24 hours.
Angina: 
●Adults aged 18 and over: the usual
dose is 1 tablet, twice a day. 
●Don’t take more than 2 tablets in 
24 hours.
●If your angina symptoms do not
improve after 7 days, or are not well
controlled, talk to your doctor or
pharmacist.
Swallow the tablets whole, with water,
after a meal.
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat
grapefruit while taking Atenofen.
Grapefruit juice is known to increase the
blood levels of the active ingredient,
afenolol. This effect can last for at least 
3 days after eating or drinking grapefruit.
If you take more Atenofen than
you should
If you take too many tablets, you must 
contact a doctor straight away.
If you forget to take Atenofen
If you miss a dose, take the next tablet
immediately. Then carry on taking your
tablets as prescribed, but wait at least 
12 hours before the next dose. 
Do not take a double dose to make up
for a missed dose.
➥
turn over 
Other medicines and Atenofen
Tell your doctor if you are taking,
have recently taken or might take: 
●Everyday painkillers called anti-
inflammatories, such as aspirin or
ibuprofen
●Antibiotics, especially ciprofloxacin or
metronidazole
●Medicines for arthritis known as non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or
NSAIDs, including indomethacin,
naproxen or parecoxib
●Any other medicines for high blood
pressure or angina including
verapamil, diltiazem or nifedipine 
●Medicines for diabetes including
insulin 
●Contraceptive pills, or other hormonal
contraception (eg coil or implants) 
●Medicines to prevent feeling sick
(nausea) 
●Digoxin, used to treat heart failure
●Cisapride, used to treat bowel spasms
●Phenytoin, used to treat epilepsy.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
If you are pregnant, think you may be
pregnant, or a planning to have a baby,
you must talk to your doctor before
you take Atenofen.
If you’re breast-feeding, ask your
doctor or pharmacist for advice before
taking Atenofen. Some of the active
ingredients of this medicine might be
passed on in your breast milk. 
Children and adolescents
Do not give this medicine to children and
adolescents under 18 years of age. The
use of Atenofen in children and
adolescents has not yet been studied.
Driving and using machines
Atenofen can make some people drowsy.
Do not drive or use machinery if you feel
drowsy: it could be dangerous. 
Figure 2
Extracts from Atenofen 2014 leaflet 
A, above, and B, below. Designed 
to look similar, based on the same 
text, to test small differences in 
presentation. 
Leaflet B shows points of 
comparison (highlighted in this 
reproduction): 
a. partial bold instead of full lines of 
bold, including ‘poor circulation’ 
bullet point;
b. restrained use of bold instead of 
plentiful use of bold;
c. plain text within a bullet point 
(‘virus’ bullet, same on both 
versions);
d. minimal heading space instead 
of proportionate spacing.
A
B
c
a
d
b

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 695 
This [partial bold] is my best. This [full bold] is a bit too much – it has got the 
whole sentence in bold. This [partial] [has] got everything that needs to be in 
bold, in bold.
I like the bold print better on here – if you have low blood pressure. I’d 
sooner have the whole sentence done in the bold print than just list a couple 
of words.
Performance in the leaflet testing, analysed below, suggests that partial 
bold was the better option in use. 
Two respondents preferred capital letters for emphasis, and two 
favoured underlining. However seven people chose underlining as the 
worst option for clarity (one referred to it as ‘the smaller text’); six chose 
the version with no emphasis; and five chose capitals as the worst option. 
Cues to list items
When first shown the lists, most respondents could not see the differences 
between versions. The differences in cue (dashes, small bullets, large bul-
lets) and spacing were pointed out to those who asked. There was a strong 
preference for larger bullet points (19 of 20 respondents), with a prefer-
ence for a smaller indent (12 of the 19 respondents). Respondents said that, 
where the indent was larger, there was too much room to get lost between 
the bullet and the following text. 
Respondents disliked the use of dash cues, with 16 out of 20 naming 
this style as the worst option. Dashes are often used in PLs as they have 
appeared in the European Medicines Agency’s official Word-based tem-
plate for PLs (EMA 2013). 
Impact of design detail on performance
Heading spacing
We had predicted that carefully spaced headings would help readers 
searching for information. Leaflet A had more open heading spacing than 
leaflet B above the section headed Children and adolescents. We asked 
respondents if a 14-year-old could take Atenofen, to which the answer 
was ‘no’. Despite the heading spacing, four respondents using leaflet 
A answered by reference to the separate dosage section (which specified 
a dose for ‘adults 18 and over’, without specifically excluding children). 
This section was also referred to by one user of version B. The answers 
they gave were correct, but not comprehensive.
This unexpected result might have been foreseen. The dosage section 
in leaflet A (see Figure 2), which contains age-related information, was 
printed almost entirely in bold. Our observation was that respondents’ 
attention was caught by this block of bold, so that they did not see the 
dedicated subsection Children and adolescents. Respondents using leaflet 
A spent slightly longer searching for the information (mean 21 seconds; 
range 5 to 51) than those using leaflet B (mean 17 seconds, range 2 to 38). 

696 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
This may have been due to the distraction effect of the large amount of 
bold print on leaflet A, which effectively neutralized subtle modulation 
of heading spacing. Hence the effects of heading spacing have not been 
effectively examined by our study. The distracting effect of the bold sug-
gests that using blocks of bold text to emphasize some content can have 
unintended consequences for other content. 
Full versus partial bold
We asked respondents whether Atenofen could be taken by someone who 
has poor circulation. The answer is that they should not take it. Users of 
leaflet A, with a full line of bold, took longer to find this information (mean 
21 seconds, range 3 to 93) than those with leaflet B, in which only the words 
‘poor circulation’ were highlighted (mean 13 seconds, range 1 to 28).
As discussed above, when asked for their preference for emphasis, 
respondents who chose bold were split between full lines of bold (Figure 2, 
version A) and key terms in bold (partial bold, version B). But our tim-
ing data, together with the distraction impact of a block of bold that we 
observed, suggest that the use of partial bold to highlight the specific 
words at issue is more effective than full bold. If used sensitively, it may 
prove less likely to distract those searching for other information. 
What is the right amount of bold text? 
We asked respondents to find the usual dose for high blood pressure. This 
required a two-stage answer: the starting dose is one tablet, once a day; 
after two days, this increases to one tablet twice a day. There was one 
response error to this question on each leaflet version. However, users of 
leaflet A took longer to find the information (mean 12 seconds, range 3 to 
51) than users of leaflet B (mean 6 seconds, range 2 to 13). It appears that 
when a block of bold was used (on version A) the effect of emphasis was 
lost. 
Bold emphasis compared to no emphasis
We asked if someone who had recently had a virus should take Atenofen. 
The answer is that a doctor’s advice is needed beforehand. ‘If you have 
recently had a virus’ was printed without bold emphasis, but otherwise 
had similar prominence to ‘if you have poor circulation’ (discussed above). 
The ‘recent virus’ information to which this question related was iden-
tical on leaflets A and B, and we intended to compare it to the performance 
of the earlier ‘poor circulation’ question. All respondents found the virus 
information to answer, and all gave a correct answer. Search times were 
similar for the two leaflets: mean search time for leaflet A was 15 seconds 
(range 3 to 46); the mean for leaflet B was 13 seconds (range 2 to 47). 
Comparing leaflet A search times with those for full lines of bold sug-
gests that the virus bullet, with no emphasis, performed better than full 
bold. Comparing leaflet B search times suggests that partial bold per-
formed comparably to no emphasis, although it is not possible to draw 

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 697 
a strong conclusion on the basis of a limited study such as this. Additionally, 
the virus question here was asked after the question regarding circulation: 
respondents had become more used to the task of searching the leaflet, 
which may have reduced search times. However, our findings suggest that, 
in a reasonably well crafted layout, excessive use of bold may perform 
worse than no emphasis at all.
Detailed text and layout changes to increase clarity
We asked respondents what they should do if, after taking Atenofen for 
angina for a few days, the medicine was not working. The correct answer 
was to consult a doctor or pharmacist (see Figure 3). 
This question caused users of leaflet B some difficulty. The amount of 
bold around the relevant dosage section was heavy in leaflet A, lighter for 
leaflet B. While, according to our discussion above, this should have made 
leaflet B easier to read, in fact respondents using leaflet B had longer search 
times (mean 65 seconds, range 3 to 143) than those using leaflet A (mean 23 
seconds, range 8 to 67). One respondent failed to find any sort of answer:
Angina . . . it’s got here, treating angina, pain around the heart etcetera, but 
it doesn’t say what you should do if it’s not working . . . If you are allergic . . . 
perhaps it’s just me, but I don’t see anything about what you should do. 
This result was unexpected as the wording to answer the question had 
been revised to be shorter, the sentence simpler, and with more restrained 
use of bold emphasis. We looked again at the text. Version A is on the left, 
version B on the right. 
Version A has the excess of bold that, under other questions, we have 
associated with distraction, confusion and long search times. The modi-
fied sentence structure in leaflet B is simpler than that in leaflet A. With 
hindsight, however, it was difficult for some respondents to decode ‘if 
your angina symptoms do not improve’, and equate it to the medicine not 
working (the wording of the question). The leaflet might have worked bet-
ter with simpler language – such as ‘if your angina is not better after 7 days’. 
There are further problems, relating to the interplay between language, 
position and emphasis. In both leaflet versions, the phrase ‘do not improve’ 
Figure 3
Atenofen leaflet A, 
left, and B, right. 
The effects of 
bold text, position 
and wording are 
combined. Version 
B was expected 
to perform better 
than version A, 
but did not.
B
A
Angina: 
●Adults aged 18 and over: the usual
dose is 1 tablet, twice a day. 
●Don’t take more than 2 tablets in 
24 hours.
●If your angina symptoms do not
improve or are not well controlled,
after 7 days, talk to your doctor or
pharmacist.
Angina: 
●Adults aged 18 and over: the usual
dose is 1 tablet, twice a day. 
●Don’t take more than 2 tablets in 
24 hours.
●If your angina symptoms do not
improve after 7 days, or are not well
controlled, talk to your doctor or
pharmacist.

698 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
is broken across a line, leaving the ‘not’ on the right-hand edge. Watching 
people study leaflets has taught us that many people use their fingers to 
guide them through documents. Typically, they will run a finger down the 
left-hand margin, and their eye may travel slightly rightwards from there. 
The left-hand side is where things begin: readers often do not read the 
whole text. The word ‘not’ at the extreme right is liable to be missed in 
such scanning. Furthermore, one respondent in the current study used his 
thumb towards the right of the column, occasionally obscuring the text 
at the end of lines. The following line begins ‘improve’ – which does not 
have a negative connotation. The crucial difference between the texts may 
be that leaflet A includes another line with ‘not well controlled’, in bold, in 
the middle of a line, which may have assisted readers. 
Our intervention in the text of leaflet B did not take sufficient account 
of such interplay and may explain why users of leaflet B had particular dif-
ficulties. Important warnings should be positioned on the left, to get the 
message in first. Successful design in this context needed a close focus on 
fine details of line breaks and emphasis, as well as simplifying language. 
Conclusions: how to help medicine users 
Medicines PLs often present readers with dense and technical information 
which they find off-putting to read and difficult to understand. Existing 
research and the studies we have conducted convince us that the precepts 
of information design have an important role to play in solutions.
Design that helps the greatest number 
We aspire to design that helps the least skilled most of all. User-centred 
design of medicines instruction leaflets is a must-do, not a nice-to-have. 
While regulatory authorities have recognized this in law, they have, under-
standably, struggled to issue detailed guidance (MHRA 2005; European 
Commission 2009). Involving patients in the design of patient informa-
tion is an accepted part of medicines regulation. But it is likely to be inef-
fective if it is done only to satisfy regulations. Our research suggests that 
leaflets with strongly structured layouts are easier for readers to navigate, 
which is particularly advantageous for less able readers, confirming pre-
vious research (Schriver 1997; Sless and Shrensky 2007). Our preference 
data suggest that users respond to user-centred design. While they may 
overestimate how much they will be helped by good design, if it removes 
the daunt factor it may help by encouraging people to start reading PLs. 
User-centred design is not about dumbing down 
Skilled readers may undervalue their own abilities to understand PLs. 
Medical writers (typically, skilled readers) may build complexity into leaf-
lets without realizing it (Rowlands et al. 2015). In all the studies reported 

Information design in medicine package leaflets / 699 
Information design in medicine package leaflets / 699 
here, very few people were displeased by design features that clarified key 
messages.
Managing emphasis is crucial 
The majority of respondents in the study chose bold text for emphasis, 
rather than capitals or underlining and preferred carefully spaced and 
prominent bullets. However, use of bold needs to be kept under strict 
review (this follows good practice in professional typographic design), as 
in specific search tasks, large blocks of bold text were counter-productive. 
Good information design cannot be reduced to a checklist 
While there are reference sources giving basic design principles, some 
cited in this chapter, the designed environment introduces variables that 
designers cannot predict (for example, the inadvertent obscuring of a neg-
ative statement, due to positioning at a line break), but to which they must 
react. Information designers need to be dynamic problem-solvers who can 
make sense of competing demands, while prioritizing end-users’ needs. 
Using test interviews to study design failures is crucial 
Information designers’ process must be underpinned by relentless focus 
on users interacting with documents, and by testing and engagement with 
them to ascertain why failures or performance differences arise. Users’ 
difficulties with designed documents will quickly indicate where improve-
ment is needed. There is always something to learn, humbling as it may be. 
Competing interests
The authors carry out paid consultancy work for companies in the pharmaceutical 
industry. The work described in this chapter was not funded by a pharmaceutical 
company, nor from any external sources. 
Acknowledgements
Our thanks are due to Miriam Harris for proofreading and advice.
References
Dickinson, David, Suzy Gallina, Emily Newsom-
Davis, and Jane Teather. 2010. ‘Medicine package 
leaflets: does good design matter?’ Information 
Design Journal 18 (3): 225–40.
Dickinson, David, and Suzy Gallina. 2012. ‘Addressing 
the “daunt factor”: complex roles for user-
oriented design in drug leaflets.’ Presented at 
Information Design Conference, London. <https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/311137283_
Addressing_the_daunt_factor_complex_roles_
for_user-oriented_design_in_medicine_leaflets>.
Dickinson, David, D. K. Theo Raynor, and Mark 
Duman. 2001. ‘Patient information leaflets for 
medicines: using consumer testing to determine 
the most effective design.’ Patient Education & 
Counseling 43: 14–59.
European Commission. 2009. Guideline on the 
readability of the labelling and package leaflet 
of medicinal products for human use, revision 1. 
Brussels: European Commission.
European Medicines Agency (EMA). 2013. Quality 
review of documents human product information 
template (English), version 9. London: EMA. 
European Parliament and Council. 2004. Directive 
2004/27/EC (amending Directive 2001/83/EC 
on the Community code relating to medicinal 

700 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
700 / David Dickinson and Suzy Gallina
products for human use). Brussels: European 
Commission. 
Gustafsson, Jan, Sofia Kälvemark, Gunvor Nilsson, 
and J. Lars G. Nilsson. 2003. ‘A method to evaluate 
patient information leaflets,’ Drug Information 
Journal 37 (1): 115–125.
Hartley, James. 2004. ‘Designing instructional and 
informational text.’ In Handbook of research on 
educational communications and technology, 2nd 
edn, edited by David H. Jonassen, 917–947. New 
York: Macmillan. 
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory 
Agency (MHRA), Committee on Safety of 
Medicines. 2005. Always read the leaflet: getting 
the best information with every medicine. Report 
of the Committee on Safety of Medicines Working 
Group on Patient Information. Annex 6: 97–111. 
London: The Stationery Office.
Raynor, D. K. Theo, Alison Blenkinsopp, Peter 
Knapp, Janet Grime, Donald J. Nicolson, 
Kristian Pollock, Gill Dorer, Simon Gilbody, 
David Dickinson, John Maule, and Pat Spoor. 
2007a. ‘A systematic review of quantitative and 
qualitative research on the role and effectiveness 
of written information available to patients 
about individual medicines.’ Health Technology 
Assessment 1 (5): 1–178. 
Raynor, D. K. Theo, Jonathan Silcock, Peter Knapp, 
and Hilary Edmondson. 2007b. ‘How do patients 
use medicine information leaflets in the UK?’ 
International Journal of Pharmacy Practice 15: 
209–218.
Raynor, D. K. Theo, and David Dickinson. 2009. 
‘Key principles to guide development of 
consumer medicine information: content 
analysis of information design texts.’ Annals of 
Pharmacotherapy 43 (4): 700–6.
Rowlands, Gillian, Joanne Protheroe, John Winkley, 
Marty Richardson, Paul T. Seed, and Rima Rudd. 
2015. ‘A mismatch between population health 
literacy and the complexity of health information: 
an observational study.’ British Journal of General 
Practice 65 (635): e379–e386.
Schriver, Karen A. 1997. ‘Seeing the text: the role of 
typography and space.’ In Dynamics in document 
design: creating texts for readers, 249–359.
Chichester: John Wiley. 
Sless, David, and Ruth Shrensky. 2007. Writing about 
medicines for people, 3rd edn. Usability guidelines 
for consumer medicines information. Sydney: 
Australian Self-Medication Industry. 
Waarde, Karel. 1993. ‘An investigation into the 
suitability of the graphic presentation of patient 
package inserts.’ PhD thesis, University of 
Reading.
Vander Stichele, Robert, B. De Potter, Patrick 
Vyncke, and Marc G. Bogaert. 1996. ‘Attitude 
of physicians towards patient package inserts 
for medication information in Belgium.’ Patient 
Education and Counseling 28: 5–13.
Wright, Patricia. 1999. ‘Designing healthcare advice 
for the public.’ In Handbook of applied cognition, 
1st edn, edited by Frank Durso, 695–723. 
Chichester: John Wiley. 

701
Using animation to help 
communication in e-PILs in Brazil 
Carla Galvão Spinillo
This chapter discusses research done in Brazil on animated instructions 
(referred to as animated procedural pictorial sequences), focusing on medicine 
usage. It proposes recommendations for designing these instructions in elec-
tronic-Patient Information Leaflets (e-PILs). Research conducted on the misuse 
of medicines in Brazil and on poor graphic design of Patient Information Leaflets 
that affects patient’s comprehension of medicine information is discussed 
alongside the importance of using animation to facilitate information visuali-
zation. In highlighting the importance of clarity in e-PILs, Mayer and Moreno’s 
(2002) principles for animation in learning contexts are considered.
Patient access to medicine information is a citizen’s right acknowledged 
by law in most countries. Access to the relevant information is essential to 
prevent the misuse of medicines, as this would jeopardize the treatment 
of diseases (Waarde 1999, 2004, 2006; Dickinson et al. 2001; Burapadaja 
et al. 2004; Sless 2004; Cossío 2013). In Brazil, medicine information is 
available to patients in both print and digital formats. When available in 
digital format, it is referred to as an e-PIL (electronic-Patient Information 
Leaflet). Information in digital format is required by law, and is available 
on the webpages of the Brazilian Ministry of Health and of pharmaceutical 
companies. E-PILs are intended to ease access to medicine information 
and to empower patients when making health treatment decisions. E-PILs 
are a particularly effective way of showing drug interaction and how to use 
or prepare the medicine (e.g. injections, oral suspensions, inhalers). E-PILs 
also provide patients with information which is usually not included in 
medical prescriptions, such as related warnings (Martins 2009), despite 
their relevance to the task of correct medicine use (Fujita 2009; Wright 
2003). In addition, e-PILs can make use of animation to show instruc-
tions for medicines usage, which could be visualized, either via computers 
(desktops, laptops) or mobile devices (smartphones, mobile phones, and 
tablets). Animation means the simulated visual representation of apparent 
motion (Mayer and Moreno 2002), as well as the ways of representing 
dynamic processes that vary in time (Bétrancourt and Tversky 2000). In 
the presentation of medical information, animation has been widely used 
to show something that cannot be easily seen in reality by the naked eye 
(e.g. blood circulation, action of a medicine in the body), and to represent 
phenomena that are not visual, such as inhaling air. Animated instructions 
can be employed to facilitate visualization and understanding of medicine 
usage in e-PILs.
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 701–714
48

702 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
The misuse of medicines and e-PILs as 
a communication artefact for users 
The National Agency of Sanitary Surveillance (ANVISA) of the Brazilian 
Ministry of Health regulates and supervises the production and distri-
bution of medicines and their Patient Information Leaflets (PILs) in the 
country. Despite legal efforts to improve the quality of PILs, statistics 
show that deaths from poisoning due to misuse of medicines in Brazil are 
still alarming. According to data from The National System of Toxic and 
Pharmacological Information (SINITOX 2011), the number of cases of 
human poisoning by medication has increased in the last decade. In 2000, 
1,331 out of 22,121 cases of poisoning were due to errors in medicine usage 
by patients. In 2011, this number rose: out of 29,178 cases of poisoning, 
2,017 were due to misuse of medicines. This is linked to lack of informa-
tion comprehension. Thus, a PIL is more than just a legal document of 
the pharmaceutical industry: it is a communication tool for users which 
ensures correct task performance in the use of medication.
Research has shown that legibility and readability affect the comprehen-
sion of medicine information by patients (Brown et al. 2004; Fuchs 2010; 
Raynor 2003; Harwood and Harrison 2004; Gal and Prigat 2005; Maat 
and Lentz 2009; Andriesen 2006; Payne 2002; Cossío 2013; Waarde 2004, 
2013). In Brazil, studies on PILs have indicated that not only deficiencies in 
the text but also in procedural pictorial sequences (i.e. visual instructions) 
affect PILs’ communication effectiveness. Extreme partial depiction and 
lack of figure–ground contrast, among other graphic aspects, have been 
found to negatively influence patients’ comprehension of instructions for 
medicine usage (Spinillo et al. 2007; Spinillo and Waarde 2013). Spinillo 
and Padovani (2012) claim that the cognitive load in using/taking medi-
cines is high, and that this has not been taken into account in the instruc-
tions provided by the Brazilian PILs, even when presenting procedural 
pictorial sequences.
In most e-PILs, information on how to use medicines is conveyed by 
text rather than by pictorial sequences. A survey of Brazilian e-PILs availa-
ble on the national portal of the Ministry of Health, the Bulario Eletronico, 
showed that only 18% of e-PILs have pictorial sequences, that is, 111 out of 
631 current Brazilian e-PILs (Spinillo and Amorim 2014).1 Since Brazil has 
a high number of illiterate and functionally illiterate people, the absence 
of pictorial instructions on how to use medicines makes such information 
inaccessible to them. The survey also showed that there are problems with 
the graphic presentation of information on medicine usage in the e-PILs’ 
pictorial sequences, and that this may affect comprehension and task 
performance.
To date, although e-PILs are digital artefacts, they do not tend to make 
  1	 The portal provides open access to information on medicines to patients and health 
professionals (pharmacists, nurses, and medical doctors).

Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil / 703 
use of the technological resources of this media, such as animation, which 
has been proved to enhance content comprehension (e.g. Lowe 1999, 
2003; Ainsworth 2008; Schnotz and Lowe 2008).
In order to explain the cognitive processes involved in learning from 
animation and from the combined use of text and pictures, Mayer and his 
colleagues have proposed the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning 
(Mayer and Sims 1994; Mayer 2001; Mayer and Chandler 2001). This the-
ory is based on Paivio’s (1986) Dual Coding Theory in which cognition 
occurs in two distinct, but integrated subsystems: verbal and non-verbal. 
The verbal subsystem processes linguistic representational units (referred 
to as logogens), whereas the non-verbal subsystem processes nonlinguis-
tic representational units (referred to as imagens). The verbal subsystem 
receives auditory stimuli whereas the non-verbal one receives visual 
stimuli. Mayer and Moreno (2002) have proposed seven principles for the 
communicative effectiveness of animation on learning contents:
•	 multimedia: animation should be accompanied by audio text;
•	 spatial contiguity: if text on screen is used, it should come close to the 
animation it refers to;
•	 temporal contiguity: animation and corresponding audio text must be 
presented simultaneously rather than successively;
•	 coherence: the elements of animation must be mutually coherent, 
and irrelevant text, images, and sounds should be avoided in the 
animation;
•	 modality: in animations, audio text should be preferred to text on 
screen, in order to promote information processing;
•	 redundancy: content should be presented in animation and audio 
text simultaneously. These should not be accompanied by text on 
screen, since this may lead to cognitive overload in information 
processing; and
•	 personalization: text (audio/on screen) should be presented in 
conversational rather than formal style, as this seems to promote 
individual’s involvement with the content to be learned.
Fischer at al. (2006) and Ainsworth (2008) question the communica-
tive effectiveness of animation due to differences in the methodological 
approaches adopted to studies in the field. Most authors, however, agree 
on the advantages of employing animation, such as: to reduce cognitive 
load (Schnotz and Lowe 2008); to motivate learning (Rieber 1991); and 
to support the learning task (Tversky and Morrison 2002). Höffler and 
Leutner (2007) claim that animation facilitates the visualization of pro-
cesses and improves procedural knowledge. In other words, animation 
may assist task performance. In the case of e-PILs, animated procedural 
pictorial sequences may assist not only comprehension of instructions but 
also the tasks of how to use/take medicines.

704 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
Content and graphic presentation of animated 
procedural pictorial sequences 
Animated procedural pictorial sequences present procedural (steps) and 
non-procedural (e.g. warnings) information. Bieger and Glock (1985/­
1986) proposed a taxonomy for information represented by text and pic­
ture instructions. Among the categories identified by these authors, the 
qualifying, inventorial, and contextual ones are considered here due to 
their pertinence to medicine usage. The qualifying category embraces 
visual or verbal information which ‘qualifies’ an object or action related to 
the task to be performed (procedural content). The inventorial category 
concerns the components to be handled during the task, as a ‘visual inven-
tory’ of the task. Finally, the contextual category regards the output of the 
task, providing its ‘visual context’ (non-procedural contents).
An example of these categories can be found in an animated proce-
dural pictorial sequence for preparing an insulin injection: presenting the 
syringe components (needle and body of the syringe) and the insulin bot-
tle is the inventorial information (Figure 1). Showing the dosage measures 
on the body of the syringe is the qualifying information; and showing the 
insulin injection ready to be used (insulin inside the syringe) is the contex-
tual information. The use of images to represent contextual information 
may facilitate cognitive processes, as they help to construct a mental rep-
resentation of the procedure by showing the output of the task. According 
to Ganier (2004), this is essential to the success of the task.
In a  study of graphic presentation of animated procedural pictorial 
sequences, Spinillo et al. (2010) considered 23 animations for assembling 
instructions and identified variables for animation and text-image relation. 
For animation, they considered framing, camera movement, or shots (e.g. 
zoom, medium shot); scene transition, effects, speed, and presentation. 
For the text presented on screen, they considered typographic alignment, 
Figure 1
Screenshot 
from inventorial 
information of 
an animated 
procedural 
pictorial sequence 
for preparing an 
insulin injection.
UFPR archives. 
Animation by Bianca 
Oliveira, Bruna 
Capistrano, and 
Mackarena Hernández.

Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil / 705 
gender, and hierarchy; text-image separation cues, the relationship of 
text to the image (caption, label of the animated image); and text position 
on the screen layout. Finally with regard to the image, they considered 
image style, depiction completeness, views (e.g. sectional, exploded), 
and emphatic cues. They considered these variables pertinent not only 
to assembling instructions but also to animated procedural pictorial 
sequences for medicine use, since these variables covered generic aspects 
of graphic presentation of animation. For instance, an animation on using 
a nasal spray may employ scene transitions and camera movements (zoom 
and medium shot); a caption to explain the steps; a symbolic device to 
show prohibition; and a view of the patient’s face to show where the med-
icine acts (Figure 2).
In general, studies in animation focus on cognitive aspects of learning 
contents and are mostly in the fields of psychology of learning, devel-
opment, and cognition (e.g. Mayer and Moreno 2002; Tversky and 
Morrison 2002; Catrambone and Seay 2002; Hegarty 2004; Höffler and 
Leutner 2007; Ainsworth 2008;). Despite their contributions to research 
on animation, these studies have not considered aspects of graphic rep-
resentation of information in animation. In information design research, 
the effectiveness of animation on the representation of tasks has been 
considered. Such studies focus mainly on the assembling of products, and 
on the use of software in self- training/tutorials (e.g. Buba 2008; Souza 
2008; Pottes 2012). Little research, however, has been done on animated 
procedural pictorial sequences with focus on medicine usage, particularly 
on their graphic presentation. In order to fill this gap, an analytical review 
of the graphic presentation of animations on using medicines, as well as 
tests on the comprehension of an animated procedural pictorial sequence 
have been carried out in Brazil. These are discussed below.
Figure 2
Screenshot from 
an animation 
on using a nasal 
spray.
LAI-DI/UFPR research 
archives. Illustrations by 
Leandro Alburquerque 
and animation by 
Thatianne Ferreira.

706 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
An investigation of animated procedural 
pictorial sequences for e-PILs in Brazil 
Review of animated procedural pictorial sequences 
This study examined 30 animated procedural pictorial sequences on med-
icine usage available on the internet. To determine the sample, keywords 
were used to search for the animations. Each animation was viewed to 
make sure that it included instructions on how to use/take the medicines. 
The sample was described taking into account the information content 
(procedural and non-procedural) and graphic presentation variables. 
The information content was categorized as inventorial, qualitative, and 
contextual. For the graphic representation, aspects of animation, text, and 
image presentation were described.
The results were analysed qualitatively, by identifying commonalities 
in the graphic presentation of the animations according to the variables 
considered, so as to indicate possible trends in the sample. Weaknesses 
and strengths in the way the animations had been designed to represent 
medicine use were identified. The positive graphic characteristics of the 
sample together with recommendations in the literature (Mayer and 
Moreno 2002; Spinillo et al. 2010, 2011) were considered when designing 
the animated procedural pictorial sequence for testing in the comprehen-
sion study. 
Comprehension study
The comprehension test was conducted individually with 20 adult par-
ticipants. In order to properly verify the effect of animation on com-
prehension of instructions for medicine usage, a control condition was 
established in which a static version of the animated procedural pictorial 
sequence was tested. Participants were equally divided into two groups: 
experimental condition for the animated procedural pictorial sequence, 
and control condition for the static version. The dependent variable (X) 
was comprehension and the independent variable (Y) was the animation 
and static format of the material. Both animated and static procedural 
pictorial sequences explained the instructions for using oral suspension 
medicine (antibiotics). This type of medicine was chosen due to the com-
plexity of the task: it requires handling, preparing, and measuring; and 
it involves several components (bottle, lid, and syringe).2 The animated 
procedural pictorial sequence presented inventorial and qualifying infor-
mation; and steps for performing the whole procedure (from opening the 
bottle to ­giving the medicine to a patient). Emphatic cues were used to 
  2	 The Bulario Eletronico <http://www.anvisa.gov.br/datavisa/fila_bula/> makes 
­available a number of oral suspension medicines with procedural pictorial sequences 
in their e-PILs which have representational drawbacks.

Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil / 707 
draw attention to particular aspects of the task. Written texts were used 
to label the inventory images only; and audio text synchronized to the 
animation was used to explain the steps in a conversational style. Figure 3 
shows screenshots of the animation produced for testing. For the control 
condition, the static version had the same graphic characteristics, but texts 
were displayed as captions to the images. Figure 4 shows the static version 
tested.
The procedure was the same for both conditions. The material was 
introduced to each participant individually. Participants were asked to 
read/view the material, and then to engage in a semi-structured interview 
designed to assess content comprehension and acceptability of the mate-
rial for the medicine preparation/usage. The participants could read/view 
the material as many times as they wished before answering the interview 
questions, and the responses were registered in writing by the researcher. 
The results were compared across conditions in a  qualitative manner. 
Commonalities in the participants’ responses were taken as trends in their 
reactions to the material tested (static and animated procedural pictorial 
sequences).
The results of the analytical and comprehension studies were discussed 
Figure 4
Static version of 
the animation 
produced for 
testing.
LAI-DI/UFPR research 
archives. Illustrations 
by Lucas Zeferino 
and Uelinton Pires 
(copyright free).
Figure 3
Screenshots from 
the animation 
produced for 
testing.
LAI-DI/UFPR research 
archives. Illustrations 
and animation by Lucas 
Zeferino and Uelinton 
Pires (copyright free).

708 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
in the light of the literature in an inductive manner by identifying charac-
teristics and relationships.
Results and discussion
Review of animated procedural pictorial sequences 
The sample of 30 animated procedural pictorial sequences analysed con-
sisted mainly of animations explaining how to use inhalers (N=12) and 
injections (N = 12). One animation gave instructions on how to use an eye-
drop, two on how to use a skin wound adhesive, and three on how to use 
a nasal spray.
Almost half of the animations (N = 14) did not use audio texts. This con-
tradicts Mayer and Moreno’s redundancy principle (2002), which states 
that content should be presented in animation and audio text simultan-
eously. Inventorial and qualifying information was found in less than half 
of the sample (N = 9 and N = 10, respectively). Since most inhalers and 
injections require visualization of the components and/or dosage meas-
urer, so that patients can perform the tasks correctly, omission of such 
information may compromise task performance.
Almost all animated procedural pictorial sequences employed close 
shots (N = 28) to allow visualization of details of the task. Although for 
static sequences this may pose difficulties to the viewer, in animation 
this does not seem to be a problem due to the possibility of using camera 
movements to zoom in and out, which makes perceiving the whole and 
partial depictions possible.
Emphatic devices (e.g. magnifying lens effect, colour) were used in 
only eight animations to show particular features of the objects or steps, 
indicating that most animations did not intentionally aim to attract view-
ers’ attention. Also, although warnings were presented in almost all ani-
mations (N = 29), the lack of cues for attention may lead to viewers over-
looking these warnings, and consequently ignoring possible risks related 
to the medicine usage tasks.
Contrary to the modality and redundancy principles (animation and 
audio text), 20 out of 30 animations also employed texts on screen. This is 
considered to affect the cognitive load in information processing (Mayer 
and Moreno 2002). Such texts are often positioned at the bottom of the 
screen as captions to the images (N = 17), and some typographic cues (e.g. 
uppercase, bold) were used to draw attention to key words of the task 
description.
Most of the animated procedural pictorial sequences (N = 27) allowed 
viewers to choose the steps describing the medicine usage by interacting 
with the sliding bar on the bottom of the screen. Despite contributing to the 
viewer’s decision-making on what to see in the medicine usage animation, 
the sliding bar does not make it clear which step/content is to be viewed. 

Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil / 709 
This is because the viewer needs to move the cursor forward/backwards 
over the bar until they find the desired content. This makes finding the 
steps difficult, and viewers may experience anxiety when interacting with 
the animation. An exception to this is found in one animated procedural 
pictorial sequence on how to use an inhaler which displays a numbered 
sequence of steps at the bottom of the screen. This makes choosing a par-
ticular step easier, empowering users in their decision-making process on 
procedural tasks (Pottes 2012; Spinillo et al. 2011).
This review of 30 animated procedural pictorial sequences has revealed 
that the majority of them do not follow research-based recommendations, 
and this might hinder understanding of the procedural messages.
Comprehension study
The results of both control and experimental conditions showed that the 
majority of participants (N = 6 and N = 7 respectively) understood the 
instructions on how to use the oral suspension medicine. Thus, the ani-
mated procedural pictorial sequence and its static version succeeded in 
communicating the instructional message. This seems to not fully agree 
with the findings of previous studies which show that animation improves 
learning and procedural knowledge rather than static representations 
(Höffler and Leutner 2007).
In the experimental condition nine out of ten participants did not 
consult the animation when asked to explain how to prepare/use the oral 
suspension medicine. On the other hand, an equal number of participants 
(N = 9) of the control condition consulted the static sequence to answer the 
same questions. It seems that participants felt more confident in answer-
ing questions based on the content learned from animation than from the 
static representation. This suggests that presentation format (static and 
animation) may affect individuals’ perception of learning. This, however, 
is beyond the scope of the present study and requires further investigation.
Participants’ responses also differed on what they considered to have 
helped them to understand the instructions. All participants of experi-
mental condition judged that animation with audio text facilitated their 
understanding of the content. This seems again to support the modality 
and redundancy principles for animation (Mayer and Moreno 2002). On 
the other hand, only half of the participants agreed that text and images 
together aided comprehension of the static sequence. These responses 
may be related to participants’ cognitive processes as considered in the 
Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (Mayer and Moreno 2002). 
Audio text and animation are processed in different subsystems (verbal 
and non-verbal ones), while written texts and images are both visual stim-
uli and processed in the same subsystem (the non-verbal one). The latter is 
considered to lead to cognitive overload in information processing.
Participants of the control condition shifted from reading texts/cap-
tions to reading images in the static sequence as they are both processed in 

710 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
the non-verbal subsystem. This seems to have negatively affected partici-
pants’ opinion on the communication role of text. Participants’ statements 
corroborate this assumption: ‘Because visualizing is better than reading’, 
‘Because I don’t need to read to understand the medicine use’. Therefore, 
it is plausible to infer that there may be a relation between information 
processing in subsystems and the perception of media roles in the rep-
resentation of medicine usage.
As for the inventorial information in the static sequence, presenting the 
components to prepare the oral suspension seems to have been beneficial 
to participants’ comprehension of the procedure, particularly on placing 
the lid for attaching the syringe. No misunderstandings occurred in the 
participants’ responses. This seems to support the assumption that inven-
torial information helps to build relations between the components of the 
task and the steps to be carried out prior to performance (Ganier 2004; 
Spinillo et al. 2011).
Conclusions and final considerations
Before presenting the main conclusions of this research, it is important 
to highlight that due to the qualitative nature of the studies presented, 
allied to the limited number of animations examined in the analytical and 
experimental studies, generalizations should not be made. Nevertheless, 
the research findings suggest considerations that may be relevant to the 
design of animated procedural pictorial sequences on medicine usage for 
Brazilian e-PILs.
The findings of the study on comprehension of the oral suspension 
medicine ratified the literature, particularly on content representation 
in animation (Mayer and Moreno 2002). On the other hand, the results 
of the review of animated procedural pictorial sequences did not agree 
with the literature on animation and on representation of procedural 
contents (Bieger and Glock 1985/1986; Ganier 2004; Spinillo et al. 2011). 
This suggests that the theoretical and empirical evidence on learning from 
animation, and on procedural instructions provided in the literature, is 
not taken into account when designing animations about medicine usage. 
The knowledge generated from research on these fields appears to be 
restricted to the academic domain, not reaching developers of animation 
on medicine usage. This indicates a gap between research-based know-
ledge and professional practice in the design of this kind of animation, 
which may weaken communication effectiveness.
The comprehension study shows that Mayer and Moreno’s (2002) prin-
ciples for designing animation with learning purposes are relevant in the 
context of medicine usage. In particular, it shows that inventorial informa-
tion is of relevance to the understanding of tasks which involve medicine 
components (e.g. assembling, handling, mixing). This suggests that when 
designing animation for medicine usage, procedural and non-procedural 

Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil / 711 
content should be considered as both help to promote the understanding 
of tasks.
Based on the findings of the studies discussed here, and taking into 
consideration the literature on animated procedural pictorial sequences 
(e.g. Souza 2008; Spinillo et al. 2010; Pottes 2012), some recommenda-
tions are made in order to improve the design of animation on medicine 
usage in Brazilian e-PILs. These recommendations relate to the graphic 
representation of procedural and non-procedural contents on medicine 
usage, and take into account Mayer and Moreno’s (2002) principles, as 
follows:
1	 Whenever pertinent, use interactive features to allow viewers to 
decide what and when to see the steps of medicine usage in the 
animated procedural pictorial sequence;
2	 Whenever possible, employ camera movement (e.g. zoom) and 
emphatic cues (e.g. colour) to draw attention to details and particular 
elements of the animation on medicine usage;
3	 Consider the complexity of the task and the medicine components 
when deciding whether to represent the animation in 2D or 3D style;
4	 If possible, show a person performing the task of medicine usage, as 
this promotes understanding. Depending on the task complexity, the 
representation of the person can be omitted to facilitate visualization 
of the steps;
5	 Add motion cues (e.g. arrows, lines) to emphasize an animated action 
and show the pre-action and post-action movements in the animation 
as this promotes understanding of the steps;
6	 When the medicine usage involves assembling, handling, and/or 
mixing components, include inventorial and contextual information to 
facilitate information processing and the construction of action plan 
by medicine users; and
7	 Provide audio text for steps that produce auditory outputs, such as 
a ‘click’ when connecting components of a syringe (onomatopoeia).
Finally, it is important to highlight that despite the contributions made 
by this research, further work is still needed to ensure optimum usability 
of Brazilian e-PILS. To be effective, future work needs to take into account 
the needs of all those involved in medicine usage, as well as the context in 
which animated procedural pictorial sequences are used. The Government 
and the pharmaceutical industry stand to gain from an information design 
approach, as this will help promote the correct use of medicines and the 
success of health treatments.

712 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
712 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to CNPq (National Council for Research and Development of the 
Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology) for a grant to develop this research. 
Thanks are also due to research assistants Rafaella Raboni and Gustavo Amorim 
for their hard work and dedication; to the graphic design students for their ani-
mations; and to the participants who volunteered to the study. Special thanks are 
due to Dr Mariangela Spinillo and to the editors for their contributions to this  
chapter.
References
Ainsworth, S. 2008. ‘How do animations influence 
learning?’ In Current Perspectives on Cognition, 
learning, and instruction: recent innovations in 
educational technology that facilitate student 
learning, edited by D. Robinson and G. Schraw, 
37–67. Charlotte, NC: Information Age 
Publishing.
Andriesen, S. 2006. ‘Readability testing of PILs – 
a new ‘must.’ EPC. Samedan Ltd Pharmaceutical 
Publishers, Autumn: 42–44. 
Bétrancourt , M., and B. Tversky. 2000. ‘Effect of 
computer animation on users’ performance: 
a review.’ Travail-Humain 63: 311–329.
Bieger, G. R., and M. D. Glock. 1985/1986. 
‘Comprehending spatial and contextual 
information in picture text instructions.’ Journal of 
Experimental Education 54: 181–188. 
Brown, H., M. Ramchandani, T. J. Gillow, and 
M. D. Tsaloumas. 2004. ‘Are patient information 
leaflets contributing to informed consent for 
cataract surgery?’ Journal of Medical Ethics 30: 
218–220.
Buba, D. 2008. ‘Instruções visuais animadas para 
a indústria automotiva: uma abordagem analítica 
em design informacional.’ Diploma dissertation 
in Information Design, Pontifícia Universidade 
Católica do Paraná, Curitiba.
Burapadaja, S., P. Tantipathananandh, and B. 
Sirithunyalug. 2004. ‘Consumer’s opinions on 
reading a medicine leaflet.’ CMU Journal 3 (2): 
155–167.
Catrambone, R., and A. F. Seay. 2002. ‘Using 
animation to help students learn computer 
algorithms.’ Human Factors 44: 495­–511.
Cossío, M. G. 2013. ‘Headings as a reading strategy 
in medicine instructions.’ In Research and 
practice: selected readings of the 5th information 
design international conference, edited by L. 
Fadel, C. G. Spinillo, M. Moura, and R. Triska, 
130–47. Florianopolis: The Brazilian Society of 
Information Design. 
Dickinson, D., D. K. Raynor, and M. Duman. 2001. 
‘Patient information leaflets for medicines: using 
consumer testing to determine the most effective 
design.’ Patient Education and Counseling 43: 
147–159.
Fischer, S., R. K. Lowe, and S. Schwan. 2006. ‘Effects 
of presentation speed of a dynamic visualization 
on the understanding of a mechanical system.’ 
In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society, edited by R. Sun and N. 
Miyake, 1305–1310. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.	
Fuchs, J. 2010. ‘The way forward in package insert 
user tests from a CRO’s perspective.’ Drug 
Information Journal 44: 119–129.
Fujita, P. T. L. 2009. ‘Análise da apresentação gráfica 
do conteúdo textual da bula de medicamento na 
perspectiva de leitura do paciente em contexto de 
uso.’ Master’s dissertation, Universidade Federal 
do Paraná, Curitiba.
Gal, I., and A. Prigat. 2005. ‘Why organizations 
continue to create patient information leaflets 
with readability and usability problems: an 
exploratory study.’ Health Education Research, 
Theory & Practice 20 (4): 485–493.
Ganier, F. 2004. ‘Les apports de la psychologie 
cognitive à la conception d’instructions 
procédurales.’ InfoDesign: Revista Brasileira de 
Design da Informação 1 (1): 17–28. 
Harwood, A., and J. E. Harrison. 2004. ‘How 
readable are orthodontic patient information 
leaflets?’ Journal of Orthodontics 31: 210–219.
Hegarty, M. 2004. ‘Dynamic visualizations and 
learning: getting to the difficult questions.’ 
Learning and Instruction 14: 343–351.
Höffler, T. N., and D. Leutner. 2007. ‘Instructional 
animation versus static pictures: a meta-analysis.’ 
Learning and Instruction 17: 722–738. 
Lowe, R. K. 2003. ‘Animation and learning: selective 
processing of information in dynamic graphics.’ 
Learning and Instruction 13: 157–176.
Lowe, R. K. 1999. ‘Extracting information from 
an animation during complex visual learning.’ 
European Journal of Psychology of Education 14: 
225–244.
Maat H. P., and L. Lentz. 2009. ‘Improving the 
usability of patient information leaflets’, Patient 
Education and Counseling 80 (1): 113–119.

Using animation to help communication in e-PILs in Brazil / 713 
Martins, R. 2009. ‘Análise gráfica de receitas médicas: 
uma contribuição do design da informação 
para a detecção e prevenção de erros latentes.’ 
Unpublished Masters dissertation, Universidade 
Federal do Paraná, Curitiba.
Mayer, R. E. 2001. Multimedia learning. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., and P. Chandler. 2001. ‘When learning 
is just a click away: does simple user interaction 
foster deeper understanding of multimedia 
messages?’ Journal of Educational Psychology 93: 
390–397.
Mayer, R. E., and R. Moreno. 2002. ‘Animation 
as an aid to multimedia learning.’ Educational 
Psychology Review 14: 87–99.
Mayer, R. E., and V. K. Sims. 1994. ‘For whom is 
a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions 
of a dual-coding theory of multimedia learning.’ 
Journal of Educational Psychology 86 (3): 389–401.
Paivio, A. 1986. Mental representations: a dual coding 
approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Payne , S. A. 2002. ‘Balancing information needs: 
dilemmas in producing patient information 
leaflets.’ Health Informatics Journal 8: 174–179. 
Pottes, A. 2012. ‘Animação Multimídia de Instrução 
(AMI) visualizada em Dispositivo de Interação 
Móvel (DIM): um estudo exploratório acerca 
da influência da flexibilidade de interação sobre 
a visualização da informação e a realização da 
tarefa.’ Masters dissertation, Universidade Federal 
do Paraná, Curitiba.
Raynor, D. K. T. 2003. ‘Consumer medicines 
information: an international perspective.’ The 
Chronic Ill 7: 4–7. 
Rieber, L. P. 1991. ‘Animation,incidental learning, and 
continuing motivation.’ Journal of Educational 
Psychology 83: 318–328.
Schnotz, W., and R. Lowe. 2008. ‘A unified 
view of learning from animated and static 
graphics.’ In Learning with animation: research 
implications for design, edited by R. Lowe and 
W. Schnotz, 304–356. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
SINITOX. ‘Sistema Nacional de Informações 
Tóxico-Farmacológicas.’ Rio de Janeiro: Fundação 
Oswaldo Cruz. Acesed 31 May 2014. <http://www.fiocruz.br/sinitox_
novo/cgi/cgilua.exe/sys/start.htm?sid=15>.
Sless, D. 2004. ‘Labeling code of practice: designing 
usable non-prescription medicine labels for 
consumers.’ Accessed: 29 April 2014. <http://
www.communication.org.au/cria_publications>. 
Souza, J. M. B. 2008. ‘Towards the optimization 
of software instructional demonstrations.’ PhD 
thesis, Department of Typography & Graphic 
Communication, University of Reading. 
Spinillo, C. G., and G. Amorimá. 2014. ‘Survey of 
procedural pictorial sequences in e-PILs, Bulario 
Eletronico da Anvisa.’ Unpublished report, 
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba. 
Spinillo, C. G., and S. Padovani. 2012. ‘Information 
safety: a patient centred framework for the design 
of medicine inserts.’ In Advances in medicine and 
biology, edited by Leon V. Berhardt, 53: 1–22. New 
York: Nova Publisher.
Spinillo, C. G., S. Padovani, F. Miranda, and P. T. L. 
Fujita. 2007. ‘Instruções visuais em bulas de 
medicamentos no Brasil: um estudo analítico 
sobre a representação pictórica da informação.’ 
In Anais do 3º congresso internacional de design 
da informação. Curitiba: Sociedade Brasileira de 
Design da Informação.
Spinillo, C. G., J. M. B. Souza, T. C. Maia, G. R. 
Storck, and A. Oselame. 2010. ‘A representação 
gráfica de instruções visuais animadas: um 
estudo analítico na perspectiva da ergonomia 
informacional.’ In Anais do 10º ERGODESIGN 
– Congresso internacional de ergonomia e 
usabilidade de interfaces humano-tecnologia: 
produto, informações, ambiente construído e 
transporte (CD-ROM). Rio de Janeiro: Pontifícia 
Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro.
Spinillo, C. G., J. M. B. Souza, G. R. Storck, and 
A. Pottes. 2011. ‘Alguns aspectos sobre os 
modos de representação e o processamento da 
informação em instruções visuais animadas.’ In 
Anais do XI congresso internacional de ergonomia 
e usabilidade de interfaces e interação humano-
computador. Manaus: Universidade Federal do 
Amazonas.
Spinillo, C. G., and K. Waarde. 2013. ‘Pictorial 
instructions in package inserts of Brazil and 
European Union: are they for patients?’ In 
Research and practice: selected readings of the 
5th information design international conference, 
edited by L. Fadel, C. G. Spinillo, M. Moura, and 
R. Triska, 119–129. Florianopolis: The Brazilian 
Society of Information Design. 
Tversky, B. and J. B. Morrison. 2002. ‘Animation: 
can it facilitate?’ International Journal of Human–
Computer Studies 57 (4): 247–262.
Waarde, K. 1999. ‘The graphic presentation of 
patient package insert.’ In Visual information for 
everyday use: design and research perspectives, 
edited by H. J. G. Zwaga, T. Boersema, and 
H. C. M. Hoonhout,75–81. London: Taylor & 
Francis.
Waarde, K. 2004. ‘Visual information about 
medicines: providing patients with relevant 
information.’ In Selected readings of the 
Information Design International Conference 2003, 
edited by C. G. Spinillo and S. G. Coutinho, 81–89. 
Recife: SBDI Sociedade Brasileira de Design da 
Informação. 
Waarde, K. 2006. ‘Visual information about 
medicines for patients.’ In Designing effective 
communications: creating contexts for clarity and 
meaning, edited by Jorge Frascara, 38–50. New 
York: Allworth Press.

714 / Carla Galvão Spinillo
Waarde, K. 2013. ‘Designing information about 
medicines: the role of visual design.’ In 
Research and practice: selected readings of the 
5th information design international conference 
edited by L. Fadel, C. G. Spinillo, M. Moura, and 
R. Triska, 106–118. Florianopolis: The Brazilian 
Society of Information Design. 
Wright, P. 2003. ‘Criteria and ingredients for 
successful patient information.’ Journal of 
Audiovisual Media in Medicine 26 (1): 6–10.

715
Information design: 
research and 
practice,
pages 715–730
Medical information design 
and its legislation
Some reflections
Karel van der Waarde 
This chapter shows the relation between current European legislation and 
the information on packaging and labelling of medicines. It describes some of 
the assumptions of this legislation and shows how these affect the design of 
information for patients. The chapter traces some of the historical roots of the 
legislation and guidelines in order to frame the situation in 2015. It comments 
on the process on how labelling is written, designed, and tested, and shows how 
these activities are restricted and separated. Because it is likely that other areas 
of information design will be more strictly regulated, the example of medicines 
needs to be understood to build on best practice and avoid similar mistakes.
A brief description of the context: 
providing an historical frame
Just over fifty years ago . . .
The thalidomide disaster in the early 1960s triggered the advent of official 
registration of medicines. Before a medicine can be prescribed or sold, it 
needs to obtain a licence from regulatory authorities. These authorities 
check if a medicine is safe enough to give to patients, and further check if 
the accompanying information is correct and follows legislation and asso-
ciated guidelines. 
The registration process has developed over the last 50 years, but the 
core of the process has remained much the same. The process is based 
on a succinct text that describes the scientific background and facts about 
a single medicine. This ‘Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC)’, or 
‘Core data sheet’, became obligatory in Europe in 1965 (Directive 65/65/
EEC 1965). It was a very dense scientific text of the main facts about a medi-
cine, and it was intended for healthcare professionals only. Around 1985 all 
medicines had such a summary. Since 1965, it was also possible to include 
a package leaflet (article 4, point 9), but very few were actually developed. 
These leaflets were included on a voluntary basis and their contents and 
quality varied substantially. Most of these package leaflets were aimed at 
healthcare professionals.
In the 1980s only a few types of medicines, such as oral contraceptives 
and inhalers, contained any written information for patients, and most of 
this information consisted of warnings.
49

716 / Karel van der Waarde 
Gradual shifts
In the late 1980s, opinions about the provision of written information to 
patients were divided. Doctors and pharmacists claimed that they were 
able to inform and advise patients adequately. There was a  fear that 
written information could lead to dangerous situations because patients 
might start to experiment themselves, and information could increase the 
experience of side effects by suggestion. 
Several simultaneous developments led up to a change around 1990. 
Patients became more vocal and started to demand understandable infor-
mation. The pharmaceutical industry wanted more direct contact with 
patients in order to improve brand-­identities, and provide essential infor-
mation about their products. This idea was especially supported by indus-
try associations in the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, where most 
of the medicines were repacked by pharmacists from bulk packaging into 
small ‘brown bottles’. And the increasing trade of medicines across Europe 
made it necessary to compare and standardize medicines and packaging. 
Each of the twelve European Community countries in 1990 had its 
own national legislation. Luc Joossens conducted a  comparative study 
and found a wide variety of approaches (Joossens 1990). In Denmark, 
it was prohibited to provide any printed information. In Germany both 
the technical SPC and a package leaflet for patients were included in the 
packaging, but liability issues prevented articulation of a clear distinction 
between these two. In southern European countries, a technical leaflet 
was included. Belgium and Switzerland were the first countries to intro-
duce patient package leaflets (Stichele 2004, vii). These countries intro-
duced package leaflets between 1988 and 1992. This development has been 
recorded and studied in detail (Stichele 2004). 
Fortunately, the benefits of providing information to patients were sup-
ported by the results of several studies in Great Britain, Switzerland, and 
Belgium (Gibbs 1989; Rupf 1991; Haecht 1992). These studies concluded 
that there are three main benefits of providing information to patients:
•	 an increase in knowledge about all aspects of medicines such as risks, 
instructions, side effects, storage and warnings;
•	 increased number of relevant questions to healthcare providers;
•	 increased satisfaction.
However, a direct relation between ‘providing information’ and a more 
effective use of medicines by patients has not been found.
The start of European legislation 
Regulation of the supply of information about medicines was seen as 
a  responsibility of the European Commission in their quest to create 
a single European market. It was based on the assumption that patients 

Medical information design and its legislation / 717 
are consumers, and that standardization would be beneficial for industry 
within the ‘free movement of goods’ policy. This is logical because the 
department that dealt with medicines regulations was the Department of 
Enterprise and Industry. It was not the Department of Health. If an alter-
native route had been chosen, such as the provision of information by 
local pharmacists (Australia), or left to market initiatives (USA), the legal 
aspects might have been less important. 
A decision of the Council of Health ministers in 1988 led to the 1992 
Directive (92/27/EC). This directive was only eight pages long. It stipu-
lated the information that had to appear on the outer package (usually 
a cardboard box), the inner package (usually a blister pack, a tube, or 
a bottle) and in a package leaflet. The sequence of the information was 
standardized: it is not allowed to change the order of the information. The 
directive applied to medicines that need a prescription (Prescription Only 
Medicines – POM), and prescriptions that can be bought without a pre-
scription (Over-­The-­Counter – OTC). As Luc Joossens (1990) concluded 
his comparative study: ‘It has been a  combination of patient wishes, 
political will of the member states, and a change in attitude of the indus-
try that made this legislation.’ In practice, this caused a very quick shift 
from ‘unregulated pharmacy packs’ to ‘regulated branded industry packs’. 
Within a period of about five years, most medicines were sold in packaging 
made by the pharmaceutical industry.
The practical application: readability guidelines  
and templates
The 1992 requirements to provide an obligatory leaflet to patients were 
seen as another hoop to jump through before registration, and the most 
convenient legal compliance processes were sought. 
The provision of detailed information for patients proved to be a real 
challenge. The 1992 Directive states that all medicine packs must provide 
‘Full and comprehensible information’ (92/27/EC). Article 4.1 stipulates 
that the information in the leaflet and on the packaging must be ‘easily 
legible, clearly comprehensible and indelible’. And article 8 states that ‘the 
package leaflet must be written in clear and understandable terms for the 
patient and be clearly legible’. The conflict between ‘full’ and ‘comprehen-
sible’ was difficult to overcome: ‘full’ demanded fairly long texts and these 
turned out to be difficult to understand. The ambiguous terminology in 
the directive (‘comprehensible’ and ‘understandable’; ‘easily legible’, and 
‘clearly legible’) added to the confusion.
Some of these conflicts were foreseen, and the Directive mentions in 
article 12 that the ‘Commission shall publish guidelines concerning the 
legibility of the particulars’. The first version of this ‘readability guideline’ 
appeared on September 28, 1998 (Pharmaceutical Committee 1998). The 
guideline consisted of three parts. 

718 / Karel van der Waarde 
•	 The first part provides general design advice on things like the type 
size, colour, syntax, and headings. The general guidelines were 
probably based on some literature and best practice, but the guideline 
does not point to any references to confirm this. 
•	 The second part (Annex 1) provided ‘An example of a model leaflet’ 
(p. 13). This model was intended as a ‘suggestion’, but it was used as 
a rigid template that was copied as accurately as possible. 
•	 The third part (Annex 2) described ‘An example of a method for 
Testing the Readability of the Leaflet’ (p. 24). The description of 
the testing was based on the first edition of David Sless and Rob 
Wiseman’s Writing about medicines for people (1994). At that time, 
this was probably the only comprehensive description of good 
information design practice related to medicines. Unfortunately, the 
situation in Australia differed greatly from the European context. 
Especially the production and distribution of the printed information 
varied considerably. In Australia, pharmacists should print out the 
‘Consumer Medicines Information’ on a printer in a pharmacy. In 
Europe, the leaflets are printed for the pharmaceutical industry to be 
included in the package.
The combination of the requirements in the 1992 Directive and the 
Readability guideline turned out to be a challenge. There was no clear 
process, no clear goal, no appropriate visual examples, and hardly any 
appropriate experience to build on. A second version of the Readability 
guideline, published in 2009, resolved some of these issues (Directorate-­
General Enterprise and Industry 2009).
Different registration processes
Simultaneously, the organization of the Regulatory Authorities changed. 
In each of the European Union countries, these Regulatory Authorities 
were usually part of the national Ministries of Health. In order to enhance 
cooperation, and to make sure that medicines could be registered for the 
whole of Europe in one application, a European Agency was established. 
This agency started in 1995 as The European Agency for the Evaluation of 
Medicinal Products (EMEA), and changed its name in 2004 to European 
Medicines Agency (EMA). 
This reorganization of the authorities created three different ways 
to register a medicine in Europe. It is possible to register a medicine in 
a single EU-­country by applying to a single national authority, in a group of 
countries based on the registration in a single country, and throughout the 
European Union by applying to the European Medicines Agency (EMA). 
Fortunately, the process for each of the three options is similar and the 
national regulatory authorities and the EMA closely cooperate and aim to 
harmonize their activities. 

Medical information design and its legislation / 719 
To simplify the control of the labelling, the Regulatory authorities 
developed a template. The first version of this template appeared in the 
1998 Readability guideline and only showed a  package leaflet. At the 
moment, the template includes the Summary of Product Characteristics 
(SPC), the outer packaging, the inner packaging, and the package leaflet. 
The development of this template, from its inception in 1998 up to version 
8 in July 2012 has been investigated (Wolf, Fuchs and Schweim 2012). They 
show that every version added more words and made the text in package 
leaflets longer.
In the registration process of a medicine, a text based on the completed 
EMA-­QRD template must be submitted at different stages. The regulatory 
authorities check if the information about a specific medicine is correctly 
included in the template. The visual design of both packaging and pack-
age leaflet is compared to the requirements of the Readability guideline, 
and the test report is compared to the method in the annex of the 2009 
Readability guideline.
In the last years, the Directive and the Readability guideline were sup-
plemented by several other guidelines. There are for example a ‘Guideline 
on summary of product characteristics’, a  ‘QRD convention to be fol-
lowed for the EMA-­QRD templates’, and a description on the ‘Product 
Information linguistic review process for new applications in the central-
ised procedure’. Each of these documents is updated irregularly to cope 
with practical developments. The combination of all these documents 
amounts to a  fairly complex set of instructions to follow. In order to 
develop a text for a package leaflet, it is essential to follow the EMA-­QRD 
template, compare this with a range of legal obligations stated in several 
regulations, and apply the advice from a continuously updated collection 
of guidelines. The website of the European Medicines Agency (www.ema.
europe.eu) provides access and guidance.
Current aims of supplying information to patients
In 2010, there was another fundamental shift. The legislative depart-
ment dealing with medicines moved from the European Commissions’s 
Directorate-General for Enterprise and Industry to that for Health and 
Consumer Protection. The main aim until 2010 was to ‘regulate the phar-
maceutical sector in the dual interest of protecting public health while 
completing the single market for pharmaceuticals’. The aim since 2010 is 
‘To guarantee the highest possible level of public health and to secure the 
availability of medicinal products to citizens across the European Union’. 
The focus has moved from ‘regulating the industry’ to ‘cooperation with 
the industry to make medicines available’. This shift is slowly starting to 
influence the development and supply of information about medicines.
The ultimate aim for providing written information is to encourage 
the safe and appropriate use of medicines. This includes the activities of 
all healthcare professionals, carers, and patients. The synergy between 

720 / Karel van der Waarde 
these groups should aim to increase the effectiveness of medicine use. 
Depending on the type of relation with a patient, this has been called 
compliance, adherence, or concordance. A second main reason to supply 
information is that people have a right to be informed. In contrast, in the 
USA, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has taken a different per-
spective. Information about medicines on labelling is intended for health-
care professionals only. If patients learn something, it is seen as an added 
benefit.
It is very likely that patients will continue to use more medicines and use 
more combinations of medicines. There will be more elderly people, and 
the elderly will live longer. There is also an increase in the use of preven-
tive medicine, such as cholesterol lowering medicines. This increasing use 
increases the likelihood and number of accidents and errors. It therefore 
becomes more beneficial to pay attention to efficient and effective infor-
mation that enables people to act appropriately. A second motivation to 
pay more attention to the information provision is the shift from branded 
pharmaceuticals to cheaper generic medicines and bio-­similar medicines. 
These cannot distinguish themselves through their chemical characteris-
tics, and enhanced information might add genuine value.
Summarizing
This brief review shows that the last decades have been fairly hectic. Be-
tween 5,000 and 10,000 medicine boxes in each European country have 
changed to comply with the regulations. Regulations and guidelines have 
been introduced and updated continuously. Europe has grown from twelve 
to twenty-four official languages, and mergers between pharmaceutical 
companies, and several organizational changes in regulatory agencies and 
the EU itself have taken place. There has not been much time to reconsider 
and reflect on the causes and effects of all these changes. 
What is the current situation in practice?
A  fairly neutral description of the historical development of the legal 
framework in Europe does not do much justice to the frantic activities 
that were needed to adhere to the plethora of regulations, templates, and 
guidelines. A concise description of the developments, interactions and 
arguments could take several volumes. Reducing the scope to the three 
main activities of information development might show the most direct 
relations between legislation and its consequences on the visual informa-
tion that is supplied to patients. 
The development of information for patients consists of three main 
activities: writing, designing, and testing. Each of these activities is fairly 
strictly regulated and controlled. Below is a  brief description of these 
three processes.

Medical information design and its legislation / 721 
Writing information about medicines
All writing processes start with the EMA-­QRD template (EMA-­QRD tem-
plate 2014). This template is based on a European Directive which dictates 
both the contents as well as the sequence of the different topics (2001/83/
EC, article 59, 2004). All sections in the template are heavily annotated 
with advice and references on the approach and exact wording that should 
be used. The template is available in 24 European languages, and is fre-
quently updated. 
The EMA-­QRD template consists of three parts. The first is the ‘sum-
mary of product characteristics’ (SPC). This is the current version of the 
document that was first introduced in 1965. The second part describes 
the information on the outer packaging (usually a cardboard box), and 
the inner packaging (such as a blister pack, a tube, or a bottle). And the 
third part provides the ‘nearly obligatory’ texts for package leaflets. The 
information in the third part (the package leaflets) must accurately pres-
ent the same information as is provided in the first part (the summary), but 
rephrased in patient friendly terms. Diverting from the text in the template 
is possible, but any modification must be based on some evidence, for ex-
ample by referring to the results of a readability test. 
The template is provided as a Microsoft Word file. There is no descrip-
tion of a step-­by-­step process and there are no accepted terminology lists. 
Furthermore, many different teams need to check the texts at different 
points in the development. This practice makes the writing of the text 
prone to all sorts of errors. It is very difficult to have an effective version 
control, track changes and motivations for changes, check translation 
quality, and maintain a consistent content accuracy.
Designing information about medicines
The design of information about a medicine on an outer package, an inner 
package and in a package leaflet is also regulated. The main document is 
the 2009 Readability guideline. It proclaims: ‘The guidance gives advice 
on the presentation of the content of the labelling and package leaflet and 
on the design and layout concepts which will aid the production of quality 
information’ (p. 6). The guideline provides for example advice about type 
size and font, headings, style, paper, and the use of symbols and picto-
grams. Some examples of this advice are: 
•	 ‘Choose a font which is easy to read.’ (p. 7) 
•	 ‘Linespaces should be kept clear’ (p. 8), and ‘A column format for the 
text can help the reader navigate the information.’ (p. 8) 
Although this might look like good advice, it does not really help to select 
a typeface (what would be appropriate criteria, and what would be a suita-
ble selection process?), to clear linespaces (how can this be done, and why is 
it necessary?), or to consider column formats (what are the alternatives?). 

722 / Karel van der Waarde 
Unfortunately, most of the advice in the 2009 version of the Readability 
guideline proves to be very hard to apply in practice. The main reasons are 
that it provides advice without taking a context, a process, or languages 
into account. 
And it is not only the pharmaceutical industry who has to interpret 
and apply this design guidance. During the registration process, the reg-
ulatory authorities need to check if a design adheres to these guidelines. 
Unfortunately, there has hardly been any training to assess visual presenta-
tion, there was a deluge of applications and renewals, the criteria were 
vague, there was no process support, and there was no digital support. It 
Figure 1
Three examples of obligatory text and standard order recreated from 
current package leaflets. A very similar text appears in a product that can 
be bought over ­the counter for very short-term use (as a pain killer), in one 
supplied as a prescription-­only medicine for a chronic disease (for high 
blood pressure), and in one used as a serious treatment (for leukaemia). 
Note, however, the differences in several standard phrases: none of the 
texts follows the EMA-­QRD template verbatim.
Figure 2 
The corner of a box for ibuprofen on sale 
in the UK in 2014 (actual size). The type is 
small, tightly packed, and light. There is little 
space between the lines. The text is printed 
in black ink on a silver grey background, the 
background is highly reflective, and there 
are braille dots pushed through the text 
deforming the character shapes. According 
to the typographic literature, each of these 
seven typographical factors reduces the 
legibility of a text. However, this combination 
of seven detrimental factors has been 
approved by the regulatory authorities. 
It conforms to all legislation and is ‘clearly 
legible and understandable’. 
If you experience any side-effects not included in this leaflet or are not sure about anything, talk to 
your doctor or pharmacist.
5 Storing this medicine
Keep the product out of the reach and sight of children.
Do not store above 30°C.
If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you  
notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet,  
please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
5   How to store Xxxxxx
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
Do not store your tablets above 30oC. Keep them  
in the pack in which they were supplied to you.
If any side effect becomes severe, or if 
you notice any side effect not listed here,
please tell your pharmacist or doctor.
How to store this medicine
Store below 25°C.
Store in the original package.
Keep this medicine in a safe place out of the 
sight and reach of children, preferably in a 
locked cupboard.

Medical information design and its legislation / 723 
is therefore remarkable that the regulatory authorities have been able to 
cope and handle this situation. 
In order to help to decide if the Readability guideline was followed, 
some regulatory authorities have developed checklists. One of these 
checklist asks: ‘Is there text in capitals, italics, underlined, in boxes, etc.?’ 
and gives a one point bonus when these are not used (MHRA 2012, annex 1). 
Unfortunately, the consequence of this checklist is that typographic dif-
ferentiation is even more difficult to achieve because the use of capitals, 
italics, underlined text and boxed is actively discouraged.
This Readability guideline seems to be based on two assumptions. The 
first assumption is that ‘visual design’ can be described as a series of un­
related decisions. The second assumption is that a visual presentation can 
be developed without referring to the information content. 
Testing information about medicines
The requirement to test package leaflets was introduced in the 2004 
Directive (2004/27/EU, article 59 and 61(1)). Article 59 states that ‘the 
package leaflet shall reflect the results of consultations with target patient 
groups to ensure that it is legible, clear, and easy to use.’ A test consist of 
two or more series of ten structured interviews. Each interview consists of 
approximately fifteen questions. The questions focus on the most impor-
tant and risky actions. There are two criteria: 
1	 Can a participant find the location in the package leaflet where the 
answer is mentioned?
2	 Can a participant understand the information, and apply the advice to 
their situation?
Ninety per cent of the people who participate should be able to find 
the required information, and ninety per cent of those who have found 
the information should be able to understand it correctly. This testing 
process is loosely based on a description of ‘diagnostic testing’ (Sless and 
Wiseman 1994). The performance level is based on a code of practice 
for non-­prescription medicines in Australia (Communication Research 
Institute of Australia 2004).
The obligation to test has undoubtedly improved the quality of package 
leaflets as well as increased the awareness of the pharmaceutical industry 
to pay more attention to information for patients. However, there are still 
many disputes about the relevance, value and process of this test. Some 
of the main objections are related to the context, testing criteria, and the 
testing process.
The current testing sequence only looks at a  single leaflet without 
taking the practical context into account. It ignores other information 
sources, such as the packaging, the medicine itself, and pharmacist’s 
labels. Secondly, only twenty to twenty-­five people are interviewed in one 
language, usually English. Although such a small number will highlight the 

724 / Karel van der Waarde 
main problems, it will not indicate fundamental differences in in­terpreta-
tion related to historical, linguistic, or cultural differences. The practical 
validity of the test – does the test really indicate if the information enables 
people to act appropriately – is still uncertain.
The reliability of the test is questionable too. The original purpose of 
the diagnostic test was to establish the ‘health of a document’, and point 
to areas that might need to be changed. The use of this type of test to 
‘establish a certain performance level’ does not really help to improve 
a leaflet. It just provides an indication that a minimal standard has been 
met. Furthermore, the influence of the selection of the questions, the 
selection of the participants, the criteria, the test language, the influence 
of the interviewer, and the interpretation of the remarks, need more study. 
Without some evidence, testing package leaflets in accordance with the 
current guidelines might not provide trustworthy answers.
A third point is that testing in practice is mainly done as a final step to 
check if a leaflet ‘achieves the required scores’. Testing is not seen as an 
integrated part of a formative-­iterative process. In order to be helpful, it 
is necessary to have direct contact with patients at several points during 
a document development process. Different types of tests, such as diag-
nostic tests, benchmark tests, and performance tests should be under-
taken to aid decisions. 
Figure 3 
A readability test interview. A participant first reads or scans 
a package leaflet. The interviewer asks questions and the participant 
searches for the answer, interprets the relevant contents, and 
provides comments. The test focuses on one leaflet only, without 
considering other information objects that would normally be 
available, such as cardboard boxes, medicines, and pharmacists’ 
labels.
Photo: Karel van der Waarde.

Medical information design and its legislation / 725 
Summarizing
Although it is clear that the increased attention to writing, designing and 
testing has improved the quality of information for patients, it is also clear 
that the current way of working has some severe shortcomings. The legal 
framework seems to restrict the effectiveness of information about medi­
cines because it does not allow for an effective combination of writing, 
designing, and testing of information. Only a limited number of options 
can be considered. Each option needs to be compared to the full range 
of regulations and guidelines. This is a time-consuming and tedious ac­
tivity because there are many vague and often conflicting requirements. 
Furthermore, the guidance starts out from the incorrect assumption that 
it is a linear process. 
Developing an alternative approach
The European Commission is convinced that the legislation about medi-
cines information needs to change. In an amendment to the regulations in 
2010, they state that ‘an assessment report on the current short­comings’ 
should be published on 1 January 2013 (Directive 2010/84, article 59, 
­paragraph 4). The Commission also aims to present proposals to improve 
the readability, layout and contents of the scientific summary (SPC) 
and package leaflet. Two reports were finalized in March 2014 and were 
published in October 2015 (PIL-S study 2014; PILS-BOX study 2014). 
Unfortunately, neither of these reports discusses the fundamental short-
comings or provides alternatives. 
This delay has created an opportunity to reflect on the historical develop-
ments (pages 715–720 in this chapter) and the current situation (pages 
720–725). It also makes it possible to consider some of the assumptions 
about the provision of information to patients. The assumptions that were 
mentioned in the first two sections of this chapter are:
•	 All medicines are equal, and the accompanying information can be 
treated in an identical way. 
•	 All patients across Europe read, understand and act in a similar way. 
The reasons for taking medicines, the pharmaceutical form, the 
context, the languages, and characteristics of patients can be ignored.
•	 The activity of ‘writing information for patients’ can be based on 
a standardized template. Different types of information (such as 
warnings, instructions, checklists) and different user actions (such as 
considering, taking, checking) are not relevant.
•	 The activity of ‘designing information for patients’ can be dealt with 
by a set of simple unrelated decisions.
•	 It is not necessary to make a link between contents and visual 
presentation.

726 / Karel van der Waarde 
•	 A readability test can be done outside a practical context.
•	 Readability test results can be indicated by two quantitative criteria 
only. 
•	 Writing, designing, and testing can be seen as independent and 
separated activities.
To modify legislation and guidelines, it is fairly easy to rephrase each 
of these assumptions by simply reversing their expectations. This might 
lead to some improvements, but it would not tackle some of the more fun-
damental flaws in the current regulatory framework. These fundamental 
flaws are related to the criteria, the process, and the arguments.
The criteria: performance-based use
If the aim of providing information about medicines is to enable people 
to act appropriately, then it is necessary to start from the activities that 
people need to perform. The current legislation treats all activities for all 
medicines as ‘similar’. It does not matter if a patient needs to take single 
tablet to relieve some mild pain, to use an asthma inhaler for a longer 
period, or to inject insulin for decades. 
In order to design information for these different situations, it seems ne-
cessary to consider a strategy that consists of a combination of five related 
actions. These are not in order of importance and need to be seen as part 
of a larger plan. Not all actions will be equally important for all medicines.
•	 Designing information. It is necessary and possible to supply 
information in different formats to really enable people to act, for 
example on paper, on a website, as PDF-­file, and on a mobile phone. 
This combination of digital and printed information about medicines 
still needs to be developed. 
•	 Designing a product. The design of medicines and devices needs to be 
more stongly related to the expectations and behaviour of patients. 
Some insulin pens are good examples, but many other devices such 
as asthma inhalers need attention. Alternative formats need to be 
investigated too. For example, it might be possible to integrate – for 
those medicines that must be taken with food – the active ingredients 
in food such as a cereal bar? This is currently legally impossible, but it 
would really help some patients to take medicines.
•	 Designing education and training. For some medicines, it is necessary 
to give training to patients and to healthcare professionals. Obvious 
examples are insulin injections and asthma inhalers, but other 
situations might also need specific education to train people to use 
medicines correctly.
•	 Designing a process. The process of providing medicines to patients 
might need to be reconsidered. The use of standardized packaging has 
changed the role and involvement of doctors, nurses and pharmacists 

Medical information design and its legislation / 727 
because information is provided by the brand owner. The use of 
branded medicine packs is probably not an ideal format to supply 
information in all situations – for example, for medicines used in 
hospitals, or for those used by professionals only. 
•	 Designing system. For some medicines it might be beneficial to 
consider the complete systems of production, prescribing, dispensing 
and delivery, especially the increase in online-­purchasing of medicines 
should provoke such a reassessment.
These five design activities imply that there is not a single solution that 
would fit all medicines. It is, however, likely that a combination of these 
activities would lead to an improvement in the safe and appropriate use of 
medicines.
Each of these five activities needs to be assessed by a different set of suc-
cess criteria. These criteria depend on the activity of patients in a context, 
and evaluate if patients are able to perform an action. In each of these five 
activities, different ‘performance-based criteria’ can be used. Such perfor-
mance-based criteria directly relate designed artefacts with the behaviour 
of people. 
The process: shifting values 
Apart from the need to start from the activities of people who handle 
medicines, it would be beneficial to try to involve all stakeholders in the 
development process of the information about medicines. At the moment, 
information about medicines is dealt with from three different perspec-
tives. There are legal requirements, based on the European Directives and 
national legislations. There are financial requirements of the pharmaceu-
tical industry, healthcare systems and insurances. And there are health 
requirements of patients. Unfortunately, these three perspectives do not 
have much in common: they don’t share a single collective aim. 
Many of the problematic regulations and guidelines are currently based 
on the exclusion of one or more perspectives. It would be beneficial to 
modify these to respect all three perspectives. This would mean that the 
consequences of guidelines need to be considered by patients and health-
care providers, regulatory authorities, and pharmaceutical industries. 
However, a change in the process is likely to shift relations of power 
and values. Such a shift would mean that the provision of information 
might move from legal and economic perspectives towards a healthcare 
perspective. Information about medicines should not only be ‘legally cor-
rect’, and ‘cost effective’, but increasingly aim to provide tangible benefits 
to patients.
Develop valid and reliable arguments
In order to facilitate the shift from ‘standardized information’ to ‘enabling 
the activities of people’, and the shift from legal and economic perspectives 

728 / Karel van der Waarde 
to a healthcare perspective, two options could be considered. The first is 
to develop and evaluate arguments and evidence. The second is to develop 
prototypes and models that show and prove the viability of alternatives. 
Unfortunately, some of the necessary arguments, evidence, and proto-
types are not available yet. 
Several issues have, though, increasingly been discussed over the last 
twenty years: the form of the legislation, the aims of providing informa-
tion, the formats of this provision, and the process of regulatory approval. 
The experience of the last decades shows that it would be beneficial to 
consider the following four broad issues before a new regulatory frame-
work is introduced. 
•	 What are the arguments for considering ‘performance-based 
legislation’? Although the 2004 Directive states that ‘information must 
enable the users to act appropriately’, performance-based legislation 
has not been implemented (Directive 2004/27/EC, article 65, 2004). 
Investigations into ‘users’, ‘enabling’, ‘acting’, and ‘appropriate’ 
will show the differences between medicines, and indicate how 
relevant performance standards can be established. These could be 
investigated further to form a basis for guidelines and legislation.
•	 Which arguments are needed for convincing patients and health care 
providers to make optimal use of medicines? The ultimate aim of 
providing information about medicines is to support people to make 
decisions and enhance effective medicine use. Although this sounds 
like a convincing argument, it might be an incorrect assumption. The 
answer might differ according to the type of medicine or context.
•	 What are the arguments for considering ‘information strategies’? 
There are many potential ways to provide relevant information 
to patients about a specific medicine. The involvement of the 
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and patients is 
required, but both analogue and digital formats need to be developed 
further.
•	 What are the arguments about the ‘regulation and control of 
information’? Information about medicines provided by the 
pharmaceutical industry needs to be checked and verified. This is 
essential to safeguard public health. The process, tools, and measures 
that are required to optimally fulfil this role need to be considered.
More research could bring the discussion about these four broad issues 
forward. Fundamental research could provide some reliable data, and 
applied research could find, define, and test ‘best practice’. 
Apart from the development of arguments, it is also possible to develop 
prototypes and conduct experiments. These could show how specific 
challenges can be dealt with. Just ‘making things that might work’, test-
ing these in practice, and improving these gradually might prompt some 

Medical information design and its legislation / 729 
progress too. Without valid arguments, reliable data, and convincing pro-
totypes it will remain very difficult to change the current situations into 
preferred ones.
Summarizing
In order to develop the current regulatory framework, three tasks need to 
be considered simultaneously. It is necessary:
•	 to establish what needs to be achieved. The aims and performance 
levels for people who handle medicines need to be defined. The 
questions ‘which people?’, ‘which actions?’, ‘in which context?’, and 
‘what are appropriate criteria?’ need to be used as a basis.
•	 to develop a process that is likely to achieve required performance 
levels. This calls for a shift in values by moving away from the legal and 
economic perspectives towards a healthcare perspective.
•	 to find out which arguments are needed to make sure that the process 
and performance levels are suitable and appropriate for all involved 
stakeholders.
These three tasks could not have been undertaken earlier. They were 
simply not known or articulated when the legislative framework was set up 
in the late 1980s. Approaching these tasks simultaneously and thus treating 
‘information about medicines for patients’ as a ‘wicked problem’ (cf. Rittel 
and Webber 1973), might seem far-­fetched and like wishful thinking, but is 
likely to lead to a necessary reconsideration of assumptions and a refram-
ing of perspectives.
Conclusions
Information provided with medicines on packaging and in package leaf-
lets is strictly regulated to make sure that patients receive correct and 
unbiased advice. Unfortunately, the legislation related to medical infor-
mation in Europe has not resulted in artefacts that really ‘enable people to 
act appropriately’. 
Before any changes in the legislation are suggested, it is necessary to 
reconsider current assumptions, choose relevant performance criteria, 
generate valid data, and develop convincing prototypes. 
Furthermore, based on experience, it seems essential to get all stake-
holders round the same table and make sure that the different criteria – 
legal, financial, and health – are understood and accepted.
This development requires a value shift from a legal-­economic approach 
towards health requirements. Focusing on the activities of people, and 
enabling individuals to act appropriately, is likely to disturb the balance 
between current legal and financial interests. 

730 / Karel van der Waarde 
730 / Karel van der Waarde 
References
Communication Research Institute of Australia. 
2004. Labelling code of practice: designing 
usable non-­prescription medicine labels for 
consumers. Canberra: Communication Research 
Press.
Directive 65/65/EC. 1965. Council Directive 65/65/
EEC of 26 January 1965 on the approximation 
of provisions laid down by law, regulation or 
administrative action relating to medicinal products. 
(OJ No L 22 of 9. 2. 1965, p. 369).
Directive 92/27/EC. 1992. Council Directive 92/27/
EEC of 31 March 1992 on the labelling of medicinal 
products for human use and on package leaflets. (OJ 
No L 113 of 30. 4. 1992, p. 8).
Directive 2001/83/EC. 2001. Directive 2001/83/ec of 
the European parliament and of the council of 6 
November 2001 on the Community code relating to 
medicinal products for human use. (OJ No L 311 of 
28. 11. 2001, p. 67).
Directive 2004/27/EC. 2004. Directive 2004/27/ec of 
the European parliament and of the council of 31 
March 2004 amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the 
Community code relating to medicinal products for 
human use. (OJ No L 136 of 30. 4. 2004, p. 34).
Directive 2010/84/EU. 2010. Directive 2010/84/
eu of the European parliament and of the council 
of 15 December 2010 amending, as regards 
pharmacovigilance, Directive 2001/83/EC on the 
Community code relating to medicinal products 
for human use. (OJ No L 348 of 31. 12. 2010, p. 74).
Directorate-­General Enterprise and Industry. 2009. 
Guideline on the readability of the labelling and 
package leaflet of medicinal products for human use. 
Brussels: European Commission.
EMA-­QRD-­template. Acesed 26 May 2014. <http://www.ema.europa.eu/
docs/en_GB/document_library/Template_or_
form/2009/12/WC500029823.pdf>. 
Gibbs, Sharon. 1990. ‘Informing patients about 
medicines: an evaluation of prescription 
information leaflets in general practice.’ PhD 
thesis, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton.
Haecht, Chris H. M. 1992. ‘Onderzoek naar de impact 
van patient-­gerichte geneesmiddelenbijsluiters.’ 
PhD thesis, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
University of Ghent. 
Joossens, Luc. 1990. De geneesmiddelenbijsluiters in 
de twaalf landen van de Europese gemeenschap. 
Brussels: OIVO.
MHRA. 2012. Best practice guidance on patient 
information leaflets. London: Medicines and 
Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. Acesed 26 May 2014. 
<http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/pl-a/
documents/websiteresources/con157151.pdf>.
Pharmaceutical Committee. 1998. A guideline on 
the readability of the label and package leaflet 
of medicinal products for human use. Brussels: 
European Commission.
PILS-BOX study. 2014. ‘Feasibility and value of a 
possible “key information section” in patient 
information leaflets and summaries of product 
characteristics of medicinal products for human 
use (The PILS-BOX study).’ Acesed 5 April 2016. <http://ec.europa.eu/
health/files/committee/75meeting/pilbx.pdf>.
PIL-S study. 2014. Study on the package leaflets 
and the summaries of product characteristics 
of medicinal products for human use (PIL-S 
study). Acesed 5 April 2016. <http://ec.europa.eu/health/files/
committee/75meeting/pil_s.pdf>. 
Rittel, Horst W., and Melvin M. Webber. 1973. 
‘Dilemmas in general theory of planning.’ Policy 
Sciences 4 (2): 155–169.
Rupf, Reto E. 1991. ‘Evaluation of patient-­oriented 
drug information: package leaflets as viewed 
by the patient and their impact on outpatients’ 
behaviour during treatment.’ PhD thesis, Faculty 
of Philosophy and Natural Sciences, University of 
Basel. 
Sless, David, and Robin Wiseman. 1994. Writing 
about medicines for people: usability guidelines 
for consumer medicine information. Canberra: 
Department of Health and Family Services.
Stichele, Robert H. Vander. 2004. ‘Impact of written 
drug information in patient package inserts: 
accep­tance and benefit/risk perception.’ PhD 
­thesis, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
and Heymans Institute of Pharmacology, 
University of Ghent.
Wolf, Anna, Jörg Fuchs, and Harald G. Schweim. 
2012. ‘QRD template texts intended for package 
inserts.’ Pharm. Ind. 74 (9): 1540–1549.

Index


733
Page numbers in bold refer to 
figures, page numbers in italic refer 
to tables.
3Ps programme 355–6
A
abstract and synthetic auditory 
alarms 384–5
abstraction 162
Academy of Fine Arts and Design, 
Ljubljana 647–50
access point principle 545, 548–9, 
552
access structures 186n, 189
accessibility: e-books 499; indexes 
490, 499; typefaces for 485–6, 
486; universal 405, 414
acoustics fundamentals 380–2
act utilitarianism 164
action, segmentation of 357
active observation 650n
Adams, A. 310, 311–2, 438
Adams, George A. 134, 135n
Adobe Illustrator 89
Adobe Systems Incorporated 184
Adprint 125, 127, 128, 129, 130, 
134
advertorials 627
aerial perspective 87n
aesthetic qualities, page layout 188
Affordable Care Act (USA) 658
affordances, theory of 275, 278–9, 
280
Agrawala, Maneesh 34
Aicher, Otl 154
Aiden, Erez 165
Aigner, Wolfgang 39, 40
Ainsworth, S. 105n, 703
alarm fatigue 382
alarms. see auditory alarm design
‘Alarms and Alerts Guide and 
Evaluation Tool’, Rail Safety and 
Standards Board 378
Alexander, Christopher 95n, 189
Allen, Brock S. 280
alphabetical order 495–6
ambient noise level 382
ambiguity 349, 357–8
American Institute of Graphic Arts 
(AIGA) 538n
American Institutes for Research 
636
American Medical Association 655
American National Standards 
Institute, ANSI Z535 332, 333, 333, 
336, 337, 338, 339, 340
American Society for Indexing 489
American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers 148
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol 530, 
531, 534, 535–9, 536, 537
anatomical illustration: fold-
out reveals 91; labelling 101; 
Leonardo da Vinci 89, 90, 91
Anderson, T 186
animal camouflage 430
animations, animated diagrams 
and graphics 94, 247: Animation 
Processing Model (APM) 
371–4, 372; Cognitive Theory 
of Multimedia Learning 703; 
communicative effectiveness 703; 
Composition Approach 371–2; 
educational 356, 361, 369–74, 
370, 372; interpretation 370–1; 
learners processing burden 
371, 373; learning cognitive 
processes 703; learning contexts 
701; Progressive Path cues 371; 
visual cues 370–1; text-image 
relationships 704–5; time-oriented 
data 30
animated instructions, electronic-
Patient Information Leaflets 
(e-PILs) 701–11
animated procedural pictorial 
sequences 704, 704–5, 705; 
advantages 701; close shots 708; 
comprehension test 706–8, 707, 
709–10, 710–1; effectiveness 708–
11; emphatic devices 708; e-PIL 
706–11, 707; recommendations 
711; text-image relationships 708
Animation Processing Model (APM) 
371–4, 372
annotation 229–31
ANSI 304
ANSI Z535 332, 333, 333, 336, 337, 
338, 339, 340
Anthoniszoon, Cornelis, Caerte van 
Oostlant 70, 71
anti-smoking campaigns 671, 673, 
673, 674–5, 675
Apple 315, 326, 483, 566, 574
apprehension 355, 356
apps 613; wayfinding 519–20
Architect’s Journal 520
Arend, Udo 320–1, 321
Aristotle 68, 597
Armbruster, B. 186
Arntz, Gerd 108, 113, 114, 265
arrows 368; function 103, 351, 352, 
356; technical and scientific 
illustration 103, 103; wayfinding 
537, 537
arrows, straight ahead 541–52, 542; 
access point principle 545, 545, 
548–9, 551–2; ambiguous 548, 
548; application 545–51, 546, 
547, 548, 549, 550, 551; decoding 
541; destination principle 
542–5, 543, 544, 546, 546, 551–2; 
downward pointing 541, 545, 545, 
547, 547–8, 548; flow lines 544, 
544–5; interpretation 552; lack of 
agreement 545–6, 546; mixed use 
548–51, 549, 550, 551; multilevel 
environments 547, 547, 548–51, 
549, 550, 551; perspective 542, 
542; upward pointing 541, 542–5, 
543, 544, 546, 546–7, 547
artefact structure 189
arthritis 656, 665–6, 666
Arthur, Paul 520, 542, 542
artificial intelligence 402
Artis Royal Zoo, Amsterdam 532, 
532
Askehave, Inger 474
assembly instructions, text-free 95, 
95, 96
assisted GPS 564
Association of American Publishers 
499
attention maintenance 337, 337–8
attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) 656, 662–4, 663
Attneave, Fred 319
audience, evaluation studies 451
auditory alarm design 377–88; 
abstract and synthetic alarms 
384–5; abstract-iconic/analogic 
continuum 386–7; acoustic 
environment 382, 388; acoustics 
fundamentals 380–2; aesthetic 
attributes 382; appropriateness 
387; auditory icons 385–6; 
cognition background 382–3, 
383; detectability 381–2; 
disadvantages of speech 383; 
information content 384–7; 
localizability 381; loudness 380; 
metaphor in 385–6; mnemonics 
387; modality selection 378–80, 
379; phase 380; philosophy 
380, 387–8; pitch 382; process 
387–8; referents 380; signals 380; 
Index

734 / Index
sound types 382–3, 383, 388; 
traditional 384; and vision 378
auditory icons 385–6
Australia 153
Australian Communications 
Research Institute (CRI) 621, 628
authority, loss of 178
autism 656
automatic learning 16
axes, labelling 51, 51
axonometric projection 87n
B
Back to the future part II (film) 524
Bailey, John H. 319
Bal, M. 588
balanced scorecard, The 627–8, 628
Bandura, Albert 678
Banks, Tom 632
bar charts 43, 50, 271, 271
Barbeau de la Bruyère, Jean-Louis, 
Mappemonde historique 13, 14, 15
Barbeu-Dubourg, Jacques 3n; 
Chronographie ou description de 
tems 15–7, 16
Barton, Ben 215
Barton, Marthalee 215
Barton, Mary 197–9
Bartzen-Culver, Kathleen 162
Bateman, J. 189, 191
Bateman, John A. 225, 230, 232, 
233, 234
Bauhaus 148, 188
Bayer, Herbert, exhibition design 
591, 591–2
Beale, Lester 138
Beck, Harry 265
before-and-after treatment 119
behaviour change 669–70, 671, 
681–2
behavioural compliance 342–3
Behrens, Roy R 427
beliefs 341–2
Beniger, James R. 57
Bentham, Jeremy 163–4
Bernhardt, S. 190
Bertin, Jacques 27, 224
Bhatia, Vijay K. 474
Bible, the 7
Biczók, Gergely 566
Biderman, Albert D. 47
big data 165
Bilandzic, Helena 283–4
Bilton, N. 192
Black, Alison 210
Blake, John 69
Bluetooth Low Energy 566–7
Boekraad, Hugues C. 643
Boersema, T. 310, 311–2, 538–9
Bolingbroke, Lord 18
Bonk, Robert J. 474
Bonsiepe, Gui 205, 208, 215
books: index main headings 493; 
index subheadings 493; index 
term choices 492; indexing 
processes 491; metadata 490; 
resilience 277; typefaces 479
Boucheix, Jean-Michael 371, 372
Boulton, Matthew 44, 45, 48
Bouma, Herman xi
Bouwer, Andreas 572
boxes 351–2
Boyd, Ceilyn 501
Boyd Davis, Stephen 18, 32
brain imaging 459
brands and branding 315, 318, 577, 
623–4, 626–7
breaking down 119
Brennan, Francis 129
brightness 406
Brighton 519
Brinkman, Dr W. 662
Brinton, Willard C. 58; Graphic 
methods for presenting facts 148, 
148–9
Bristol 517
British Dyslexia Association 486
British Parking Association 557
British Standard BS 7581 503, 504
Brown, Bruce 624–8, 625
Brown, Tim 647–8
Brown, Tom 619
Buache, Philippe 13
Buchanan, Colin 632
buildings, wayfinding inside 520–1, 
521
built environments, wayfinding 511, 
513–5, 514, 516, 516–21, 519, 521
Bureau Mijksenaar 535–8
Burke, Christopher 117
Burke, Edmund 18
Burtin, Will 138, 141, 142, 143, 145
business to business forms 617
Busselle, Rick 283–4
Butz, Andreas 563n, 571–2
Byrne, Michael D. 319
C
caesarean delivery 656
Cai, Jessie 564, 573
Cairney, P. 305
calendars 24
Calvert, Margaret 517
camouflage 430
Campbell, Robert L. 292
Candlin, Christopher N. 464
Card, Stuart K., 244, 292, 295–6
Carnegie-Mellon University, 
Communications Design Center 
153
Carpman, Janet Reizenstein 511
Carroll, John M., 292, 294
Carta Pisana 69–70, 70
Carter, R. 578
cartographic visualization 244
Cartographies of time (Rosenberg 
and Grafton) 4
cartography 9, 12, 13
Centre for Information Design 
Research 213
Centro de Estudios Espinosa 
Yglesias (CEEY) 595
Černe Oven, Petra 652
Challenger disaster 656
Chandler, Maurice 118n
Chaparro, B. S. 441
Chapman, Myra 503
chart junk 4, 18, 172
Chart of biography (Priestley) 17, 
17–8, 19, 30–1, 31
charts 43
Cherry, Colin, On human 
communication 154, 154
Chi, Ed H. 501
children 105n
children’s books, Isotype: 
approaches to visual organisation 
118, 119; before-and-after 
treatment 119; breaking down 
119; comparisons 118; design 
process 118, 121–2, 123, 
124; feedback 122, 124, 125; 
indexing for 500; integration 
of text and pictures 122, 122; 
juxtaposition 119; magnification 
119; narrative explanations 118; 
planning 121; repetition 119; 
representations 118; reviews 124; 
scale 119; source material 121–2; 
transformation process 120–2, 
122, 125
Chisnell, Dana 392
Chorianopoulos, Konstantinos 
318–9
chronographie 3n
Chronographie ou description de tems 
(Barbeu-Dubourg) 15–7, 16
Chronography 16–7
chronology 7
Chung, Jaewoo 567n
chunking 337, 337–8
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital 
Medical Center 656
CINDEX 491
Cinegram 92–4, 93
circle charts 54, 54–5, 55, 57
clarity 97–8, 99, 208, 349, 354–7, 
357, 426, 553–60, 578, 609, 611, 
617, 635–6, 635–40, 697, 697–8
Clark, Jeff 264n
Cleland, Thomas Maitland 129n
Cleveland, William S. 27, 28, 34
auditory alarm design (cont.):

Index / 735 
closed-system indexing 488
coastal views 65–6, 66, 74
co-design 649
Coe, Mary 498
cognitive load 498, 703
cognitive maps 512
cognitive processes approach, 
exhibitions 597, 597, 599
cognitive psychology 56–7, 292
Cognitive Theory of Multimedia 
Learning 703, 709
cohort studies 453
collaboration 622–3, 649; aims 656; 
areas of expertise 656, 657–8; 
benefits 655–7, 667; decision 
support aids 663, 665, 666; 
design as a research method 660; 
divergent/convergent thinking 
659–60; effectiveness 661; ethical 
requirements 661; features 655, 
657–61, 667; goals 659; medical + 
design 655–77; personas 657–8; 
perspectives 657; projects 655; 
prototypes 660–1; rigour 658; 
shared knowledge 657–8
collection indexes 489; accuracy 
498; cross references 494; 
indexing processes 491–2; 
locators 495; main headings 
493–4; subheadings 493–4; term 
choices 492
colour: holistic thinking 658–9; 
international palette 324; 
labelling with 419; perception 
of 406; saturation 407; text 430; 
typefaces 484, 484; use of 143, 
144; visual conventions 261; 
warnings and warning symbols 
336, 339
colour bleeding 414
colour blindness 414, 431–2
colour coding 51, 51; wayfinding 
534, 535
colour contrast 638; bleeding 414; 
brightness 406; checks 414; 
colour plane effects 410–4, 
412, 413; colour sets 412, 413; 
definition 406; design approach 
406–7; differences 406–7; as a 
function of luminance 410, 411; 
gestalt principles 431–2; headings 
407, 407–8; impact of red, green, 
and blue 409, 409–10; limits 410; 
local colour sets 412–3, 413; 
luminance contrast calculations 
408–10, 409, 411, 412, 413; 
luminance contrast ratio 407–8; 
minimum threshold 406, 414; 
surface material characteristics 
407; and text size 406; for 
visually impaired readers 405–14; 
WCAG2.0 407–14, 409, 411, 412, 
413
colour sets 412, 413
columns 506, 506
Comber, Tim 215
Comenius 361, 362, 362
comics 234
The commercial and political atlas 
(Playfair) 43, 45; bar charts 50; 
colour coding 51, 51; divided 
surface area chart 50, 50, 50; 
errors 49n; event markers 52, 52; 
first edition 48, 52; framing 51; 
graphical innovation 49, 49–54, 
50, 51, 52, 53; graphs 48–9; 
gridlines 52, 52; hachure and 
stippled dots 51; labelling of axes 
51, 51; second edition 48; solid 
and broken lines 54; suppression 
of non-significant digits 52, 
52; theoretical/hypothetical/
projected values 53, 53–4; third 
edition 48, 50, 51, 51, 52, 53; 
time period indicators 52; time-
series line graph 49, 49; titles and 
textual descriptions 50–1
communication: clarity of 426, 635–
6, 640; drivers 625, 626, 627–8; 
failures 199; forms and 607–8; 
improvement measurement 624–
8, 625, 626, 628; LUNAtic design 
methodology 635–40; modes 625
Communication Research Institute 
of Australia (CRIA) 153
communication technologies 178–9
communication theory 237–8
Communication-Human Information 
Processing model 331, 334–43, 
335; attention maintenance 337, 
337–8; attention switch 336, 
344; attitudes and beliefs 341–2; 
channel 334; communications 
framework 334; comprehension 
338, 338–41, 339, 340; delivery 
334–5; environmental stimuli 
335; evaluation 344; motivation 
342, 344; processing stages 334; 
receiver 336; source 334
Communications Design Center, 
Carnegie-Mellon University 153
communicative effectiveness, 
animations 703
communicative power 32
commutation tests 180
company forms 608–10, 611, 612; 
business to business forms 617; 
internal 614–6, 615, 616
comparative information 43.
computer vision systems 567–8
computers, potential 23
conceptual thinking 193
congruity 355
Conklin, Harold 418
consequentialism 163
considerate text 186
constructivism 188
consultancy 620–1
continuity principle 428, 432, 432
contrast principle 428, 431–2
contrast sets: coordinated labelling 
421; definition 418; embedded 
420; exemplifiers 422; iconicity 
420–1; labelling tools 418–20; 
labels and labelling 417–23; 
topologies 420; visual identities 
421–2
control groups 457
controlled vocabulary 488, 492, 494, 
498
conversational literacy 199
Conzola, Vincent C. 343
coordinated labelling 421
Core data sheet 715
corporate identity design 153
corporate typefaces 482, 482, 483
corpus linguistics 191
Cote, Joseph A. 326, 326
Courtis, M. S. 154–5
craft 622
credibility 210, 298
Crichton, Jonathon 464
critical consciousness 646
cross-disciplinarity xi
Crystal, D. 152, 152
Cukier, Kenneth 165
cultural differences, icons 322–3
cultural identity, local 481
cultural preferences, icons 323–4, 
324
customer experience 610, 623–4, 
624, 627–8, 628, 633, 636
customer service touchpoints 623–
4, 624, 628–9, 633
cut-away views 88, 89
Cutts, Martin 152
cycle plots 34, 35
D
D’Alembert, Jean le Rond 12
The Dallas Morning News 166
data analysis: evaluation studies 
460–1; workflows 40
data handling, ethics 167, 167–9, 
168
data journalism 243, 245
data presentation, ethics 169–73, 
171
data processing, ethics 167–9
data publication, ethics 167, 167–9, 
168
data sources, ethics 165–7, 166
data stories 245, 250

736 / Index
data visualization 244–5, 250–1, 
456–7
data-graphics, Isotype 107–15
daunt factor 692
Davy, D. 152, 152
de Jong, M. D. T. 443–4
De Stijl 188
Deatherage, B. 378–9, 379
decision support aids, medical 
655–7; ADHD 662–4, 663; 
HPV vaccination 664–5, 665; 
International Patient Decision 
Aid Standards 661–2; juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis 665–6, 666; 
trials 664
Delft University of Technology 538–9
Delin, J. 189, 191, 624
demonstration tables 505, 505
Denis, Daniel J. 244
deontological ethics 163
Descartes, R. 12, 47
design, definition 656
design aesthetics 210
design as a research method 660
Design Business Association 632
design coordination 153
Design coordination and corporate 
image (Henrion and Parkin) 153
Design Council 632
design critique, GeM framework 
231, 231–2
design education 297; change 
implementation 651–2; 
collaboration 649; critical 
consciousness 646; curriculum 
651; ‘Designing an agenda’ 
project 647–50, 652–3; 
emancipatory method 645–53; 
knowledge acquisition 646–7; 
knowledge transmission 
644; traditional method 644; 
transformation 646–7
design improvement: case 
studies 628–32, 629, 630, 632; 
consultancy 620–1; design 
thinking 619–20; improvement 
624–8, 625, 626, 628, 628–32, 
629, 630, 632; information 
design 621–3; information design 
quality 629, 629–30; performance 
measurement 623; return on 
investment measurement 630, 
630–1; up-front business case 
631–2, 632; usability testing 622
Design Issues 208
design knowledge 291
design process 621–3; phases 619–
20; role for genre 227–9; sources 
of constraint 228, 228
design solutions, testing xi
design thinking 619–20, 623
designers, three mistakes 647–8
‘Designing an agenda’ project 
647–50, 652–3
Designing for people (Dreyfuss) 155, 
155
Designing instructional text (Hartley) 
151
Designing usable texts (Duffy and 
Waller) xi
design-test-repeat 293
destination principle 542–5, 543, 
544, 546, 546, 551–2
detectability, sound 381–2
development cycle 619
Dewar, R. E. 305
diagnostic testing 105, 437, 438, 
438, 443–4, 723–4
Diagrammatics 86
diagrams 86, 349–58; abstract 363; 
ambiguity 349, 357–8; ancient 
world 349; animated 361, 369–74, 
370, 372; apprehension 355, 
356; characteristics of 263, 
363–4; clarity 349, 354–7, 357; 
congruity 355; cultural factors 
352; definition 350; depicting 
dynamics 368, 368–9; design 349, 
354–8, 358; designers 367; Diderot 
and D’Alembert’s Encyclopédie 
353, 353–4; educational 
advantages 364–5; educational 
361–74; educational effectiveness 
365–6; glyphs 350, 351–2, 355; 
information selection 355; 
knowledge structures 349; Minard 
354, 355; purpose 349, 349–50, 
358; spatial diagrammatic devices 
350; spatial information 349, 
352; symbols 352–3; temporal 
information 349; word use 352–3
Dickinson, David 211, 211, 216, 444, 
445–6
dictionaries 483–5, 484
difference threshold 212
digital genres 192–3, 267, 267–8
digital natives 276
digital page layouts 192–5, 196, 197
Dillon, Andrew 151, 297, 440
directed communication 207
disability sign 265, 265, 270
Discus chronologicus (Weigel) 4–8, 5
Disney, Walt 131
divergence 236
divergent/convergent thinking 
659–60
diversity: design challenges 391–
403; enhancements for 401–2; 
text input challenges 393–4
divided surface area chart 50, 50
Doctors, Dissection and 
Resurrection Men exhibition 577, 
579; and chronology 584–5; cues 
580–1; exhibition content 580–1, 
581; exhibition graphics 581, 589; 
institutional context 587–8; Lubar 
585; map 582–4, 585; narratorial 
perspectives 586–8; photographs 
587; sequence 582; spaces and 
locations 581–4, 582; timeline 
585–6, 586; verbal cues 582–3; 
visual cues 582, 584–5; voices 588
document creators, graphic literacy 
199–201
document design, and gestalt 
principles 428
document literacy 185–6
documents: diagnostic testing 105n; 
life cycle 194
Dodsley, Robert 7
double-page spreads 188
Dragicevic, Pierre 36
Dreyfuss, Henry, Designing for 
people 155, 155
Dual Coding Theory 703
Duffy, Charles xi
duty ethics 163
dynamic monitoring 573
dynamic representations 368, 368–
9; time-oriented data 28
Dynamics in document design 
(Schriver) xii
dyslexic readers 486, 486
Dyson, Mary C. 296, 443
E
Eagle comic 88
Eagleson, Robert 153
Eames, Charles and Ray 646, 649, 
652
earcons 379, 387
Easterby, Ronald xi, 150, 150
e-books: accessibility 499; apps 501; 
indexing 488, 500; locators 494–5; 
sales 276
ecological psychology 280
Economist 172
editorial design, and graphic 
information 141, 143, 144, 145
education 109, 361–74; animations 
356, 361; exhibition value and 
591–605; illustrations 362–3; 
medical 655; textbooks 361, 362
educational design 625
educational diagrams 361–74; 
advantages 364–5; animated 
361, 369–74, 370, 372; Animation 
Processing Model (APM) 
371–4, 372; designers 366, 367; 
effectiveness 365–6; goals 366; 
learners processing burden 371, 
373; target audience 365; testing 
367

Index / 737 
educational information 131
educational method: change 
implementation 651–2; 
collaboration 649; critical 
consciousness 646; ‘Designing an 
agenda’ project 647–50, 652–3; 
emancipatory method 645–53; 
knowledge acquisition 646–7; 
knowledge transmission 644; 
teachers 644, 645–6; traditional 
644; transformation 646–7
egocentric 3D maps 81, 81–2, 82
eightmaps.com 165–7, 166
Eindhoven xi
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 149
Electronic Chart Display and 
Information Systems (ECDIS) 77, 
77–8
electronic publishing 183
electronic-Patient Information 
Leaflets (e-PILs) 701–11; animated 
procedural pictorial sequences 
706–11, 707; comprehension 
test 706–8, 707, 709–10, 710–1; 
effectiveness 708–11; emphatic 
devices 708; ; limitations 
702–3; pictorial sequences 702 
recommendations 711; text 702
elemental typography 147
Ells, J. G. 305
Elsevier 482, 482
embodied cognition 281–2
embodiment 281–2
emotional impact, icons 324–7
empathy 620–1, 621
emphasis 431, 687
empiricism, and theory 293–4
enablement 231
e-navigation 79
engagement 205, 206, 210–1; visual 
rhetoric 212–8, 213, 217
Enhanced Interactive Spiral 
technique 35, 35
Entertainment Overcoming 
Resistance Model (EORM) 677–9, 
678, 681
environmental image 513
environmental structuring 531
EPUB Indexes specification 487, 488, 
497, 499, 500, 501
Eratosthenes 68
Ergonomics (journal) 151
’Espinasse, Margaret 47
Espinosa Meneses, Margarita 593
ethics 161–73; collaboration 
661; competing interests 
699; consultancy 621; data 
handling 167, 167–9, 168; data 
presentation 169–73, 171; 
data processing 167–9; data 
publication 167, 167–9, 168; data 
sources 165–7, 166; individualistic 
643; and information value 167; 
maps and map reading 162; 
moral rule 165; normative 163; 
research 446–7; utilitarianism 
163–5
European Agency for the Evaluation 
of Medicinal Products (EMEA) 718
European Commission (EC) 685
European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
686, 695, 718–9
European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI) 304
European Union 725; Council of 
Health 716; Directive (92/27/
EC) 717–8, 721, 723; Directive 
2004/27/EC 727; medicine 
information legislation 715–29
Eusebius 3
evaluation 603
evaluation studies 451–62; 
accuracy/knowledge/memory 
457; audience 451; behaviour 
457; bias 454; blinding 454; 
cohort studies 453; confidence 
457; control groups 457; data 
analysis 460–1; double-blinding 
454; exhibitions 601–2, 603, 604; 
focus groups 460; formative 451, 
452, 453; informal 451, 457–8; 
insights 456–7; intentions 457; 
interviews 458–9; limitations 451; 
longitudinal studies 453–4, 457; 
measurements 456–7; method 
choice 452; methods 451–2; 
observational research 459; 
partners 461; planning 452–4; 
preference 457; preference data 
453; qualitative 452, 456, 461; 
quantitative 452, 456, 460–1; 
questionnaires 458; randomized 
controlled trials 452–3; 
randomized cross-over approach 
453; response capture 457–60; 
sampling 454–6; in situ trials 453; 
summative 451, 452, 452–3; time 
456
event markers 52, 52
Excel Parking Services Ltd 557–8, 
558
exemplifiers 422
exhibitions and exhibition graphics 
577–89; audience 595–6; and 
chronology 584–5; clarity 578; 
cognitive processes approach 597, 
597, 599; cognitive structure 596–
7, 597, 599; design concepts 591; 
design principles 591–2; Doctors, 
Dissection and Resurrection Men 
exhibition 579, 580–8, 581, 583, 
589; educational value 591–605; 
effectiveness 577; evaluation 601–
2, 603, 604; framing 588; goals 
591; graphic design 577–9, 578; 
graphic objects 578; Imagine your 
future: social mobility case study 
593–605, 597, 600, 601, 603, 603, 
604; interactive 591; institutional 
context 587–8; learning 
environment 593; locations 
581–2; narratorial perspectives 
586–8; photographs 587; roles 
577–9, 591; sequence 582; 
social information design 595–6, 
596; spaces 582, 582–4; spatial 
approach 596, 597, 599; spatial 
transitions 587; storyworlds 577, 
579–80; timelines 585–6, 586; 
touring 592; verbal cues 582–3; 
visitor movement 592; visual cues 
577, 579–80, 582, 584–5, 589; 
voices 588; wall graphics 584–5, 
586
experiential texture 282
experimentation, 294
explanation 625
exploded sequences 88, 90
explorative information graphics 252
expository agency 587–8
expression, forms of 222
Extended Elaboration Likelihood 
Model 678
Extended Parallel Process Model 
(EPPM) 673–5, 674
eye movement tracker technologies 
291, 459
F
Fallah, Navid 520–1
fear-appeal messages 669, 670, 
672–7, 673, 674, 675, 676, 677
Federal Highway Administration 
168, 168
Federico et al. 34
feedback 442
Ferguson, Stephen 15–6, 19n
Few, Stephen C. 503
figure and ground organization 428, 
428–30, 429
Findeli, Alain 643
Fischer, S. 703
Fischetti, William 45–6
Fish Bowl 396
fixed pages 195, 196, 197
Fleetwood, Michael D. 319
flow lines 544, 544–5
flowed pages 195, 196, 197
Flying Review 88
focal awareness, readers 190
focus groups 460
Foges, Wolfgang 127, 130n
fold-out reveals 88, 91

738 / Index
Foltz, P. W. 183
Food and Drug Administration (US) 
720
Footscray Station footbridge 550, 
550–1, 551
Forbes, T. W. 151
Forceville, C. 179
foregrounding 269–70
formal qualities, page layout 188
formative evaluation 451, 452, 453
forms 607–17, 609; apps 613; basic 
requirements 610; business to 
business 617; clarity 609, 611, 
617; company 608–10, 611, 612; 
complexity 613, 615; customer 
experience 610; data exchange 
613; definition 607; design 
literature 608n; fillers 608, 613, 
617, 636; government 612, 612–4, 
613, 614; information access 
615; internal company 614–6, 
615, 616; issuers 608; language 
608, 610, 613; LUNAtic design 
methodology 635–40; online 
609, 609, 610, 611; problem with 
607–8; questions 608; roles 607–8; 
settings 607; stakeholders 616; 
standardized 614; structure 610; 
tone of voice 610n
Forrester Research 633
Fortunati, L. 179n
Fortune magazine 128; articles 141; 
editorial and visual concepts 128–
9; editorial design 141, 143, 144, 
145; graphic information 130, 
138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 
145–6; launch 128; survey feature 
129; use of colour 143, 144
Foster, J. 310, 311, 312
fotonovelas 679–81, 680
Foucault, Michel 226
Fox, Kathryn 503
fragmented pages 195, 196, 197
Frake, Charles 418
frames 29, 351–2
framing 190–1
Franklin, Benjamin 17
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
(US) 162
Freire, Paulo 644
Fretz, Mark 499
Friendly, Michael 244
Froshaug, Anthony 154, 154n
Frutiger, Adrian 537
Fry, Ben 264
fugitive pages 195, 196, 197
Fuller, Buckminster R. 644, 646
functional literacy 185–6
Funkhouser, H. Gray 264
Future books 127–8, 134–5; graphic 
design of information 127–8; 
Isotype Institute contribution 
134–5; visual presentation 127
Future magazine 127–8, 130, 134; 
aims 133; editorial design 143; 
editorial process 131; graphic 
information 129–30, 132, 
133, 135–6, 136, 137; Isotype 
Institute contribution 129–31, 
132, 133, 135n, 145; maps 
130–1; photographs 129–30; print 
production 132, 133; ‘T.V.A. for 
south-east Europe’ 130, 131, 132; 
use of Disney material 131
G
Gallucci, Giovanni Paolo 7
Games, Abram 128, 135–6, 137, 145
Ganier, F. 704
Gantt charts 25, 35
Gapminder Foundation 36
García, Mariano 317–8
García Hernández, Caridad 593
Garcie, Pierre, Le grant routtier et 
pyllotage 66, 66
Garland, Ken 151, 154
Gatwick Airport Skyway 549, 549
Generation Y 646n
generic perspective, page layout 
189
Genre and Multimodality project 
229, 229–32, 231, 233
genres 205; definition 221, 227; 
digital 192–3, 267, 267–8; 
document 192; families 227; 
multimodality 221, 226–9, 228, 
239; page layout 189; as rhetorical 
frameworks 266–9, 267, 268; 
socializing effects 266; and visual 
rhetoric 205–8
geographic information 61
George-Palilonis, Jennifer 252
geoslavery 573
Gesellschafts- und 
Wirtschaftsmuseum in Wien 
(Social and Economic Museum of 
Vienna) 107, 113, 591–2
gestalt principles 425–33; attention 
425; continuity 428, 432, 432; 
contrast 428, 431–2; definition 
427; and document design 428; 
figure and ground organization 
428, 428–30, 429; grouping 
428, 433, 433; organization 428; 
perception 425, 425–6; proximity 
428, 432, 432–3; sensation 425; 
similarity 428, 430, 430–1; syntax 
427
gestalt psychology 188, 427
Gibson, David 513
Gibson, James J. 280, 543, 544, 
544–5
global navigation satellite systems 
(GNSS) 76, 516, 561, 562–9
globalization 481
glyph 35, 350, 351–2, 355, 541
Gmail 399–400
Goldfarb, Ilia 324
Goldsworthy, R. C. 310
Golledge, Reginald G. 512
Gomez, Javier V. 568
GOMS (Goals, Operators, Methods, 
and Selection rules) 292
González de Cosío, María (Maria 
González de Cossío) 443
Goodman, Nelson 87n
Google Now 572
Gould, John D. 296
government forms 612, 612–4, 613, 
614
GPS 76, 509, 516, 562, 562–9, 564–5
Grafton, Anthony T. 4, 12
Grant, Myron A. 511
graphic design literature 187–90
graphic devices 216–8, 420
graphic forms, choice 170
graphic information: definition 
128n; and editorial design 141, 
143, 144, 145; Fortune magazine 
128, 128–9, 130, 138, 139, 140, 
141, 142, 143, 144, 145–6; Future 
books 127–8, 134–5; Future 
magazine 127–8, 129–30, 132, 
133, 134, 135–6, 136, 137; graphic 
design 127–8; integration 141; use 
of colour 143, 144; visual impact 
138; visual presentation 127
Graphic Information Research Unit 
152
graphic language 188
graphic literacy 177, 197–201, 198, 
201; conversational level 200; 
document creators 199–201; 
graphic level 200; prose level 200
graphic metaphor 86
Graphic methods for presenting facts 
(Brinton) 148, 148–9
graphical symbols. see symbols
Graphics handbook (Garland) 154
Graunt, John 43, 46
Great Britain, road signs 149, 517
Greeks, ancient 68
Green, Andrew 493
Green, R. T. 154–5
Greenwald, Glenn 165
gridlines 52, 52, 506
Grinstein, Georges 27
grounded theory analysis 461
grouping principle 428, 433, 433
Grudin, Jonathan 319
The Guardian 245, 480, 480, 544, 544
Guiding Light system 567n
Gushrowski, B. 440

Index / 739 
H
Haas, Christina 279
Habel, Christopher 230
Haber, Robert B. 26
hachure and stippled dots 51
Halcomb, C. G. 441
Halliday, M. 190
Hamilton, David 197–9
Haramundanis, Katherine 327
Harper, R. 194
Hartley, Jim, Designing instructional 
text 151
Harvard Business Review 155n
Harvard University, Graduate School 
of Business Administration 148
Hasan, R. 190
hazard control 331, 332–3, 333, 344
hazard perception 341
headings: colour contrast 407, 
407–8; medicine package leaflets 
687, 695–6; spacing 695–6
health, return on investment 
measurement 630, 630–1
health promotion campaigns 669–
82; anti-smoking campaigns 671, 
673, 673, 674–5, 675; behaviour 
change 669–70, 671, 681–2; 
challenges 681–2; defensive 
reactions 674; Entertainment 
Overcoming Resistance Model 
(EORM) 677–9, 678, 681; 
Extended Parallel Process Model 
(EPPM) 673–5, 674; fear-appeal 
messages 669, 670, 672–7, 673, 
674, 675, 676, 677; fotonovelas 
679–81, 680; HIV/AIDS prevention 
campaigns 670–2, 673, 676, 
676–7, 677; messages 671; 
narratives 669, 670, 677–81, 678, 
680; negative consequences 672; 
persuasive power 669; puzzling 
messages 669, 670, 670, 670–2, 
671; recommended behaviour 
673; resistance 677, 679; 
understanding 672
hearing, spatial 381
Hecht, Michael 681
Heer, Jeffrey 34, 248
Hegarty, Mary 593
Helal, Sumi 565
Helvicus, Theatrum historicum 6
Henderson, Pamela W. 326, 326
Henrion, F. H. K. 128, 135, 136, 136, 
143, 145, 153
Henschel, R. 191
herbals 46–7
Herman, David 579
Hern, Alex 622
heuristics 436–7, 438, 438, 439, 
441–2
hidden detail: cut-away views 88, 
89; exploded sequences 88, 90; 
fold-out reveals 88, 91; portraying 
85, 86–8, 87, 89, 90, 91, 92; 
see-through surfaces 88, 91; 
transparent sheets 91
hierarchical interactivity 246
hierarchy 257, 257–8; data graphical 
strategies 270–1, 271; invoking 
265–72, 267, 268, 269, 271; 
pictorial strategies 269–70; 
spectrum 269, 269; textual 
strategies 271; visual 269–70
High Sensitivity GPS 564
Hiippala, Tuomo 231, 232, 233
historical time, visualizations of: 
approaches 4; cartography 
9, 12, 13; chronology 7; early 
visualizations of 3–19; figurative 
graphic metaphor 8–9, 10–1, 
12–3, 14, 15–8, 16, 17; lists 
3–4; mathematical divisions 6; 
mechanical model 4–8, 5, 7; 
metaphorical 9; narrative 6; scale 
15; and space 13, 18; timelines 
3–4, 18–9; totality 15; visual 
summary 8
HIV/AIDS prevention campaigns 
670–2, 673, 676–7, 677
Hoch, Ernest 156, 156
Hochschule für Gestaltung (HfG 
Ulm) 147n
Hoeken, Hans 672
Hoey, Michael 474
Hoffler, T. N. 703
Hoffman, Bob 280
Hofstede, Geert 323, 676
holistic thinking 658–9
Holloway, Julie B. 319
Holmes, Nigel 251–2, 451
Hoofddorp R-NET station 548–9, 549
horizon graphs 33, 33–4
Horn, Robert 151, 153n
Hornik, Robert C. 669
Hornikx, Jos 445–6
Horton, William K. 318
Hospers, Gert-Jan 510
HPV vaccination 656, 664–5, 665
HSB-colour model 407
Huang, Sheng-Cheng 316–7, 317, 
319–20, 321, 324
Hughes, P. 578–9
human activity, representation of 
295, 296–8
human navigation. see wayfinding
human–computer interaction (HCI) 
223–4
Huot, Stéphane 36
Hynes, Niki 326
hyperlinked interactivity 246
hypertext 183
I
iBeacon technology 566
iconicity 420–1
icons 245, 315–27, 419; abstract 
318, 321; as access to interface 
functionality 315; auditory 385–6; 
brands and branding 315, 318; 
colour use 324; as communication 
318–9, 319; complexity 319, 
319–20, 320; concreteness 318, 
320, 320, 321; cultural differences 
322–3; cultural preferences 
323–4, 324; design 319, 319–21, 
320, 327; distinctiveness 320–1; 
effectiveness 316, 320; emotional 
impact 324–7, 326; familiarity 
324–5; functional groupings 317, 
317–8; impact of prior knowledge 
318–9; labelled 317; linking 316, 
316–7, 317; perceptual span 321; 
recognition 317; referents 316; 
representational 318; roles 315, 
316, 316–8, 317, 327; as search 
aids 317; size 321–2; usability 
325–6; User group experience 
319; visual appeal 324–5; visual 
field 322. see also symbols
identification 625
Ikea 95, 96
image building design 625
image quality 296
image-flow 233–7
images 245
Imagine your future: social mobility 
exhibition 593–5; aims 596; 
audience 595–6; cognitive 
structure 596–7, 597, 599; 
constraints 599–600; design 597–
601, 601, 605; evaluation 601–2, 
603, 604; interaction facilities 
64, 600, 604; narrative 600; 
qualitative interviews 602, 603, 
604; quantitative survey 601–2; 
social information design 595–6, 
596; venues 601n
Imago Romani imperii (Martignoni) 
8–9, 10–1, 12, 18
immersive virtual interactivity 
246
The imperative of responsibility 
(Jonas) 169
in situ trials 453
inattentional bias 401
InDesign 488
index filtering 497
indexes and indexing 487–501; 
accessibility 490, 499; accuracy 
498; advantages 491; alphabetical 
order 495–6; for children 500; 
classified entries 493; closed-
system 488; cognitive load 498; 

740 / Index
collection 489, 491–2, 493–4, 495, 
498; complementary navigation 
options 490–1; complexity 498; 
consistency 499; and context 
492; controlled vocabulary 488, 
498; cross references 493, 494, 
500; defective premises 493; 
differentiation 497; digital 488–90; 
double entry 494; e-books 488, 
495, 500; electronic 500; EPUB 
Indexes specification 487, 488, 
497, 499, 500, 501; filtering 497; 
formats 498; future developments 
500–1; human-created 487, 
488; hybrid 489; indents 497; 
information design principles 
487; localization 499; locators/
page numbers 494–5; main 
headings 493–4, 497; mashup 
489; metadata 489, 490; 
minimalist approach 496; open-
system 488; organization / filing 
order 495–6; personalization 499; 
precision 499; processes 491–2; 
punctuation 496; role 487; see 
references 492, 494; semantic 
coding 490; software 491; 
structured content 490; structures 
493–6; subheadings 493–4, 497; 
term choices 492; typefaces 498; 
types 488–91; visual design 496–8; 
visual hierarchies 496–7; websites 
489; XML 490
individualistic ethics 643
indoor wayfinding and navigation 
systems 520–1, 561–74; accuracy 
563, 564, 566; complexity 
569–70; context 572; coverage 
563; design 569–72; future 
developments 574; information 
needs 569–71; integration 
571–2, 574; intelligent systems 
571–2; location-based services 
561; people with special needs 
570–1; personal location data 
561; positioning technology 
562–9; privacy 561, 573–4, 574; 
seamless 565, 567, 571; smart 
environments 572; tracking 573
IndoorAtlas 569
Industrial Revolution 44
inertial sensors 568–9
infographic. see interactive 
information graphics
information: Acting on 636, 640, 
641; locating 636, 637, 638; 
UNderstanding 636, 638, 639, 
640; user-friendly xi
information content, auditory 
alarms 384–7
information design xi; goals 426; 
principles 205
Information design (Easterby and 
Zwaga) xi
information design histories: 
chronology 157–8; documents 
147–56
information design improvement, 
measurement 628–32, 629, 630, 
632, 632–3
Information Design Journal 147, 150–
3, 151, 152n, 153, 153, 158, 655
information design methodology 
621–3
information design quality 629, 
629–30
information design research 
435–48; animations 705; 
approach choice 438, 446, 448; 
blinding 454; categories 435–8; 
category characteristics 438, 
438–9; control groups 457; data 
analysis 447, 460–1; diagnostic 
testing 437, 438, 438, 443–4, 
723–4, 724; double-blinding 454; 
ethical considerations 446–7; 
evaluation studies 451–62, 453; 
expert opinions 436–7, 439, 
443; feedback 442; focus 439; 
focus groups 460; framework 
application 436, 438, 438, 439, 
440–1; good practice 446–8; 
heuristics 436–7, 438, 438, 439, 
441–2; historical accounts 436; 
interviews 458–9; longitudinal 
studies 453–4; methods 439–40; 
objectives 446; observational 
research 459; participants 
439, 444; planning 452–4; 
qualitative 439–40, 443, 445, 
447; quantitative 439–40, 443, 
445, 447; questionnaires 446, 
458; randomized controlled trials 
452–3; randomized cross-over 
approach 453; reliability 447; 
research studies 437–8, 445–6; 
response capture 457–60; results 
reporting 447; sampling 454–6; 
scope 435; in situ trials 453; tools 
439; usability testing 438; user 
research 437, 444–5, 622; validity 
448
information designers xi
information mapping 151
information overload 23, 61, 529, 
529
information recording 650n
information selection 355
information theory 154, 154
information theory metaphor 
154–5
information value 190–1; and ethics 
167
information-saturation 651
In-Location Alliance 567n, 574
instant, the 24, 24–5
institutional context 587–8
Instructional Science 151
instructive information graphics 
252
interaction designers 293
interactive digital displays 264; hot 
spots 94; navigation features 
94; technical and scientific 
illustration 92, 92–4, 93
interactive information graphics 
243–54; classification model 
251–4, 252, 253; communicative 
function 250–1, 252–3, 254; 
control 247; data visualization 
244–5; definition 251; dramaturgic 
structure 247–50, 248, 249, 250, 
253; exploratives 252; hybridity 
243; information visualization 
244; instructives 252; interactivity. 
246–7; interactivity 253; interface 
design 247; key features 243–51; 
linearity 247–8, 248, 253; 
linear-nonlinear 249, 249–50, 
250; multimodality 251, 253; 
narrative 252; nonlinearity 247–8, 
248–50, 249, 250; objective 
250–1; semiotic system 245–6; 
significance of numbers 245–6; 
simulatives 252; strength of 246; 
text 253
interactivity: control 247; definition 
246; interface design 247; levels 
of 246–7, 253; linear 247–8, 248, 
253; linear-nonlinear 249, 249–50, 
250; and narrativity 248; nonlinear 
247, 248–50, 249, 250
interdisciplinary approach xi–xii
interdisciplinary teamwork 605
interface design 295; consistency 
394; delete operations 395, 
395–400, 396, 397, 399; deleted 
item retrieval 399, 399–400; 
design challenges 403; design 
infelicities 403; design principles 
403; enhancements for older 
adults 401–2; interactivity 
247; legacy procedures 394; 
low discoverability 392; menu 
options 400; numeric keys 393; 
for older adults 391–403; safety 
net functions 394; syntax 398; 
team decisions 402; text input 
challenges 393–4; visual context 
400
internal company forms 614–6, 615, 
616
indexes and indexing (cont.):

Index / 741 
International Community on 
Auditory Display 386
International Digital Publishing 
Forum 488
International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC) 304, 309
International Foundation for (the 
promotion of) Visual Education 
107–15
International Maritime Organization 
77
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) 304, 306; 
ISO 3864 308, 309, 333; ISO 7000 
306, 307; ISO 7001 306–7, 307, 
308; ISO 7010 307; ISO 9186 310–2; 
ISO 20712 307–8; ISO 22727 308; 
Online Browsing Platform 308, 
309, 313; Technical Committee 
145 Graphical Symbols 309–10, 
311
International Patient Decision Aid 
Standards 661–2
International picture language 
(Neurath) 111, 111–2
International Reading Association 
186
international standards, symbols 
303
International Telecommunications 
Union (ITU) 304
International Visual Literacy 
Association (IVLA) 197n
internet, the 182, 391
interviews 458–9
Investigating English style (Crystal 
and Davy) 152, 152
invisible content 405
iPad 282–5
Isherwood, Sarah J. 318
ISO 3864 308, 309, 333
ISO 7000 306, 307
ISO 7001 308
ISO 7010 307
ISO 9186 310–2
ISO 20712 307–8
ISO 22727 308
Isotype 107–15, 265, 271; 
arrangement of data 111; 
children’s books 117–25; 
contextualization 115; 
continuation of 113–4; emphasis 
on collaboration 115, 118, 120; 
founding principle 109, 109; 
Future magazine 129–31, 132, 
133, 135n, 145; honesty of 
representation 109; as language 
114; legacy 125; lesson of 115; 
method 108–9, 109, 110, 111–2, 
112; name 108; origins 107; 
simplicity 111; testing 113; 
transformation process 108–9, 
120–2, 122; the transformer 115; 
units of representation 109, 111; 
use of colour 111
Isotype children’s books: 
approaches to visual organisation 
118, 119; before-and-after 
treatment 119; breaking down 
119; comparisons 118; design 
process 118, 121–2, 123, 
124; feedback 122, 124, 125; 
integration of text and pictures 
122, 122; juxtaposition 119; 
magnification 119; narrative 
explanations 118; planning 121; 
repetition 119; representations 
118; reviews 124; scale 
119; source material 121–2; 
transformation process 120–2, 
122
Isotype Institute 117, 125, 128, 647; 
contribution to Future books 
134–5; contribution to Future 
magazine 129–31, 132, 133, 136, 
137, 145
J
James, Shamagonam 680
Jansen, Carel 676
Jevons, William Stanley 57–8
John, Bonnie E 292
Johnson, Mark 542–3
Johnston, Edward 485
Jonas, Hans, The imperative of 
responsibility 169
Joossens, Luc 715, 717
Joshi, Yateendra 503
The Journal News 161–3, 162
Journal of Typographic Research 152
juvenile idiopathic arthritis 665–6, 
666
juxtaposition 33, 119
K
Kant, Immanuel 163, 644
Kaplan, Robert S 627–8, 628
Karreman, Joyce 392
Keim, Daniel 27
Keir. James 45
Kellog, Wendy A. 294
Kepes, György 138, 140
key messages 687
key performance indicators 628, 633
keyboards 393
Kieras, David E. 292
Kim, Ig-Jae 567n
Kimbell, Lucy 620–1, 621, 623
Kimble, Joseph 473
Kindle 276, 285, 285–7, 486
King, L. E. 305
Kinneir, Jock 149, 517
Kinross, Robin 117, 147–8, 151, 156, 
208, 209, 215, 647 
Kipping, Gary J. 296
Kline, T. J. B 305
knowledge: acquisition 646–7; 
condensed 5–6; preservation of 
178; shared 657–8; transmission 
644
knowledge structures, diagrams 349
Koberstein, Herbert, Statistik in 
Bildern 114
Koefoed, Susanne 265
Koffka, Kurt 427
Köhler, Wolfgang 427
Kolawole, Emi 647–8
Kolers, Paul xi
Kondratova, Irina 324
Kong, Nicholas 34
Kong Harald, MV 61
Kosslyn, Stephen Michael 593
Kostelnick, Charles 206, 207, 210
Koutsourelakis, Charalambos 318–9
Koyama,, K. 311, 312
Kräutli, Florian 18
Kress, G. 190–1, 225–6, 238, 251, 474
Krishnamurthy, P. 579
Kung Valdemars jordebok 65
Kuusniemi, Heidi 568
Kystverket 79
L
labels and labelling: axes 51, 
51; changing 423; colour 419; 
contrast sets 417–23; coordinated 
421; creators 417; graphic devices 
420; iconicity 420–1; icons 419; 
information design quality 
629, 629–30; introducing 423; 
letter-based identifiers 418–9; 
letter-number combinations 
419; multiple 422; names 418; 
numbers 418; placeholder 422; 
taxonomic 420; technical and 
scientific illustration 100, 100–1, 
101, 102; tools 418–20; utility 
417–8; visual identities 421–2; and 
wayfinding 422–3
Lakoff, George 542–3
Landnámabók 62–3
landscape layout 48
language 246; forms 608, 610, 613; 
linearization 186–7; opposition to 
plain 152
language corpora 178
language string 178
Lanier, Jaron 165
Larkey, Linda K. 681
Larson, Kevin 210
Law Reform Commission of Victoria 
473
Le Corbusier 145n

742 / Index
leader lines 101–2, 102
learning: automatic 16; cognitive 
aspects 705; Cognitive Theory of 
Multimedia Learning 703, 709; 
design options 391; obstacles 401; 
perception of 709
learning resources 361–74
LED lights 567
Lee, Sunmin 680, 681
left–right distinction 190–1
legibility: design criteria 211; 
medicine package leaflets 687; 
print 337; symbols 306; typeface 
479
legible cities 517–8, 519
Legible London 517–8, 519, 631–2, 
632
Leonardo da Vinci 85, 87–8, 89, 90, 
91
letter-based identifiers 418–9
Leutner, D. 703
Lewis, David 511, 521, 571
Li, Yung-Ming 210
Liebowitz, Matthew 138, 139
lifelogging 194
Lindberg, Tomas 321–2
line and column breaks 687
line plots 33
linear interactivity 247–8, 248, 253, 
249, 249–50, 250
linear interrupted artefacts 234
linear perspective 87
linear-nonlinear interactivity 249, 
249–50, 250
lines: solid and broken 54, 55; 
thicknesses 96, 96, 97–8, 99
linguistics 152, 223; corpus 191; 
multimodal 224–6, 227; structural 
190
Linsky, Robert 635–40
Linux 483, 483
Lionni, Leo 141
lists 3
literacy 185–6; conversational 199; 
graphic 197–201, 198, 201; rates 
197; tests 197–8
local colour sets 412–3, 413
localizability, sound 381–2
location-based services 561
Lockheed Martin 573
logo design 326, 326
Loken, Barbara 669
London 517, 517–9, 519, 631–2, 632; 
Royal College of Art 152
longitude 76
longitudinal studies 453–4, 457
Loorbach, Nicole 392
Løvlie, Lavrans 623
low discoverability 392
Lowe, Richard K. 371, 372
Lowen, Lucien 135n
Lubinga et al. 672
Luce, Henry 128
luminance contrast 407–8; 
calculations 408–10, 409, 411, 
412, 413; definition 408; function 
410, 411; impact of red, green, 
and blue 409, 409–10
Lunar Society, the 44–5
LUNAtic design methodology 
635–40; Act 636, 640, 641; 
Locate 636, 637, 638; pillars 635; 
simplification 636; stakeholders 
635, 638, 640; UNderstanding 636, 
638, 639, 640
Lützhöft, Margareta 78
Lynch, Kevin 510, 517
M
McCloud 234
Macdonald-Ross, Michael 113, 150, 
218
McDougall, Siné J. P. 320, 320, 325
McGill, Robert 27, 28
Mackey, Margaret 280
Mackinlay, Jock 27, 28, 244
McNabb, David A. 26
McQuarrie, Edward F. 671
Macrex 491
magazine, typefaces 480
magnification 119
main headings 493–4, 497
Maio, Gregory R 669
Maldonado, Tomas 154
Maltby, John R. 215
management consulting 620–1
Mann, William C. 230
many-faced infographic 173
Mappemonde historique (Barbeau de 
la Bruyère) 13, 14, 15
maps and map reading: cognitive 
512; data visualization 244; 
egocentric 3D maps 81, 81–2, 82; 
electronic charts 77, 77–8, 79; 
ethics 162, 162; Future magazine 
130–1; mental 512–3; Mercator 
projection 71; Middle Ages 69; 
nautical charts 67, 67–74, 68, 
71, 72, 73, 75; orientation 69; 
perspective 67, 67, 81, 81–2, 82; 
reading-maps 64–5, 65; roles 350; 
route maps 351, 357; storyworlds 
582–4, 585
Mara, Felix 520
Marcus, Aaron 318, 323
maritime domain, information 
integration 61–82; bridge 61, 
61–2; current 76–8, 77; future 
developments 78, 78–82, 80, 81, 
82; historical 62–76, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75
Martignoni, Girolamo Andrea, 
Imago Romani imperii 8–9, 10–1, 
12, 18
Martin, Roger 620
mass communication: behaviour 
change 669–70, 671, 681–2; 
challenges 681–2; Extended 
Parallel Process Model (EPPM) 
673–5, 674; fear-appeal messages 
669, 670, 672–7, 673, 674, 675, 
676, 677; health promotion 
campaigns 669–82; messages 
671; narratives 669, 670, 677–81, 
678, 680; negative consequences 
672; persuasive power 669; 
puzzling messages 669, 670, 670, 
670–2, 671
mass media campaigns: behaviour 
change 669–70, 671, 681–2; 
challenges 681–2; Extended 
Parallel Process Model (EPPM) 
673–5, 674; fear-appeal messages 
669, 670, 672–7, 673, 674, 675, 
676, 677; health promotion 669–
82; messages 671; narratives 669, 
670, 677–81, 678, 680; negative 
consequences 672; persuasive 
power 669; puzzling messages 
669, 670, 670, 670–2, 671
The mathematical theory of 
communication (Shannon and 
Weaver) 147
Matiella, Ana Consuelo 680
matrices 3–4
Mattiza, Scott 166
Mayer, Richard E. 593, 701, 703, 708, 
710–1
Mayer-Schönberger, Viktor 165
Mayhorn, C. B. 310
medical + design collaboration 
655–77; areas of expertise 656, 
657–8; benefits 655–7, 667; 
context 659; decision support 
aids 655–7, 663, 665, 666; design 
as a research method 660; 
divergent/convergent thinking 
659–60; effectiveness 661; ethical 
requirements 661; features 655, 
657–61, 667; goals 659; holistic 
thinking 658–9; learning styles 
664; perspectives 657; projects 
655; prototypes 660–1; rigour 658; 
shared knowledge 657–8
medical alarms 384–5
medicine information: alternative 
approach 725–9; animated 
procedural pictorial sequences 
704, 704–11, 705; assumptions 
725–6; Core data sheet 715; 
design process 721–3, 722, 726–7; 
Directive (92/27/EC) 717–8, 721, 
723; Directive 2004/27/EC 727; 

Index / 743 
Directive 2010/84 725; education 
726; e-PIL 701–11; health 
requirements 727; historical 
context 715–20; information 
design 726; legislation 715–29; 
non-procedural contents 704; 
obligatory text 721, 722; patient 
access 701; performance based 
criteria 727; performance based 
use 726–9; performance levels 
729; procedural content 704; 
product design 726; readability 
guidelines 717–8, 719, 721–3; 
registration processes 718–9; 
Regulatory authorities 718–9; 
stakeholders 727, 729; Summary 
of Product Characteristics 
715; Summary of Product 
Characteristics 719, 721; system 
design 727; templates 717–8, 
721; testing process 723–4, 724; 
writing processes 721
medicine package leaflets 685–99, 
715, 716, 717; best practice 685; 
characteristics 686; clarity 697, 
697–8; competing interests 699; 
comprehension 687–8, 702; daunt 
factor 692; design devices 692–3; 
design failures 699; effectiveness 
692; emphasis management 
687; follow-up study 688, 688, 
690–2; headings 687, 695–6; key 
messages 687; legal requirements 
685; legibility 687; line and 
column breaks 687; micro-
differences 692–3, 694, 695–8; 
misuse of 702; mode of emphasis 
693, 695, 696–7, 697, 699; model 
text 685; negative comments 686; 
older readers 691; performance 
695–8, 697; preliminary study 
687–8; readership levels 685–6; 
recommendations 698–9; 
regulations 685, 686; research 
method 686–7; role 685–6; search 
timing data 691; structure 687; 
template 686; usability 685; use of 
bold 696, 697; user ratings 691–2; 
user-centred design 687–8, 689, 
690–2, 698–9; visual cues 695
medieval manuscripts, integration 
of the visual and the verbal 182–3, 
184
Meikle, Andrew 44, 45
Meilinger, Tobias 513
memory 179n, 193–5, 391, 400
mental maps 512–3
mental models 366, 579–80
Mercator, Gerard 12, 71
Mercator projection 71
metacognition 276
metaphor: orientational 543; in 
sounds 385–6; understanding 
542–3
metaphoric illustrations 104, 104–5
metasyntactic signifiers 422
Mexico, Imagine your future: social 
mobility case study 593–605, 597, 
600, 601, 603, 603, 604
Michel, Jean-Baptiste 165
Mick, David Glen 671
Microsoft 483
Mijksenaar, M. 310, 311–2
Mijksenaar, Paul 419, 535, 535–8
Milestones Project 244
military camouflage 430
military symbols 149–50, 150
military-industrial complex 140–50
Mill, John Stuart 163–4
Millard, Ann 583
Miller, Colette (Colette Jeffrey) 511, 
521, 571
Miller, Jane E. 503
Miller, Jonathan 429–30
Milton Keynes 152–3
Minard, Charles Joseph 31, 32, 354, 
355
minimalism 270
minimum visible difference 212
misinformation 169
mistakes, designers 647–8
Mitchell, W. J. T. 245
Mitra, Sugata 649, 651
Miyamoto, Yuri 322–3
mnemonics 387
model human processor approach 
292–3
modernism 147n, 208
Modley, Rudolf 265
Mølhave, Annegrete 86n
Molich, Rolf 442
Mollerup, Per 511, 519–20, 520, 523
Montello, Daniel R. 523, 569, 571
Moore, B. C. J. 380
Moran, K. 443
Moran, Thomas P. 292, 296
Moreno, R. 701, 703, 708, 710–1
Morozov, Evgeny 165–7
Moszkowicz, Julia 427
motion, visual representations 103, 
103
motion tracking 568–9
motivational relevancies 465
motor meanings 280–1
Moyer-Gusé, Emily 681
Mulhall, Michael 266, 267
Müller, Karl H., Symbole, Statistik, 
Computer, Design 114
multimodal linguistics 224–6, 227
multimodal literacy 237
multimodality 221–39; definition 
221; emergence of 223; GeM 
framework 229, 229–32, 231, 
233; and genre 221, 239; human–
computer interaction (HCI) 223–4; 
interactive information graphics 
251, 253; literacy 237; natural 
conversational interaction 224; 
refining 232–8, 235; role for genre 
226–9, 228; scope 222–3; semiotic 
considerations 222–3
multivariate data 25
MUNIN (Maritime Unmanned 
Navigation through Intelligence in 
Networks) 82, 82
N
Nagel, Thomas 164n
names 418; placeholder 422
nametags 422–3
narrative 579n, 600, 669, 670; 
definition 677; Entertainment 
Overcoming Resistance Model 
(EORM) 677–9, 678; fotonovelas 
679–81, 680; health promotion 
campaigns 677–81, 678, 680; 
mental reconstruction 285–6
narrative engagement 283–4
Narrative Engagement Scale 283–4
narrative information graphics 252
narrative visualization 250
narrativity: and interactivity 248; 
linearity 248
Näsänen, Risto 321–2
National Agency of Sanitary 
Surveillance (ANVISA) 702
National Archives (UK) 217–8
National Institute on Aging and 
National Library of Medicine 441
National System of Toxic and 
Pharmacological Information 702
NATO xi; conference on the visual 
presentation of information 150
natural conversational interaction 
224
natural environments, wayfinding 
515, 515–6
Natural History Museum 125
nautical charts 67, 67–9, 69, 
74; clutter 71; Dutch era 
70–1, 71, 72, 73, 73; earliest 
69–70, 70; electronic 76–8, 77, 
79; hydrographic information 71; 
information 69–70; modern 75; 
perspective 73; portolan 69–71, 
70, 71, 72, 73, 73–4, 75; symbols 
71, 73, 73
navigation, information integration 
61–82; book of nature 63; 
bridge 61, 61–2; coastal views 
65–6, 66, 74; current 76–8, 77; 
egocentric 3D maps 81, 81–2, 82;  
medicine information (cont.):

744 / Index
electronic charts 76–8, 77, 
79; e-navigation 79; future 
developments 78–82, 80, 81, 
82; geographic knowledge 
64; historical 62–76, 63, 64, 
65, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 
75; Landnámabók 62–3; the 
Mediterranean 65, 67; narrative 
64–5, 65, 65, 73; nautical charts 
67, 67–74, 68, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75; 
the periplus 65; positioning 76; 
reading-maps 64–5, 65; sea traffic 
management 80, 80; solskuggefjǫl, 
sun-shadow-board 64, 64; sun 
compass 63, 63; Vikings 62–5, 63, 
64, 65. See also wayfinding
Ndlovu, Mandla 671
network technologies 92
networks of choice 225
Neurath, Marie (née Reidemeister) 
107–8, 115, 128, 131n, 134, 
156, 156; approaches to visual 
organisation 118; attention to 
detail 124, 125; children’s books 
117–25; design process 118, 120, 
120–1, 121–2, 124; and feedback 
122, 124, 125; legacy 125
Neurath, Otto 107–8, 109, 113, 
114, 115, 120, 128, 265, 271, 
647; aims 145; Bildstatistik nach 
Wiener Methode in der Schule 113; 
contribution to Future magazine 
129–31, 132, 133; death 134; 
exhibition design 591, 591–2, 595; 
International picture language 111, 
111–2
Neurath, Walter 133
New, Steve 620–1, 621
new typography 147n, 188
The New York Times 166, 192, 243–4, 
245, 480
Newcastle University 649
Newell, Allen 292, 295–6
newspapers: headlines 480; 
typefaces 480, 480
Newton, Isaac 6, 12, 24
Niagara-on-the-Lake xi
Nichani, Maish 252
Nielsen, Jacob 397, 403, 437, 442
Niemelä, Marketta 318
Nightingale, Florence 31, 32
Nisbett, Richard E. 322–3
noise pollution 383
non-Latin scripts, typefaces 481, 481
nonlinear interactivity 247, 248–50, 
249, 250
non-procedural contents 704
non-significant digits, suppression 
of 52, 52
Norman, Robert 66, 278
normative ethics 163
Norton, David 627–8, 628
numbers 245–6, 418–9 
numeric tables 503–7; definition 
503–4; demonstration tables 505; 
design 504–6, 505; effective use 
504, 504; formatting 505–6, 506; 
reference tables 505; types 505
O
object interactivity 246
observational research 459
Oceanic, RMS 61, 61–2
Office 365 396
offset lithography 132, 133, 142
older adults: accessibility issues 
394; confidence 392; design 
challenges 391–403; diversity 
392; enhancements for 401–2; 
inattentional bias 401; interface 
design for 391–403; internet use 
391; learning obstacles 401; and 
medicine package leaflets 691; 
text input challenges 393–4
Oliver, Amy 513
On human communication (Cherry) 
154, 154
online checkout processes 610
online forms 609, 609, 610, 611
open data movement 245
Open University 125; Textual com­
munication research group 153
open-system indexing 488
operating system fonts 483, 483
optical scaling 480, 480
Ordinance Survey (OS) 518
organizational charts 268, 268
orientational metaphor 543
Orwell, George 134n
Otto, Richard G. 280
out-of-the-loop performance 
problems 81
P
page design, interpretative 
challenges 237
page layout 177–202; access 
structures 186n, 189; aesthetic 
qualities 188; artefact structure 
189; audience expectations 
178; and corpus linguistics 191; 
definition 177; diagrammatic 
quality 188–9; digital 192–5, 
196, 197; double-page spreads 
188; and e-readers 182; formal 
qualities 188; framing 190–1; 
function 179–80, 180, 181, 
182; GeM framework 233–7, 
235; generic perspective 189; 
in graphic design literature 
187–90; and graphic literacy 
197–201, 198, 201; and impact 
179–80; information value 190–1; 
integration of the visual and the 
verbal 182–3, 184; linearization 
186–7; pattern language 189–90; 
perceptual principles 188; and 
printing 182–3; and production 
technologies 182–3, 184; and 
readers 185–7; salience 190–1; 
and semiotics 190–2; status 
177, 179; and strategic reading 
185–6, 187; structural linguistics 
190; theorizing 187–92; topic 
structures 189; typographic 
hierarchy 182; word spacing 187
page types 195, 196, 197
page-flow 233–7
Paivio, A. 703
Palmer, Stephen E. 427
Pappachan, Preethy 323
parasocial interaction 679
Parkin, Alan 153
parking enforcement and parking 
signs 553–60; business model 
553; car-park entrance signs 557–
8, 559; crowded 555; income 553, 
554, 556, 557, 560; penalty charge 
notices 553, 554; private 553; 
private land 557–8, 559; public 
land 554–6, 555, 557; residents-
only permit rules 555, 555–6, 
556; standardization 554–5, 555; 
standards 559–60
participatory experiences 598n
Passini, Romedi 510, 520, 542, 542
patient experience 630, 630–1
Patient-Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute 658
pattern language 95–6, 189–90
Patterson, R. 386–7
Pay for Performance Advertising 620
Pearson, Karl 58
Pediatric Rheumatology Care and 
Outcomes Improvement Network 
665n, 666
Pedley, Mary Sponberg 12
Peirce, Charles S. 245, 316, 318
Penman, Robyn 152n
Pennac, Daniel 185
Pentland, Alex 165
Peraya, Daniel 317, 317
perceived hazard 341
perception 425; constancy 426; 
processes 425–6; subjective 426; 
visual 426
perceptual constancy 426
perceptual fluency hypothesis 325
perceptual issues, statistical graphs 
56
perceptual principles, page layout 
188
navigation (cont.):

Index / 745 
perceptual span 321
performance based criteria 727
performance based strategy 726–9
performance measurement 623
periplus, the 65
personal location data 561
personalization 499
personas 657–8
perspective: aerial 87n; linear 87, 87
perspective projection 87, 87
persuasion 625, 669; modes of 597, 
603
Pettersson, Rune 492
Petty, Sir William 43, 46
phablets 403
Phillips, Sir Richard 46
photogravure 132, 133, 139, 140, 
144
Photoshop 89
Pictorial Assembly Instructions 
(PAIs) 95–6
pictorial statistics 129
pie charts 43, 54, 55, 57, 270–1, 271
Piening, Peter 129
Pijukkana, Kingkarn 322
Pittsburgh, Carnegie-Mellon 
University 153
placeholder labels 422
plain-language 473, 474, 559; 
opposition to 152; power of 152n
Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles 666
PlanningLines 35, 35
Plato, Phaedrus 178
Playfair, James 44
Playfair, John 44, 47; The commercial 
and political atlas 48, 48–54, 
49, 50, 51, 52, 53; graphical 
innovation 49, 49–54, 50, 51, 52, 
53
Playfair, William 31, 31, 43–58, 267; 
biography 44–6; British family 
antiquity 45; The commercial 
and political atlas 43, 45; genius 
47; legacy 57–8; psychological 
understanding 56–7; publications 
45; Statistical breviary 54, 54–6
Polaine, Andy 623
Polanyi, Michael 190
Popova, Lucy 675
positioning technology 562–9; 
tracking and privacy issues 573–4
Potter, M. C. 305
Power, J. D. 628
pragmatism 377
Predan, Barbara 652
preference data 453
presbyopia 431
Priestley, Joseph 48; Chart of 
biography 17, 17–8, 19, 30–1, 31
printing: eighteenth century 47–8; 
offset lithography 132, 133, 
142; and page layout 182–3; 
photogravure 132, 133, 139, 
140, 144; three great privileges 
of 185
privacy 561, 573–4, 574
private land, parking signs 557–8, 
559
procedural content 704
processing fluency 325
processing of visible language, The 
(Kolers et al) xi
Progressive Path cues 371
Project Tango 568
proximity principle 428, 432, 432–3
pseudolites 564
psychology 151, 151, 291
psychosomatic perception 280
Ptolemy 68–9, 69
public information 149
public information documents: 
accessibility 463; analyst’s 
perspective 465; audience 466–7; 
choice 463–4; data collection 
465; data gathering 465, 466; 
design features 467–8, 468, 470, 
470–4, 472, 472; effectiveness 
463; formats 463; motivational 
relevancies 465; multi-
perspective approach 464, 464–5; 
organizational structure 467, 469; 
readability 467, 468, 468, 469, 
474; reader perspectives 463–74; 
research methods 465, 467; 
research texts 465, 466; revised 
version testing 470–3, 472, 472; 
text analysis 465, 467–8, 468, 473; 
text creator(s) 464, 466–7, 469–
70; text receiver(s) 464–5, 466, 
467, 469–70; writing processes 
466–7
public information symbols 303, 
306–7, 307, 308
public land, parking signs 554–6, 
555, 557
public transport 561
Pugh, A. 185
punctuation 482, 482
puzzling messages 669, 670, 670, 
670–2, 671
Q
qualitative data 439–40, 443, 445, 
447, 452, 456, 461
qualizon graphs 34
quantitative data 439–40, 443, 445, 
447, 452, 456, 460–1
questionnaires 458
R
radar 76
radio communication 76
radio frequency identification (RFID) 
565
Rafaeli, Sheizaf 247
Rail Safety and Standards Board, 
‘Alarms and Alerts Guide and 
Evaluation Tool’ 378
railway timetables 208, 209
Rajamanickam, Venkat 252
Rancière, Jacques 643, 644, 645, 652
randomized controlled trials 452–3
randomized cross-over approach 453
rank charts 262–3, 262–4, 265, 266, 
270
Raubal, Martin 570
Rayner, Keith 291
REACT radio frequency identification 
(RFID) digital system 519
readability guidelines, medicine 
information 717–8, 719, 721–3
Readability of Print Research Unit, 
Royal College of Art, London 152
readers: expectations 266; 
engagement 210–1; focal 
awareness 190; and page layout 
185–7; passive decoding role 
237–8; rights 185
reading 275–87; active strategies 
186; affordances 280; cognitive 
load 277; cognitive processing 
279; comprehension 276; 
continuous 480; definition 295; 
digitization 276–7, 279–80, 282, 
295–6; ecological psychology 
275; embodied approach 281–2; 
engagement 282–7; experiential 
texture 282; as human–
technology interaction 275, 278; 
interface impacts 282, 282–7; 
interfaces 275–7, 278; iPad based 
282–5; on Kindle 276; Kindle 
based 285, 285–7; linear 185; 
maps 64–5, 65; materiality 278, 
279, 285; medium preferences 
276; mental reconstruction 285–6; 
modal affordances 279; motor 
meanings 280–1; multimodality 
turn 278–9; narrative engagement 
283–4; on paper 276; paper based 
282–7; performance 276–7; print 
hegemony 277; psychology of 
291; receptive 185; research 
paradigms 275–6; responsive 185; 
scanning 185; and science 294–6; 
searching 185; semiotics-oriented 
approach 278–9; sensorimotor 
aspects 279–80, 282;; sensory 
experience 179n; skimming 185; 
strategic 185–6, 187; strategies 
185
Reason, Ben 623
Reber, Rolf 325

746 / Index
receptive reading 185
Redish, Janice 392
redundancy principle 708, 709
reference tables 505
Refilwe Africa 671
Reid, Thomas 47
Reijner, Hannes 33
Reising, Jenny S. 523
Reiss, Manfred 135n
rendering 89
Rennie, John 45
repetition 119
Reppa, Irene 325
research. see information design 
research
Research Ethics Committee 447
research studies 437–8, 445–6
response capture 457–60
responsive reading 185
return on investment measurement 
630, 630–1
rhetoric 17–8
rhetorical images 4
rhetorical structure theory (RST) 230
Ricco’s law 406
Richards, Clive 86n, 92n
road signs, Great Britain 149, 485, 
517
Robinson, Ken 651
Robinson, Rhonda S. 425
Robyn, Dorothy L. 57
Rogers, Yvonne 317
Rolls Royce 82
rose charts 32, 32
Rosenberg, Daniel 4, 12, 18, 32
Rosling, Hans 36
Rouner, Donna 678
route maps 351, 357
rows 506, 506
Royal College of Art, London, 
Readability of Print Research 
Unit 152
Royal National Institute for 
Blind, REACT radio frequency 
identification (RFID) digital 
system 519
Rubin, Edgar John 429
Ruiter, Robert A. C. 674
rule utilitarianism 164–5
Ryan, M.-L. 248, 583
Ryan, T. A. 319
S
Saarinen, Jukka 318
Saenger, P. 187
safety-related symbol signs 303, 
306, 308–9, 309
Sahachaisaeree, Nopadon 322
salience 190–1
sampling 454–6
Sanderson, P. 378
Sandnes, Frode Eika 568
Sas, Corina 523, 569, 571
Satta, Salvatore 423
Sauer, Juergen 78
scale 15, 119
scanning 185
scatter plots 36, 37
Schellens, P. J. 443–4
Schmandt, Chris 567n
Schnotz, Wolfgang 364
Schoenberg Collection, the 182
Schriver, K. 149n, 188, 428, 474, 624
Schumacher, P. C. 95–6
Schumann, Heidrun 35
Schwartz, Carol B. 319
Schwesinger, Borries 629
science: and design 291–8; 
empiricism and theory 293–4; 
experimentation 294; methods 
293; and reading 294–6; 
representation of human activity 
295, 296–8; validation 298
scientific illustration. see technical 
and scientific illustration
Scottish Enlightenment 44, 47
sea traffic management 80, 80
searching 185
Second World War 150
see-through surfaces 88, 91
Segel, Edward 248
segmentation, of action 357
Sellen, A 194
Seller, John, The English pilot 73–4, 
75
semantic coding 490
semantics 154, 154
semiotic engineering 155
semiotic modes 233–8, 239
semiotics 153, 153, 180; interactive 
information graphics 245–6; and 
multimodality 222–3; and page 
layout 190–2; reading 278–9
sensation 425
sense-making processes 40
sensory data, selection 425
sensory experience, reading 179n
sequence 231
service sector 623–4, 624
Shah, Priti 593
Shaikh, Dawn 213
shared decision making 661
shared knowledge 657–8
Shedroff, N. 441
Shen, Siu-Tsen 326
ships, information integration 
61–82; Automatic Identification 
System (AIS) 80; bridge 61, 
61–2; current 76–8, 77; future 
developments 78, 78–82, 80, 81, 
82; historical 62–76, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75; 
integrated bridge systems 78; 
unmanned 82, 82
Shneiderman, Ben 244
Shu, Suzanne B. 210
signage 520, 532, 532; access point 
principle 545, 545; ambiguous 
548, 548; arrows 541–52; bad 
553–60; decoding 541; destination 
principle 542–5, 543, 544, 546, 
546; parking 553–60; typefaces 
481, 485, 485
signal words 333, 336, 338, 338
signs, theory of 245
similarity principle 428, 430, 430–1
Simon, Herbert 645, 656
Simon, Nina 598n
simplicity 111
Simplification Centre 211, 218
Sims, Rod 246, 247
simulative information graphics 252
situational variables 271–2
skeuomorphism 397
skimming 185
SKY Index 491
Slater, Michael D. 678
Sless, David 105n, 148, 152n, 153, 
305, 437, 452, 621–3, 628, 629–30
Small, Robert 44
small multiples 29, 29
smart environments 572
smartphones 182, 519, 564
Smith, Adam 44, 45
Smith, David C. 315
Smithsonian National Museum of 
Natural History 523
social cognitive theory 678
social information design 595–6, 
596
social media 169
Society of Environmental Graphic 
Design 523
solskuggefjǫl, sun-shadow-board 64
sonification 379
sound: detectability 381–2; 
localizability 381–2; meanings 
384–5; metaphor in 385–6; types 
382–3, 383, 388
space, empty 18
space and time 349
sparklines 34, 34
spatial approach, exhibitions 596, 
597, 599
spatial data 25
spatial diagrammatic devices 350
spatial disorientation 510
spatial hearing 381
spatial memory 512
spatial organization 206, 207
spatial representations 512
special needs, indoor wayfinding 
570–1

Index / 747 
Spelke, Elizabeth S. 512–3
Spence, Ian 45–6
Spencer, Herbert 152
Spinillo, C. G. 704
SpiraClock 36, 36
stacked graphs 36, 36
Staes, Jef 651
staff engagement 615
stakeholders 635, 638, 640, 727, 729
Stanbridge, Karen 210
standardized, forms 614
static representations, time-oriented 
data 28, 29, 30
Statistical breviary (Playfair) 54, 54–6
statistical data, transformation into 
visual displays 600–1, 601, 603
statistical graphs 43–58; bar charts 
50; circle charts 54, 54–5, 55, 
57; colour coding 51, 51; The 
commercial and political atlas 
48, 48–54, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53; 
divided surface area chart 50, 
50; Eighteenth-century barriers 
to 46–8; event markers 52, 52; 
gridlines 52, 52; hachure and 
stippled dots 51; labelling of 
axes 51, 51; landscape layout 48; 
perceptual issues 56; pie charts 
54, 55, 57; Playfair’s legacy 57–8; 
psychology of 56–7; simplicity 
46; solid and broken lines 54, 
55; Statistical breviary 54, 54–6; 
suppression of non-significant 
digits 52, 52; theoretical/hypo­
thetical/projected values 53, 53–
4; time period indicators 52; time-
series line graph 49, 49; titles and 
textual descriptions 50–1
statistical testing 460–1
Statistik in Bildern (Koberstein) 114
Steehouder, Michael 392
Steinweiss, Alex 138, 140
Stern, Richard C. 425
Stewart, Dugald 44, 47
Stöckl, Hartmut 225
Stone, Brad 166
storyworlds 577; and chronology 
584–5; construction 582–3; 
definition 579; Doctors, 
Dissection and Resurrection 
Men exhibition 579, 580–8, 
581, 583; institutional context 
587–8; narratorial perspectives 
586–8; reference world 583–4; 
spaces and locations 581–4, 582; 
timelines 585–6, 586; verbal cues 
582–3; visual cues 577, 579–80, 
582, 584–5, 589; voices 588
straight ahead arrows: access 
point principle 545, 548–9, 
551–2; ambiguous 548, 548; 
application 545–51, 546, 547, 
548, 549, 550, 551; decoding 541; 
destination principle 542–5, 543, 
544, 546, 546, 551–2; downward 
pointing 541, 545, 545, 547, 
547–8, 548; flow lines 544, 544–5; 
interpretation 552; mixed use 547, 
548–51, 549, 550, 551; multilevel 
environments 547, 547, 549, 550, 
551; perspective 542, 542; upward 
pointing 541, 542–5, 543, 544, 
546, 546–7, 547
strategic reading 185–6, 187
striders 517–8, 518
strollers 517–8, 518
Strom der Zeiten (Strass) 18–9
structural linguistics 190
structured content 490
subheadings 493–4, 497
Summary of Product Characteristics 
715
summative evaluation 451, 452, 
452–3
Sun, Xianghong 322
sun compass 63, 63
superimposition 33
Sutnar, Ladislav 138, 139, 144, 145, 
188; Visual design in action 143, 
156, 156
Sweden 598n
Swobodzinski, Martin 570
Symanzik, Jürgen 45–6
Symbole, Statistik, Computer, Design 
(Müller) 114
symbols: abstract 340; clarity 304, 
310, 310; comprehensibility 
306, 310–2, 313; comprehension 
310–2, 340; design 340; design 
process 308–10; legibility 306; 
message 305, 305; nautical 
charts 71, 73, 73; performance 
305; popularity 304–5; public 
information 303, 306–7, 307, 
308; recognition 305, 305; roles 
303–4, 304–5, 305; safety colours 
307; safety-related 303, 306, 
308–9, 309; standard graphical 
symbols 304; standardization 
bodies 304, 313; standards 303, 
306–8; success requirements 
305–6; technical 306, 307; testing 
303–13; transportation hubs 538n; 
two-part 310, 310; warning 305–6, 
307, 309, 331–44; water safety 
307–8, 310, 310. see also icons
syntax 427
T
tables see numeric tables
tablets: consistency 394; default 
interface 392; delete operations 
395, 395–400, 396, 397, 399; 
deleted item retrieval 399, 
399–400; deleting applications 
397, 397–8; design challenges 
391–403, 403; design infelicities 
403; design principles 403; 
enhancements for older adults 
401–2; interface design 391–403; 
keyboards 393; low discoverability 
392; menu options 400; numeric 
keys 393; online help 402; syntax 
398; text input challenges 393–4
Taboada, Maite 230
taxonomy 420, 441
teams 622–3
technical and scientific illustration 
85–105; annotations and labelling 
100, 100–1, 101, 102; arrows 
103, 103; challenges facing 
105; cut-away views 88, 89; 
diagnostic testing 105; diagrams 
86; exploded sequences 88, 90; 
fold-out reveals 88, 91; graphic 
metaphor 86; hidden detail 85, 
87, 89, 90, 91, 92; historical 
precedents 85; hybrid forms 86, 
103; interactive digital displays 
92, 92–4, 93; leader lines 101–2, 
102; metaphoric 104, 104–5; 
naturalistic representation 87; 
perspective projection 87, 87–8; 
process scenarios 86; scope 85–6; 
see-through surfaces 88, 91; 
text-free instructions 95, 95–6, 
96; transparent sheets 91; visual 
clarity 97–8, 99
technical publications, distribution 
92
technical symbols 306, 307
Telecom Australia 628–9
Tesoriero, Ricardo 565
testing: design solutions xi; 
medicine information 723–4, 724; 
usability 622
text: animations 704–5; colour 430; 
complex 483–5, 484; considerate 
186; density 216; educational 
advantages 364–5; encounters 
with 178; hierarchical structure 
271; interactive information 
graphics 253; linearity 183; size 
and contrast 406
text design, rhetorical functions 
207, 207
textbooks 361, 362
text-flow 233–7
text-free instructions, technical and 
scientific illustration 95, 95–6, 96
text-image relationships: animated 
procedural pictorial sequences 
708; animations 704–5;  

748 / Index
integration 127
Textual communication research 
group, Open University 153
thalidomide disaster 715
Theatrum historicum (Helvicus) 6
theoretical/hypothetical/projected 
values 53, 53–4
theory, and empiricism 293–4
Thinkmap, Inc 501
Thomas, Keith 436n
Thomas, M. 191–2, 232
Thompson, Nicholas 167, 167–9
Thompson, Sandra A. 230
Tilling, Laura 46
time 23; anchor points 24, 24–5;  
arrangement 24; conceptualiza-
tions of 24, 24–5, 25; continuum. 
24; cyclic arrangement 25, 25; 
facets 24; granularity 25; intervals 
25, 25; linear progression 25, 25; 
perception of 24; primitives 24, 
24–5
time, visualizations of: approaches 
4; cartography 9, 12, 13; 
chronology 7; cycle plots 34, 35; 
early 3–19; Enhanced Interactive 
Spiral technique 35, 35; figurative 
graphic metaphor 8–9, 10–1, 12–
3, 14, 15–8, 16, 17; Gantt charts 
35; horizon graphs 33, 33–4; line 
plots 33; lists 3–4; mathematical 
divisions 6; mechanical model 
4–8, 5, 7; metaphorical 9; 
narrative 6; PlanningLines 35, 
35; qualizon graphs 34; scale 15; 
scatter plots 36, 37; and space 13, 
18; sparklines 34, 34; SpiraClock 
36, 36; stacked graphs 36, 36; 
timelines 3–4, 18–9; TimeViz 
Browser 38–40, 39; totality 15; 
Trajectory Wall 37, 37–8; visual 
summary 8
time intervals 25
time period indicators 52
TIMEframe representation 297
timelines 18–9, 544, 544; emergence 
of 3–4; storyworlds 585–6, 586
time-oriented data 23–40; abstract, 
25; animations 30; characteristics 
25; communicative power 32; 
contemporary visualization 
techniques 33, 33–40, 34, 35, 36, 
37, 38, 39; data analysis methods 
40; definition 23; dynamic 
representations 28, 29–30; 
filtering 26–7; frame of reference 
25; historical representations 
30–3, 31, 32; mapping 27; 
multivariate 25; rendering 27; 
spatial 25; static representations 
28, 29, 30; univariate 25; variables 
25; visual representations 23; 
visual variables 27, 27–8, 28; 
visualization 25–40, 27, 28, 29, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39
time-series line graph 43, 49, 49
titles and textual descriptions 50–1, 
636
Tominski, Christian 35, 37–8
top-down-design 248
topic structures 189
touchpoints 623–4, 624, 628–9, 633
Townsend, Claudia 210
Tractinsky, Noam 325–6
traditional auditory alarms 384
traffic fatalities 167, 167–8, 168
Traffic Penalty Tribunal 553
Traffic Signs Manual 553, 554–5, 
559–60
Trajectory Wall 37, 37–8
Transport for London 517, 518
transport signage 485
Treacy, Eleanor 129
treemaps 267–8
Trendalyzer 36
truth 162
Tufte, Edward 4, 18, 34, 169n, 170, 
258n, 266, 271, 451, 495–6, 656; 
The visual display of quantitative 
information 264, 503
Tuftean consensus, the 169–70
Tversky, Barbara 371
two-part symbols 310, 310
Twyman, Michael 88n, 125, 188, 234
Tyler, Anne 493
typefaces: for accessibility 485–6, 
486; books 479; choice 479–86; 
colour 484, 484; for complex 
text 483–5, 484; for continuous 
reading 479, 479–80; corporate 
482, 482, 483; indexes 498; italic 
483–4, 484; large size 480, 480–1; 
legibility 479, 483; letterforms 
481, 481; magazine 480; neutral 
213; newspapers 480, 480; non-
Latin scripts 481, 481; online 
485, 485; on-screen reading 480; 
operating system fonts 483, 
483; optical scaling 480, 480; 
punctuation 482, 482; sans serif 
212n, 481, 481, 482, 482, 485, 
485; serif 212n, 479–80, 481, 481; 
signage 481, 485, 485; small size 
480, 480; typographic variation 
483; Unicode-compliant fonts 481; 
weight 479, 481, 481, 484, 484
typefaces, named: Adobe 
Devanagari 481; Akzidenz Grotesk 
483, 537; Alphabet Roissy 537; 
Argo 481, 484, 484–5; Arno 479; 
Arrival 485; Brill 482; Chadwick 
482, 482; DIN 483, 485; Dutch 
road-sign alphabet 485, 485 Effra 
482; Franklin Gothic 480, 480; 
Frutiger 483, 537; Frutiger Neue 
481; Garamond Premier Pro 480; 
Georgia 480; Guardian Egyptian 
Text 480, 480; Gulliver 482, 482; 
Helvetica 422; Helvetica Neue 
481; Horseferry 482, 482; Imperial 
480; IR Modena 482, 483; London 
Underground alphabet 485; 
Nassim 481, 481; New Transport 
485, 485; Nimrod 480; Nirmala 
UI 483, 483; OpenDyslexia 486, 
486; Plantin 484 San Francisco 
483, 483; Segoe UI 483, 483; 
Skolar 481, 481; Swift 484, 484–5; 
Times New Roman 480; Tisa 
479; Ubuntu 483, 483; Vesta 482; 
Wayfinding Sans 480, 485, 485, 
542 
typographic decisions 207–8
typographic differentiation 212–6, 
213, 218
typefaces, named: 
typographic hierarchy 182
typographic resonance 578
Typographische Mitteilungen 147
typography: elemental 147; good 
210; new typography 147
U
ubiquitous computing (UbiComp) 
572
UK Association for Accessible 
Formats 485–6, 486
Ulm 1 147, 154, 154
understanding, information 638, 
639, 640
Unger, Gerard 485
Unger, Jennifer B. 680
Unicode-compliant fonts 481
United States of America 148–9, 
155; Affordable Care Act 658; 
ANSI 304; Food and Drug 
Administration 720; fotonovelas 
679–80; Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) 162; military-industrial 
complex 140–50; Plain Writing 
Act 474
univariate data 25
University of Cincinnati 656
University of Reading, Otto and 
Marie Neurath Isotype Collection, 
the 115, 117, 127
unmanned ships 82, 82
Unsworth, Len 235–6
US Coast Guard Research and 
Development Centre 77–8
US Consumer Product Safety 
Commission 331
text-image relationships (cont.):

Index / 749 
US Department of Defense 150, 150
US statistical atlas 262–3, 262–4, 
266
usability 210
usability testing 438, 622
Usability.gov 294
user experience 293
user interfaces 210
user ratings 691–2
user research 437, 444–5, 622
user-centred design 293, 297; 
medicine package leaflets 687–8, 
689, 690–2, 698–9
user-friendliness 691–2
user-generated content 487
utilitarianism 163–5; act 164; rule 
164–5
V
Valle, Ramón 680, 681
Valois, Jean-Paul 47
Valturius, Robertus 88n
van den Haak, M. J. 443–4
Van den Putte, Bas 671
Van Der Drift, Marcel 522
van der Weel, Adriaan 275, 277
van Leeuwen, T. 190–1, 225–6, 238, 
279
van Mulken, Margot 445–6
Varela, Francisco 281
variation, sources of 232–3
Vernon, M. D. 113, 114
Verstappen, Renate 676
Vigilante, William J. 343
Vikings 62–5, 63, 64, 65
virtue ethics 163
visible content 405
Visible Language 152
visual acuity 431
Visual Analytics 40
visual appeal 210
visual clarity, technical and 
scientific illustration 97–8, 99
visual communication, effective 
406
visual conventions 257–72; 
colour 261; construction 
257, 258–65, 259, 260, 261, 
262–3, 265; currency 259; data 
graphical strategies 270–1, 271; 
development 261–5, 262–3, 
265; digital re-inventions 264; 
enculturation 260; function 
257; hierarchy 257, 257–8; 
homogenizing effects 271; 
institutional 260, 260–1; invoking 
hierarchy 265–72, 267, 268, 269, 
271; pictorial strategies 269–70; 
reach 260–1; situational variables 
271–2; specialized 265, 265; 
textual strategies 271
visual cues: medicine package 
leaflets 695; storyworlds 577, 
579–80, 582, 584–5, 589
Visual design in action (Sutnar) 156, 
156
visual design, indexes and indexing 
496–8
visual diction 97
visual discourse communities 257, 
259–61
visual education 107–8
visual enculturation 260
visual grouping 433, 433
visual hierarchies 496–7
visual hierarchy 269–70
visual identities 421–2
visual impact 211
visual literacy 186
visual metaphor 135
visual perception 426
visual rhetoric 205–18, 229; 
definition 205, 207; design 
criteria 211; and engagement 
210–1, 212–8, 213, 217; genre 
associations 205–8; good design 
210–1, 211; graphic devices 
216–8; and layout complexity 
215–6, 217; neutrality 208, 209; 
spatial organization 206, 207; 
text design functions 207, 207; 
typographic differentiation 
212–6, 213
visual storytelling 250–1
visual summary 8
visual thinking, framework 253, 253
visual variables 27, 27–8, 28
visualization: definition 23; 
rhetorical images in 4, values 170
visually impaired readers, on-screen 
colour contrast for 405–14
W
Wade, Mitch 501
Wagemans, Johan 427
Waghenaer, Lucas Janszoon: 
Spieghel der Zeevaerdt 71, 72, 73, 
74; Thresoor der Zeewaerdt 73
Wainer, Howard 503
Wakefield, Melanie A. 669
WalkBrighton app 519
Walker, B. N. 387
Walker, Rob 522
Wallace, Steve 442
Waller, Robert xi, 151, 153n, 206–7, 
211, 218, 227–8, 228, 229, 485, 624
Walsh, Michael, F. 326
Wang, Hsiu Feng 323
Wang, Ranxiao Frances 512–3
Ward, Matthew 27
Warde, Beatrice 185
warnings and warning symbols 
305–6, 307, 309, 331–44; 
attention maintenance 337, 
337–8; attention switch 336, 
344; attitudes and beliefs 
341–2; behavioural compliance 
342–3; channel 334; colour 
336, 339; Communication-
Human Information Processing 
model 344; compliance 342–3; 
components 332; comprehension 
338, 338–41, 339, 340, 340, 
341, 344; definition 331; delivery 
334–5; effectiveness. 331–2; 
effectiveness 343; environmental 
stimuli 335; evaluation 
methodologies 343; graphical 
configurations 336; and hazard 
control 331, 332–3, 333, 344; 
message content 339, 339; 
motivation 342, 344; perceived 
cost of compliance 342; and 
perceived hazard 341; processing 
331, 334–43, 335; receiver 336; 
reminder value 341; roles 331, 
331–2; salience 343; signal words 
333, 336, 338, 338; size 336; 
standards and guidelines 332; 
symbols 339–44, 340
The Washington Post 172
water safety symbols 307–8, 310, 
310
Watson-Brown, Anthony 473
Watt, James 44, 45, 48
wayfinding 422–3, 509–24; 
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol 
case study 536; apps 519–20; 
built environments 511, 513–5, 
514, 516, 516–21, 519, 521; 
cognitive maps 512; continuity of 
information 517–9, 519; definition 
510, 511, 528; digital 519–20, 
522–4, 561, 569–72; indoor 561–
74; information content 511–2, 
512; inside buildings 520–1, 521; 
journey stages 521, 521; natural 
environments 515, 515–6; nodes 
model 514, 514; personalized 561; 
process 510–1; research 509–10, 
521; role of information designers 
509; spatial disorientation 510; 
strategies 512–5, 514, 517–8, 
518; striders 517–8, 518; strollers 
517–8, 518; symbiosis 509, 522–4; 
wearable devices 522–3. see also 
straight ahead arrows
wayfinding strategy 527–40; 
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol 
case study 535–9, 537; arrows 
537, 537; colour coding 534, 
535; conceptual testing 538–9; 
continuous assessment 539–40; 

750 / Index
decision points 536; design 
phases 527, 527–8; destination 
classification 533–4, 534; 
destination grouping 531, 531; 
development 527, 528, 528–33; 
directions based on process 
steps 530, 531; environmental 
structuring 531–2; and frequency 
of use 533; information details 
532–3; information overload 
529, 529; location-based 531–2, 
533; route creation 532, 532; 
terminology 534; users 530
wayshowing 511
WCAG2.0 accessibility guidelines 
405–14; background 405–7; 
colour contrast 407–14, 409, 411, 
412, 413; colour contrast colour 
plane effects 410–4, 412, 413; 
contrast limits 410; luminance 
contrast 408, 408–10, 409, 411, 
412, 413; luminance contrast 
ratio 407–8; minimum threshold 
414
wearable devices 522–3
Weaver, Warren 154
Weber’s law 406
websites, indexing 489
Wedgwood, Josiah 45
Weigel, Christoph, Discus 
chronologicus 4–8, 5
Weimar Republic 148
Wertheimer, Max 427
Whitrow, Gerald James, What is 
time? 24
Whittaker, S. 194
Widdice, Dr Lea 664
Wiedenbeck, Susan 317
Wiener, Jan M. 510–1
Wiener Methode der Bildstatistik 
(Vienna Method of Pictorial 
Statistics) 107
Wi-Fi positioning 565–6
Wildfeuer, Janina 234
Willard, Emma 19
Willis, Scooter 565
Wills, Graham 40
WIMP systems 315
Wissing, Benno 535
Wogalter, M. S. 305–6, 343
Wolf, Maryanne 279–80
working memory load 513
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 
407
Wright, Patricia (Pat Wright) 151, 
152n, 402, 503
writing 279
Wrolstad, Merald xi, 152
Wurman, Richard Saul ix, 441
Wykes, Cathy 503
X
Xerox Alto 315
XML 490
Y
Yamada, Ann-Marie 680
Yeh, Yung-Shao 210
Z
Zacks, Jeffrey M. 371
Zajonc, Robert B. 325
Zethsen, Karen K. 474
Zheng, Dongfang 567
Ziefle, Martina 323
Zwaga, Harm xi, 150, 150, 538–9
wayfinding strategy (cont.):

