Information Systems Today
 Managing in the Digital World
 EIGHTH EDITION
Joseph Valacich • Christoph Schneider
GLOBAL 
EDITION

•
W
 
 
riting Space—Better writers make better communicators—
who become better managers. Designed to help 
develop and assess concept mastery and critical 
thinking, the Writing Space oﬀers  assisted auto-graded
 writing assignments so students can receive
 
meaningful,
 personalized feedback quickly and easily. And because of
 Intergration with Turnitin®, Writing Space can check students’ 
work
 
for improper citation or plagiarism.
MIS: Engage, Apply, Empower
PROBLEM 
SOLVING
TEAMWORK
DECISION 
MAKING
CRITICAL 
THINKING
ABILITY 
TO APPLY 
KNOWLEDGE 
COMMUNICATION
NEW 
 HIRE

•  Learning Catalytics™—is an interactive, student response tool that 
uses students’ smartphones, tablets, or laptops to engage them in more 
sophisticated tasks and critical thinking as well as collaboration with other
class members. Included with MyLab with eText, Learning Catalytics enables
you to generate classroom discussion, guide your lecture, and promote 
peer-to-peer learning with real-time analytics. 
                                         
• Pearson eText—keeps students engaged in learning on their own time, while 
helping them achieve greater conceptual understanding of course material.  
Combining resources that illuminate content with accessible self-assessment, 
MyLab with Pearson eText provides students with a complete digital learning 
experience—all in one place.
•  Dynamic Study Modules—help students  learn the language of MIS by
continuously assessing their activity and performance in real time  by adapting to the 
student's knowledge and conﬁdence on each concept. These are available as
graded assignments prior to class, and accessible on smartphones, tablets, and
computers. 
 
 
 
•  Reporting Dashboard—View, analyze, and report learning outcomes 
clearly and easily, and get the information needed to keep 
students on track throughout the course with the new Reporting 
Dashboard. Available via the MyLab Gradebook and fully mobile-ready, 
the Reporting Dashboard presents student performance data at the 
class, section, and program levels in an accessible, visual manner.
•  Accessibility (ADA)—Pearson is working toward WCAG 2.0 Level AA
and Section 508 standards, as expressed in the Pearson Guidelines for  
Accessible Educational Web Media. Moreover, our products support
customers in meeting their obligation to comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) by providing access to learning technology programs  
for users with disabilities.
Please email our Accessibility Team at disability.support@pearson.com for the most
up-to-date information.   
•  LMS Integration—You can now link from Blackboard Learn, Brightspace by 
D2L, Canvas, or Moodle to MyLab IS. Professors can acess assignments, 
       rosters, 
and resources, and synchronize grades with your LMS gradebook.
Single sign-on provides students access to all the personalized 
learning resources that make studying more eﬃcient and eﬀective.
A L W A Y S  L E A R N I N G

This page intentionally left blank

INFORMATION SYSTEMS TODAY
Joseph Valacich
University of Arizona
Christoph Schneider
City University of Hong Kong
M A N A G I N G  I N  T H E  D I G I T A L  W O R L D
EIGHTH EDITION
GLOBAL EDITION
Harlow, England • London • New York • Boston • San Francisco • Toronto • Sydney • Dubai • Singapore • Hong Kong 
Tokyo • Seoul • Taipei • New Delhi • Cape Town • Sao Paulo • Mexico City • Madrid • Amsterdam • Munich • Paris • Milan

VP Editorial Director: Andrew Gilfillan
Senior Portfolio Manager: Samantha Lewis
Content Development Team Lead: Laura Burgess
Program Monitor: Ann Pulido/SPi Global
Editorial Assistant: Madeline Houpt
Managing Editor, Global Edition: Steven Jackson
Acquisitions Editor, Global Edition: Tahnee Wager
Senior Project Editor, Global Edition: Daniel Luiz
Manager, Media Production, Global Edition:  
M. Vikram Kumar
Senior Manufacturing Controller, Global Edition: 
Trudy Kimber
Product Marketing Manager: Kaylee Carlson
Project Manager: Katrina Ostler/ 
Cenveo® Publisher Services
Text Designer: Cenveo Publisher Services
Cover Designer: Lumina Datamatics, Inc.
Cover Art: pogonic/Shutterstock
Full-Service Project Management:  
Cenveo Publisher Services
Composition: Cenveo Publisher Services
Unattributed figures in text: Joseph Valacich, Christoph 
Schneider, Information Systems Today, 8Ed., © 2018. 
Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.
Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers make no representations about the suitability of the information 
contained in the documents and related graphics published as part of the services for any purpose. All such 
documents and related graphics are provided “as is” without warranty of any kind. Microsoft and/or its 
respective suppliers hereby disclaim all warranties and conditions with regard to this information, including 
all warranties and conditions of merchantability, whether express, implied or statutory, fitness for a particular 
purpose, title and non-infringement. In no event shall Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers be liable for 
any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or 
profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising out of or in connection 
with the use or performance of information available from the services.
The documents and related graphics contained herein could include technical inaccuracies or typographical 
errors. Changes are periodically added to the information herein. Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers 
may make improvements and/or changes in the product(s) and/or the program(s) described herein at any time. 
Partial screen shots may be viewed in full within the software version specified.
Microsoft® Windows®, and Microsoft Office® are registered trademarks of the Microsoft corporation in the U.S.A. 
and other countries. This book is not sponsored or endorsed by or affiliated with the Microsoft corporation.
Pearson Education Limited
KAO Two
KAO Park
Harlow
CM17 9NA
United Kingdom
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2018
The rights of Joseph Valacich and Christoph Schneider to be identified as the authors of this work have been 
asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Information Systems Today: Managing in the 
Digital World, 8th edition, ISBN 978-0-13-463520-0, by Joseph Valacich and Christoph Schneider, published 
by Pearson Education © 2018.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either 
the prior written permission of the publisher or a license permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text 
does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use 
of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this book by such owners.
ISBN 10: 1-292-21597-6
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-21597-6
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
14 13 12 11 10
Typeset in Times LT Pro-Roman by Cenveo Publisher Services.
Printed and bound by Vivar, Malaysia.

Dedication
To my mother Mary, you are the best.
—Joe
To Birgit for your love and support.
—Christoph

This page intentionally left blank

7
Joseph (Joe) Valacich is an Eller Professor of MIS within the Eller College of Management 
at the University of Arizona, a Fellow of the Association for Information Systems (2009), and 
the Chief Science Officer (CSO) of Neuro-ID, Inc. He was previously on the faculty at Indiana 
University, Bloomington, and Washington State University, Pullman. He has had visiting faculty 
appointments at City University of Hong Kong, Buskerud College (Norway), the Helsinki School 
of Economics and Business, the Norwegian University of Life Sciences, and Riga Technical 
University (Latvia). He received a PhD degree from the University of Arizona (MIS) and MBA 
and BS (Computer Science) degrees from the University of Montana. Prior to his academic career, 
Dr. Valacich worked in the software industry in Seattle in both large and startup organizations.
Dr. Valacich has served on various national task forces designing model curricula for the 
information systems discipline, including IS ‘97, IS 2002, and IS 2010: The Model Curriculum 
and Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Information Systems, where he was 
co-chairperson. He also served on the task force that designed MSIS 2000 and 2006: The Master 
of Science in Information Systems Model Curriculum. He served on the executive committee, 
funded by the National Science Foundation, to define the IS Program Accreditation Standards 
and served on the board of directors for CSAB (formally the Computing Sciences Accreditation 
Board) representing the Association for Information Systems (AIS). He was the general confer-
ence co-chair for the 2003 International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) and the 2012 
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS); both were held in Seattle.
Dr. Valacich has conducted numerous corporate training and executive development pro-
grams for organizations, including AT&T, Boeing, Dow Chemical, EDS, Exxon, FedEx, General 
Motors, Microsoft, and Xerox. He has served in a variety of editorial roles within various 
academic journals and conferences. His primary research interests include human–computer 
interaction, deception detection, technology-mediated collaboration, mobile and emerging tech-
nologies, and e-business. He is a prolific scholar, having published more than 200 scholarly 
articles in numerous prestigious journals and conferences, including: MIS Quarterly, Information 
Systems Research, Management Science, Academy of Management Journal, Journal of MIS, 
Decision Sciences, Journal of the AIS, Communications of the ACM, Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, and Journal of Applied Psychology. He is a coauthor of the 
leading textbooks Modern Systems Analysis and Design (8th ed.) and Essentials of Systems 
Analysis and Design (6th ed.), both published by Pearson.
In 2016, Dr. Valacich was awarded the University of Arizona, Tech Launch Arizona, “Innova-
tion & Impact Award” for Information Technology. He was awarded the “Distinguished Alumnus 
Award” from the University of Montana Alumni Association in 2012 and the “Outstanding Alum-
nus Award” from the University of Montana’s School of Business Administration in 2009. Dr. 
Valacich is also ranked as one of the most prolific authors in the history of MIS Quarterly—his 
discipline’s top journal—over the life of the journal (1977–2016) (see misq.org). Throughout his 
career, he has also won numerous teaching, service, and research awards.
Christoph Schneider is an assistant professor in the Department of Information Systems at 
City University of Hong Kong and previously held a visiting faculty appointment at Boise State 
University. He earned a Swiss Higher Diploma in Hotel Management at the University Centre 
César Ritz in Brig, Switzerland, a BA in Hotel and Restaurant Administration at Washington 
State University, and a PhD in Business Administration (Management Information Systems) 
at Washington State University. His teaching interests include the management of information 
systems and web design.
About the Authors

8        ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dr. Schneider is an active researcher. His primary research interests include human–com-
puter interaction, electronic commerce, and computer-mediated collaboration. His research has 
appeared in peer-reviewed journals, such as Information Systems Research, Management Infor-
mation Systems Quarterly, Management Science, and IEEE Transactions on Professional Com-
munication; further, he has presented his research at various international conferences, such as 
the International Conference on Information Systems, the European Conference on Informa-
tion Systems, and the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. He serves as a 
member of the International Steering Committee of the International Conference on Informa-
tion Systems Development (ISD) and as senior editor at Information Systems Journal.

9
Preface  19
Chapter 1 	
Managing in the Digital World  30
Chapter 2 	
Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information 
Systems  76
Chapter 3 	
Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and 
Services  118
Chapter 4 	
Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce  166
Chapter 5 	
Enhancing Organizational Communication and 
Collaboration Using Social Media  210
Chapter 6 	
Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and 
Analytics  252
Chapter 7 	
Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information 
Systems  298
Chapter 8 	
Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply 
Chain and Customer Relationship Management  334
Chapter 9 	
Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  372
Chapter 10 	
Securing Information Systems  418
Technology Briefing	 Foundations of Information Systems  
Infrastructure  470
Acronyms  519
Glossary  521
Name Index  541
Organization Index  542
Subject Index  545
Brief Contents

This page intentionally left blank

11
Preface  19
Chapter 1 	
Managing in the Digital World  30
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Open Innovation  30
Information Systems Today  32
The Emergence of the Digital World  32
Globalization and Societal Issues in the Digital World  35
◾COMING ATTRACTIONS: Memory Crystals  35
Five IT Megatrends That Shape the Digital Future  38
◾WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Wearable Technologies  38
◾GREEN IT: The Green Internet of Things  44
Information Systems Defined  44
Data: The Root and Purpose of Information Systems  46
Hardware, Software, and Telecommunications Networks: The Components of 
Information Systems  46
People: The Builders, Managers, and Users of Information Systems  47
◾SECURITY MATTERS: Ransomware  52
Organizations: The Context of Information Systems  53
◾WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Technology Addiction  56
The Dual Nature of Information Systems  57
Case in Point: An Information System Gone Awry: Outages Outrage Gamers  57
Case in Point: An Information System That Works: FedEx  57
Information Systems for Competitive Advantage  58
◾ETHICAL DILEMMA: The Social and Environmental Costs of the Newest
Gadgets  59
IS Ethics  60
Information Privacy  60
Intellectual Property  64
The Need for a Code of Ethical Conduct  65
◾INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Business Career Outlook  66
Key Points Review  67  •  Key Terms  67  •   Review Questions  68  •  Self-
Study Questions  68  •  Problems and Exercises  69  •  Application 
Exercises  70  •  Team Work Exercise  70  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  71
◾APPLE  72
◾HEALTHCARE IS  73
Chapter 2	
Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information 
Systems  76
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Startups and New Business Models  76
Enabling Organizational Strategy through Information Systems  78
Organizational Decision-Making Levels  78
Organizational Functional Areas  80
Contents

12        CONTENTS
Information Systems for Automating: Doing Things Faster  81
Information Systems for Organizational Learning: Doing Things Better  83
Information Systems for Supporting Strategy: Doing Things Smarter  84
Identifying Where to Compete: Analyzing Competitive Forces  84
Identifying How to Compete: Choosing a Generic Strategy  85
Identifying How to Compete: Resources and Capabilities  86
◾ GREEN IT: The Electric Navy  87
Identifying How to Compete: Analyzing the Value Chain  88
The Role of Information Systems in Value Chain Analysis  88
The Technology/Strategy Fit  89
Business Models in the Digital World  89
◾ WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Digital Nomads  90
Revenue Models in the Digital World  90
◾ WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: The Pains of Uber in China  93
Platform-Based Business Models and the Sharing Economy  93
Service-Based Business Models  95
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: The Ethics of the Sharing Economy  96
Valuing Innovations  97
The Need for Constant IS Innovation  99
Successful Innovation Is Difficult  100
Open Innovation  101
Organizational Requirements for Innovation  102
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: The CITE Project  103
The Innovation Process  103
◾ SECURITY MATTERS: The Bangladesh SWIFT Theft  106
Startups and Crowdfunding  106
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Education  108
Key Points Review  109  •  Key Terms  109  •  Review Questions  110  •  Self-
Study Questions  110  •  Problems and Exercises  111  •  Application 
Exercises  112  •  Team Work Exercise  112  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  112
◾ LINKEDIN  113
◾ STREAMING VIDEO  114
Chapter 3	
Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and 
Services  118
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: From Google to Alphabet  118
The IS Infrastructure  120
◾  WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Mobile Payments Are Transforming Developing 
Countries  122
Applications and Databases Supporting Business Processes  124
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: Putting People’s Lives Online  125
IS Infrastructure Components  126
Hardware  126
System Software  128
Storage  130
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: Making Death Optional?  130
Networking  131
◾ GREEN IT: Alphabet Renewables  137
Data Centers  139


CONTENTS        13
Issues Associated with Managing the IS Infrastructure  140
Rapid Obsolescence and Shorter IT Cycles  140
Big Data and Rapidly Increasing Storage Needs  143
Demand Fluctuations  143
Increasing Energy Needs  144
Cloud Computing  144
◾  WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Old and Dirty Energy Drives Global Internet 
Growth  145
What Is Cloud Computing?  145
Managing the Cloud    149
Advanced Cloud Applications    152
◾ SECURITY MATTERS: Car Hacking  154
Green Computing  157
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Movie Industry  158
Key Points Review  159  •  Key Terms  159  •  Review Questions  160  •  Self-
Study Questions  160  •  Problems and Exercises  161  •  Application 
Exercises  162  •  Team Work Exercise  162  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  163
◾ DBS SINGAPORE MOVES TO THE CLOUD  163
◾ THE DARK WEB  164
Chapter 4 	
Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic 
Commerce  166
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Taobao and the World of E-commerce  166
E-Commerce and E-Government  168
Types of Electronic Commerce  168
E-government  169
E-finance  170
Business-To-Consumer E-Commerce  171
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: The AI Hedge Fund  172
E-tailing: Capabilities and Opportunities  174
Benefits of E-tailing  177
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: The Ethics of Reputation Management  178
Drawbacks of E-tailing  179
Electronic Commerce Websites and Internet Marketing  179
Designing Websites to Meet Online Consumers’ Needs  180
◾ SECURITY MATTERS:  Too Small to Be Hacked?  180
Internet Marketing  182
◾ WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Buying Likes  186
Mobile Commerce, Consumer-To-Consumer EC, and 
Consumer-To-Business EC  187
C2C EC  189
C2B EC  190
Securing Payments and Navigating Legal Issues in EC  191
Securing Payments in the Digital World  191
◾ GREEN IT: Green Online Shopping  192
◾ WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Mobile Payments  193
Legal Issues in EC  196
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Retailing  199

14        CONTENTS
Key Points Review  200  •  Key Terms  200  •  Review Questions  201  •  Self-
Study Questions  201  •  Problems and Exercises  202  •  Application 
Exercises  203  •  Team Work Exercise  203  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  204
◾ WEB ANALYTICS   205
◾ ROCKET INTERNET—CLONING BUSINESS MODELS  206
Chapter 5 	
Enhancing Organizational Communication and 
Collaboration Using Social Media  210
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Facebook  210
The Need for Communication and Collaboration  212
Virtual Teams  212
Groupware  213
Videoconferencing  214
◾ GREEN IT: Green IT Fueling Renewable Energy  216
Intranets and Employee Portals  216
The Evolving Web  218
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: Dissolvable Electronics  219
Evolving Web Capabilities  219
Evolving Social Interaction  220
The Evolving Workspace  221
Future Web Capabilities  221
Social Media and the Enterprise  222
Enhancing Communication Using Social Media  222
Enhancing Cooperation with Social Media  225
◾ SECURITY MATTERS: Terrorism Is Winning the Social Media Battle  228
Enhancing Collaboration with Social Media  229
◾ WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Going SoLoMo: Yelp  231
Enhancing Connection with Social Media  233
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: Anonymity, Trolling, and Cyberharassment  235
Managing Social Media Applications in the Enterprise  236
Organizational Issues  236
◾ WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Crowdfunding Failures  238
Downsides and Dangers of using Social Media Applications  239
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Online Travel  241
Key Points Review  242  •  Key Terms  242  •  Review Questions  243  •  Self-
Study Questions  243  •  Problems and Exercises  244  •  Application 
Exercises  244  •  Team Work Exercise  245  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  246
◾ LIVING IN A BUBBLE: FACEBOOK, NEWSFEEDS, AND JOURNALISM  246
◾ LIKE FARMING AND CLICKBAIT  247
Chapter  6 	 Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and 
Analytics  252
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Intelligence Through Drones  252
Enhancing Organizational Decision Making  254
Why Organizations Need Business Intelligence and Advanced Analytics  254
◾  GREEN IT: Big Data, Internet of Things, and Analytics Fuel Greener 
Facilities  257
Databases: Providing Inputs into Business Intelligence and Advanced 
Analytics  257


CONTENTS        15
◾ WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Twitter Fever—Look Before You Tweet  261
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: Emotion Aware Gaming  267
Business Intelligence and Advanced Analytics  267
Business Intelligence  268
◾ WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Identifying Malaria Hotspots  273
Advanced Analytics  273
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: Orwellian Internet of Things  275
◾  SECURITY MATTERS: Hacktivists Versus Fembots: The Ashley Madison 
Case  281
Knowledge Management and Geographic Information Systems  282
Knowledge Management Systems  282
Geographic Information Systems  285
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Healthcare  288
Key Points Review  289  •  Key Terms  289  •  Review Questions  290  •  Self-
Study Questions  290  •  Problems and Exercises  291  •  Application 
Exercises  292  •  Team Work Exercise  293  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  293
◾ DATA ANALYTICS IN HEALTHCARE  293
◾ GATHERING SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE  294
Chapter 7 	
Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise 
Information Systems  298
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Amazon.com  298
Core Business Processes and Organizational Value Chains  300
Core Business Processes  300
Organizational Activities Along the Value Chain  302
◾ GREEN IT: Why Your Enterprise Systems Should Be in the Cloud  305
Value Systems: Connecting Multiple Organizational Value Chains  307
Enterprise Systems  307
The Rise of Enterprise Systems  308
Supporting Business Processes  309
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: Too Much Intelligence? RFID and Privacy  310
◾  COMING ATTRACTIONS: The Internet of Things Will Transform ERP and 
Organizations  313
Enterprise Resource Planning  316
Responding to Compliance and Regulatory Demands  317
Choosing an ERP System  317
◾  SECURITY MATTERS: To Update or Not to Update, That Shouldn’t Be the 
Question  318
Enabling Business Processes Using ERP Core Components  319
ERP Installation  322
ERP Limitations  322
Achieving Enterprise System Success  322
◾  WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Big ERP Systems Embracing Small Mobile 
Devices  323
Secure Executive Sponsorship  323
Get Help from Outside Experts  324
Thoroughly Train Users  324
Take a Multidisciplinary Approach to Implementations  324
Evolve the Implementation  324
◾  WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Software Error Frees Prisoners Early and Is 
Linked to Killings  325

16        CONTENTS
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: The Automobile Industry  326
Key Points Review  327  •  Key Terms  327  •  Review Questions  328  •  Self-
Study Questions  328  •  Problems and Exercises  329  •  Application 
Exercises  330  •  Team Work Exercise  330  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  330
◾ SOFTWARE AS A SERVICE: ERP BY THE HOUR  331
◾ TH MILK VIETNAM ADOPTS CLOUD ERP  332
Chapter 8 	
Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships 
via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship 
Management  334
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Walmart  334
Supply Chain Management  336
What Is a Supply Chain?  336
Business-to-Business Electronic Commerce: Exchanging Data in Supply 
Networks  336
Managing Complex Supply Networks  339
Benefits of Effectively Managing Supply Chains  340
Optimizing the Supply Chain Through Supply Chain Management  342
◾  WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: SpaceX Rocket Failure due to Supply Chain 
Failure  343
Developing an SCM Strategy  344
◾ GREEN IT: Nike’s Green Supply Chain  345
Supply Chain Planning  345
Supply Chain Execution  346
Supply Chain Visibility and Analytics  349
Customer Relationship Management  349
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: Augmenting Supply Chain Success  350
◾  SECURITY MATTERS: Disclosing the Customer Data of the Most 
Vulnerable  353
Developing a CRM Strategy  353
Architecture of a CRM System  354
◾  WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Developing a Mobile CRM App for 
Customers  358
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: When Algorithms Discriminate  362
Ethical Concerns with CRM  363
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Manufacturing  363
Key Points Review  364  •  Key Terms  364  •  Review Questions  365  •  Self-
Study Questions  365  •  Problems and Exercises  366  •  Application 
Exercises  367  •  Team Work Exercise  367  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  367
◾ SUPPLY CHAIN HAVOC  368
◾ EFFICIENTLY DELIVERING PRODUCTS OVER THE “LAST MILE”  369
Chapter 9 	
Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  372
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: The Maker Movement  372
Making the Business Case  374
Business Case Objectives  374
The Productivity Paradox  374
Making a Successful Business Case  376
◾ GREEN IT: Project Natick—Microsoft’s Underwater Data Centers  378


CONTENTS        17
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: Harvesting Human Energy  380
Presenting the Business Case  382
◾ ETHICAL DILEMMA: Ethical App Development  384
The Systems Development Process  385
Custom Versus Off-the-Shelf Software  385
Open Source Software  386
Systems Integration: Combining Custom, Open Source, and Off-the-Shelf 
Systems  387
IS Development in Action  387
The Role of Users in the Systems Development Process  389
Systems Development Controls  389
Steps in the Systems Development Process  389
◾ WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Creating Mobile Apps  390
Phase 1: Systems Planning and Selection  390
Phase 2: Systems Analysis  391
Phase 3: Systems Design  394
Phase 4: Systems Implementation and Operation  395
Repeating the SDLC: Systems Maintenance  397
◾ SECURITY MATTERS: Mobile Cybercrime  399
Other Approaches to Designing and Building Systems  399
Acquiring Information Systems  401
External Acquisition  401
◾ WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: Top Security Threats  402
Outsourcing Systems Development  406
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Broadcasting  408
Key Points Review  409  •  Key Terms  409  •  Review Questions  410  •  Self-
Study Questions  410  •  Problems and Exercises  411  •  Application 
Exercises  412  •  Team Work Exercise  412  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  413
◾ NEXT GENERATION IDENTIFICATION: FBI, ICE DATABASES EXPAND AND 
JOIN FORCES  414
◾ BIG DATA, HADOOP, MAP REDUCE  415
Chapter 10 	 Securing Information Systems  418
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: Not So “Anonymous”—Activists, 
Hacktivists, or Just Plain Criminals?  418
Computer Crime  420
Hacking and Cracking  420
Types of Computer Criminals and Crimes  420
◾  GREEN IT: Anonymous Protests the Killing of Dolphins and Whales in 
Japan  424
Computer Viruses and Other Destructive Code  425
◾  WHEN THINGS GO WRONG: The Bug That Almost Killed the 
Internet  430
Cyberharassment, Cyberstalking, and Cyberbullying  432
Software Piracy  432
Cybersquatting  434
Laws Against Computer Crime  434
Cyberwar and Cyberterrorism  435
◾ WHO’S GOING MOBILE: Backdoors in Every Mobile Phone?  436
Cyberwar  436
Cyberterrorism  437

18        CONTENTS
Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure  470
Foundational Topics in IS Hardware  471
Input Technologies  471
Processing: Transforming Inputs into Outputs  473
Output Technologies  477
Foundational Topics in IS Software  478
System Software  479
Programming Languages and Development Environments  479
Foundational Topics in Networking  485
Evolution of Computer Networking  485
Types of Networks  487
Packet Switching  490
Network Standards and Protocols  490
Network Technologies  494
The Internet  500
Foundational Topics in Database Management  506
Relational Database Design  506
Advanced Database Models  511
Key Points Review  511  •  Key Terms  512  •  Review 
Questions  513  •  Self-Study Questions  514  •  Problems and 
Exercises  515  •  Answers to the Foundational Hardware Self-Study 
Questions  517  •  Answers to the Foundational Software Self-Study 
Questions  517  •  Answers to the Foundational Networking Self-Study 
Questions  517  •  Answers to the Foundational Database Self-Study 
Questions  517
Acronyms  519
Glossary  521
Name Index  541
Organization Index  542
Subject Index  545
TECHNOLOGY 
BRIEFING 
◾  ETHICAL DILEMMA: Ethics and Cyberwar: Just Because We Can, Should 
We?  440
Managing Information Systems Security  440
Assessing Risks  442
Developing a Security Strategy  444
Implementing Controls and Training  446
◾  SECURITY MATTERS: Back to the Future: Analog May Be the Future of 
Securing Critical Infrastructure  447
◾ COMING ATTRACTIONS: Can You Become Your Password?  453
Monitoring Security  456
◾ INDUSTRY ANALYSIS: Cybercops Track Cybercriminals  459
Key Points Review  460  •  Key Terms  460  •  Review Questions  461  •  Self-
Study Questions  461  •  Problems and Exercises  462  •  Application 
Exercises  464  •  Team Work Exercise  464  •  Answers to the Self-Study 
Questions  465
◾ SINGPASS E-GOVERNMENT SECURITY  466
◾ CHINA’S GREAT (FIRE) WALL  467

19
Approach
Information systems have become pervasive. Mobile devices, social media, and cloud computing 
have transformed organizations and society. Organizations see the possibilities of the Internet of 
Things, in that not only computers but various sensors, motors, actuators, or even cameras can 
generate a wealth of potentially useful data. Businesses face unprecedented opportunities, but 
also challenges, through the ability to utilize Big Data. What does all this mean? What are the 
catalysts of these concepts and of all this change? More important, how can organizations thrive 
in this dynamic and highly competitive marketplace? The answer to these and many similar ques-
tions is that information systems and related information technologies are driving innovation, new 
business models, and hypercompetition. It is little wonder that teaching an introductory course on 
information systems has never been more crucial—or more challenging.
One of the greatest challenges that we face in teaching information systems courses is how 
to keep pace in the classroom with what is happening out in the real world. Being relevant to 
students while at the same time providing the necessary foundation for understanding the breadth, 
depth, and complexity of information systems has never been more difficult. We wrote Informa-
tion Systems Today, Eighth Edition, with this overarching goal in mind, to be both rigorous and 
relevant. To accomplish this, we want students not only to learn about information systems but 
also to clearly understand the importance of information systems for individuals, organizations, 
and society. Additionally, we do not want to simply spoon-feed students with technical terms and 
the history of information systems. Instead, students must understand exactly what innovative 
organizations are doing with contemporary information systems and, more important, where 
things are heading. Finally, we want to empower students with the essential knowledge needed to 
be successful in the use and understanding of information systems in their careers.
To this end, we wrote Information Systems Today, Eighth Edition, so that it is contemporary, 
fun to read, and useful, focusing on what business students need to know about information sys-
tems to survive and thrive in the digital world.
Audience
Information Systems Today, Eighth Edition, is primarily for the undergraduate introductory infor-
mation systems course required of all business students. The introductory information systems 
course typically has a diverse audience of students majoring in many different areas, such as 
accounting, economics, finance, marketing, general management, human resource management, 
production and operations, international business, entrepreneurship, and information systems. 
This book was also written for students studying topics outside of business, especially in the 
growing and broad area of information sciences. Given the range of students taking this type of 
course, we have written this book so that it is a valuable guide to all students, providing them with 
the essential information they need to know. Therefore, this book has been written to appeal to a 
diverse audience.
Information Systems Today, Eighth Edition, can also be used for the introductory course 
offered at the graduate level—for example, in the first year of an MBA program. Such usage 
would be especially appropriate if the course heavily focused on the diverse set of cases provided 
in each chapter.
What’s New to the Eighth Edition
Our primary goal for Information Systems Today, Eighth Edition, was to emphasize the impor-
tance of information systems to all business students as the role of information technology and 
systems continues to expand within organizations and society. Most notably, we extensively 
Preface

20        PREFACE
examine how five big megatrends—mobile, social media, the Internet of Things, cloud comput-
ing, and Big Data—are transforming individuals, organizations, and society. Given this clear 
focus, we are better able to identify those topics most critical to students and future business 
professionals. Consequently, we have made substantial revisions to the basic content of the chap-
ters and pedagogical elements as well as introduced several new elements that we believe help 
achieve this goal. New or expanded chapter topics include the following:
■
■An extensively revised chapter—Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World”—focuses 
not only on defining what an information system consists of but also provides new content 
on globalization and societal issues in the digital world as well as the role of five IT mega-
trends in fueling and addressing these issues.
■
■An extensively revised chapter—Chapter 2, “Gaining Competitive Advantage Through 
Information Systems”—provides new content describing how information systems play a 
key part in enabling different types of innovation and innovative business models.
■
■A revised chapter—Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and 
Services”—provides updated content on the need for a reliable, adaptable, and scalable 
infrastructure to support the needs of today’s organizations as well as on essential infra-
structure concepts related to hardware, software, storage, networking and the Internet, data 
centers, and cloud computing.
■
■A revised chapter—Chapter 4, “Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce”— 
provides updated content related to e-commerce involving the end consumer as well as new 
and expanded coverage of e-finance, fintech, and related issues.
■
■A revised chapter—Chapter 5, “Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collabora-
tion Using Social Media”—centers around various topics related to the need for organiza-
tional communication and provides updated content on how individuals and organizations 
use both traditional communication and collaboration tools and social media for communi-
cation, collaboration, cooperation, and connection.
■
■An extensively revised chapter—Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big 
Data and Analytics”—provides extended coverage on business intelligence and advanced 
analytics and greatly expanded content on machine learning, predictive modeling, artificial 
intelligence, unstructured data analytics, and spatial decision support.
■
■A revised chapter—Chapter 8, “Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via 
Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management”—provides updated content 
on business-to-business electronic commerce and supply chain management as well as 
customer relationship management (CRM).
■
■A revised chapter—Chapter 9, “Developing and Acquiring Information Systems”—
provides updates to various topics and extended content on alternative system development 
methodologies.
■
■A revised chapter—Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”—provides an update to 
all topics and deeper coverage on industrial espionage and cyberterrorism.
■
■A revised Technology Briefing covers foundational concepts related to various informa-
tion technologies. The Technology Briefing provides the foundations for a deeper under-
standing of the topics introduced in Chapter 3 and is intended for use in more technically 
oriented courses. Each section of this briefing was designed to stand alone—it can be read 
with or without the other sections.
In addition to the changes within the main chapter content, we have also added two new 
features to each chapter—Green IT and Security Matters. Green IT presents environmental issues 
arising from the use of information systems. For example, in Chapter 4, we discuss the environ-
mental impacts of online shopping. Security Matters presents some current issues and threats 
arising from the ubiquitous use of information systems. For example, in Chapter 5, we discuss 
how hacktivists challenged the extramarital dating website Ashley Madison.
Beyond the chapter content and features, we have also made substantial changes and refine-
ments to the end of each chapter. In particular, we carefully revised many of the end-of-chapter 
problems and exercises to reflect content changes and new material. Further, we have carefully 
updated the end-of-chapter cases about contemporary organizations and issues to illustrate the 
complexities of the digital world. Each case mirrors the primary content of its chapter to better 
emphasize its relevancy within the context of a real organization. All these elements are discussed 
more thoroughly next.


PREFACE        21
Our goal has always been to provide only the information that is relevant to all business 
students, nothing more and nothing less. We believe that we have again achieved this goal with 
Information Systems Today, Eighth Edition. We hope you agree.
Key Features
As authors, teachers, developers, and managers of information systems, we understand that in 
order for students to best learn about information systems with this book, they must be motivated 
to learn. To this end, we have included a number of unique features to help students quickly and 
easily assess the true value of information systems and their impact on everyday life. We show 
how today’s professionals are using information systems to help modern organizations become 
more efficient and competitive. Our focus is on the application of technology to real-world, con-
temporary situations. Next, we describe each of the features that contribute to that focus.
Pedagogy—A Multitiered Approach
Each chapter provides a list of learning objectives to lay the foundation for the chapter content, 
followed by an opening case to highlight how contemporary organizations are utilizing informa-
tion systems to gain competitive advantage, streamline organizational processes, or improve 
customer relationships or how information systems fuel societal change. In addition, throughout 
each chapter, various short pedagogical elements are presented to highlight key information sys-
tems issues and concepts in a variety of contexts. These elements help to show students the 
broader organizational and societal implications of various topics. At the end of each chapter, the 
Key Points Review repeats the learning objectives and describes how each objective was achieved; 
a variety of questions and exercises helps students assess their understanding of the chapter mate-
rial and encourages them to synthesize and apply the concepts learned. A list of references 
appears at the end of each chapter.
OPENING CASE—MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD.  Each chapter begins with an opening 
case describing a real-world company, technology, and/or issue to spark students’ interest in the 
chapter topic. We have chosen engaging cases that relate to students’ interests and concerns by 
highlighting why information systems have become central for managing in the digital world. 
Each opening case includes a series of associated questions the students will be able to answer 
after reading the chapter contents. The organizations, technologies, or issues highlighted in 
these cases are as follows:
■
■The rise of open innovation
■
■How information systems fuel startups and new business models
■
■Google’s meteoric rise and its transition to Alphabet
■
■How Chinese e-commerce company Taobao became a leader in the world of e-commerce
■
■How Facebook has emerged as one of the most successful and powerful social media sites
■
■Intelligence through drones
■
■Amazon.com’s use of its sophisticated infrastructure to automate the supply chain for both 
large and small customers
■
■How Walmart became a leader in managing its global supply chains
■
■The rise of the maker movement
■
■How the hacking group “Anonymous” uses various tactics to further its ideological goals
Green IT Case
Climate change and resource scarcity are among the most pressing issues societies face. To highlight 
the role of information systems in this context, each chapter includes a Green IT case. This new 
feature discusses important issues related to the environmental impacts of information systems as 
well as how information systems can be used to reduce negative environmental impacts. The Green 
IT cases are embedded in the text of the chapter and highlight concepts from the surrounding chapter 
material. The issues and organizations highlighted in these cases are as follows:
■
■Green IT and the Internet of Things
■
■How the U.S. Navy is using alternative energy sources to address power consumption of its 
fleets

22        PREFACE
■
■How Alphabet uses renewably energy to power its data centers
■
■The environmental impacts of online shopping
■
■How green IT is fueling the use of renewable energy
■
■How the Internet of Things, Big Data, and analytics fuel greener facilities
■
■Why your ERP system should be in the cloud
■
■How Nike builds a greener supply chain
■
■How companies are trying to reduce the carbon footprint of modern data centers
■
■How Anonymous protests the killing of dolphins and whales in Japan
Security Matters
With information systems becoming ever more ubiquitous, security is of growing concern, not 
only for organizations but also for individuals. While we dedicate an entire chapter to issues sur-
rounding securing information systems, this new feature presents some current issues and threats. 
The topics discussed in this element are as follows:
■
■How computer criminals use ransomware to extort money from organizations and everyday 
people
■
■How attackers use the SWIFT system to conduct virtual bank robberies
■
■How attackers can remotely hack into a car’s onboard systems
■
■How even small companies are not immune from being targeted
■
■How terrorism is winning the social media battle
■
■How hacktivists challenged the extramarital dating website Ashley Madison
■
■How companies have to weigh the benefits and dangers of not updating ERP systems
■
■How VTech’s attackers disclosed the customer data of the most vulnerable
■
■How attackers use mobile malware to steal online banking users’ login credentials
■
■How analog may be the future of securing critical infrastructure
Coming Attractions
We worked to ensure that this book is contemporary. We cover literally hundreds of different 
current and emerging technologies throughout the book. This feature, however, focuses on 
innovations that are likely to soon have an impact on organizations or society. The topics dis-
cussed are as follows:
■
■Storing the history of humankind in memory crystals
■
■CITE—a city-sized test lab for innovations
■
■Extending the human lifetime indefinitely
■
■Using artificial intelligence to manage hedge funds
■
■Dissolvable electronics to fight bacteria
■
■Emotion aware gaming
■
■Transforming ERP and organizations using the Internet of Things
■
■Reducing supply chain problems using augmented reality
■
■Harvesting human energy
■
■Using brainwaves to verify people’s identities
When Things Go Wrong
Textbooks don’t usually describe what not to do, but this can be very helpful to students. This 
feature enables students to learn about a real-world situation in which information systems did 
not work or were not built or used well. The topics and issues discussed are as follows:
■
■The negative effects of technology addiction
■
■The pains of Uber in China
■
■Dirty data centers and the environmental impact of cloud computing
■
■How companies are trying to rig “likes” to gain reputation on social networking sites
■
■Crowdfunding failures
■
■How Twitter can quickly disseminate misinformation, with unforeseen consequences

■
■How a software error freed prisoners early
■
■How a supply chain failure caused SpaceX rocket failure
■
■Top security threats
■
■How the “heartbleed” bug almost killed the Internet
Who’s Going Mobile
Mobile technologies have become pervasive throughout society. New opportunities and issues 
have emerged with the growing importance of mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets, 
which are in people’s immediate reach 24/7. Related to each chapter’s content, this feature exam-
ines topics related to the growth in mobile device usage throughout the world. The topics dis-
cussed are as follows:
■
■The rise of wearable technologies
■
■How information systems support the lifestyle of the digital nomads
■
■How mobile payment systems have transformed developing countries
■
■The rise of mobile payments
■
■Going SoLoMo: Yelp
■
■Identifying malaria hotspots using mobile phone data
■
■Managing businesses on the road using mobile ERP
■
■Developing mobile CRM apps for customers
■
■How to succeed in mobile app development
■
■Backdoors in mobile phones
Ethical Dilemma
Ethical business practices are now a predominant part of contemporary management education 
and practice. This feature examines contemporary dilemmas related to the chapter content and 
highlights the implications of these dilemmas for managers, organizations, and society. Discus-
sion questions are provided to seed critical thinking assignments or class discussions. The topics 
discussed are as follows:
■
■The social and environmental costs of the newest gadgets
■
■The ethics of the sharing economy
■
■The ethics of publishing street photography on the web
■
■The ethics of reputation management
■
■Anonymity, trolling, and cyberharassment
■
■The Orwellian Internet of Things
■
■Privacy issues of radio frequency identification
■
■Using CRM systems to target or exploit consumers
■
■Ethical app development
■
■The ethics of cyberwar
Industry Analysis
Every industry is being transformed by the Internet and the increasing use of information systems 
by individuals and organizations. To give students a feel for just how pervasive and profound these 
changes are, each chapter presents an analysis of a specific industry to highlight the new rules for 
operating in the digital world. Given that no industry or profession is immune from these changes, 
each Industry Analysis highlights the importance of understanding information systems for every 
business student, not only for information systems majors. Discussion questions help students 
better understand the rapidly changing opportunities and risks of operating in the digital world. 
Chapter 1 examines how the digital world is transforming the opportunities for virtually all busi-
ness professions. Subsequent chapters examine how globalization and the digital world have 
forever transformed various industries, including education, entertainment, retail, travel, health 
care, automobile, manufacturing, broadcasting, and law enforcement. Clearly, we are in a time of 
tremendous change, and understanding this evolution will better equip students to not only sur-
vive but also thrive in the digital world.

PREFACE        23

End-of-Chapter Material
Our end-of-chapter material is designed to accommodate various teaching and learning styles. It 
promotes learning beyond the book and the classroom. Elements include the following:
■
■Key Terms—Highlight key concepts within the chapter.
■
■Review Questions—Test students’ understanding of basic content.
■
■Self-Study Questions—Enable students to assess whether they are ready for a test.
■
■Problems and Exercises—Push students deeper into the material and encourage them to 
synthesize and apply it.
■
■Application Exercises—Challenge students to solve two real-world management problems 
using spreadsheet and database applications from a running case centered on a university 
travel agency. Student data files referenced within the exercises are available on the book’s 
website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
■
■Team Work Exercise—Encourage students to keep up with, discuss, visualize, and pres-
ent interesting, important trends and forecasts related to Internet usage within a variety of 
contexts.
We have extensively updated these elements to reflect new chapter content and the natural 
evolution of the material.
End-of-Chapter Cases
To test and reinforce chapter content, we present two current real-world cases at the end of each 
chapter. Like the Opening Cases of each chapter, these cases are taken from the news and are 
contemporary. However, these are longer and more substantive than the Opening Cases. Sources 
for these cases include BusinessWeek, CIO magazine, InformationWeek, Wired, and various web-
sites. They too are followed by discussion questions that help the student apply and master the 
chapter content. The organizations, products, and issues highlighted in these cases are as 
follows:
■
■Apple’s rise, fall, and reemergence as a global technology giant
■
■How electronic health records are transforming healthcare
■
■How LinkedIn provided a professional networking platform through which users could 
consume content as well as create value
■
■How streaming video is disrupting the movie rental and TV broadcasting industries
■
■How Amazon Web Services transformed itself and became a pioneer in the use of cloud 
computing in Asia
■
■How the dark web fuels illegal activities
■
■How web analytics are providing unprecedented insights into online consumer behavior
■
■How Rocket Internet aims to become a European Internet giant by cloning business models
■
■How algorithms determine news feeds
■
■How scammers use like farming and clickbait to game Facebook’s newsfeed algorithms
■
■How healthcare in Singapore has used big data and analytics
■
■How companies gather social intelligence through social media
■
■How software as a service has enabled small and medium-sized organizations to utilize 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems
■
■How TH Milk Vietnam has adopted a cloud-based ERP system
■
■How natural disasters disrupt global supply chains
■
■How companies attempt to use information systems to efficiently deliver products to the 
“last mile”
■
■How the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of Homeland Security joined 
forces in developing a comprehensive database of biometric information to better track and 
apprehend criminals
■
■How Hadoop and MapReduce fuel the use and analysis of Big Data
■
■How SingPass gives the residents of Singapore access to e-government services
■
■How China limits information exchange within its society through its “great firewall”
24        PREFACE

Organization
The content and organization of this book are based on our own teaching as well as on feedback 
from reviewers and colleagues throughout the field. Each chapter builds on the others to reinforce 
key concepts and allow for a seamless learning experience. Essentially, the book has been struc-
tured to answer three fundamental questions:
1.	 What are contemporary information systems, and how are they being used in innovative 
ways?
2.	 Why are information systems so important and interesting?
3.	 How best can we build, acquire, manage, and safeguard information systems?
The ordering and content of our chapters were also significantly influenced by the “IS 2010 
Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Information Systems”1; these 
guidelines, written by prominent information systems scholars, define the information systems 
core body of knowledge for all business students. By design, the content of Information Systems 
Today, Eighth Edition, carefully follows these guidelines, and we are, therefore, very confident 
that our book provides a solid and widely agreed-on foundation for any introductory information 
systems course.
The chapters are organized as follows:
■
■Chapter 1: Managing in the Digital World—Information systems are fueling change in the 
digital world. Here, we help students understand what information systems are, the press-
ing issues societies in the digital world are facing, how five IT megatrends—mobile, social 
media, the Internet of Things, cloud computing, and Big Data—influence organizations 
and society, and how information systems have become a vital part of modern organiza-
tions. We walk the student through the technology, people, and organizational components 
of an information system, and lay out types of jobs and career opportunities in information 
systems and in related fields. We also focus on how technology is creating countless ethical 
concerns.
■
■Chapter 2: Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems—Given the 
rapid advancement of new technologies, we explain why and how companies are continu-
ally looking for innovative ways to use information systems for competitive advantage, and 
how information systems support organizations’ business strategies. Here, we discuss how 
companies from GE to Uber can use information systems for automation, organizational 
learning, and strategic advantage by creating new and innovative business models.
■
■Chapter 3: Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services—With the 
ever-increasing complexity of maintaining a solid information systems infrastructure, it 
becomes increasingly important for organizations such as Google to design a reliable, 
robust, and secure infrastructure. Here, we provide an overview of the essential information 
systems infrastructure components and describe why they are necessary for satisfying an 
organization’s informational needs. We also examine the rapid evolution toward the deliv-
ery of infrastructure capabilities through a variety of cloud-based services.
■
■Chapter 4: Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce—Perhaps nothing 
has changed the landscape of business more than the use of the Internet for electronic com-
merce. Here, we describe how firms such as Amazon.com, Dell, or Taobao; governments; 
financial services providers; and e-finance startups use the Internet to conduct commerce 
in cyberspace. Further, we describe the requirements for successful e-commerce websites 
and discuss Internet marketing and mobile commerce as well as consumer-to-consumer 
and consumer-to-business e-commerce. Finally, we discuss payment and legal issues in 
e-commerce.
■
■Chapter 5: Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social 
Media—Social media have forever changed how people interact. In addition to enabling 
various business opportunities, social media have also enabled companies to better har-
ness the power and creativity of their workforce. Here, we provide an overview of tradi-
tional communication and collaboration tools and examine how different social media can 

PREFACE        25
1 Topi, H., Valacich, J., Wright, R. T., Kaiser, K., Nunamaker Jr., J. F., Sipior, J. C., & de Vreede, G. J. (2010). 
IS 2010: Curriculum guidelines for undergraduate degree programs in information systems. Communica-
tions of the Association for Information Systems, 26(18).

enhance communication, collaboration, cooperation, and connection within organizations 
but also between organizations and their customers. Further, we discuss the importance of 
carefully managing the use of social media within organizations. Finally, using examples 
such as Twitter and Facebook, we describe how companies can deal with potential pitfalls 
associated with social media.
■
■Chapter 6: Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics—A key to 
effective management in a global, highly competitive, and rapidly changing environment 
is high-quality and timely information to support decision making in order to realize the 
strategic goals of the organization. Here, we first describe the need for enhanced decision 
making and explain how databases serve as a foundation for gaining business intelligence. 
We then discuss concepts related to business intelligence and advanced analytics, including 
data mining, machine learning, and predictive modeling. Finally, we discuss how knowl-
edge management and geographic information systems help organizations make better 
business decisions.
■
■Chapter 7: Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems—
Enterprise systems have become a critical technology in a broad range of organizations, 
both large and small, to integrate information and span organizations’ boundaries to better 
connect a firm with customers, suppliers, and other partners. Here, we focus on founda-
tional concepts related to enterprise systems, walking students through various core busi-
ness processes, and then examine how enterprise resource planning systems can be applied 
to improve these processes and organizational performance.
■
■Chapter 8: Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and 
Customer Relationship Management—Two additional types of enterprise systems, supply 
chain management systems and customer relationship management systems, are being used 
to facilitate various business processes between suppliers and customers. Here, we begin 
by introducing business-to-business electronic commerce. Next, we examine how supply 
chain management systems can support the effective management of supply networks. 
Finally, we examine customer relationship management systems and their role in attracting 
and retaining customers and, using examples from companies such as Dell, discuss how 
organizations can integrate social media in their CRM efforts.
■
■Chapter 9: Developing and Acquiring Information Systems—Nearly every organization 
needs to develop or acquire information systems. Here, we begin by describing how to for-
mulate and present the business case to build or acquire a new information system. We then 
walk the student through the traditional systems development approach and explain how 
numerous other approaches, such as agile development, can be utilized depending on the 
situation. Finally, we examine the steps followed when acquiring an information system 
from an outside vendor.
■
■Chapter 10: Securing Information Systems—With the pervasive use of information sys-
tems, new dangers have arisen for organizations, and the interplay between threats, vulner-
abilities, and potential impacts has become a paramount issue within the context of global 
information management. Here, we contrast several types of computer crime and discuss 
the growing significance of cyberwar and cyberterrorism. We then highlight the primary 
threats to information systems security and explain how systems can be compromised and 
safeguarded. We conclude this chapter with a discussion of the role of auditing, informa-
tion systems controls, and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act. Note that some instructors may choose 
to introduce this chapter prior to the discussion of the information systems infrastructure in 
Chapter 3.
■
■Technology Briefing—In addition to these 10 chapters, we include a Technology Briefing 
that focuses on foundational concepts regarding hardware, software, networking and the 
Internet, and databases. While Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems Infrastruc-
ture and Services,” provides a more managerial focus to these enabling technologies, this 
foundational material provides a more in-depth examination of these topics. By delivering 
this material as a Technology Briefing, we provide instructors the greatest flexibility in 
how and when they can apply it.
26        PREFACE

Available in MyLab MIS:
■
■MIS Video Exercises – videos illustrating MIS concepts, paired with brief quizzes
■
■MIS Decision Simulations – interactive exercises allowing students to play the role of a 
manager and make business decisions
■
■Assisted-Graded writing exercises – taken from the end of each chapter, with a rubric 
provided
■
■Chapter Warm Ups, Chapter Quizzes – objective-based quizzing to test knowledge
■
■Discussion Questions – taken from the end of each chapter
■
■Dynamic Study Modules – on-the-go adaptive quizzing, also available on a mobile phone
■
■Learning Catalytics – bring-your-own-device classroom response tools
■
■Pearson eText – an accessible, mobile-friendly eText
Instructor Resources
At the Instructor Resource Center, www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich, instructors can eas-
ily register to gain access to a variety of instructor resources available with this text in download-
able format. If assistance is needed, our dedicated technical support team is ready to help with the 
media supplements that accompany this text. Visit http://support.pearson.com/getsupport for 
answers to frequently asked questions and toll-free user support phone numbers.
The following supplements are available with this text:
■
■Instructor’s Resource Manual
■
■Test Bank
■
■TestGen® Computerized Test Bank
■
■PowerPoint Presentation
■
■Image Library
Reviewers
We wish to thank the following faculty who participated in reviews for this and previous 
editions:
Lawrence L. Andrew, Western Illinois University
Karin A. Bast, University of Wisconsin–La Crosse
David Bradbard, Winthrop University
Rochelle Brooks, Viterbo University
Brian Carpani, Southwestern College
Amita Chin, Virginia Commonwealth University
Jon D. Clark, Colorado State University
Paul Clay, Fort Lewis College
Khaled Deeb, Barry University
Thomas Engler, Florida Institute of Technology
Badie Farah, Eastern Michigan University
Roy H. Farmer, California Lutheran University
Mauricio Featherman, Washington State University
David Firth, University of Montana
Frederick Fisher, Florida State University
Jonathan Frank, Suffolk University
James Frost, Idaho State University
Frederick Gallegos, California State Polytechnic 
University–Pomona
Dale Gust, Central Michigan University
Peter Haried, University of Wisconsin–La Crosse
Albert Harris, Appalachian State University
Michelle Hepner, University of Central Oklahoma
Traci Hess, University of Massachusetts
Bruce Hunt, California State University–Fullerton
Carol Jensen, Southwestern College
Bhushan Kapoor, California State 
University–Fullerton
Elizabeth Kemm, Central Michigan University
Beth Kiggins, University of Indianapolis
Chang E. Koh, University of North Texas
Brian R. Kovar, Kansas State University
Kapil Ladha, Drexel University
Linda K. Lau, Longwood University
Amy Lavin, Temple University
Cameron Lawrence, University of Montana
Martha Leva, Penn State University–Abington
Weiqi Li, University of Michigan–Flint
Clayton Looney, University of Montana
Dana L. McCann, Central Michigan University
Richard McCarthy, Quinnipiac University
Patricia McQuaid, California State Polytechnic 
University, San Louis Obispo
Michael Newby, California State 
University–Fullerton
Kathleen Noce, Penn State University–Erie
W. J. Patterson, Sullivan University
Timothy Peterson, University of Minnesota–Duluth
Lara Preiser-Houy, California State Polytechnic 
University, Pomona
Sridhar Ramachandran, Indiana University 
Southeast

PREFACE        27

Eugene Rathswohl, University of San Diego
Rene F. Reitsma, Oregon State University
Jose Rodriguez, Barry University
Bonnie Rohde, Albright College
Kenneth Rowe, Purdue University
Dana Schwieger, Southeast Missouri State 
University
G. Shankaranarayanan, Boston University
James Sneeringer, St. Edward’s University
Cheri Speier, Michigan State University
Bill Turnquist, Central Washington University
Craig K. Tyran, Western Washington University
William Wagner, Villanova University
Minhua Wang, State University of New 
York–Canton
John Wells, University of Massachusetts
Nilmini Wickramasinghe, Cleveland State 
University
Yue Zhang, California State University–Northridge
Acknowledgments
Although only our two names are listed as the authors for this book, this was truly a team effort 
that went well beyond the two of us. Pearson has been an outstanding publishing company to work 
with. Pearson is innovative, has high standards, and is as competitive as we are.
Among the many amazingly helpful people at Pearson, there are a handful of people we wish 
to thank specifically. First, Katrina Ostler, our project manager, helped to whip us and this book 
into shape and get it finished on time. Additionally, Ann Pulido from SPI Global helped in getting 
approval for photos, figures, websites, and other graphics, as well as coordinating refinements as 
the book moved through the stages of production. Finally, we want to thank our editor, Samantha 
Lewis.
In addition to our colleagues at Pearson Prentice Hall, several individuals have been particu-
larly instrumental in making the eighth edition the best ever. First, Michael Byrd, PhD candidate 
at the University Arizona, did an outstanding job on creating and revising several of our case 
elements. Also, a special thanks goes out to Dave Wilson (University of Oklahoma) and Catherine 
Chan (Hong Kong Baptist University), who were instrumental in drafting earlier chapter ele-
ments. Thanks, team! We could not have done it without you.
Most important, we thank our families for their patience and assistance in helping us to com-
plete this book. Joe’s wife Jackie, daughter Jordan, and son James were a constant inspiration, as 
was Christoph’s wife Birgit. This one is for all of you.
Global Edition Acknowledgments
Pearson gratefully acknowledges and thanks the following people for their work on the Global 
Edition:
Contributors
Neerja Sethi, Nayang Technological University 
Vijay Sethi, Nayang Technological University 
Laura Lappalainen, University of Vaasa
Athary Alwasel, King Saud University
Reviewers
Babak Bashari Rad, Asia Pacific University
Kalai Anand Ratnam, Asia Pacific University
Nurul Nuha Abdul Molok, International Islamic University Malaysia
Shamik Siddiqui, Jumeira University
28        PREFACE

This page intentionally left blank

30
30
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Open Innovation
W
here do good ideas come from? An eccen-
tric inventor toiling alone? A secretive lab 
filled with researchers in white coats? Views 
of innovation are shifting away from these traditional 
stereotypes. For decades, corporations funded internal 
research and development units and tightly controlled 
both the inputs and outputs of these operations. Oppor-
tunities to interact with customers were limited, and 
the possibility of spending months or years and millions 
of dollars developing products that no one wanted was 
a real threat. New technologies are enabling a shift in 
the way innovation occurs.
Traditionally, universities would conduct basic and 
applied research, but the results of this research only 
sometimes would make their way to the private sector. 
Corporations would fund their own research and devel-
opment operations, often at great expense. Such opera-
tions took years to set up and were often highly 
constrained in the types of research they could carry 
out. Programs of research were evaluated against busi-
ness plans that had been studied, reviewed, and 
approved by multiple layers of management. The time 
and complexity involved in these bureaucratic processes 
often left the actual research out of date and out of 
touch with the realities of the marketplace and actual 
customer wants and needs. The resulting products 
Managing in the 
Digital World
1
Today, organizations from Apple to Zappos use informa-
tion systems to better manage their organizations in the 
digital world. These organizations use information systems 
to provide high-quality goods and services as well as to 
gain or sustain competitive advantage over rivals. In addi-
tion to helping organizations to be competitive, informa-
tion systems have contributed to tremendous societal 
changes. Our objective for this chapter is to help you 
understand the role of information systems as we con-
tinue to move further into the digital world, the role of 
information systems in current issues faced by societies in 
the digital world, and the role of information technology 
(IT) megatrends in influencing the digital future. We then 
highlight what information systems are, how they have 
evolved to become a vital part of modern organizations, 
and why this understanding is necessary for you to 
become an effective manager in the digital world. We 
conclude by discussing ethical issues associated with the 
use of information systems.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab 
.com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

31
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How do the five IT megatrends fuel open innovation?
2.	What are the primary information systems compo-
nents that enable open innovation?
3.	What intellectual property issues arise from engag-
ing in open innovation?
Based on:
Board of Innovation. (n.d.). List of open innovation and crowdsourcing 
examples. Retrieved June 20, 2016, from http://www.boardofinnovation 
.com/list-open-innovation-crowdsourcing-examples
GE. (2016). GE open innovation. GE.com. Retrieved April 24, 2016, from 
http://www.ge.com/about-us/openinnovation
Open Innovation Community. (2016). Open innovation. Retrieved 
April 24, 2016, from http://openinnovation.net/about-2/
open-innovation-definition
would often fail in the market due to being years late or 
no longer being relevant.
Open innovation is a new approach. Instead of rely-
ing on tightly controlled internal research projects, com-
panies are opening up their research and development 
efforts to a broad audience (Figure 1.1). Customers, sup-
pliers, and other companies are invited to participate 
more directly in different phases of the innovation pro-
cess, and companies are working more collaboratively 
with universities.
Many companies take these ideas even further and 
open up the research and development efforts to any-
one who wishes to participate online or in person. For 
example, Starbucks introduced “My Starbucks Idea,” 
where customers can post ideas and suggestions as well 
as vote on or discuss others’ ideas. Hundreds of 
customer-generated ideas have been launched over the 
years. Likewise, more than 37,000 ideas have been sub-
mitted to Dell’s “IdeaStorm” website, with more than 
550 ideas implemented, and Heineken’s “Innovators 
Brewhouse” uses open innovation to generate ideas 
related to topics ranging from methods for counterfeit 
detection to brewing closer to the consumer or new, 
more convenient packaging. Further, new tools like 
interactive 3D visualization and rapid prototyping tech-
nologies like 3D printing allow for tremendously low-
ered barriers to entry to innovation. Many companies 
and institutions have set up collaborative spaces to share 
resources and encourage the fusion of ideas and skills 
that can lead to exciting breakthroughs. As with many 
innovations themselves, this innovative way of innovat-
ing would not be possible without information systems.
1.	 Describe the characteristics of the digital world, contemporary societal issues of the 
digital world, and IT megatrends shaping the digital future.
2.	 Explain what an information system is, contrasting its data, technology, people, and 
organizational components.
3.	 Describe the dual nature of information systems in the success and failure of modern 
organizations.
4.	 Describe how computer ethics affect the use of information systems and discuss the 
ethical concerns associated with information privacy and intellectual property.
Open
innovation
FIGURE 1.1
Open innovation entails opening up the innovation process to outside 
entities, including academia, individual innovators, research labs, 
other companies, or suppliers.

32    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Information Systems Today
Today, information systems (IS) are ubiquitous: Be it traditional desktop computers, laptop com-
puters, smartphones, tablets, you name it; information systems are all around us, whether you 
see them or not. Companies such as FedEx and UPS use information systems to route trucks and 
track packages. Retailers such as Walgreens and Walmart use information systems for every-
thing from optimizing supply chains to recording purchases and analyzing customer tastes and 
preferences. Cities use information systems for adaptive traffic control systems or variable speed 
limits. Cars use information systems for everything from ignition control to airbags to distance 
control and park assist systems. Many innovative business models, ranging from Airbnb to Uber, 
are built on or around information systems. Alternatively, just look around your school or place 
of work. At your school, you register for classes online; use e-mail, Twitter, or Facebook to com-
municate with fellow students and your instructors; access e-books from your library; and com-
plete or submit assignments on online learning platforms such as Blackboard, Moodle, Canvas, 
or Sakai. At work, you may use a PC for e-mail and many other tasks. Your paychecks are prob-
ably generated by computer and automatically deposited into your bank account via high-speed 
networks. Even in your spare time, information systems are ubiquitous: You use social network-
ing sites like Facebook to stay connected with your friends and family, you watch videos on 
YouTube, you upload pictures taken with your smartphone to picture-sharing sites like Insta-
gram, you listen to music on Pandora or Spotify, and you use your smartphone for playing 
games, sending e-mails, or reading books. Chances are that each year you see more information 
systems than you did the year before, and these systems are a more fundamental and important 
part of your social, academic, and work life than ever before.
The Emergence of the Digital World
Over the past decades, the advent of powerful, relatively inexpensive, easy-to-use computers has 
had a major impact on business and society. When you stop and think about it, it is easy to see 
why information systems are important. Increasing global competitiveness has forced companies 
to find ways to be better and to do things less expensively. The answer for many firms continues 
to be to use information systems to do things better, faster, and cheaper. Many organizations use 
information systems to support innovative business models, or build their entire business models 
around technological innovations. Likewise, using global telecommunications networks, compa-
nies can more easily integrate their operations to access new markets for their products and ser-
vices as well as access a large pool of talented labor in countries with lower wages.
Clearly, we are living in a digital world. Given the proliferation of mobile devices such as 
tablets or smartphones, some have even argued that we are living in the post-PC era, where wire-
less, mobile devices will replace traditional desktop and laptop computers. In fact, already in the 
last quarter of 2011, Apple sold more iPads than HP (traditionally one of the world’s leading PC 
makers) sold PCs, and in the United States, smartphone penetration has reached 82 percent 
(Nielsen, 2016). Initially created as consumer devices, tablets have become commonplace in 
various professional settings, including warehouses, showrooms, airplane cockpits, and hospi-
tals (Figure 1.2).
Yet desktop PCs and laptops are unlikely to go away. Rather, devices with newer form fac-
tors will work in tandem with older form factors to provide truly ubiquitous experiences; mobile 
devices complement traditional computers, providing different devices for different users and 
different tasks, where not the device but the services and data provided are of primary impor-
tance. Further, the changes we’ve seen so far have given rise to developments such as wearable 
computers, augmented reality devices, or surface computers.
Changes in technology have enabled new ways of working and socializing; whereas tradi-
tionally, people were bound to a stationary PC to do essential tasks, they can now perform such 
tasks from almost anywhere they have a cell phone signal. Likewise, workdays traditionally had 
a clear beginning and a clear end—from when you powered your computer on to when you 
turned it off at night. Today, many tasks (especially more casual tasks such as reading or sending 
e-mails) can be done at any time, often in small chunks in between other tasks, such as when 
waiting in line at the supermarket cashier.
Computing has changed from an activity primarily focused on automating work to encom-
pass various social and casual activities. Devices such as smartphones or tablets, paired with 
mobile broadband networks, allow for instant-on computing experiences, whenever and 


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    33
wherever; advances in cloud computing (think Gmail, Office Online, or Dropbox) allow for 
accessing e-mails, files, notes, and the like, from different devices, further enhancing portability 
and mobility.
In effect, we are in a virtuous cycle (or in a vicious cycle, considering the creep of work life 
into people’s leisure time and the increasing fixation on being permanently “on call”), where 
changes in technology lead to social changes and social changes shape technological changes. 
For example, communication, social networking, and online investing almost necessitate mobil-
ity and connectivity, as people have grown accustomed to checking e-mails, posting status 
updates, or checking on real-time stock quotes while on the go. In addition, the boundaries 
between work and leisure time are blurring, so that employees increasingly demand devices that 
can support both and often bring their own devices into the workplace.
KNOWLEDGE WORKERS AND THE KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY.  In 1959, Peter Drucker predicted that 
information and information systems would become increasingly important, and at that point, 
more than half a century ago, he coined the term knowledge worker. Knowledge workers 
are typically professionals who are relatively well educated and who create, modify, and/or 
synthesize knowledge as a fundamental part of their jobs.
Drucker’s predictions about knowledge workers were accurate. As he predicted, they are 
generally paid better than their prior agricultural and industrial counterparts; they rely on and 
are empowered by formal education, yet they often also possess valuable real-world skills; 
they are continually learning how to do their jobs better; they have much better career oppor-
tunities and far more bargaining power than workers ever had before. Knowledge workers 
make up about a quarter of the workforce in the United States and in other developed nations, 
and their numbers are rising quickly.
Drucker also predicted that, with the growth in the number of knowledge workers and with 
their rise in importance and leadership, a knowledge society would emerge. He reasoned that, 
given the importance of education and learning to knowledge workers and the firms that need 
them, education would become the cornerstone of the knowledge society. Possessing knowl-
edge, he argued, would be as important as possessing land, labor, or capital (if not more so) 
(Figure 1.3). Indeed, research shows that people equipped to prosper in the knowledge society, 
such as those with a college education, earn far more on average than people without a college 
education, and that gap is increasing. In fact, the most recent data from the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s American Community Survey (2014 data) reinforce the value of a college education: 
Median earnings for workers 25 and over with a bachelor’s degree were US$50,450 a year, 
while those for workers with a high school diploma were US$27,809. Median earnings for 
workers with a graduate or professional degree were US$66,175, and for those without a high 
school diploma US$20,542. These data suggest that a bachelor’s degree is worth about US$1 
million in additional lifetime earnings compared to a worker with only a high school diploma. 
FIGURE 1.2
Mobile devices are increasingly 
being used in various professional 
settings.
Source: William Perugini/Shutterstock.

34    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Additionally, getting a college degree will qualify you for many jobs that would not be avail-
able to you otherwise and will distinguish you from other job candidates. Finally, a college 
degree is often a requirement to qualify for career advancement and promotion opportunities 
once you do get that job.
People generally agree that Drucker was accurate about knowledge workers and the evolu-
tion of society. While people have settled on Drucker’s term knowledge worker, there are many 
alternatives to the term knowledge society. Others have referred to this phenomenon as the 
knowledge economy, the new economy, the digital society, the network era, the Internet era, and 
other names. We simply refer to this as the digital world. All these ideas have in common the 
premise that information and related technologies and systems have become indispensable and 
that knowledge workers are vital.
Today, not only knowledge workers use information systems as integral parts of their work 
lives; many “traditional” occupations now increasingly use information systems—from the UPS 
package delivery person using global positioning system (GPS) technology to take the best route 
to deliver parcels to the farmer in Iowa who uses precision agriculture to plan the use of fertiliz-
ers to increase crop yield. In essence, (almost) every organization can now be considered an 
e-business. An e-business is an organization that uses information technologies or systems to 
support nearly every part of its business. Thus, the lines between “knowledge workers” and 
“manual workers” are blurring, to the point that some argue that “every worker is a knowledge 
worker” (Rosen, 2011).
THE DIGITAL DIVIDE.  Some have argued, however, that there is a downside to being a knowledge 
worker and to living in the digital world. For example, some have argued that knowledge workers 
will be the first to be replaced by automation with information systems. Others have argued that 
in the new economy there is a digital divide, where those with access to information systems 
have great advantages over those without access to information systems. The digital divide is 
one of the major ethical challenges facing society today when you consider the strong linkage 
between computer literacy and a person’s ability to compete in the digital world. For example, 
access to raw materials and money fueled the Industrial Revolution, “but in the informational 
society, the fuel, the power, is knowledge,” emphasized John Kenneth Galbraith, an American 
economist who specialized in emerging trends in the U.S. economy. “One has now come to see 
a new class structure divided by those who have information and those who must function out 
of ignorance. This new class has its power not from money, not from land, but from knowledge” 
(Galbraith, 1987).
Items of Value in the
Knowledge Society
Knowledge
Labor
Land
Capital
FIGURE 1.3
Knowledge has become as 
important as—and many feel more 
important than—land, labor, and 
capital resources.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    35
The good news is that the digital divide in America is rapidly shrinking, but there are still 
major challenges to overcome. In particular, people in rural communities, the elderly, people 
with disabilities, and minorities lag behind national averages for Internet access and computer 
literacy. Outside the United States and other developed countries, the gap gets even wider and 
the obstacles get much more difficult to overcome, particularly in the developing countries 
where infrastructure and financial resources are lacking. For example, most developing coun-
tries are lacking modern informational resources such as affordable Internet access or efficient 
electronic payment methods.
To be sure, there is a downside to overreliance on information systems, but one thing is for 
certain: Knowledge workers and information systems are now critical to the success of modern 
organizations, economies, and societies. At the same time, information systems play a crucial 
role in various major issues societies face. These issues are examined next.
Globalization and Societal Issues in the Digital World
The past decades have brought about a number of dramatic global changes, many of which will 
continue to influence individuals, businesses, economies, and societies well into the future. 
Many of such interrelated societal “megatrends,” discussed by consulting firms such as Pricewa-
terhouseCoopers (PwC) or Ernst & Young (EY), local and national governments, or global polit-
ical and business leaders at the World Economic Forum, are related to ever-increasing 
globalization—the integration of economies throughout the world, enabled by innovation and 
technological progress (International Monetary Fund, 2002). You can see the effects of global-
ization in many ways, such as the greater international movement of commodities, money, infor-
mation, and labor as well as the development of technologies, standards, and processes to 
facilitate this movement.
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Memory Crystals
In the Superman films and many other sci-fi movies and books, 
characters make use of data storage devices that resemble 
large crystals. In the stories, these crystals often store incredibly 
large amounts of data and last for extraordinary lengths of 
time. Now scientists have taken a step toward making such 
technology a reality. Researchers at the University of South-
ampton (UK) have created a nanostructured glass storage 
device that resembles the fictional technologies. The technique 
uses self-assembling nanostructures written into fused quartz 
using tiny femtosecond (one-quadrillionth, or one-millionth of 
one-billionth, of a second) laser light pulses. The data are 
encoded in five dimensions (5D): height, length, width, posi-
tion, and orientation. Using these multiple dimensions along 
with the nanoscale laser writing allows a small glass disc, about 
the size of a large coin, to store 360 terabytes (TB) of data. As 
a terabyte is equal to 1,024 gigabytes (GB), the amount of 
data stored on each tiny disk is several hundred times the 
amount of data stored on a standard desktop computer 
(1–4 TB) and several thousand times the data storage capacity 
of most smartphones (16–128 GB). The quartz material is 
highly stable (up to 13.8 billion years at 190 degrees Celsius), 
so data can be archived essentially forever.
To demonstrate the technology, the scientists recorded 
several major documents from human history on the disks, 
including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, New-
ton’s Opticks, the Magna Carta, and the King James Bible. 
The technology could be used by any organization or busi-
ness seeking to store large volumes of data for long periods 
of time. Museums, libraries, national archives, and others 
could preserve their information and records for nearly 
unlimited time. Data stored using the technique could well 
outlast any other aspects of not just our technology but our 
civilization. Professor Peter Kazansky from the university’s 
research team says: “It is thrilling to think that we have cre-
ated the technology to preserve documents and information 
and store it in space for future generations. This technology 
can secure the last evidence of our civilization: all we’ve 
learnt will not be forgotten.” The scientists are looking for 
industry partners to further develop and commercialize the 
technology.
Based on:
Mullen, M. (2016, February 17). New “Superman” crystals can store 
data for billions of years. CNN Money. Retrieved April 14, 2016, 
from http://money.cnn.com/2016/02/17/technology/5d-data-storage-
memory-crystals/index.html
Phys.org. (2016, February 15). Eternal 5D data storage could record 
the history of humankind. Retrieved April 14, 2016, from http://phys 
.org/news/2016-02-eternal-5d-storage-history-humankind.html

36    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
GLOBALIZATION: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES.  For organizations, globalization has 
opened up many opportunities, brought about by falling transportation and telecommunication 
costs. Today, shipping a bottle of wine from Australia to Europe costs merely a few cents, and 
people can make voice or video calls around the globe for free using services such as Skype, 
Google Hangouts, or WhatsApp. To a large extent fueled by movies, television, and other 
forms of media, the increasing globalization has moved cultures closer together. The streaming 
movie provider Netflix is available in almost every country of the world, people in all corners 
of the world can receive television programming from other countries, and major movies are 
increasingly international. Developments such as these help create a shared understanding about 
norms of behavior or interaction, desirable goods or services, or even forms of government 
(though such shared understanding is still often lacking, and many of these developments 
have not yet happened). The rapid rise of a new middle class in many developing countries 
has enabled established companies to reach new markets, enabling them to sell their products 
to literally millions of new customers. At the same time, with the decrease in communication 
costs, companies can now draw on a large pool of skilled professionals from all over the globe. 
Countries such as Russia, China, and India offer high-quality education, leading to an ample 
supply of well-trained people at low cost. Some countries have even built entire industries 
around certain competencies, such as software development or tax preparation in India and call 
centers in Ireland.
The tremendous decrease in communication costs has increased the use of outsourcing—
the moving of business processes or tasks (such as accounting, manufacturing, or security) to 
another company or another country—as now companies can outsource business processes on a 
global scale (Figure 1.4). Companies are choosing to outsource business activities for a variety 
of reasons; the most important reasons include the following (King, 2003):
■
■To reduce or control costs
■
■To free up internal resources
■
■To gain access to world-class capabilities
■
■To increase the revenue potential of the organization
■
■To reduce time to market
■
■To increase process efficiencies
■
■To be able to focus on core activities
■
■To compensate for a lack of specific capabilities or skills
Often, companies located in countries such as India can provide certain services much 
cheaper because of lower labor costs, or companies perform certain functions in a different 
country to reduce costs or harness skilled labor. For example, in India, two companies—Wipro 
and Infosys—have emerged as the leaders in providing IT services that range from business con-
sulting to systems development. In addition, a wide variety of other services—ranging from 
telephone support to tax returns—are candidates for outsourcing to different countries, be it Ire-
land, China, or India. Even highly specialized services, such as reading of X-rays by skilled 
FIGURE 1.4
Companies are outsourcing 
production to overseas countries 
(such as China) to utilize talented 
workers or reduce costs.
Source: Lianxun Zhang/Fotolia.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    37
radiologists, are outsourced by U.S. hospitals to doctors around the globe, often while doctors in 
the United States are sleeping.
Yet globalization has also brought about a number of operational challenges for organiza-
tions. Organizations face governmental challenges related to differences in political systems, 
regulatory environments, laws, standards, or individual freedoms. Likewise, geoeconomic chal-
lenges include differences in infrastructure, demographics, welfare, or workers’ expertise. Lastly, 
organizations face cultural challenges, such as dealing with differences in languages, beliefs, 
attitudes, religions, or life focus but also different viewpoints regarding intellectual property. As 
a result, companies intending to outsource services or production have to carefully choose out-
sourcing locations, considering numerous different factors, such as English proficiency, salaries, 
or geopolitical risk. While countries such as India remain popular, other formerly popular coun-
tries (such as Singapore, Canada, or Ireland) are declining because of rising salaries. With these 
shifts, outsourcers are constantly looking at nascent and emerging countries such as Bulgaria, 
Egypt, Ghana, Bangladesh, or Vietnam.
Obviously, organizations have to weigh the potential benefits (e.g., cost savings) and draw-
backs (e.g., higher geopolitical risk or less experienced workers) of outsourcing to a particular 
country, and often, cost savings prove to be negligible due to added overhead, such as customs, 
shipping, or training as well as quality problems. In fact, InformationWeek, a leading publication 
targeting business IT users, found that 20 percent of the 500 most innovative companies in terms 
of using IT took back projects previously outsourced to another country. Nevertheless, IT out-
sourcing is big business: Research firm IDC forecasted the market for IT outsourcing to be 
$103 billion in 2019 (Tapper, 2015).
SOCIETAL ISSUES IN THE DIGITAL WORLD.  The rapid development of transportation and 
telecommunication technologies, national and global infrastructures, and information systems 
as well as a host of other factors has created a number of pressing societal issues that will 
tremendously influence the world we live in (PWC, 2016; Schreiber, 2016). In this section, we 
will highlight a few of these issues (Figure 1.5). One such issue is demographic changes—
changes in the structure of populations such as related to age, birth rates, and migration. While 
many countries in the developed world see rapidly aging populations, developing regions such 
as Africa are expected to rapidly rise in population, fueling a massive global population growth. 
These differences in demographic changes will also shift the balance of demand and supply 
of labor; further, differences in welfare are likely to further increase, and many countries are 
already experiencing both positive and negative effects of mass migrations. In addition, many 
regions of the world are seeing rapid urbanization—the movement of rural populations to urban 
areas, to a point where 50 percent of the world’s population is now living in cities (PWC, 2016); 
sustaining this growth while providing livable environments for the inhabitants will pose major 
challenges. Another major trend is the global shifts in economic power—changes in countries’ 
purchasing power and control over natural resources—where established economies are losing 
0
23,5
32,2
26,7
–273
0
100
36,7
FIGURE 1.5
Societal issues in the digital world.
Source: Pichaitun/Fotolia.

38    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
their dominating positions in the world’s economy, resulting in the need to resolve political 
struggles (PWC, 2016). Many of these issues interact, affect each other, and/or fuel other issues, 
such as issues related to resource scarcity due to limited availability of fossil fuels and other 
natural resources and climate change—large-scale and long-term regional and global changes 
in temperatures and weather patterns. Population growth, global trade, consumerism, and other 
factors contribute to increasing waste and pollution, as well as a growing need for resources, 
at a time where humans already live beyond the finite natural resources the planet can provide. 
Likewise, climate change—regardless of its causes—and its associated changes in weather 
patterns, rise in sea levels, and increase in the severity of storms pose a number of challenges 
for individuals, societies, and the world. As a consequence, sustainable development—
“development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs” (World Commission on Environment and Development, 
1987)—will become an ever increasingly important aspect. In addition to these societal issues, 
we have witnessed a number of breakthroughs and transformations enabled by technology; these 
breakthroughs are disrupting traditional business models but can also help address pressing 
societal issues. Next we will discuss five IT megatrends that shape the digital future.
Five IT Megatrends That Shape the Digital Future
In most developed societies, information technologies have become pervasive—information 
technologies are in fact used throughout society, and the speed of innovations is increasing at a 
tremendous pace, with many radical innovations marginalizing or displacing existing products 
or industries (see Chapter 2, “Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems”). 
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Wearable Technologies
For a long time, the smart fridge has been touted as the prime 
example of possibilities enabled by the Internet of Things, a 
network of physical objects that are connected over the Inter-
net. While the smart fridge has yet to take off, many much 
smaller “things” have become tremendously popular—wear-
able technologies, such as smartwatches or activity trackers. 
The term wearable technologies refers to clothing or acces-
sories that incorporate electronic technologies. For example, 
the Apple Watch, Samsung’s Galaxy Gear, or the Fitbit incorpo-
rate various sensors; depending on the device, the sensors 
record physiological data such as body movements or heart 
rate but also environmental data such as ambient light, orien-
tation, or altitude. Smartwatches such as the Apple Watch or 
Samsung’s Galaxy Gear are designed to be an extension of the 
user’s phones, used to display notifications from the phone or 
tablet devices, providing quick access to some of the phone’s 
or tablet’s functions, in addition to enabling the user to moni-
tor various fitness activities. Activity trackers such as the Fitbit 
are designed to be worn and passively used on a regular basis, 
supporting the “quantified self“—the logging of all aspects 
of one’s daily life, ranging from monitoring and recording of 
activities, performance, or intakes to monitoring bodily states 
(such as moods or physiological data) to improve one’s overall 
health and performance. Yet other devices are intended for 
special use cases—as in the “Climbax,” a rock-climbing device 
that tracks your climbing technique.
Whereas many wearable technologies are designed to sup-
port the quantified self, many see social relationships as the 
next big thing in wearables and experiment with social wear-
ables that allow users to connect with each other in novel 
ways. For example, experimental concepts include a social fan 
jersey, which allows sports fans to experience vibration pat-
terns as their favorite rugby player hits the ground. Many of 
these technologies are both exciting and futuristic, but there 
remain security, privacy, and other issues to resolve: Early 
wearable devices have been demonstrated to be easily hack-
able, and there is also broad concern about the potential dis-
tractions to automobile drivers or students in classrooms from 
such wearable devices. While offering great promises, these 
exciting technologies will require adjustments and compro-
mises if they are to obtain the extensive adoption their manu-
facturers are aiming for.
Based on:
Cosco, A. (2016, March 7). The social age of wearable tech: From 
quantified self to emotional second skin. Wareable. Retrieved 
March 18, 2016, from http://www.wareable.com/wearable-tech/
the-social-age-of-wearable-tech-beyond-the-quantified-self
Green, C. (2014, May 12). Wearable technology creates $50 billion 
investment frenzy. Information Age. Retrieved March 18, 2016, from 
http://www.information-age.com/technology/mobile-and-networking/ 
123457988/wearable-technology-creates-50-billion-investment-frenzy


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    39
For example, within just a few years, drones evolved from being primarily used by the military 
to being used by farmers, aerial photographers, filmmakers, and hobbyists alike. Self-parking 
systems are already available in many vehicles, self-driving cars and trucks are being actively 
tested by various companies, and autonomous Caterpillar mining trucks are already in use. Like-
wise, the development of sophisticated web technologies has brought about a fundamental shift 
in types of information technologies that are being used, and we’re seeing five (intertwined) 
“megatrends” that influence individuals, organizations, and society (Figure 1.6). Understanding 
the influence of these megatrends will be increasingly important: Individuals will increasingly 
feel the impact of these megatrends on their private and work lives, and businesses need to have 
a business strategy that is fit for today’s digital world and the digital future.
■
■Mobile. One of the biggest trends we’re seeing today is the move toward mobile devices, 
as indicated in the opening section of this chapter. In most developed countries, the vast 
majority of adults have a mobile phone, and typically, people have their mobile phones 
within their reach 24/7. Compare that with the access to your laptop or PC. In the develop-
ing world, mobile devices are frequently seen leapfrogging traditional PCs; owing to the 
lack of stable, reliable power or landline telephone infrastructure, mobile devices are often 
the primary means of accessing the Internet. For organizations, this increase in mobility 
has a wide range of implications, from increased collaboration to the ability to manage a 
business in real time—at any time, from anywhere—to changes in the way new (or exist-
ing) customers can be reached (Figure 1.7). With the increase in mobile devices, organiza-
tions not only have to create mobile-device-friendly versions of their websites but often 
Changes in
Organizations
and Society
Mobile
Big Data
Cloud
Computing
Internet of
Things
Social Media
FIGURE 1.6
Five IT megatrends.
HOTEL
FIGURE 1.7
Mobile devices allow running 
business in real time—at any time, 
from anywhere.

40    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
build mobile apps (software programs designed to perform a particular, well-defined 
function) to market their products or services. In addition, fueled by advances in consumer-
oriented mobile devices (such as smartphones and tablets) and the ability to access data 
and applications “in the cloud,” today’s employees are increasingly using their own devices 
for work-related purposes or are using software they are used to (such as social networks 
for communicating) in the workplace. While initially, workers tended to use their own 
devices primarily for checking e-mails or visiting social networking sites, they now use 
their own devices for various other important tasks, including customer relationship man-
agement or enterprise resource planning. For organizations, this trend can be worrying (due 
to concerns related to security or compliance or increasing need to support the workers’ 
own devices), but it can also provide a host of opportunities, such as increased productiv-
ity, higher retention rates of talented employees, or higher customer satisfaction. Managing 
this trend of “bring your own device” (BYOD) is clearly a major concern of business and 
IT managers alike. Further, we have witnessed the consumerization of IT; many techno-
logical innovations are first introduced in the consumer marketplace before being used by 
organizations, and businesses have to constantly evaluate how a wide variety of new tech-
nologies might influence their ways of doing business. Throughout the text, we will intro-
duce issues and new developments associated with increases in mobility.
■
■Social Media. A second megatrend, as you have undoubtedly noticed, is social media. The 
rise of social media is largely based on the network effect—referring to the notion that 
the value of a network (or tool or application based on a network) increases with the num-
ber of other users. In other words, if a network has few users, it has little or no value. You 
may be one of the more than 1.6 billion (and growing) Facebook users who share status 
updates or pictures with friends and family, or you may use apps such as Snapchat, Twit-
ter, or WhatsApp to communicate with your friends. How useful would these social media 
platforms be if none of your friends or family members had access to them? Today, the use 
of social media has gone way beyond friends and families. University professors use social 
networks to provide students with updates about course-related topics, and organizations 
use social media to encourage employee collaboration or to connect with their customers 
(Figure 1.8). In addition, companies can harness the power of the crowd by using social 
media to get people to participate in innovation and other activities. With the rise of social 
media, we have witnessed a shift in roles, where users are not mere consumers of infor-
mation but have become important creators and contributors. As you can imagine, social 
media are here to stay; while we will touch on social media–related aspects throughout the 
book, we will devote Chapter 5, “Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collabo-
ration Using Social Media,” to social media and related topics.
■
■The Internet of Things. A third megatrend is the Internet of Things (IoT)—a network 
of a broad range of physical objects that can automatically share data over the Internet. 
Such objects (or “things”) can range from an automobile tire equipped with a pressure sen-
sor to a smart meter enabling remote monitoring of energy consumption to a cow with an 
injectable ID chip. Already in 2008, more devices were connected to the Internet than there 
were people living on earth. Fueled by advances in chips and wireless radios and decreas-
ing costs of sensors (devices that can detect, record, and report changes in the physical 
environment), in the not-too-distant future everything that can generate useful information 
Social media
Google+
LinkedIn
Facebook
Customers
Business partners
Co-workers
Family
Friends
Social circles
XING
Wikipedia
FIGURE 1.8
Social media are used in various 
personal and business settings.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    41
will be equipped with sensors and wireless radios (Figure 1.9). In other words, anything 
that can generate data or uses data can be connected, accessed, or controlled via the Inter-
net (sometimes referred to as “pervasive computing”). With the ability to connect “things” 
such as sensors, meters, signals, motors, actuators, or cameras, the potential for gather-
ing useful data is almost limitless. For example, the market for smart home technologies 
(sometimes called home automation)—technologies enabling the remote monitoring and 
controlling of lighting, heating, or home appliances—such as the Nest Learning Thermo-
stat, is expected to reach almost US$60 billion by 2020. Using smart home technology, one 
can monitor home temperatures when on vacation or remotely adjust the air-conditioning; 
likewise, sensors integrated in a road’s surface can monitor temperatures and trigger 
dynamic speed limits in case there is the risk of ice or snow. Similarly, sensors can monitor 
availability of parking spaces or traffic flow, alerting drivers of changes in conditions. Mil-
lions of sensors connected to the Internet can monitor weather conditions, helping to gener-
ate more accurate local weather predictions, or can monitor soil moisture in golf courses, 
reducing the need for watering. Cardiac monitors can alert physicians of patients’ health 
risks. The use of IoT technologies in manufacturing—referred to as Industrial Internet of 
Things (IIoT)—enables the convergence of information technology and operations tech-
nology, offering the potential for tremendous improvements in efficiency, product quality, 
agility, and flexibility, allowing companies to mass-produce customized products, better 
monitor supply chains, and so on. In sum, the applications of sensor technology for home 
automation, smart cities, smart metering, smart farming, e-health, manufacturing, and other 
areas are almost limitless. As the number of sensors and devices connected to the Internet 
grows, the Internet of Things will evolve to become the Internet of Everything (IoE), where 
just about any device’s functionality is enhanced through connectivity and intelligence.
■
■Cloud Computing. The fourth megatrend is cloud computing. Whereas traditionally each 
user would install a number of different applications for various tasks—from creating 
documents to listening to music—as well as store documents, pictures, and other data on 
FIGURE 1.9
The Internet of Things.

42    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
his or her computer, web technologies enable using the Internet as the platform for applica-
tions and data. Now, much of the functionality previously offered by applications installed 
on each individual computer is offered by applications “in the cloud,” accessed via a web 
browser. Increasingly, not only the applications but also the data reside in the cloud, to be 
accessed at any time from anywhere (Figure 1.10). A good example of cloud computing is 
the various services offered by Google, such as Gmail (e-mail), Google Docs (word pro-
cessing), and Google Calendar, all of which are accessed via a web browser, freeing users 
from the task of installing or updating traditional desktop applications or worrying about 
storing or backing up data. Cloud computing has made inroads in a variety of organiza-
tional applications, and many organizations rely on an information systems infrastructure 
in the cloud. Further, cloud computing can enable advanced analytics of massive amounts 
of Big Data generated by mobile devices, sensors, or users of social networks. We will 
extensively discuss cloud computing in Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems 
Infrastructure and Services.”
■
■Big Data. Together, these transformations of our social and work interactions enabled 
by 24/7 connectivity have given rise to a fifth trend, Big Data. Big Data are typically 
described as extremely large and complex datasets, which are characterized as being of 
high volume, variety (i.e., many different types of data), and velocity (i.e., the data are 
being collected and analyzed at ever-increasing rates). Following the old adage that infor-
mation is power, organizations are continuously seeking to get the right information to 
make the best business decisions. Yet organizations are generating and collecting ever more 
data from internal and external sources. The rise of social media has further increased the 
amount of unstructured data available to organizations; for example, people frequently 
voice their thoughts about products or companies on blogs or social networks. In addition, 
the Internet of Things, allowing for connecting devices and sensors to the Internet, further 
contributes to the growth of data available to organizations and individuals. With decreas-
ing costs for capturing and storing data, data are now not only ubiquitous but also cheap. 
A study by research firm IDC estimated that in 2013, 4.4 zettabytes of data were gener-
ated and consumed. How much is 4.4 zettabytes? Well, 4.4 zettabytes equals 4.4 trillion 
gigabytes, or the equivalent of 32 billion 128GB iPads. As the number of devices con-
nected to the Internet is expected to reach 30 billion in 2020, the amount of digital data 
generated worldwide is forecast to reach 44 zettabytes in 2020 and 180 zettabytes by 2025. 
For many organizations today, value is created from data. Consider, for example, that the 
largest/most valuable organizations in the “old economy” (such as GE, Dow, or Ford) have 
100,000–300,000 employees, and the largest organizations in the “new economy” (such as 
Microsoft, HP, or Oracle) have 50,000–100,000 employees; in contrast, modern companies 
of the digital world (such as Facebook, Twitter, or Groupon) have risen to the top with a 
mere 5,000–15,000 employees by creating value from data (Hofmann, 2011) (Figure 1.11). 
Ever-increasing amounts of data increase the ability to detect meaningful relationships and 
regularities, and insights gained from analyzing Big Data not only can contribute to busi-
ness success but can also help to address some of the tremendous challenges society faces. 
Applications
Data
FIGURE 1.10
Applications and data stored in 
the cloud can be accessed from 
different devices.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    43
For example, Big Data is a key factor enabling research ranging from genomics to climate 
change. However, analyzing tremendous amounts of (often unstructured) data (i.e., Big 
Data) poses tremendous challenges for organizations. In Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business 
Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics,” we will discuss how organizations can harness 
Big Data to make better business decisions.
Just as the societal issues interact and affect each other, so do the IT megatrends. For exam-
ple, cloud computing allows for generating new machine learning algorithms to analyze Big 
Data, continuously improving artificial intelligence capabilities. Similarly, continuous input 
from various sensors, paired with artificial intelligence to make sense of such Big Data streams, 
enables tremendous advances in robotics (i.e., the use of robots to perform manual tasks). The 
different megatrends have also enabled various business model innovations that disrupt estab-
lished industries. For example, fueled by mobile devices, social media, and cloud computing, 
Uber and Airbnb are examples of innovative business models based on the concept of a sharing 
economy and disrupt traditional taxi and lodging companies. Likewise, the Internet of Things 
and the massive amounts of data generated enable the creation of service-oriented business mod-
els (sometimes referred to servitization), where companies shift from selling physical products 
to providing these as services (see Chapter 2); for example, using sensors to monitor perfor-
mance, temperature, or mileage enables tire manufacturers Bridgestone and Michelin to sell tires 
as a service, where truck operators pay based on usage, whereas the manufacturer is responsible 
for the tires’ performance. Other industries being disrupted range from the financial industry to 
healthcare providers, where information systems allow for various radical innovations.
While these megatrends open up an almost unlimited potential for innovative products, ser-
vices, or processes, they also pose a variety of challenges for organizations operating in the digital 
world. Throughout the book, we will discuss not only the opportunities but also the challenges 
organizations face when trying to harness the potential of these megatrends. What do these mega-
trends mean for you and for today’s workforce? On a most basic level, they imply that being able 
to use information systems, to assess the impacts of new technologies on one’s work or private 
life, and to learn new technologies as they come along will be increasingly important skills.
Most modern-day high school and university students have grown up in a computerized 
world. If by some chance they do not know how to operate a computer by the time they graduate 
from high school, they soon acquire computer skills because in today’s work world, knowing 
how to use a computer—called computer literacy (or information literacy)—can not only open 
up myriad sources of information but can also mean the difference between being employed and 
being unemployed. In fact, some fear that the Information Age will not provide the same advan-
tages to “information haves”—those computer-literate individuals who have almost unlimited 
access to information—and “information have-nots”—those with limited or no computer access 
or skills.
Computer-related occupations have evolved as computers have become more sophisticated 
and more widely used. Where once we thought of computer workers as primarily programmers, 
data entry clerks, systems analysts, or computer repairpersons, today many more job categories 
in virtually all industries, from accounting to the medical field, involve the use of computers. In 
Old Economy
Information Age
Economy
New Economy
FIGURE 1.11
Companies in the Information Age 
economy are creating value not 
from people but from data.

44    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
fact, today there are few occupations where computers are not somehow in use. Computers man-
age air traffic, perform medical tests, monitor investment portfolios, control construction 
machinery, and more. Because they are especially adept at processing large amounts of data, 
they are used extensively by universities and public schools, in businesses of all sizes, and in all 
levels and departments of government. Engineers, architects, interior designers, and artists use 
special-purpose computer-aided design programs. Musicians play computerized instruments, 
and they write and record songs with the help of computers. Professionals in the medical indus-
try use healthcare IS to support everything from patient diagnosis and treatment to analyzing 
patient and disease data to running doctors’ offices and hospitals (see Chapter 6). Not only do we 
use computers at work, we also use them in our personal lives. We teach our children on them, 
manage our finances, do our taxes, compose letters and term papers, create greeting cards, send 
and receive e-mail, surf the Internet, purchase products, and play games on them. With the 
increasing use of computers in all areas of society, many argue that being computer literate—
knowing how to use a computer and use certain applications—is not sufficient in today’s world; 
rather, computer fluency—the ability to independently learn new technologies as they emerge 
and assess their impact on one’s work and life—is what will set you apart in the future.
Information Systems Defined
An information system (IS) is the combination of people and information technology that cre-
ate, collect, process, store, and distribute useful data. Information technology (IT) includes 
hardware, software, and telecommunications networks. Hardware refers to physical computer 
GREEN IT 
The Green Internet of Things
The Internet and associated technologies have been busy dis-
rupting business and society for the past several decades. Next 
up, another revolution in information technology is going to 
shake things up again. Green IT (or green computing, see 
Chapter 3) refers to the study and practice of using computing 
resources more efficiently to reduce environmental impacts as 
well as the use of information systems to reduce negative envi-
ronmental impacts. The Internet of Things brings connectivity 
and information technology to places never before considered. 
Together, these technologies are once again poised to revolu-
tionize business and society.
Traditionally, IT resources were seen as an ever-expanding 
pool—as business needs grew, more servers and data centers 
were installed. Eventually a limit has to be reached; the impact 
of power consumption alone from a modern data center can 
be profound. New technologies and techniques are having a 
large impact on both how we provision IT resources and how 
we interact with our world’s resources. New servers are 
designed for low power consumption. Cloud computing archi-
tectures allow resources to be allocated on an as-needed basis.
With the Internet maturing into an established platform, 
new opportunities have become apparent. By combining ubiq-
uitous connectivity with inexpensive processing power and 
sensor devices, nearly anything can be connected to the Inter-
net. To be considered a part of the IoT, a device simply needs 
to be connected to the Internet, collect and transmit sensory 
data, and be something physical that interacts with the real 
world. Umbrellas notify us of the weather, smartwatches moni-
tor our steps and vital signs, and nano-scale sensors are help-
ing scientists collect unprecedented data about natural 
phenomena and ecosystems. Power companies can instrument 
our houses, our cars, and their distribution systems to gain 
unprecedented insights into energy use and demand.
Internet technologies disrupted many businesses and social 
processes by changing the scope and scale of interactions 
between people. By making large-scale interaction and com-
munication possible almost instantaneously, supply chains 
could be redesigned, globalization was accelerated, and politi-
cal processes were altered (for better and for worse). Individuals 
became citizen journalists. Together with the IoT, green tech-
nologies are enabling more accurate forecasting of resource 
needs and allow businesses and governments alike to become 
more informed and responsive. Tomorrow’s leaders will need to 
incorporate such devices and systems into their planning to stay 
ahead of customer and citizen wants and needs.
Based on:
Byles, D. (2016, January 13). Technology, disruption, the Inter-
net of Things… and you. Businessgreen.com. Retrieved April 24, 
2016, from http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/opinion/2441499/
technology-disruption-the-internet-of-things-and-you
McCabe, L. (2009, December 30). What is green IT, and why should 
you care? Smallbusinesscomputing.com. Retrieved April 24, 2016, 
from http://www.smallbusinesscomputing.com/testdrive/article 
.php/3855806/What-Is-Green-IT-and-Why-Should-You-Care.htm


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    45
equipment, such as a computer, tablet, or printer, as well as components like a computer monitor 
or keyboard. Software refers to a program or set of programs that tell the computer to perform 
certain tasks. Telecommunications networks refer to a group of two or more computer systems 
linked together with communications equipment. Although we discuss the design, implementa-
tion, use, and implications of hardware, software, and telecommunications throughout the text, 
the specifics on hardware, software, and telecommunications networks are discussed in Chapter 3 
and the Technology Briefing. While traditionally the term information technology referred to the 
hardware, software, and networking components of an information system, the difference is 
shrinking, with many using the terms IS and IT synonymously. It is important to note that while 
many of today’s technologies operate autonomously, they don’t build themselves and do not 
exist for their own sake; rather, they are created to serve a useful purpose for people. Also, any 
information system involves data that are useful, for someone, somewhere. For example, trans-
actional data are useful for businesses, status updates in your news feed on Facebook are useful 
for your friends as well as for Facebook itself, scores in a computer game are useful for the 
player as well as for the game developers, and so on. In Figure 1.12, we show the relationships 
among these IS components.
People in organizations use information systems to process sales transactions, manage loan 
applications, or help financial analysts decide where, when, and how to invest. Product managers 
also use them to help decide where, when, and how to market their products and related services, 
and production managers use them to help decide when and how to manufacture products. Infor-
mation systems also enable us to get cash from ATMs, communicate by live video with people in 
other parts of the world, or buy concert or airline tickets. (Note that the term information systems 
is also used to describe the field comprising people who develop, use, manage, and study infor-
mation systems in organizations.)
It is important to note that people use various terms to describe the field of information sys-
tems, such as management information systems, business information systems, computer infor-
mation systems, and simply systems. Next, we more thoroughly examine the key components of 
the IS definition.
Telecommunications
Information
System
Software
Create
Collect
Process
Store
Distribute
Hardware
Data
People
FIGURE 1.12
An information system is the 
combination of people and 
information technology that 
create, collect, process, store, and 
distribute useful data.

46    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Data: The Root and Purpose of Information Systems
Earlier, we defined information systems as the combination of people and information technol-
ogy that create, collect, process, store, and distribute useful data. We begin by talking about data, 
the most basic element of any information system.
DATA.  Before you can understand how information systems work, it is important to distinguish 
between raw, unformatted data, information, and knowledge. Unformatted data, or simply data, 
are raw symbols, such as characters and numbers. Data have no meaning in and of themselves and 
are of little value until processed (Ackoff, 1989). For example, if we asked you what 465889727 
meant or stood for, you could not tell us (Figure 1.13). However, if we presented the same data 
as 465-88-9727 and told you it was located in a certain database, in John Doe’s record, in a field 
labeled SSN, you might rightly surmise that the number was actually the Social Security number 
of someone named John Doe. While data have no inherent meaning, the old adage “garbage 
in, garbage out” applies to data as well; thus, a key consideration of assessing whether data are 
reliable for making decisions is data quality, consisting of completeness, accuracy, timeliness, 
validity, and consistency.
INFORMATION.  Data can be formatted, organized, or processed to be useful; they are 
transformed into information, which can be defined as a representation of reality, and can 
help to answer questions about who, what, where, and when (Ackoff, 1989). In the previous 
example, 465-88-9727 was used to represent and identify an individual person, John Doe 
(see Figure 1.13). Contextual cues, such as a label, are needed to turn data into information 
that is familiar and useful to the reader. Think about your experience with ATMs. A list of 
all the transactions at a bank’s ATMs over the course of a month would be fairly useless 
data. However, a table that divided ATM users into two categories, bank customers and 
non-bank customers, and compared the two groups’ use of the machine—their purpose for 
using the ATMs and the times and days on which they use them—would be incredibly useful 
information. A bank manager could use this information to create marketing mailings to attract 
new customers. Without information systems, it would be difficult to transform raw data into 
useful information.
KNOWLEDGE.  In order to actually use information, knowledge is needed. Knowledge is the 
ability to understand information, form opinions, and make decisions or predictions based 
on the information. For example, you must have knowledge to be aware that only one Social 
Security number can uniquely identify each individual (see Figure 1.13). Knowledge is a body 
of governing procedures, such as guidelines or rules, that are used to organize or manipulate data 
to make them suitable for a given task.
Understanding the distinctions between data, information, and knowledge is important 
because all are used in the study, development, and use of information systems.
Hardware, Software, and Telecommunications Networks: The Components 
of Information Systems
Ever since the dawn of humankind, there was a need to transform data into useful information 
for people, and people have invented various calculating devices, such as the abacus or the slide 
rule. Before the introduction of the first computers (which worked on a mechanical basis using 
punch cards), almost all business and government information systems consisted of file folders, 
Data
Information
Knowledge
465889727
Raw
Symbols
Formatted
Data
Data
Relationships
Meaning:
------------
???
Meaning:
------------
SSN
Meaning:
------------
SSN       Unique Person
465-88-9727
465-88-9727      John Doe
FIGURE 1.13
Data, information, and knowledge.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    47
filing cabinets, and document repositories. Computer hardware has replaced these physical arti-
facts, providing the technologies to input and process data and output useful information; today, 
hardware includes not only “traditional” computer components but a variety of other input and 
output devices, including sensors, cameras, actuators, and the like. Software enables organiza-
tions to utilize the hardware to execute their business processes and competitive strategy by pro-
viding the computer hardware with instructions on what processing functions to perform. 
Finally, the telecommunications networks allow computers to share data and services, enabling 
the global collaboration, communication, and commerce we see today. The rapid evolution of 
the various hardware, software, and networking components make the ability to tie everything 
together ever more important.
People: The Builders, Managers, and Users of Information Systems
The IS field includes a vast collection of people who develop, maintain, manage, and study 
information systems. Yet an information system does not exist in a vacuum and is of little use if 
it weren’t for you—the user. We will begin by discussing the IS profession and then talk about 
why knowing about fundamental concepts of information systems is of crucial importance in 
your personal and professional life.
If you are choosing a career in the IS field, you will find countless opportunities. With the 
growing value of data for competitive advantage, every company can now be considered a tech-
nology company, needing people with the right skill set to help optimize its business processes. 
The career opportunities for a person with IS training continue to be strong, and they are 
expected to continue to improve over the next 10 years. For example, the 2016–17 edition of the 
Occupational Outlook Handbook published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics predicted that 
employment for computer and IS managers will grow 15 percent through 2024, much faster than 
the average for all occupations (www.bls.gov/ooh/management/computer-and-information-
systems-managers.htm). As more and more organizations rely more heavily on IS professionals, 
this boost in employment will occur in nearly every industry, not just computer hardware and 
software companies. Money magazine (http://money.cnn.com/pf/best-jobs) ranked software 
architect as the best job in America, with database developer and information assurance analyst 
also being among the top 10 best jobs in America (Table 1.1); also, U.S. News magazine (http://
money.usnews.com/careers/best-jobs/rankings/the-100-best-jobs) rated computer systems ana-
lyst and web developer among the top 20 jobs (two of the few nonmedical jobs in that list). Like-
wise, a degree in information systems can provide the foundation for becoming a data scientist, 
currently one of the jobs with highest demand (Florentine, 2016).
In addition to an ample supply of jobs, earnings for IS professionals will remain strong. 
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, median annual earnings of these managers in 
May 2014 were US$127,640, with the top 10 percent earning more than US$187,200. Also, 
according to Salary.com, the median salary in 2016 for IT managers was US$109,701. Accord-
ing to a 2016 report by the National Association of Colleges and Employers, management 
TABLE 1.1   Best Jobs in America (2015)
Rank
Career
Job Growth 
(10-year forecast)
Median Pay (in US$)
1
Software architect
23%
124,000
2
Video game designer
19%
79,900
3
Landman
13%
103,000
4
Patent agent
13%
126,000
5
Hospital administrator
23%
114,000
6
Continuous improvement manager
12%
96,600
7
Clinical nurse specialist
19%
89,300
8
Database developer
23%
88,200
9
Information assurance analyst
37%
96,400
10
Yoga instructor
13%
62,400
Source: Based on 100 Best Jobs in America, published by CNN Money, © 2016.

48    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
information systems was expected to be the highest-paid business major, with a mean starting 
salary of US$56,846. Likewise, information systems graduates with a master’s degree had an 
average starting salary of US$67,632, higher than business majors such as accounting, finance, 
or marketing, according to a study by Temple University. Finally, computer and IS managers, 
especially those at higher levels, often receive more employment-related benefits—such as 
expense accounts, stock option plans, and bonuses—than do nonmanagerial workers in their 
organizations (a study by Payscale.com found that IS majors were—post-graduation—among 
the most satisfied with their careers).
As you can see, there continues to be a very strong need for people with IS knowledge, 
skills, and abilities—in particular, people with advanced IS skills, as we describe here. In fact, 
IS careers are regularly selected as not only one of the fastest growing but also a career with 
far-above-average opportunities for greater personal growth, stability, and advancement. 
Although technology continues to become easier to use, there is still and is likely to continue 
to be an acute need for people within the organization who have the responsibility of planning 
for, designing, developing, maintaining, and managing technologies. Much of this will happen 
within the business units and will be done by those with primarily business duties and tasks as 
opposed to systems duties and tasks. However, we are a long way from the day when technol-
ogy is so easy to deploy that a need no longer exists for people with advanced IS knowledge 
and skills. In fact, many people believe that this day may never come. Although increasing 
numbers of people will incorporate systems responsibilities within their nonsystems jobs, 
there will continue to be a need for people with primarily systems responsibilities. In short, IS 
staffs and departments will likely continue to exist and play an important role in the foresee-
able future.
Given that information systems continue to be a critical tool for business success, it is not 
likely that IS departments will go away or even shrink significantly. Indeed, all projections are 
for long-term growth of information systems in both scale and scope. Also, as is the case in any 
area of business, those people who are continually learning, continuing to grow, and continuing 
to find new ways to add value and who have advanced and/or unique skills will always be sought 
after, whether in information systems or in any area of the firm.
The future opportunities in the IS field are likely to be found in a variety of areas, which is 
good news for everyone. Diversity in the technology area can embrace us all. It really does not 
matter much which area of information systems you choose to pursue—there will likely be a 
promising future there for you. Even if your career interests are outside information systems, 
being a well-informed and capable user of information technologies will greatly enhance your 
career prospects.
CAREERS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS.  The field of information systems includes those people in 
organizations who design and build systems, those who use these systems, and those responsible 
for managing these systems. The people who help develop and manage systems in organizations 
include systems analysts, systems programmers, systems operators, network administrators, 
database administrators, systems designers, systems managers, and chief information officers. 
(In Table 1.2 we describe some of these careers.) This list is not exhaustive; rather, it is intended 
to provide a sampling of IS management positions. Furthermore, many firms will use the same 
job title, but each is likely to define it in a different way, or different companies will have 
different titles for the same basic function. As you can see from Table 1.2, the range of career 
opportunities for IS managers is broad, and salary expectations are high.
WHAT MAKES IS PERSONNEL SO VALUABLE?  In addition to the growing importance of people 
in the IS field, there have been changes in the nature of this type of work. No longer are IS 
departments in organizations filled only with nerdy men with pocket protectors. Many more 
women are in IS positions now. Also, it is now more common for an IS professional to be a 
polished, professional businessperson who can speak fluently about both business and 
technology. IS personnel are now well-trained, highly skilled, valuable professionals who garner 
high wages and prestige and who play a pivotal role in helping firms be successful.
Many studies have been aimed at helping us understand what knowledge and skills are nec-
essary for a person in the IS area to be successful. Interestingly, these studies also point out just 
what it is about IS personnel that makes them so valuable to their organizations. In a nutshell, 
good IS personnel possess valuable, integrated knowledge and skills in three areas—technical, 
business, and systems—as outlined in Table 1.3 (see also Figure 1.14).


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    49
TABLE 1.2   Some IS Management Job Titles and Brief Job Descriptions
IS Activity
Job Title
Job Description
Salary Range, in 
US$, in Percentiles 
(25%–75%)
Develop
Systems analyst
Analyze business requirements and select information sys-
tems that meet those needs
63,000–80,000
Software developer
Code, test, debug, and install programs
71,000–91,000
Software architect
Create customized software for large corporations
98,000–130,000
IT consultant
Provide IT knowledge to external clients
57,000–93,000
Database developer
Develop, modernize, and streamline databases
57,000–68,000
Maintain
IT auditor
Audit information systems and operating procedures for 
compliance with internal and external standards
64,000–83,000
Database administrator
Manage database and database management software use
75,000–99,000
Webmaster
Manage a firm’s website
59,000–80,000
Manage
IT manager
Manage existing information systems
95,000–126,000
IS security manager
Manage security measures and disaster recovery
102,000–125,000
Information assurance analyst
Ensure availability and security of information stored on 
networks and in the cloud
60,000–93,000
E-commerce manager
Manage development, maintenance, and strategy related to 
e-commerce systems
97,000–126,000
Chief information officer (CIO)
Highest-ranking IS manager; oversee strategic planning 
and IS use throughout the firm
213,000–316,000
Chief digital officer (CDO)
Executive focused on converting traditional “analog” busi-
nesses to digital; oversee operations in rapidly changing 
digital sectors like mobile apps and social media
150,000–200,000
Study
University professor
Teach undergraduate and graduate students; study the use 
of information systems in organizations and society
70,000–180,000
Government scientist
Perform research and development of information sys-
tems for homeland security, intelligence, and other related 
applications
60,000–200,000
Source: Based on http://www.salary.com, http://www.payscale.com.
TABLE 1.3   IS Professional Core Competencies
Domain
Description
Technical Knowledge and Skills
Hardware
Hardware platforms, infrastructure, cloud computing, virtualization, peripherals, mobile devices
Software
Operating systems, application software, mobile apps
Networking
Network administration, cabling and network interface cards, wireless, Internet, security
Business Knowledge and Skills
Business integration, industry
Business processes, functional areas of businesses and their integration, industry characteristics
Managing people and projects
Planning, organizing, leading, controlling, managing people and projects
Social
Interpersonal, group dynamics, political
Communication
Verbal, written, and technological communication and presentation
Systems Knowledge and Skills
Systems integration
Connectivity, compatibility, integrating subsystems and systems
Development methodologies
Steps in systems analysis and design, systems development life cycle, alternative development 
methodologies
Critical thinking
Challenging one’s and others’ assumptions and ideas
Problem solving
Information gathering and synthesis, problem identification, solution formulation, comparison, choice

50    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Technical Competency  The technical competency area includes knowledge and skills 
in hardware, software, networking, and security. In a sense, this is the “nuts and bolts” of 
information systems. This is not to say that the IS professional must be a technical expert in 
these areas. On the contrary, the IS professional must know just enough about these areas to 
understand how they work, what they can do for an organization, and how they can and should 
be applied. Typically, the IS professional manages or directs those who have deeper, more 
detailed technical knowledge.
The technical area of competency is, perhaps, the most difficult to maintain because of the 
rapid pace of technological innovation in the digital world. With the economy rebounding, orga-
nizations are starting new projects or are reviving projects put on hold during the economic 
downturn; hence, while it once appeared as if most programming jobs or support jobs would be 
outsourced to third-party providers abroad, there is an increased demand in many companies for 
people with application development skills, especially in combination with sound business anal-
ysis and project management skills (Brandel, 2013). In fact, many of the hot skills listed in 
Table 1.4 are focused on the business domain, which is discussed next.
Business Competency  The business competency area is one that sets the IS professional 
apart from others who have only technical knowledge and skills, and in an era of increased 
outsourcing, it may well save a person’s job. For example, even though some low-level 
technology jobs may be outsourced, the Bureau of Labor Statistics recently reported that there 
is an increased need for IS managers as organizations embrace mobility and cloud computing 
(www.bls.gov/ooh/management/computer-and-information-systems-managers.htm). As a result, 
it is absolutely vital for IS professionals to understand the technical areas and the nature of the 
business. IS professionals must also be able to understand and manage people and projects, not 
just the technology. These business skills propel IS professionals into project management and, 
ultimately, high-paying middle- and upper-level management positions.
Systems Competency  Systems competency is another area that sets the IS professional apart 
from others with only technical knowledge and skills. Those who understand how to build and 
integrate systems and how to solve problems will ultimately manage large, complex systems 
projects as well as manage those in the firm who have only technical knowledge and skills.
IS Personnel 
System 
C
System 
A
System 
B
FIGURE 1.14
Good IS personnel possess valuable, integrated knowledge and skills in three areas—technical, business, and systems.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    51
TABLE 1.4   Hot Skills for the Next Decade
Domain
Hot Skills
Business
Business–IT alignment; business analysis; enterprise solutions; business 
process modeling; project management; third-party provider management; 
enterprise-oriented social media
Technology infra-
structure and 
services
Virtualization; cloud computing/infrastructure as a service; cloud integra-
tion; serverless computing; systems analysis and design; network design; 
systems auditing; wireless; telecommunications/VoIP (Voice over Internet 
Protocol); database administration; data centers
Security
IT security planning and management; BYOD; governance, risk, and com-
pliance; cybersecurity
Applications
Customer-facing application development; mobile app development; web 
development; open source; portal technologies; cloud computing; user expe-
rience; legacy systems integration; interface design; content management 
systems
Internet
Social media; customer-facing web applications; mobile apps; search engine 
optimization; artificial intelligence; web mining; Internet of Things
Business analytics/
data science
Business intelligence; advanced analytics; data warehousing; data mining; 
unstructured data analysis; Big Data
Source: Based on Broom (2016), Florentine (2015), Pratt (2015), Leung (2009).
Perhaps now you can see why IS professionals are so valuable to their organizations. These 
individuals have a solid, integrated foundation in technical, business, and systems knowledge 
and skills. Perhaps most important, they also have the social skills to understand how to work 
well with and motivate others. It is these core competencies that continue to make IS profession-
als valuable employees.
Given how important technology is, what does this mean for your career? Technology is 
being used to radically change how business is conducted—from the way products and services 
are produced, distributed, and accounted for to the ways they are marketed and sold. Whether 
you are majoring in information systems, finance, accounting, operations management, human 
resource management, business law, or marketing, knowledge of technology is critical to a suc-
cessful career in business.
FINDING QUALIFIED PERSONNEL.  Unfortunately, given the increased sophistication of modern 
information systems, organizations can often have a difficult time finding qualified personnel, 
and attracting the right people with the right skills is not possible in some areas. Consequently, 
many technology-focused organizations tend to cluster in areas where talented workers are 
available. Such areas are often characterized by a high quality of life for the people living 
there, and it is no surprise that many companies in the IT sector within the United States are 
headquartered in Silicon Valley, California; Boston, Massachusetts; Austin, Texas; or Seattle, 
Washington. With increasing globalization, other regions throughout the world are boasting 
about their highly skilled personnel. One such example is the Indian city of Bangalore, where, 
more than a century ago, Maharajas started to lure talented technology-oriented people to the 
region, building a world-class human resource infrastructure that attracted companies from 
around the world. In other areas, organizations may have to find creative ways to attract and 
retain people, such as by offering favorable benefits packages that include educational grants 
or expense-matching programs to encourage employees to improve their education and skills. 
Other human resource policies, such as telecommuting, flextime, and creative benefit packages, 
can also help to attract and retain the best employees.
YOU—THE USER.  Clearly, the field of information systems offers a wide variety of interesting 
career choices, and you will likely find a career that offers a host of opportunities for lifelong 
learning and advancement. Yet understanding fundamental concepts related to information 
systems will be critical in almost any career as well as in your private life. In almost any 

52    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
business-related field, you will be extensively using information systems, and you will likely 
be involved in various information systems–related decisions within your organization. 
Understanding what information systems are capable of doing (as well as what they cannot 
do), being able to communicate with the “techies,” and being able to make educated IS-related 
decisions are likely to set you apart from your competition. Especially in smaller organizations 
(that may not have dedicated IS departments), you are likely to be involved in IS-related 
investment decisions, and lacking a basic understanding of fundamental issues associated with 
topics such as IS infrastructure, systems analysis and design, or information systems security 
will put you at the mercy of outside consultants or (worse yet) vendors who are likely to act out 
of their own interests, often trying to sell you their “technology of the week/month/year.”
In addition, as you have undoubtedly noticed, you are facing a number of IS-related deci-
sions in your private life. Examples of such decisions abound; for example, you may face the 
question of what mobile phone to purchase next: an iPhone, a phone using some version of the 
Android operating system, or a phone sporting Microsoft’s Windows 10 Mobile operating sys-
tem. Such decisions are likely to include your own preferences or influence by your peers, but 
there are a number of critical differences in terms of privacy, security, available apps, and the 
like. Likewise, you may face the problem of how to best secure your wireless network at home 
or may wonder how to best keep your various files in sync across different computers or mobile 
devices.
Finally, you may have a great idea for a new product or service and want to launch a startup. 
Having the idea is but the first step, and you will soon realize the role of information systems in 
SECURITY MATTERS 
Ransomware
As more and more of our business and professional lives are 
lived online, the security of our personal and business data has 
become increasingly important. In recent years, attackers have 
gotten more sophisticated and have shifted tactics. A new tac-
tic is the distribution of ransomware, a novel approach to 
extracting money from victims. Ransomware refers to a type of 
virus that, once it has infected a victim’s system or network, 
encrypts the data it finds in place in a format that renders them 
impossible for the victim to access. The attacker then demands 
a ransom payment in return for releasing the decryption keys 
that can be used to access and recover the data (though many 
victims have painfully experienced that paying the ransom does 
not guarantee regaining access to the data). Victims range from 
individuals, who may stand to lose years of family photos or 
personal records, to businesses large and small, who may lose 
customer records, financial data, intellectual property, or other 
valuable data. The malicious software usually arrives as an 
attachment to a spam e-mail or is downloaded in the guise of a 
video or other content from a website.
Until recently, attackers have largely focused on individuals 
and small businesses and demanded relatively small ransoms 
that are affordable enough that the victim will seriously con-
sider paying the ransom. The average payment demanded in 
2015 was just US$300 according to security firm Symantec. By 
early 2016, however, there has been an apparent shift to 
larger, higher-value organizations. Hollywood Presbyterian 
Medical Center in Los Angeles was forced to pay a US$17,000 
ransom after its network was broadly infected with 
ransomware. Another hospital in Ottawa decided not to pay 
the ransom demanded of it and was able to restore data from 
backups. Security researchers warn that attackers are increas-
ingly not just attempting to lock down the data but are threat-
ening to release the data to the public if not paid. For 
organizations dealing with sensitive or personally identifiable 
information, lawsuits and reporting requirements can make 
such public release an even more costly threat than simply los-
ing access to their data.
With threats like ransomware becoming increasingly prev-
alent, individuals and organizations will need to increase their 
security awareness and vigilance to better avoid potential 
infections and also improve their backup and disaster recovery 
preparations in order to become more resilient to such attacks.
Based on:
Colwey, S., & Stack, L. (2016, February 18). Los Angeles hospital 
pays hackers $17,000 after attack. The New York Times. Retrieved 
April 14, 2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/19/business/
los-angeles-hospital-pays-hackers-17000-after-attack.html
Pilieci, V. (2016, March 16). Ottawa Hospital hit with ransom-
ware, information on four computers locked down. Ottawa Citizen. 
Retrieved April 14, 2016, from http://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-
news/ottawa-hospital-hit-with-ransomware-information-on-four-
computers-locked-down
Savage, K., Coogan, P., & Lau, H. (2015, August 6). The evolu-
tion of ransomware. Symantec.com. Retrieved April 14, 2016, from 
http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/security_
response/whitepapers/the-evolution-of-ransomware.pdf


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    53
all phases of the process of bringing your idea to the market. Thus, understanding how informa-
tion systems can fuel the development and commercialization of your idea is crucial. Through-
out this text, we will touch on those issues and hope that you will gain valuable knowledge to 
understand the trade-offs involved when selecting new information systems.
Organizations: The Context of Information Systems
We have talked about data versus information, the technology side of information systems, and 
the people side of information systems. Information systems do not exist in a vacuum; they are 
built and/or used within a certain context. Organizations use information systems to become 
more productive and profitable, to gain competitive advantage, to reach more customers, or to 
improve customer service. This holds true for all types of organizations—professional, social, 
religious, educational, and governmental—and for all types of industries—medical, legal, manu-
facturing, and so on. In fact, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service launched its own website for the 
reasons just described (Figure 1.15). The website was so popular that approximately 220,000 
users visited it during the first 24 hours and more than 1 million visited it in its first week—even 
before the web address for the site was officially announced. Today, popular websites like Face-
book.com and WSJ.com receive millions of visitors every day.
TYPES OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS.  Throughout this text, we explore various types of information 
systems commonly used in organizations. It makes sense, however, for us to describe briefly a 
few of the various types of systems used so that you will better understand what we mean by the 
term information system as we use it throughout the rest of the book. Table 1.5 provides a list of 
the major categories of information systems used in organizations.
Topping the list in the table are some of the more traditional, major categories that are used 
to describe information systems. For example, not only are transaction processing systems 
(TPS) used by a broad range of organizations to process customer transactions more efficiently, 
these systems also generate a tremendous amount of data that can be used by the organization to 
learn about customers or ever-changing product trends. Your local grocery store uses a TPS at 
the checkout that scans bar codes on products; as this occurs, many stores will print discount 
coupons on the backs of receipts for products related to current purchases. Every hour, online 
retailer Amazon.com’s website processes thousands of transactions from around the world. This 
massive amount of data is fed into large data warehouses and is then analyzed to provide pur-
chase recommendations to future customers. In addition, TPS data are sorted and organized to 
support a broad range of managerial decision making using a variety of systems; the most com-
mon of these is generally referred to as management information systems. TPS data also pro-
vide input into a variety of other information systems within organizations, including decision 
FIGURE 1.15
Website of the U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, Internal Revenue 
Service, http://www.irs.gov.
Source: Courtesy of the United States 
Department of the Treasury.

54    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
TABLE 1.5   Categories of Information Systems Used in Organizations
Category of System
Purpose
Sample Application(s)
Transaction processing system
Process day-to-day business event data at the 
operational level of the organization
Grocery store checkout cash register with 
connection to network, student registration 
system
Management information system
Produce detailed information to help manage 
a firm or part of a firm
Inventory management and planning system, 
student enrollment management
Decision support system
Provide analysis tools and access to data-
bases in order to support quantitative decision 
making
Product demand forecasting system, loan and 
investment analysis
Intelligent system
Emulate or enhance human capabilities
Automated system for analyzing bank loan 
applications, self-driving car
Business intelligence system
Analyze Big Data to better understand vari-
ous aspects of a business
Online analytical processing (OLAP) system
Office automation system (personal 
productivity software)
Support a wide range of predefined day-to-
day work activities of individuals and small 
groups
Word processor, spreadsheet, presentation 
software, e-mail client
Collaboration system
Enable people to communicate, collaborate, 
and coordinate with each other
E-mail system with automated, shared 
calendar
Knowledge management system
Enable the generation, storage, sharing, and 
management of knowledge assets
Knowledge portal for finding answers to 
common questions
Social software
Facilitate collaboration and knowledge 
sharing
Social network, connecting colleagues and 
friends
Geographic information system
Create, store, analyze, and manage geograph-
ically referenced data
Site selection for new shopping mall
Functional area information system
Support the activities within a specific func-
tional area of the firm
Planning system for personnel training and 
work assignments
Customer relationship management 
system
Support interaction between the firm and its 
customers
Sales force automation, lead generation
Enterprise resource planning system
Support and integrate all facets of the busi-
ness, including planning, manufacturing, 
sales, marketing, and so on
Financial, operations, and human resource 
management
Supply chain management system
Support the coordination of suppliers, prod-
uct or service production, and distribution
Procurement planning
Electronic commerce system
Enable customers to buy goods and services 
from a firm’s website
Amazon.com, eBay.com, Nordstrom.com
Mobile app
Perform a particular, well-defined function, 
typically on a mobile device
Instagram, Snapchat, WhatsApp,  
Facebook app
support systems, intelligent systems, business intelligence systems, knowledge management sys-
tems, social software, geographic information systems, and functional area information systems. 
Five to 10 years ago, it would have been typical to see systems that fell cleanly into one of these 
categories. Today, many organizations have replaced standalone systems with enterprise systems 
that span the entire organization. Likewise, with internetworking—connecting host computers 
and their networks together to form even larger networks like the Internet—and systems 
integration—connecting separate information systems and data to improve business processes 


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    55
and decision making—it is difficult to say that any given information system fits into only one of 
these categories (e.g., that a system is a management information system only and nothing else). 
In addition, many of these systems are not housed within organizations anymore but are located 
“in the cloud” and accessed via the users’ browsers when needed. Modern-day information sys-
tems tend to span several of these categories of information systems, helping not only to collect 
data from throughout the firm and from customers but also to integrate data from diverse sources 
and present them to busy decision makers along with tools to manipulate and analyze those data. 
Customer relationship management, supply chain management, and enterprise resource plan-
ning systems are good examples of these types of systems that encompass many features and 
types of data and cannot easily be categorized.
Office automation systems such as Microsoft Office and the OpenOffice.org Productivity 
Suite provide word processing, spreadsheet, and other personal productivity tools, enabling 
knowledge workers to accomplish their tasks; collaboration systems, such as Microsoft’s 
Exchange/Outlook, Lotus Notes, or Google Apps, provide people with e-mail, automated calen-
daring, and online, threaded discussions, enabling close collaboration with others, regardless of 
their location.
Systems for electronic commerce (or e-commerce), such as corporate websites, are also 
popular and important. These systems enable (1) consumers to find information about and to 
purchase goods and services from each other and from business firms and (2) business firms to 
electronically exchange products, services, and data. In Chapter 4, “Enabling Business-to-
Consumer Electronic Commerce,” we talk about different forms of electronic commerce involv-
ing the end consumer; in Chapter 8, “Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via 
Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management,” we discuss how organizations use the 
Internet to enable or facilitate business-to-business transactions.
While many modern-day information systems span several of these IS categories or inte-
grate different types of systems, it is still useful to understand these categories. Doing so enables 
you to better understand the myriad approaches, goals, features, and functions of modern infor-
mation systems.
We have talked about each of the parts of our definition of information systems, and we 
have talked about different types of information systems. In the next section, we focus on how 
information systems can be managed within organizations.
ORGANIZING THE IS FUNCTION.  Old-school IS personnel believed that they owned and controlled 
the computing resources, that they knew better than users did, and that they should tell users what 
they could and could not do with the computing resources; in addition, early IS departments 
typically had huge project backlogs, and IS personnel would often deliver systems that were 
over budget, were completed much too late, were difficult to use, and did not always work well. 
The increasing pervasiveness of technology in businesses and societies has led to a shifting 
mindset about information systems within organizations. Increasingly fast-paced competition 
is forcing businesses to regard IS as an enabler for streamlining business processes, providing 
better customer service, and better connecting and collaborating with various stakeholders inside 
and outside the organization. Many organizations, for example, have realized that some of the 
best ideas for solving business problems come from the employees using the system; as a result, 
personnel within many IS units have taken on more of a consulting relationship with their users, 
helping the users solve problems, implement ideas, and be more productive. IS personnel are 
increasingly reaching out to their internal customers and proactively seek their input and needs 
rather than waiting for customers to come in with systems complaints. They modify the systems 
at a moment’s notice just to meet customer needs quickly and effectively. They celebrate the 
customers’ new systems ideas rather than putting up roadblocks and giving reasons that the new 
ideas cannot or will not work. They fundamentally believe that the customers own the technology 
and the information and that the technology and information are there for the customers, not 
for the systems personnel. They create help desks, hotlines, information centers, and training 
centers to support customers. These service-oriented IS units structure the IS function so that it 
can better serve the customer.
The implications of this new service mentality for the IS function are staggering. It is sim-
ply amazing how unproductive a company can be when the IS personnel and other people within 
the firm are at odds with one another. On the other hand, it is even more amazing how productive 
and enjoyable work can be when people in the IS function work hand in hand with people 

56    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
throughout the organization. Technology is, potentially, the great lever, but it works best when 
people work together, not against each other, to use it.
THE SPREAD OF TECHNOLOGY IN ORGANIZATIONS.  Another phenomenon that shows 
how integral and vital information systems and their proper management have become to 
organizations is the extent to which the technology is firmly integrated and entrenched within 
the various business units (such as accounting, sales, and marketing).
In many organizations today, you will find that the builders and managers of a particular 
information system or subsystem spend most of their time out in the business unit, along with 
the users of that particular system. Many times, these systems personnel are permanently 
placed—with an office, desk, phone, and PC—in the business unit along with the users.
In addition, it is not uncommon for systems personnel to have formal education, training, and 
work experience in information systems as well as in the functional area that the system supports, 
such as finance. It is becoming increasingly more difficult to separate the technology from the 
business or the systems staff from the other people in the organization. For this reason, how infor-
mation systems are managed is important to you, no matter what career option you pursue.
As information systems are used more broadly throughout organizations, IS personnel often 
have dual-reporting relationships—reporting both to the central IS group and to the business 
function they serve. Therefore, at least some need for centralized IS planning, deployment, and 
management continues—particularly with respect to achieving economies of scale in systems 
acquisition and development and in optimizing systems integration, enterprise networking, and 
the like. Even in organizations that are decentralizing technology and related decisions, a need to 
coordinate technology and related decisions across the firm still persists. This coordination is 
likely to continue to happen through some form of a centralized (or, at least, centrally coordi-
nated) IS staff. Organizations are likely to continue to want to reap the benefits of IS decentral-
ization (flexibility, adaptability, and systems responsiveness), but it is equally likely that they 
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Technology Addiction
In 2015, the average person in the United Kingdom spent 
9 hours and 53 minutes consuming media each day, 50 percent 
of 18- to 24-year-olds checked their phone within 5 minutes of 
waking up, and a third of 25- to 34-year-olds visited social 
media sites or used mobile apps more than 10 times a day. 
Between the near-ubiquitous availability of network connectiv-
ity and the sheer number of options when it comes to ways to 
interact online, we are increasingly distracted by information 
technology, to the point where some doctors argue that we 
are actually becoming addicted. Dopamine—the brain chemi-
cal associated with pleasure—is released when we are stimu-
lated, whether by food, sex, excitement, or interacting online. 
The hit of dopamine we get when we get a “like,” update our 
status, or read the latest tidbit of news or gossip can have the 
same addicting effect on our bodies as drugs like cocaine or 
heroin. In addition, being plugged in all the time reduces the 
brain’s ability to let us relax. Hyper-stimulation from having a 
screen in front of us from when we wake up to when we 
finally fall asleep causes a type of hyper-arousal—we walk 
around in a constant state of distraction.
As we find more and more uses for technology in our daily 
lives, the threat of technology addiction is getting worse. Cog-
nitive psychologist and neuroscientist Daniel J. Levitin claims 
that, on average, we are taking in information equivalent to 
the content of 175 newspapers every day—five times more 
than we did 30 years ago. Children are affected as well. Too 
much screen time can affect memory and lead to a decline in 
grades—the part of the brain that helps us focus may not 
develop properly. A study carried out in Canada in 2015 by 
Microsoft revealed that the average human attention span has 
fallen from 12 seconds at the turn of this century to a mere 
8 seconds—less than that of a goldfish. However, there may 
be a bright side. Because the younger generations have been 
immersed in the technology their entire lives, they may be bet-
ter able to adjust and adapt—they may develop a better feel 
for their limits and how to avoid exceeding them.
So what can we do to improve the situation? Start by turn-
ing off the gadgets for a while each day. Improving your over-
all health helps as well—eat right, stay hydrated, and work out 
regularly. Finally, get enough sleep and don’t fall asleep to 
Netflix or Facebook.
Based on:
Foot, G. (2016). Why can’t I concentrate? BBC. Retrieved April 24, 
2016, from http://www.bbc.co.uk/guides/zshv9qt
Kleinman, Z. (2015, August 31). Are we addicted to technology? BBC 
News. Retrieved April 24, 2016, from http://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-33976695


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    57
will not want to—and will not be able to—forgo the benefits of IS centralization (coordination, 
economies of scale, compatibility, and connectivity).
Given the trend toward pushing people from the IS staff out into the various business units 
of the firm and given the need for people within each of the functional areas of the business to 
have technology skills, there is clearly a need for people who understand both the technology 
side and the business side of the organization. This is becoming increasingly important due to 
ever-faster IT cycles: Where traditionally, IS departments thought in time frames of about 
5 years, nowadays, new devices (such as new versions of Apple’s iPad) come out every 
6–18 months, and organizations wanting to harness the opportunities brought about by new 
devices have to adjust to this change in pace.
The Dual Nature of Information Systems
Given how important and expensive information systems have become, information technology 
is like a sword—you can use it effectively as a competitive weapon, but, as the old saying goes, 
those who live by the sword sometimes die by the sword. The two following cases illustrate this 
dual nature of information systems.
Case in Point: An Information System Gone Awry:  
Outages Outrage Gamers
Computer gaming has increasingly become interactive, with more and more games offering 
multiplayer experiences. Riding on the bandwagon, Sony introduced the PlayStation Network in 
2006 to accompany its successful PlayStation game consoles. In 2010, Sony added a service 
named PlayStation Plus, offering subscription-based premium services. In the war of the game 
consoles, PlayStation Plus was regarded as a way for Sony to get ahead of the competition from 
Microsoft’s Xbox and Nintendo’s Wii. However, since its inception, the PlayStation Network 
has been plagued with all-too-frequent system outages. Most notably, in 2011, a system outage 
following a malicious attack lasted 23 days. On Christmas Day 2014, a denial-of-service attack 
(see Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”) caused the PlayStation Network to be 
unavailable, ruining the holidays for many users (Figure 1.16). In 2016, the first outage hap-
pened only a few days into the new year, with further outages following just a few weeks later. 
Built to help achieve competitive advantage, the PlayStation Network continues to be Sony’s 
Achilles heel.
Case in Point: An Information System That Works: FedEx
Just as there are examples of information systems gone wrong, there are many examples of 
information systems gone right. FedEx, a US$47.5 billion family of companies (2016 data), is 
the world’s largest express transportation company, delivering millions of packages and millions 
of pounds of freight to 220 countries and territories each business day. FedEx uses extensive, 
FIGURE 1.16
System outages annoy online 
gamers.
Source: phoenix21/Fotolia.

58    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
interconnected information systems to coordinate more than 340,000 employees, hundreds of 
aircraft, and more than 100,000 ground vehicles worldwide. To improve its services and sustain 
a competitive advantage, FedEx continuously updates and fine-tunes its systems. For example, 
FedEx.com has more than 50 million unique visitors per month and more than 50 million track-
ing requests per day, and FedEx strives to provide the most accurate tracking information to each 
visitor. Similarly, in FedEx’s ground hubs, automation is another enabler of competitive advan-
tage. En route to its destination, each package typically travels through at least one sorting facil-
ity, where it is routed to its intermediate and final destinations (Figure 1.17). Traveling through 
an extensive network of conveyor belts, each package is scanned multiple times and can be 
rerouted as needed. Once a package passes an overhead scanner, there is between 1 and 2 sec-
onds of time to divert a package, so decisions have to be made in a few hundred milliseconds 
(King, 2011). On average, FedEx reengineers and improves the performance twice a year and 
now manages to deliver a quarter of all daily packages handled within 1 business day. These and 
other information systems have positioned FedEx as the global leader in express transportation.
Information Systems for Competitive Advantage
The PlayStation Network and FedEx systems are typical of systems that are pervasive in today’s 
life or used in large, complex organizations. These systems are so large in scale and scope that 
they are difficult to build. It is important to handle the development of such systems the right 
way the first time around. These examples also show that as we rely more and more on informa-
tion systems, the capabilities of these systems are paramount to business success.
Not only were these systems large and complicated, but they were—and continue to be—
critical to the success of the organizations that built them. The choices made in developing the 
systems at Sony and FedEx were strategic in their intent. Both Sony’s PlayStation Network and 
FedEx’s systems were developed and are continuously updated to help the companies gain or 
sustain some competitive advantage (Porter, 1985; Porter & Millar, 1985) over their rivals. Let 
us not let this notion slip by us—while the use of technology can enable efficiency and while 
information systems must provide a return on investment, technology use can also be strategic 
and a powerful enabler of competitive advantage.
Although we described the use of information systems at two very large organizations, firms 
of all types and sizes can use information systems to gain or sustain a competitive advantage 
over their rivals. Whether it is a small mom-and-pop boutique or a large government agency, 
every organization can find a way to use information technology to beat its rivals.
Some argue that as information systems have become standardized and ubiquitous, they are 
now more of a commodity that is absolutely necessary for every company, and companies should 
focus information technology strictly on cost reduction and risk mitigation and that investing in 
information technology for differentiation or for competitive advantage is futile. Yet, as evi-
denced by the advances in smartphones, the emergence of social networks, or changes in various 
creative industries, IT is changing rapidly, and many companies have gained competitive advan-
tage by innovatively using the potential of new technologies. Specifically, companies from 
FIGURE 1.17
Packages travel through an 
extensive network of conveyor 
belts, where they are routed 
to their intermediate and final 
destinations.
Source: Steve Design/Shutterstock.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    59
Amazon.com to Zappos created competitive advantage by combining certain commoditized 
technologies with proprietary systems and business processes. Companies with bad business 
models tend to fail regardless of whether they use information technology, but companies that 
have good business models and use information technology successfully to carry out those busi-
ness models tend to be very successful. For companies such as Google or Facebook, data gener-
ated by the customers create value, and how data are being gathered, processed, and used can be 
a source of sustained competitive advantage (Vellante, 2011); other companies, such as Amazon 
.com, use their IT expertise to sell cloud computing services to other businesses, directly gener-
ating revenue from their IT investments.
In sum, we believe that information systems are a necessary part of doing business and that 
they can be used to create efficiencies but that they can also be used as an enabler of competitive 
advantage. Organizations should also note, however, that the competitive advantage from the use 
of information systems can be fleeting, as competitors can eventually do the same thing.
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
The Social and Environmental Costs of the Newest Gadgets
We all face ethical dilemmas. Such situations, sometimes called 
moral dilemmas, occur when one has to choose between two 
different options, each of which involves breaking a moral 
imperative. Throughout this book, we will present situations 
that involve ethical dilemmas for the players involved. For most 
(if not all) of these situations, there are no definite solutions. In 
trying to resolve ethical dilemmas, decision makers should take 
into consideration both the consequences of and the actions 
involved in each approach: First, consider the consequences of 
each potential course of action, in terms of benefits and harms 
(considering degree and time horizon), so as to identify the 
option that maximizes benefits while minimizing harms. The 
second step is to consider the actions involved (irrespective of 
the consequences) and to evaluate which actions are least 
problematic from a moral standpoint (in terms of honesty, fair-
ness, respect, and so on). While you may not arrive at a perfect 
solution, taking these two factors into account should give you 
some guidance on how to arrive at a decision.
There are various ethical dilemmas surrounding the pro-
duction, use, and disposal of electronic devices, and Apple is 
no exception. For example, tiny silver letters printed on the 
back of an iPhone say: “Designed by Apple in California—
Assembled in China.” Globalization has enabled Apple to 
focus on designing electronics consumers crave while out-
sourcing the manufacturing of components and assembling of 
the devices to contract manufacturers on a global scale. How-
ever, while Apple keeps tight control over the designs of its 
devices, it does not always have complete control over how its 
suppliers build the devices.
As a case in point, Foxconn, one of Apple’s primary Chi-
nese assembly partners, was recently scrutinized following a 
series of complaints of poor working conditions. The pressures 
of huge production volumes and tight deadlines resulted in 
pushing workers to their limit, causing twitching hands, 
uncontrollable mimicking of the motion after work, a rapid 
burnout rate, the resignation of 50,000 workers each month, 
and even up to 14 suicides. An independent audit at various 
factories confirmed that laborers worked excessive overtime 
and faced health and safety issues. In addition to labor, rare 
earth minerals are crucial for manufacturing electronic devices. 
Used for everything from magnets to superconductors, many 
of today’s high-tech products would not exist without rare 
earths. However, the mining of these minerals, primarily done 
in China, poses an enormous threat to the environment as well 
as to the health of the mining workers.
As the leaders of other technology companies, Apple’s 
CEO Tim Cook faces a number of dilemmas. For its sharehold-
ers, Apple pursues a goal of profit maximization. In pursuing 
this goal, Apple introduces gadgets consumers crave at an 
ever-increasing pace, creating a hype around each new device, 
which, in turn, creates huge demand. There are few suppliers 
worldwide who can, on relatively short notice, produce the 
numbers needed to meet the demand for Apple’s products, so 
shifting suppliers is not easy for Apple. At the same time, 
reducing working hours, raising salaries, or offering other 
fringe benefits negatively affects Apple’s profit margin. Further, 
for many young Chinese, working at Foxconn for a few 
months is better than the alternative of tilling the fields on 
their families’ small farming operations or not working at all, 
as evidenced by the thousands of workers lining up for Fox-
conn’s recruiting sessions every week.
Questions
1.	 If you were in Tim Cook’s shoes, what would you do?
2.	 As a consumer, what are your ethical dilemmas associated 
with the ever-increasing desire for new gadgets?
Based on:
Anonymous. (2012, March 29). Apple addresses China Foxconn fac-
tory report. BBC News. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www 
.bbc.com/news/technology-17557630
Kaiman, J. (2014, March 20). Rare earth mining in China: the bleak 
social and environmental costs. The Guardian. Retrieved March 
21, 2016, from http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/
rare-earth-mining-china-social-environmental-costs

60    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
IS Ethics
A broad range of ethical issues have emerged through the use and proliferation of computers. 
Especially with the rise of companies such as Google, which generate tremendous profits by col-
lecting, analyzing, and using their customers’ data, and the emergence of social networks such as 
Facebook, many people fear negative impacts such as social decay, increased consumerism, or 
loss of privacy. Computer ethics is used to describe moral issues and standards of conduct as 
they pertain to the use of information systems. In 1986, Richard O. Mason wrote a classic and 
very insightful article on the issues central to this debate—information privacy, accuracy, prop-
erty, and accessibility (aka “PAPA”). These issues focus on what information an individual 
should have to reveal to others in the workplace or through online transactions, ensuring the 
authenticity and fidelity of information, who owns information about individuals and how that 
information can be sold and exchanged, and what information a person or organization has the 
right to obtain about others and how this information can be accessed and used.
With the societal changes brought about by information systems, the issues surrounding 
privacy have moved to the forefront of public concern; in addition, the ease of digitally duplicat-
ing and sharing information has raised not only privacy concerns but also issues related to intel-
lectual property. Next, we examine these issues.
Information Privacy
If you use the Internet regularly, sending e-mail messages, posting status updates on Facebook, or 
just visiting websites, you may have felt that your personal privacy is at risk. Several e-commerce 
websites where you like to shop greet you by name and seem to know which products you are 
most likely to buy (Figure 1.18); other websites provide you with advertising that appears to be 
targeted accurately at you. As a result, you may feel as though eyes are on you every time you go 
online. Information privacy is concerned with what information an individual should have to 
reveal to others in the workplace or through other transactions, such as online shopping.
Although the Information Age has brought widespread access to information, the down-
side is that others may now have access to personal information that you would prefer to keep 
private. Personal information, such as Social Security numbers, credit card numbers, medical 
histories, and even family histories, is now available on the Internet. Using search engines, 
FIGURE 1.18
Just like the owners of your 
neighborhood bookstore, online 
merchants such as Amazon.com 
greet you by name and personalize 
their websites to individual 
customers.
Source: Jurgita Genyte/Shutterstock.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    61
your friends, coworkers, spouse, or even current or future employers can find out almost any-
thing that has been posted by or about you on the Internet. For example, it is very easy to 
locate your personal blog, your most recent party pictures posted on Facebook, or even sensi-
tive questions you asked in a public discussion forum about drug use or mental health. More-
over, many of these pages are stored in the search engines’ long-term cache, so they remain 
accessible for a long time even after they have been taken off the web. Yet some countries are 
seeking to protect their citizens from this. In 2014, the European Court of Justice ruled that 
individuals have the “right to be forgotten” and that search engines may have to remove links 
with personal information if the “information is inaccurate, inadequate, irrelevant or excessive 
for the purposes of the data processing” (European Commission, n.d.). This ruling, however, 
creates yet another set of ethical issues, this time centering around censorship of web content. 
In order to uphold freedom of expression and freedom of the media, such requests are handled 
on a case-by-case basis.
INFORMATION PROPERTY ON THE WEB.  It happens to all of us. Nearly every day in our physical 
or virtual mailboxes, we receive unwanted solicitations from credit card companies, department 
stores, magazines, or charitable organizations. Many of these items are never opened. We ask 
the same question over and over again: “How did I get on another mailing list?” Our names, 
addresses, and other personal data were most likely sold from one company to another for use in 
mass mailings.
Who owns the computerized data about people—the data that are stored in thousands of 
databases by retailers, credit card companies, and marketing research companies? The answer is 
the company that maintains the database of customers or subscribers legally owns the data and is 
free to sell them. Your name, address, and other data are all legally kept in a company database 
to be used for the company’s future mailings and solicitations, and the company can sell its cus-
tomer list or parts of it to other companies who want to send similar mailings.
There are limits, however, to what a company can do with such data. For example, if a com-
pany stated at one time that its collection of marketing data was to be used strictly internally as a 
gauge of its own customer base and then sold those data to a second company years later, it 
would be unethically and illegally breaking its original promise. Companies collect data from 
credit card purchases (by using a credit card, you indirectly allow this) or from surveys and 
questionnaires you fill out when applying for a card. They also collect data when you fill in a 
survey at a bar, restaurant, supermarket, or the mall about the quality of the service or product 
preferences. By providing these data, you implicitly agree that the data can be used as the com-
pany wishes (within legal limits, of course).
What is even more problematic is the combination of survey data with transaction data from 
your credit card purchases. As information systems are becoming more powerful, it becomes 
easier to collect and analyze various types of data about people. For example, using demographic 
data (Who am I, and where do I live?) and psychographic data (What do I like, what are my 
tastes and preferences?), companies can piece together bits of data about people, creating highly 
accurate profiles of their customers or users, with each additional bit helping to create a more 
accurate picture. Such pictures, sometimes referred to as “the Database of Intentions” (Battelle, 
2010), can contain information about what people want, purchase, like, are interested in, or are 
doing; where they are; who they are; and whom they know (Figure 1.19).
Needless to say, just because people provide data at different points does not mean that they 
agree for the data to be combined to create a holistic picture. Companies are often walking a fine 
line, as data about customers are becoming increasingly valuable. Especially in the age of Big 
Data analytics, there are various concerns, for example, related to discrimination or the selling of 
personal data but also related to embarrassments resulting from data breaches. Further, advanced 
analytics of vast amounts of structured and unstructured data about people’s behavior enables 
building predictive models pertaining to people’s behavior. Ultimately, this allows manipulating 
people (e.g., by targeted advertising) and essentially reduces human beings to objects that can be 
quantified and manipulated and whose value is primarily of commercial nature.
How do you know who is accessing these databases? This is an issue that each company 
must address at both a strategic/ethical level (Is this something that we should be doing?) and a 
tactical level (If we do this, what can we do to ensure the security and integrity of the data?). The 
company needs to ensure proper hiring, training, and supervision of employees who have access 
to the data and implement the necessary software and hardware security safeguards.

62    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
In today’s interconnected world, there are even more dangers to information privacy. 
Although more and more people are concerned about their privacy settings on social networks 
such as Facebook, there are things that you may not be able to control. For example, if one of 
your friends (or even a stranger) posts a photo of you on Facebook, it will be there for many oth-
ers to view, whether you like it or not. By the time you realize it, most of your friends, cowork-
ers, and family members may have already seen it. At other times, you may divulge sensitive 
data (such as your address or date of birth) when signing up for yet another social network; as 
newer, more exciting applications come up, you abandon your profile, but your data stay out 
there. Sometimes, you may forget who’s following your activities at the various social network-
ing sites, and you may tell people things you never wanted them to know. As these examples 
show, there are many more threats to your privacy than you may have thought.
E-MAIL PRIVACY.  The use of e-mail raises further privacy issues, as nowadays, almost everyone 
sends and receives electronic mail. Although it is slowly being supplanted by social networking 
services and text messages, e-mail is still one of the most popular software applications of all 
time, having contributed greatly to a steady decline of physical mail. However, recent court cases 
have not supported computer privacy for employee e-mail transmissions and Internet usage. For 
example, most companies provide employees with access to the Internet and e-mail systems, and 
many periodically monitor the e-mail messages that employees send and receive. Monitoring 
employee behavior is nothing new, and for many businesses it was a natural extension to monitor 
employee e-mail messages.
Surprisingly, there is little legal recourse for those who support e-mail privacy. In 1986, the 
U.S. Congress passed the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA), but it offered far 
stronger support for voice mail than it did for e-mail communications. This act made it much 
more difficult for anyone (including the government) to eavesdrop on phone conversations. 
E-mail privacy is, however, much less protected. In addition, no other laws at the federal or state 
levels protect e-mail privacy. However, some states, most notably California, have passed laws 
that define how companies should inform their employees of the monitoring and in which situa-
tions monitoring is legal. Even so, this law is more of a guideline for ethical practice than a pro-
tection of privacy (Sipior & Ward, 1995).
Fortunately, the ECPA and the court case judgments thus far on e-mail monitoring suggest 
that companies must be prudent and open about their monitoring of e-mail messages and Internet 
usage. Companies should use good judgment in monitoring e-mail and should make public their 
policy about e-mail monitoring. One primary reason that employees perceive their e-mail to be 
private is the fact that they are never told otherwise (Weisband & Reinig, 1995). In addition, 
employees should use e-mail only as appropriate, based on their company’s policy and their own 
ethical standards. Given recent actions and rulings on the capture and usage of e-mail messages, 
Database of
Intentions
The Query:
What I Want
The Social
Graph:
Who I Am &
Whom I Know
The Status
Update:
What I’m Doing
The Check-in:
Where I Am
The “Like”:
What I Like 
The Social
Reader: What I’m
Interested In
The Purchase:
What I Buy
(Bing)
(Google)
(Facebook)
(LinkedIn)
(Facebook)
(Swarm)
(Facebook)
(Facebook)
(Twitter)
(Facebook)
(Google Wallet)
(Apple Pay)
FIGURE 1.19
The database of intentions.
Source: Based on The Database of 
Intentions is Far Larger than/Thought by 
John Battelle, published by John Battelle.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    63
it appears that online privacy is in jeopardy both in and out of business organizations. As a general 
rule, we all need to realize that what we type and send via e-mail in and out of the workplace is 
likely to be read by others for whom the messages were not intended. It is wise to write only those 
e-mail messages that would not embarrass us if they were made public.
HOW TO MAINTAIN YOUR PRIVACY ONLINE.  In general, companies operating in the online 
world are not required by law to respect your privacy. In other words, a vendor can track what 
pages you look at, what products you examine in detail, which products you choose to buy, 
what method of payment you choose to use, and where you have the product delivered. After 
collecting all those data, unscrupulous vendors can sell them to others, resulting in more direct-
mail advertising, electronic spam in your e-mail inbox, or calls from telemarketers.
When surveyed about concerns related to Internet use, most consumers list issues of infor-
mation privacy as a top concern. As a result, governments have pressured businesses to post their 
privacy policies on their websites. As outlined in the U.S. Federal Trade Commission’s “Fair 
Information Practice Principles” (www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy3/fairinfo.shtm, see also 
Figure 1.20), widely accepted fair information practices include:
■
■Notice/Awareness. Providing information about what data are gathered, what the data are 
used for, who will have access to the data, whether provision of the data is required or vol-
untary, and how confidentiality will be ensured. Such information is typically contained in 
data privacy statements on a website.
■
■Choice/Consent. Providing options about what will be done with the data (e.g., subscrip-
tion to mailing lists after a purchase). Typically, consumers are given a choice to opt in 
(i.e., signal agreement to the collection/further use of the data, e.g., by checking a box) or 
opt out (i.e., signal that data cannot be collected/used in other ways).
■
■Access/Participation. Providing customers with means to access data collected about them, 
check for accuracy, and request correction of inaccuracies.
■
■Integrity/Security. Ensuring integrity of the data (e.g., by using only reputable sources of 
data) as well as implementing controls against unauthorized access, disclosure, or destruc-
tion of data (we will discuss these controls in Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”).
■
■Enforcement/Redress. Providing means to enforce these practices, and/or for customers to 
receive remedies, for example, through self-regulation or appropriate laws and regulations.
Unfortunately, while data privacy statements provide information about, for example, how 
data will be used, they often do not protect the privacy of consumers. To protect yourself, you 
should always review the privacy policy of all companies you do business with and refuse to do 
business with those that do not have a clear policy or do not respect your privacy. To make sure 
Notice/
Awareness
Fair
Information
Practice
Principles
Choice/
Consent
Access/
Participation
Integrity/
Security
Enforcement/
Redress
FIGURE 1.20
Fair Information Practice 
Principles.
Source: Courtesy of the Federal Trade 
Commission.

64    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
your shopping experience is a good one, you can take a few additional steps to maintain your 
privacy:
■
■Choose Websites That Are Monitored by Independent Organizations. Several independent 
organizations monitor the privacy and business practices of websites (e.g., www.truste.com).
■
■Avoid Having “Cookies” Left on Your Machine. Many commercial websites leave cookies 
on your machine so that the owner of the site can monitor where you go and what you do 
on the site. To protect your privacy, you should carefully manage your browser’s cookie set-
tings or get special “cookie management” software (see Chapter 10 for more on cookies).
■
■Visit Sites Anonymously. There are ways to visit websites anonymously. Using services pro-
vided by companies such as Anonymizer (www.anonymizer.com), you have a high degree 
of privacy from marketers, identity thieves, or even coworkers when surfing the web.
■
■Use Caution When Requesting Confirmation E-Mail. When you buy products online, 
many companies will send you a confirming e-mail message to let you know that the 
order was received or the item has been shipped. A good strategy is to use a separate 
e-mail account, such as one that is separate from your work e-mail, when making online 
purchases.
■
■Beware What You Post or Say Online. As an old adage goes, “the Internet never forgets”; 
anything from status updates to Twitter messages to blog posts can be stored forever, and 
most content remains somewhere on the web, even after the original page has long been 
taken down. It is safe to say that probably almost everybody engages in some regrettable 
activities at some point in time. Yet having such activities appear on the web can be dev-
astating for one’s career, so use common sense before you post that drunken party pic on 
Facebook or tweet that you are so bored on your job.
Of course, there are no guarantees that all your online experiences will be problem free, but 
if you follow the advice provided here, you are much more likely to maintain your privacy.
Intellectual Property
Another set of ethical issues centers around intellectual property (IP) (i.e., creations of the 
mind that have commercial value) and the ability to easily download, copy (and potentially 
modify), and share or distribute digital information. For example, back in the days of analog 
music, it was all but impossible to create a copy of a song without sacrificing quality. Nowa-
days, you can almost effortlessly copy your friend’s entire digital music library without any 
quality loss (Figure 1.21); with just a little more effort, you can share it with your friends or 
even strangers using peer-to-peer networks. Alternatively, you may come across a great photo-
graph or article on the web and share it on Facebook or Instagram without asking for permis-
sion from the creator.
Similarly, your school may have licensing agreements with certain vendors, allowing you to 
install and use certain software while you are a student; yet you may never uninstall the software 
…..00011001010010…..
FIGURE 1.21
Digital media allows for lossless 
duplication.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    65
after graduating, or you may lend the software to some friend or family member for personal 
use. In other cases, you may not be able to afford certain programs and download a pirated ver-
sion from the web.
Just as digital technology enables lossless duplication of files, 3D printing enables creating 
physical three-dimensional objects from digital models. When building prototypes or manufac-
turing parts, companies have traditionally used machine tools to drill, cut, or mill the part out of 
a solid piece of material, leaving up to 90 percent of a slab of material ready to go in the recy-
cling or garbage bin. Instead of removing material, 3D printing successively adds thin layers of 
material to produce the final object. As 3D printers are becoming better, faster, and more afford-
able, however, they also open up new avenues for quickly and inexpensively producing counter-
feit goods. Obviously, this causes problems for consumers expecting to purchase the original 
product but also leads to tremendous losses in intellectual property when tools are widely avail-
able that enable anyone to manufacture their own copy of a product.
Obviously, there are legal issues associated with each of these scenarios. However, there are 
also ethical issues associated with such behaviors. You may argue that there was no real loss 
involved for the creator of the files or software, as otherwise you would have gone for a free alter-
native or chosen not to purchase the product at all, or you may argue that students do not have the 
funds to purchase expensive software. These issues become even more complex when viewed 
from a global perspective. In many non-Western societies, using someone else’s work is consid-
ered praise for the creator, and it is perfectly alright to use a famous song as background music in 
a YouTube video or to include another person’s writing in one’s personal blog (or term paper).
In either case, you are using someone else’s intellectual property without permission (and 
often without attribution) and without compensating the creator.
The Need for a Code of Ethical Conduct
Not only has the Internet age found governments playing catch-up to pass legislation pertaining 
to computer crime, privacy, and security, but it has also created an ethical conundrum. For 
instance, the technology exists to rearrange and otherwise change photographs, but is the prac-
tice ethical? If you can use a computer at your school or workplace for professional purposes but 
“steal” computer time to do personal business, is this ethical? Is it ethical for companies to com-
pile information about your shopping habits, credit history, and other aspects of your life for the 
purpose of selling such data to others? Should guidelines be in place to dictate how businesses 
and others use information and computers? If so, what should the guidelines include, and who 
should write them? Should there be penalties imposed for those who violate established guide-
lines? If so, who should enforce such penalties?
Many businesses have devised guidelines for the ethical use of information technology and 
computer systems; similarly, most universities and many public school systems have written guide-
lines for students, faculty, and employees about the ethical use of computers. Most organization 
and school guidelines encourage all system users to act responsibly, ethically, and legally when 
using computers and to follow accepted rules of online etiquette as well as federal and state laws.
RESPONSIBLE COMPUTER USE.  The Computer Ethics Institute is a research, education, and 
policy study organization that studies how advances in information technology have affected 
ethics and corporate and public policy. The institute has issued widely quoted guidelines for the 
ethical use of computers. The guidelines prohibit the following:
■
■Using a computer to harm others
■
■Interfering with other people’s computer work
■
■Snooping in other people’s files
■
■Using a computer to steal
■
■Using a computer to bear false witness
■
■Copying or using proprietary software without paying for it
■
■Using other people’s computer resources without authorization or compensation
■
■Appropriating other people’s intellectual output
In addition, the guidelines recommend the following:
■
■Thinking about social consequences of programs you write and systems you design
■
■Using a computer in ways that show consideration and respect for others

66    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Responsible computer use includes following the guidelines mentioned here. As a computer 
user, when in doubt, you should review the ethical guidelines published by your school, place of 
employment, and/or professional organization. Some users bent on illegal or unethical behavior 
are attracted by the anonymity they believe the Internet affords. But the fact is that we leave 
electronic tracks as we wander through the web, and many perpetrators have been traced and 
successfully prosecuted when they thought they had hidden their trails. The fact is, too, that if 
you post objectionable material on the Internet and people complain about it, your Internet ser-
vice provider can ask you to remove the material or remove yourself from the service.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Business Career Outlook
Today, organizations are increasingly moving away from focus-
ing exclusively on local markets. For example, Pricewater-
houseCoopers is focusing on forming overseas partnerships to 
increase its client base and to better serve the regions located 
away from its U.S. home. This means that not only it is more 
likely that you will need to travel overseas in your career or 
even take an overseas assignment, but it is also extremely likely 
that you will have to work with customers, suppliers, or col-
leagues from other parts of the world. Given this globalization 
trend, there is a shortage of business professionals with the 
necessary “global skills” for operating in the digital world. 
Three strategies for improving your skills include the 
following:
1.	 Gain International Experience. The first strategy is 
straightforward. Simply put, by gaining international 
experiences, you will more likely possess the necessary 
cultural sensitivity to empathize with other cultures and, 
more important, you will be a valuable asset to any global 
organization.
2.	 Learn More Than One Language. A second strategy is to 
learn more than your native language. Language problems 
within global organizations are often hidden beneath the 
surface. Many people are embarrassed to admit when they 
don’t completely understand a foreign colleague. Unfor-
tunately, the miscommunication of important information 
can have disastrous effects on the business.
3.	 Sensitize Yourself to Global Cultural and Political 
Issues. A third strategy focuses on developing greater 
sensitivity to the various cultural and political differences 
within the world. Such sensitivity and awareness can be 
developed through coursework, seminars, and interna-
tional travel. Understanding current events and the political 
climate of international colleagues will enhance communi-
cation, cohesiveness, and job performance.
In addition to these strategies, prior to making an inter-
national visit or taking an international assignment, there are 
many things you can do to improve your effectiveness as well 
as enhance your chances of having fun, and social media play 
a big role. For example, you can join local groups of expats 
on Facebook to gather useful information, or use online tools 
such as Babbel to learn a new language or brush up on your 
language skills. Other suggestions include the following:
1.	 Read books, newspapers, magazines, and websites about 
the country.
2.	 Talk to people who already know the country and its 
culture.
3.	 Watch locally produced television as well as follow the local 
news through international news stations and websites.
4.	 After arriving in the new country, take time to tour local 
parks, monuments, museums, entertainment locations, 
and other cultural venues.
5.	 Share meals and breaks with local workers and discuss 
more than just work-related issues, such as current local 
events and issues.
Regardless of what business profession you choose, glo-
balization is a reality within the digital world. In addition to 
globalization, the proliferation of information systems is hav-
ing specific ramifications for all careers. For example, managers 
use enterprise resource planning systems to manage business 
operations, doctors use healthcare information systems to 
analyze patient data and diagnose conditions, law enforce-
ment officers use databases to identify gang members by their 
tattoos, and farmers use geographical information systems to 
reduce the application of fertilizers and optimize plant yields. 
In other words, no matter what your career focus is, informa-
tion systems will be an important part of your job.
Based on:
Berdan, M. (2014, January 23). Preparing our children for the global 
economy. Huffington Post. Retrieved June 26, 2016, from http://www 
.huffingtonpost.com/marshall-s-berdan/preparing-our-children-for-the-
global-economy_b_4652835.html
Goatham, R. (2016, June 21). What’s your ‘Employability Score’? 
New Era. Retrieved June 26, 2016, from https://www.newera.com 
.na/2016/06/21/whats-employability-score
Sophie. (2013, August 19). Global studies programs: Preparing stu-
dents for a globalized world. Nerdwallet.com. Retrieved June 26, 
2016, from http://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/nerdscholar/2013/
global-studies-programs


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    67
Key Points Review
1.	 Describe the characteristics of the digital world, 
contemporary societal issues of the digital world, and 
IT megatrends shaping the digital future. Today, we 
live in a knowledge society, and information systems 
have become pervasive throughout our organizational 
and personal lives. At the same time, we have seen 
economic, cultural, and technological changes brought 
about by globalization, and societies face a number of 
challenges, including demographic changes, rapid 
urbanization, shifts in global economic power, resource 
scarcity, and climate change. Technological advances 
have enabled five IT megatrends, where mobility, 
social media, the Internet of Things, cloud computing, 
and Big Data shape the way we work and interact. 
Being successful in many careers today requires that 
people be computer literate because the ability to 
access and effectively operate computing technology is 
a key part of many careers.
2.	 Explain what an information system is, contrasting 
its data, technology, people, and organizational 
components. An information system is the 
combination of people and information technology that 
create, collect, process, store, and distribute useful 
data. Information technology includes hardware, 
software, and telecommunications networks. When 
data are organized in a way that is useful to people, 
these data are defined as information. The field of 
information systems is huge, diverse, and growing and 
encompasses many different people, purposes, systems, 
and technologies. The people who build, manage, use, 
and study information systems make up the people 
component. They include systems analysts, systems 
programmers, IS professors, and many others. Finally, 
information systems are used by all organizations, in 
all industries, so they are said to have an organizational 
component.
3.	 Describe the dual nature of information systems in 
the success and failure of modern organizations. If 
information systems are conceived, designed, used, and 
managed effectively and strategically, then together 
with a sound business model they can enable 
organizations to be more effective, to be more 
productive, to expand their reach, and to gain or sustain 
competitive advantage over rivals. Modern 
organizations that embrace and manage information 
systems effectively and strategically and combine that 
with sound business models tend to be the 
organizations that are successful and competitive.
4.	 Describe how computer ethics affect the use of 
information systems and discuss the ethical concerns 
associated with information privacy and intellectual 
property. Information privacy is concerned with what 
information an individual should have to reveal to 
others through the course of employment or through 
other transactions, such as online shopping. In the 
Information Age, others may have access to personal 
information that you would prefer to keep private. This 
becomes especially problematic as organizations are 
increasingly able to piece together information about 
you, forming an ever more complete picture. With the 
ease of duplicating, manipulating, and sharing digital 
information, intellectual property becomes an 
increasingly important issue.
Key Terms
3D printing  65
app  40
Big Data  42
BYOD  40
climate change  38
cloud computing  41
competitive advantage  58
computer ethics  60
computer fluency  44
computer literacy  43
consumerization of IT  40
data  46
data privacy statement  63
data quality  46
demographic changes  37
digital divide  34
e-business  34
globalization  35
hardware  44
healthcare IS  44
home automation  41
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)  41
information  46
information privacy  60
information system (IS)  44
information technology (IT)  44
intellectual property (IP)  64
Internet of Things (IoT)  40
internetworking  54
knowledge  46
knowledge society  33
knowledge worker  33
management information system  53
network effect  40
office automation system  55
opt in  63
opt out  63
outsourcing  36
quantified self  38
resource scarcity  38
robotics  43
sensor  40
sustainable development  38
shifts in economic power  37
smart home technologies  41
software  44
strategic  58
systems integration  54
telecommunications  
network  44
transaction processing  
system (TPS)  53
urbanization  37
wearable technologies  38

68    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM
Review Questions
	 1-1. 	Describe the major challenges societies face.
	 1-2. 	Define the term knowledge worker. Who 
coined the term?
	 1-3. 	Name your two favorite mobile devices. For 
each device, discuss how it has influenced 
your work or personal life.
	 1-4. 	Describe how cloud computing can improve 
your personal productivity.
	 1-5. 	List and describe several opportunities and 
challenges brought about by globalization.
	 1-6. 	Compare and contrast how the digital divide 
manifests in different parts of the world.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
	 1-7. 	Define and contrast data, information, and 
knowledge.
	 1-8. 	Describe three or four types of jobs and 
career opportunities in information systems 
and in related fields.
	 1-9. 	List and define four of the systems knowledge 
and/or skills core competencies.
	 1-10. 	List and define five types of information sys-
tems used in organizations.
	 1-11. 	Discuss the issues surrounding information 
privacy, and how you can protect yourself.
	 1-12. 	Following the guidelines of the Computer 
Ethics Institute, what behaviors are consid-
ered unethical computer use?
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 1-13. 	Information systems today are ______________.
A.	slower than in the past
B.	ubiquitous
C.	utilized by only a few select individuals
D.	stable and should not change
	 1-14. 	Whereas data are raw unformatted symbols or lists of 
words or numbers, information is ______________.
A.	data that have been organized in a form that is 
useful
B.	accumulated knowledge
C.	what you enter into your computer
D.	what your computer prints out for you
	 1-15. 	Information systems were described in this chapter as 
______________.
A.	any complicated technology that requires expert use
B.	the combination of people and information technol-
ogy that create, collect, process, store, and distrib-
ute useful data
C.	any technology (mechanical or electronic) used 
to supplement, extend, or replace human, manual 
labor
D.	any technology used to leverage human capital
	 1-16. 	Other terms that can be used to represent the knowl-
edge society include ______________.
A.	the new economy
B.	the network era
C.	the digital world
D.	all of the above
	 1-17. 	Which of the following was not discussed as a com-
mon type, or category, of information system used in 
organizations?
A.	transaction processing
B.	decision support
C.	enterprise resource planning
D.	web graphics
	 1-18. 	What is meant by BYOD?
A.	the increased focus of hardware companies on the 
mass market
B.	the phenomenon that devices are becoming increas-
ingly playful
C.	the use of personal devices and applications for 
work-related purposes
D.	the increase of technology in people’s households
	 1-19. 	A website asking you for permission to send you a 
weekly newsletter is an example of ______________.
A.	opt in
B.	permissions
C.	opt out
D.	data privacy
	 1-20. 	Which of the following is not considered an intellec-
tual property violation?
A.	giving software licensed to your school or work-
place to friends or family members
B.	downloading pirated movies or music
C.	making copies of music for your friends
D.	all of the above are considered intellectual property 
violations
	 1-21. 	Being ______________, or knowing how to use the 
computer as a device to gather, store, organize, and 
process information, can open up myriad sources of 
information.
A.	technology literate
B.	digitally divided
C.	computer literate
D.	computer illiterate
Answers are on page 71.


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    69
Problems and Exercises
	 1-22. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Information
ii.	 Internet of Things
iii.	 Information system
iv.	 Information privacy
v.	 Computer fluency
vi.	 Globalization
vii.	 Outsourcing
viii.	 Digital divide
ix.	 Intellectual property
x.	 Computer ethics
a.	 The issues and standards of conduct as they pertain 
to the use of information systems
b.	 Data that have been formatted in a way that is 
useful
c.	 The integration of economies around the world, 
enabled by innovation and technological progress
d.	 The ability to independently learn new technologies 
as they emerge and assess their impact on one’s 
work and life
e.	 A network of a broad range of physical objects that 
can automatically share data over the Internet
f.	 The combination of people and information tech-
nology that create, collect, process, store, and dis-
tribute useful data
g.	 The moving of routine jobs and/or tasks to people 
in another firm to reduce costs
h.	 An area concerned with what information an indi-
vidual should have to reveal to others through the 
course of employment or through other transac-
tions, such as online shopping
i.	 The gap between those individuals in our society 
who are computer literate and have access to infor-
mation resources, such as the Internet, and those 
who do not
j.	 Creations of the mind that have commercial value
	 1-23. 	Explore the website of your university. How many 
distinct information systems can you identify? What 
is the purpose of each system? Classify them accord-
ing to the types of systems listed in the chapter. Do the 
systems fit neatly into the types listed?
	1-24. 	Interview an IS instructor and an IS practitioner to 
find out why these individuals got into this field. 
What are the differences between their roles and 
responsibilities? 
	 1-25. 	Conduct a search on the web for five different IS jobs. 
What are the benefits of each job? What are the draw-
backs? Would you choose any of these jobs for your 
career? Why or why not?
	 1-26. 	Research the web for Internet-enabled household 
appliances. What are potential privacy implications of 
using those devices? What could malicious intruders 
learn about you if they were able to spy on your device 
usage?
	 1-27. 	Interview an IS manager about BYOD policies at their 
organization. Does the organization allow employees 
to use their own devices? Why or why not?
	 1-28. 	In how far have social networks influenced the way 
you work and communicate? Overall, have the changes 
been positive or negative? Have you felt compelled to 
change your online behavior?
	 1-29. 	As a small group, brainstorm what different types 
of data make up “Big Data” for a company like 
Amazon.com. What data are easiest/hardest to ana-
lyze? What data are least/most important? Justify your 
answers.
	 1-30. 	Search the web for information about you (searching 
by name, city, address, your university, and so on). 
What types of information are you able to find out? 
Did you come across any information that you would 
rather not have on the web?
	 1-31. 	Global outsourcing appears to be here to stay. Search 
the web for providers of call center outsourcing. What 
are the companies’ value propositions? What potential 
drawbacks of call center outsourcing do you see?
	 1-32. 	Search the web for recent cases of online privacy 
breaches. What could the victims have done to better 
protect their privacy?
	 1-33. 	Find your school’s guidelines for ethical computer use 
and answer the following questions: Under which cir-
cumstances would you be tempted to violate the guide-
lines? What are the potential consequences of violating 
the guidelines? 

70    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application:  
Ticket Sales at Campus Travel
	 1-34. 	The local travel center, Campus Travel, has been losing 
sales. The presence of online ticketing websites, such 
as Travelocity.com and Expedia.com, has lured many 
students away. However, given the complexity of mak-
ing international travel arrangements, Campus Travel 
could have a thriving and profitable business if it con-
centrated its efforts in this area. You have been asked 
by the director of sales and marketing to help with ana-
lyzing prior sales data in order to design better market-
ing strategies. Looking at these data, you realize that it 
is nearly impossible to perform a detailed analysis of 
ticket sales given that the data are not summarized or 
organized in a useful way to inform business decision 
making. The spreadsheet TicketSales.csv contains the 
ticket sales data for a 3-month period. Your director 
has asked you for the following information regarding 
ticket sales. Modify the TicketSales.csv spreadsheet to 
provide the following information for your director:
■
■The total number of tickets sold.
a.	 Select the data from the “tickets sold” column.
b.	 Then select the “autosum” function.
■
■The largest amount of tickets sold by a certain 
salesperson to any one location.
a.	 Select the appropriate cell.
b.	 Use the “MAX” function to calculate each sales-
person’s highest ticket total in one transaction.
■
■The least amount of tickets sold by a certain sales-
person to any one location.
a.	 Select the appropriate cells.
b.	 Use the “MIN” function to calculate the “least 
tickets sold.”
■
■The average number of tickets sold.
a.	 Select the cells.
b.	 Use the “AVERAGE” function to calculate the 
“average number of tickets sold” using the same 
data you had selected in the previous steps.
Database Application: Tracking Frequent-Flier 
Miles at the Campus Travel Agency
	 1-35. 	The director of sales and marketing at the travel 
agency would like to increase the efficiency of han-
dling customers who have frequent-flier accounts. 
Often, frequent fliers have regular travel routes and 
a preferred seating area or meal category. In previ-
ous years, the data have been manually entered into a 
three-ring binder. In order to handle the frequent fliers’ 
requests more efficiently, your director has asked you 
to build an Access database containing the traveler’s 
name (first and last name), address, phone number, 
frequent-flier number, frequent-flier airline, meal cat-
egory, and preferred seating area.
	
	 To do this, you will need to do the following:
■
■Create an empty database named “Frequent Flier.”
■
■Import the data contained in the file FrequentFliers.
txt. Use “Text File” under “Import” in the “External 
Data” tab. Hint: Use tab delimiters when importing 
the data; note that the first row contains field 
names.
	
	 After importing the data, create a report displaying the 
names and addresses of all frequent fliers by doing the 
following:
■
■Select “Report Wizard” under “Report” in the 
“Create” tab.
■
■Include the fields “first name,” “last name,” and 
“address” in the report.
■
■Save the report as “Frequent Fliers.”
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats:  
Worldwide Internet Usage
In March 2016, there were more than 3.3 billion people world-
wide who had access to the Internet at home (i.e., Internet 
users). Since its inception, the number of users has grown tre-
mendously, from only about 14 million users in 1993 to 1 bil-
lion users in 2005, 2 billion users in 2010, and 3 billion users in 
2014. Having grown exponentially in the early years, the 
growth in user numbers has slowed to less than 10 percent per 
year, after worldwide Internet penetration surpassed 35 per-
cent. In 2016, countries such as the United Kingdom, Japan, 
and the United States had the highest Internet penetration. 
However, other countries are catching up. While China had an 
Internet penetration of 52 percent and India had an Internet 
penetration of only 35 percent, they had the largest number of 
users; further, both countries having much room to grow, both 
in terms of Internet penetration and in terms of numbers 
(Table 1.6).


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    71
Questions and Exercises
	 1-36. 	Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics.
	 1-37. 	As a team, interpret these numbers. What is striking/
important about these statistics?
	 1-38. 	As a team, discuss how these numbers will look like in 
5 years and 10 years. What will the changes mean for 
globalization? What issues/opportunities do you see 
arising?
TABLE 1.6  ­Countries with Largest Number of Internet Users
Country
Population
Internet Access
% Population (penetration)
China
  1.4 billion
721 million
52
India
  1.3 billion
462 million
35
United States
324 million
287 million
89
Brazil
210 million
139 million
66
Japan
126 million
115 million
91
Russia
143 million
102 million
71
Nigeria
186 million
86 million
46
Germany
  80 million
71 million
88
UK
  65 million
60 million
93
Mexico
129 million
58 million
45
	 1-39. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, create a 
graph/figure most effectively visualizing the statistics/
changes you consider most important.
Based on:
Anonymous. (n.d.). Internet users. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://
www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 1-13.	  B, p. 32
	 1-14.	  A, p. 46
	 1-15.	  B, p. 44
	 1-16.	  D, p. 34
	 1-17.	  D, p. 54
	 1-18.	  C, p. 40
	 1-19.	  A, p. 63
	 1-20.	  D, p. 64
	 1-21.	  C, p. 43

72    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
Apple is the largest, most profitable technol-
ogy company in the world. Each year, Apple 
sells hundreds of millions of its popular 
iMacs, MacBooks, iPods, iPads, and 
iPhones. Apple’s products—and the technol-
ogy that supports them—have influenced the 
way people behave and interact. Think how 
waiting in line at the grocery store or waiting 
for the next train is more productive, or at 
least no longer tedious, when you get to 
check your inbox or watch a video on You-
Tube. Now remember how insecure you felt 
the last time you left your smartphone sitting 
on your living room sofa. Whichever way 
you look at it, Apple has enjoyed a long 
streak of successful product launches, with 
people camping out for days to get their 
hands on the latest Apple gadgets.
Over the course of its history, Apple had 
its ups and downs, with Steve Wozniak and 
Steve Jobs, the company’s founders, leaving 
Apple in the 1980s. After Steve Jobs’s return 
to Apple in 1997, Apple has had an impres-
sive run of successful products, including the 
iMac, the PowerBook, the iPod, and iTunes. 
Building on its success with the iPod, Apple 
introduced the iPhone in 2007 and, shortly 
thereafter, the “App Store,” revolutionizing 
the way we purchase and use applications on 
mobile devices. The era of iPhones contin-
ued as successive updates to the iPhone line 
were introduced year after year, each garner-
ing wider adoption than the last. In 2010, 
Apple introduced the revolutionary iPad, 
touted as a “third-category” device between 
smartphones and laptop personal computers 
(PCs). Clearly, innovations fueled by Apple 
have changed the lives of many people all 
over the world.
However, Apple has also seen a number 
of high-profile product failures. In January 
2008, to help celebrate 24 years of the Mac, 
first introduced to consumers in 1984, Wired 
magazine recalled some of Apple’s more 
infamous failures. One of Apple’s most visi-
ble flops was the Newton, actually the name 
of a newly conceived operating system that 
stuck to the product as a whole. The Newton, 
which Apple promised would “reinvent per-
sonal computing,” fell far short of its hype 
when it was introduced in 1993 as a not-so-
revolutionary personal digital assistant 
(PDA). The Newton was on the market for 
6 years—a relatively long time for an unsuc-
cessful product—but one of Steve Jobs’s 
first acts when he returned to Apple’s helm 
in 1997 was to cut the Newton Systems 
Group. Other Apple product failures include: 
the Pippin (1993), a gaming device that 
couldn’t compete with Nintendo’s 64 or 
Sony’s PlayStation; the Macintosh television 
(1993), which only sold 10,000 units; the 
PowerMac G4 Cube (2000), an 8" × 8" × 8" 
designer machine that was widely regarded 
as overpriced; the puck mouse included with 
the iMac G3 (1998), a too-small, awkward-
to-control device that users often mistakenly 
used upside down; and the Lisa (1983), 
whose whopping US$9,995 price tag (more 
than US$20,000 in current dollars) made it 
too expensive for most businesses.
In recent years, Apple has introduced a 
large variety of new products, all with 
remarkable success. Innovative products that 
consumers stand in line to get include the 
MacBook Air, as well as a line of iPods, 
iPhones, and iPads. After the death of Steve 
Jobs in 2011, time will tell if Apple’s current 
success streak continues or if, at some point, 
Apple will yet again introduce a product that 
is “too innovative” for the consumers. Intro-
duced in 2015, the Apple Watch may be one 
such product, with many questioning the 
usefulness of this wearable technology 
turned fashion statement.
With its increasing focus on personal 
devices, Apple has become not only a hard-
ware vendor but also a keeper of people’s 
(often private) information. As it is being 
stored in the cloud, personal information can 
easily be (ab)used to predict future behavior, 
potential trends, music tastes, and more. 
Connected as we may be to the rest of the 
world, salient concerns are warranted regard-
ing issues of privacy and information prop-
erty—that is, who has access to what and 
how private information is being used. Cer-
tainly, there are potential risks associated 
with being an active participant in the digital 
world, so the next time you purchase an app, 
think about how much you reveal about 
yourself with the swipe of your finger.
CASE 1 
Apple
Questions
	 1-40. 	 Given the pace at which technology is converging (e.g., 
phones, music players, cameras, and so on), what do you 
think will be Apple’s next revolutionary innovation?
	 1-41. 	 How have Apple’s products influenced the way we work and 
socialize?
	 1-42. 	 What are the ethical concerns associated with storing and 
analyzing user data?
Based on:
Apple Inc. (2014, May 2). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 21, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Apple_Inc.&oldid=711059018
Gardiner, B. (2008, January 24). Learning from failure: Apple’s most notorious 
flops. Wired. Retrieved May 12, 2014, from http://archive.wired.com/gadgets/
mac/multimedia/2008/01/gallery_apple_flops


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    73
Healthcare information systems are systems 
that facilitate the collection and processing 
of data related to healthcare activities. His-
torically, such systems were largely focused 
on the operational needs of healthcare insti-
tutions like hospitals and doctor’s offices. 
Mirroring the deployment of information 
systems in other businesses, systems were 
developed for accounting, billing, insurance 
claim processing, human resources, and 
other business functions. In recent years, 
however, there has been a push to bring the 
benefits of information technology to the 
provision of care itself. Systems are being 
developed to better generate and track data 
that are useful to improving health out-
comes. A key part of this process is the elec-
tronic health record (EHR). An EHR is a 
comprehensive record that includes your 
medical and immunization history, labora-
tory results, and other data such as medical 
imagery.
When properly maintained and handled, 
EHRs can have many benefits. Up-to-date, 
complete, and accurate data makes provid-
ers more knowledgeable and better able to 
work with you to make informed decisions 
about your health. EHRs can enhance 
patient safety and provide safer care in sev-
eral ways. EHRs can offer a more complete 
picture of your health than paper records. 
Doctors can evaluate your current condition 
in the proper context of your health history 
and other treatments you are receiving. 
EHRs can allow those providing care in an 
emergency faster access to information they 
need about your history, allergies, and pre-
scriptions. EHR systems can flag potential 
conflicts in medication and help pharmacists 
verify dosages and avoid dispensing the 
wrong medications. EHRs can also help 
avoid the need to repeat risky tests and pro-
cedures by tracking them better and ensur-
ing the results are available when and where 
they are needed.
In addition to benefits to individuals, 
EHRs can lead to better collective health 
information. Safety hazards, disease out-
breaks, high pollution levels, and other risks 
can be identified more rapidly by analyzing 
health data in aggregate. Government ser-
vices and research dollars can be allocated 
more efficiently focusing on actual commu-
nity needs. Healthcare processes and proce-
dures can be improved by utilizing modern 
data analysis techniques on aggregate health 
data as well. Overall, there is great potential 
to both improve health outcomes and reduce 
healthcare delivery costs by utilizing EHR 
systems.
However, there are also downsides and 
risks associated with EHR systems. Data pri-
vacy and security become even more impor-
tant when the data in question have to do 
with such potentially sensitive topics as your 
health. Records must be properly protected 
from the same sorts of cyberthreats that other 
businesses face. Hackers and other malicious 
actors may seek to steal personal health data 
in order to make illicit use of it. In addition, 
now that they are more readily accessible, 
there is the concern that health data could be 
used for improper or undesired purposes. 
Most people feel that health history should 
not be used in the making of hiring decisions 
in general, but there may be acceptable 
exceptions such as public safety workers or 
airline pilots. The role of health history in the 
availability and coverage of insurance is also 
a highly controversial topic.
It has also proven exceptionally difficult 
to implement EHR systems. Many hospitals 
and medical facilities rely heavily on paper 
forms and records. The deployment of EHR 
systems requires more than simply digitizing 
the existing forms; in many cases, entire 
business processes must be redesigned and 
new information systems developed. There 
are great opportunities when it comes to 
healthcare information systems, and there 
are many great challenges. The benefits for 
society from improved health and reduced 
costs must be offset against the potential 
risks of increasing the amount of our per-
sonal and private data available online. The 
increasing availability of new sources of 
health data such as activity trackers and 
other Internet of Things devices will also 
generate a new set of benefits and risks. 
Activity trackers can provide data ranging 
from the number of steps you take each day 
to vital statistics like heart rate and blood 
glucose levels. Researchers are even using 
smartphones to collect data for health studies 
and clinical trials. Such technologies as 
Apple’s Research Kit, Care Kit, and Health 
Kit allow millions of people to participate in 
medical research studies quickly and easily. 
This type of data collection promises to 
transform large-scale health research. In 
summary, IS professionals have a great 
opportunity to assist in the transition to IT-
based health systems and in helping to bal-
ance the associated risks and rewards.
CASE 2 
Healthcare IS
Questions
	 1-43. 	 Have you encountered EHRs? How have they improved or 
detracted from your healthcare experience?
	 1-44. 	 How should patient privacy be balanced against social 
needs? For example, should pilots be required to disclose 
their mental health information to their employers?
	 1-45. 	 What opportunities and challenges lay ahead as health 
records become increasingly integrated into our mobile 
devices and the Internet of Things?
Based on:
Apple. (2016). Empowering medical researchers, doctors, and now you.  
Apple.com. Retrieved April 24, 2016, from http://www.apple.com/researchkit
HeathIT.gov. (2016). Retrieved April 24, 2016, from https://www.healthit.gov
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 1-46. 	 How do the five megatrends influence how people work and interact?
	 1-47. 	 Describe and contrast the economic, cultural, and technological changes occurring in the digital world.

74    CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World 
References
Ackoff, R. L. (1989). From data to wisdom. Journal of Applied Sys-
tems Analysis, 16, 3–9.
American Fact Finder. (2014). Median earnings in the past 
12 months. 2010–2014 American Community Survey 5-year 
estimates (Table S2002). United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 
March 14, 2016, from http://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/
en/ACS/14_5YR/S2002
Anonymous. (2016, March). Information technology manager salary. 
Salary.com. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www1.salary 
.com/Information-Technology-Manager-salary.html
Battelle, J. (2010, March 5). The database of intentions is far larger 
than I thought. Searchblog. Retrieved June 20, 2016, from http://
battellemedia.com/archives/2010/03/the_database_of_intentions_
is_far_larger_than_i_thought.php
Berdan, M. S. (2014, January 23). Preparing our children for the 
global economy. HuffPost Education. Retrieved March 21, 
2016, from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/marshall-s-berdan/
preparing-our-children-for-the-global-economy_b_4652835.html
Brandel, M. (2013, September 23). 8 hot IT skills for 2014. 
Computerworld. Retrieved August 8, 2016, from http://www 
.computerworld.com/s/article/9242548/8_hot_IT_skills_for_2014
Broom, J. (2016). 7 hot IT skills for 2016. Technojobs.co.uk. 
Retrieved March 15, 2016, from https://www.technojobs.co.uk/
info/career-advice/7-hot-it-skills-for-2016.phtml
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2016, March 30). Occupational employ-
ment and wages, May 2015: Computer and information systems 
managers. BLS.gov. Retrieved June 20, 2016, from http://www 
.bls.gov/oes/current/oes113021.htm
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2015, December 17). Occupational 
outlook handbook, 2016-17 edition, computer and information 
systems managers. BLS.gov. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from 
http://www.bls.gov/ooh/management/computer-and-information-
systems-managers.htm
De La Mora, R. (2014, March 26). Internet of Things: More 
than a trend, a real business opportunity. Cisco Blogs. 
Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://blogs.cisco.com/ioe/
internet-of-things-more-than-a-trend-a-real-business-opportunity
Daugherty, P. Banerjee, P., Negm, W. & Alter, A.E. (2015). Driving 
unconventional growth through the Industrial Internet of Things. 
Accenture. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://www.accenture 
.com/us-en/_acnmedia/Accenture/next-gen/reassembling-industry/
pdf/Accenture-Driving-Unconventional-Growth-through-IIoT.pdf
Drucker, P. (1959). Landmarks of tomorrow. New York: Harper.
Epps, S. R., Gownder, J. P., Golvin, C. S., Bodine, K., & Corbett, 
A. E. (2011, May 17). What the post-PC era really means. 
Cambridge, MA: Forrester Research.
European Commission (n.d.). Factsheet on the “Right to Be For-
gotten” ruling (C-131/12). Retrieved March 21, 2016, from 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/files/factsheets/
factsheet_data_protection_en.pdf
FedEx (2016). Corporate fact sheet. Fedex.com. Retrieved 
March 21, 2016, from http://about.van.fedex.com/our-story/
company-structure/corporate-fact-sheet
Florentine, S. (2015, December 10). 10 hot IT job skills for 2016. 
CIO.com. Retrieved March 15, 2016, from http://www.cio.com/
article/3014161/careers-staffing/10-hot-it-job-skills-for-2016.html
Florentine, S. (2016, April 18). IT career roadmap: How to become 
a data scientist. CIO.com. Retrieved June 20, 2016, from http://
www.cio.com/article/3057574/careers-staffing/it-career-
roadmap-data-scientist.html
Galbraith, J. K. (1987). The affluent society. New York: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Han, B. C. (2016, June 16). Die Totalausbeutung des Menschen. 
SZ.de. Retrieved June 21, 2016, from http://www.sueddeutsche 
.de/politik/hyperkapitalismus-und-digitalisierung-die-
totalausbeutung-des-menschen-1.3035040
Hinchcliffe, D. (2011, October 2). The “big five” IT trends of the 
next half decade: Mobile, social, cloud, consumerization, and 
big data. ZDNet. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www 
.zdnet.com/blog/hinchcliffe/the-big-five-it-trends-of-the-next-half-
decade-mobile-social-cloud-consumerization-and-big-data/1811
Hofmann, P. (2011, October 15). The big five IT megatrends. Slide-
share. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www.slideshare.net/
paulhofmann/the-big-five-it-mega-trends
IDC. (2014, April). The digital universe of opportunities: Rich data 
and the increasing value of the Internet of things. IDC. Retrieved 
March 21, 2016, from http://www.emc.com/leadership/digital-
universe/2014iview/executive-summary.htm
International Monetary Fund. (2002). Globalization: Threat or oppor-
tunity? Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www.imf.org/
external/np/exr/ib/2000/041200to.htm
Kanellos, M. (2016, March 3). 152,000 smart devices every minute 
in 2025: IDC outlines the future of smart things. Forbes.com. 
Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/mic
haelkanellos/2016/03/03/152000-smart-devices-every-minute-in-
2025-idc-outlines-the-future-of-smart-things
King, J. (2003, September 15). IT’s global itinerary: Offshore out-
sourcing is inevitable. Computerworld. Retrieved March 21, 
2016, from http://www.computerworld.com/article/2572756/
it-outsourcing/it-s-global-itinerary--offshore-outsourcing-is-
inevitable.html
King, J. (2011, June 6). Extreme automation: FedEx Ground 
hubs speed deliveries. Computerworld. Retrieved March 21, 
2016, from http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/356328/
Extreme_automation--FedEx_Ground_hubs_speed_deliveries
Kirschner, B. (2014, February 13). Who art thou, chief digital 
officer? Entrepreneur.com. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from 
http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/231484
Leung, L. (2009). 10 hot skills for 2009. Global Knowledge. 
Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www.globalknowledge 
.com/training/generic.asp?pageid=2321
Mandvivalla, M., Harold, C., & Yastremsky, D. (2016). Information 
systems job index 2015. AIS & Temple Fox School. Retrieved 
August 10, 2016, from https://ibit.temple.edu/isjobindex2015/
files/dlm_uploads/2016/08/ISJobIndex.pdf
Mason, R. O. (1986). Four ethical issues of the information age. MIS 
Quarterly, 10(1), 5–12.
Michaeli, R. (2009). Competitive intelligence: Competitive advantage 
through analysis of competition, markets and technologies. New 
York: Springer.
NACE. (2016, March 10). Management information systems pro-
jected as top-paid class of 2016 business major. Naceweb 
.org. Retrieved March 15, 2016, from http://www.naceweb.org/
about-us/press/2016/management-information-systems-top-paid-
business-major.aspx
Nielsen. (2016, April 21). Daily dose: Smartphones have become a 
staple of the U.S. media diet. Nielsen.com. Retrieved August 8, 
2016, form http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2016/
daily-dose-smartphones-have-become-a-staple-of-the-us-media-
diet.html


CHAPTER 1  •  Managing in the Digital World    75
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage: Creating and sustain-
ing superior performance. New York: Free Press.
Porter, M. E., & Millar, V. (1985). How information gives you com-
petitive advantage. Harvard Business Review, 63(4), 149–161.
Pratt, Mary K. (2015, December 7). 10 hottest tech skills for 2016. 
Computerworld.com. Retrieved March 15, 2016, from http://
www.computerworld.com/article/3012033/it-skills-training/10-
hottest-tech-skills-for-2016.html
PWC. (2016). Megatrends. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://
www.pwc.co.uk/issues/megatrends.html
Rosen, E. (2011, January 11). Every worker is a knowledge 
worker. BusinessWeek. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from 
http://www.businessweek.com/managing/content/jan2011/
ca20110110_985915.htm
Russ, R. (2014, July 24). Today’s industrial revolution means 
you won’t sell products, you will sell services. The Wall Street 
Journal. Retrieved March 15, 2016, from http://blogs.wsj.com/
cio/2014/07/24/todays-industrial-revolution-means-you-wont-sell-
products-you-will-sell-services
Sally, R. (2014, August 14). Six megatrends that will shape the 
future of cities. World Economic Forum. Retrieved June 
20, 2016, from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2014/08/
six-megatrends-will-shape-future-cities
Savitz, E. (2012, February 20). Consumerization of IT: Get-
ting beyond the myths. Forbes. Retrieved March 21, 2016, 
from http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2012/02/20/
consumerization-of-it-getting-beyond-the-myths
Schreiber, U. (2016). Megatrends that will shape our future. EY.com. 
Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://www.ey.com/GL/en/Issues/
Business-environment/ey-megatrends-that-will-shape-our-future
Sipior, J. C., & Ward, B. T. (1995). The ethical and legal quandary of 
e-mail privacy. Communications of the ACM, 38(12), 48–54.
Tapper, D. (2015, April). Worldwide and U.S. IS outsourcing ser-
vices 2015-2019 forecast. IDC. Retrieved March 22, 2016, from 
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=255352
Todd, P., McKeen, J., & Gallupe, R. (1995). The evolution of IS job 
skills: A content analysis of IS jobs. MIS Quarterly, 19(1), 1–27.
TrendMicro. (2011). Consumerization of IT. Retrieved March 21, 
2016, from http://www.trendmicro.com/cloud-content/us/pdfs/
business/reports/rpt_consumerization-of-it.pdf
Vandervoorn, R. (2014, May 13). The state of the tablet market. Tab-
times.com. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from http://tabtimes.com/
resources/the-state-of-the-tablet-market
Vellante, D. (2011, November 14). When IT consumers become 
technology providers. Cliff Davies. Retrieved August 8, 
2016, from http://cliffdavies.com/blog/cloudcomputing/
when-it-consumers-become-technology-providers
Weisband, S. P., & Reinig, B. A. (1995, December). Managing user 
perceptions of e-mail privacy. Communications of the ACM, 
38(12), 40–47.
Woods, V. (2016, October 6). Gartner identifies the top 10 strategic 
technology trends for 2016. Gartner. Retrieved March 21, 2016, 
from http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3143521
World Commission on Environment and Development (Ed.). (1987). 
Our common future. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

76
76
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Startups and New 
Business Models
I
n addition to enabling new products and services, 
rapid advances in the capabilities of information tech-
nology enable entirely new business models. Some are 
refinements to existing approaches, others can be highly 
disruptive. Just because technology enables an innova-
tive business model, however, does not mean that it can 
be easily or successfully implemented.
Examples of technology-enabled business models 
include operating a platform, cutting out the middle-
man, selling subscriptions, and providing on-demand 
services. Companies building a platform enable others—
both other businesses and users—to co-create value. In 
this business model, companies like Airbnb use technol-
ogy to facilitate information gathering, identify willing 
participants, and simplify transactions. Cutting out the 
middleman (or disintermediation) means bypassing tra-
ditional retail channels and interacting directly with cus-
tomers (Figure 2.1). Using this business model, eyeglass 
vendor Warby Parker and mattress seller Casper use 
technology to disrupt traditional distribution channels 
and directly connect with buyers. Subscription-based 
services are facilitated by technology through the 
removal of friction from the transaction—the initial 
sign-up is greatly simplified through online forms, 
parameters of the subscription can easily be adjusted, 
Gaining Competitive 
Advantage Through 
Information Systems
2
This chapter examines how organizations can use infor-
mation systems (IS) strategically, enabling them to gain or 
sustain competitive advantage over their rivals. As 
described in Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World,” 
a firm has competitive advantage over rival firms when it 
can do something better, faster, more economically, or 
uniquely. In this chapter, we begin by examining the role 
of information systems at different levels of the organiza-
tion. We then examine how information systems support 
various business models and introduce innovative business 
models enabled by information systems. Finally, we talk 
about the continual need to find innovative ways to suc-
ceed with and through information systems.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab 
.com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

77
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
2.	How have information systems enabled new, inter-
esting business models like that of Uber, Spotify, and 
Airbnb?
3.	How can organizations identify innovative tech-
nologies that form the basis for innovative business 
models?
Based on:
Kessler, S. (2016, March 29). Why a new generation of on-demand busi-
nesses rejected the Uber model. Fast Company. Retrieved May 29, 2016, 
from http://www.fastcompany.com/3058299/why-a-new-generation-of-
on-demand-businesses-rejected-the-uber-model
Tomaro, N. (2015, August 6). 9 proven business models to consider for 
your startup. Huffington Post. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/nina-tomaro/9-proven-business-models-
_b_7949932.html
and payment is made easy through digital transactions. 
All this adds up to a great opportunity to gain sustained 
revenue for startups and hassle-free experiences for cus-
tomers. Netflix, Spotify, and Dollar Shave Club are exam-
ples of businesses that have recently been very successful 
with the subscription model. Lastly, on-demand services 
have grown tremendously. Mobile and location-based 
technologies have allowed substantial new opportuni-
ties on both the supply and demand side to enable on-
demand services. The most widely cited example is the 
car-hailing service Uber, with countless others who are 
trying to replicate Uber’s success.
A technology-enabled business model is not a guar-
antee of success. Many businesses trying to replicate 
Uber’s success in the on-demand arena have struggled, 
as not all goods and services are well suited to this 
approach. There are certain aspects of transportation 
and other services that make them well suited for on-
demand delivery. In contrast, markets where there are 
high and varied standards for customer satisfaction such 
as house cleaning and dining, with an abundance of 
ready substitutes such as local cleaners and restaurants, 
may face particular challenges. However, with the rise in 
innovative business models, it might be only a matter of 
time until a startup will come up with a suitable busi-
ness model.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	What is the role of information systems and strategy 
in identifying a business model?
1.	 Discuss how information systems can be used for automation, organizational 
learning, and strategic advantage.
2.	 Describe how information systems support business models used by companies 
operating in the digital world.
3.	 Explain why and how companies are continually looking for innovative ways to use 
information systems for competitive advantage.
FIGURE 2.1
Technology enables new business models, such as cutting out the 
middleman and bypassing traditional retail channels to interact 
directly with customers.

78    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Enabling Organizational Strategy through 
Information Systems
In Chapter 1, we introduced the notion that information systems can have strategic value to an 
organization. Because organizations are composed of different levels and functions, a broad 
range of information is needed to support an organization’s business processes. Business pro-
cesses are the activities organizations perform in order to reach their business goals, including 
core activities that transform inputs and produce outputs, and supporting activities that enable 
the core activities to take place. As a review, we briefly describe how organizations are gener-
ally structured as well as the common functional areas of most modern organizations. Under-
standing how organizations are structured helps to illustrate how different types of information 
systems can support various business processes and provide different levels of value to the 
organization.
Organizational Decision-Making Levels
Every organization is composed of different decision-making levels, as illustrated in Figure 2.2. 
Each level of an organization has different responsibilities and, therefore, different informational 
needs.
OPERATIONAL LEVEL.  At the operational level of a firm, the routine, day-to-day business 
processes and interactions with customers occur. Information systems at this level are designed 
to automate repetitive activities, such as processing sales transactions, and to improve the 
efficiency of business processes at the customer interface. A transaction refers to anything that 
occurs as part of a firm’s daily business of which it must keep a record. Operational planning 
typically has a time frame of a few hours or days, and the managers at the operational level, such 
as foremen or supervisors, make day-to-day decisions that are highly structured and recurring. 
Structured decisions are those in which the procedures to follow for a given situation can 
be specified in advance. Because structured decisions are relatively straightforward, they can be 
programmed directly into operational information systems so that they can be made with little 
or no human intervention. For example, an inventory management system for a shoe store in the 
mall could keep track of inventory and issue an order for additional inventory when levels drop 
below a specified level. Operational managers within the store would simply need to confirm 
with the inventory management system that the order for additional shoes was needed. At the 
operational level, information systems are typically used to increase efficiency (i.e., the extent 
to which goals are accomplished faster, at lower cost, or with relatively little time and effort) 
by optimizing processes and better understanding the underlying causes of any performance 
problems. Using information systems to optimize processes at the operational level can offer 
quick returns on the IS investment, as activities at this level are clearly delineated and well-
focused. Figure 2.3 summarizes the general characteristics of the operational level.
Executive
Level
Managerial Level
Operational Level
FIGURE 2.2
Organizations are composed of 
different decision-making levels.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    79
MANAGERIAL/TACTICAL LEVEL.  At the managerial level (or tactical level) of the organization, 
functional managers (e.g., marketing managers, finance managers, manufacturing managers, 
human resource managers) focus on monitoring and controlling operational-level activities and 
providing information to higher levels of the organization (Figure 2.4). Managers at this level, 
referred to as midlevel managers, focus on effectively utilizing and deploying organizational 
resources to increase effectiveness (i.e., the extent to which goals or tasks are accomplished 
well) to achieve the strategic objectives of the organization. Midlevel managers typically focus 
on problems within a specific business function, such as marketing or finance. Here, the scope of 
the decision usually is contained within the business function, is moderately complex, and has a 
time horizon of a few days to a few months (also referred to as tactical planning). For example, 
a marketing manager at Nike may decide how to allocate the advertising budget for the next 
business quarter or some other fixed time period.
Managerial-level decision making is not nearly as structured or routine as operational-level 
decision making. Managerial-level decision making is referred to as semistructured decision 
making because solutions and problems are not clear-cut and often require judgment and exper-
tise. For semistructured decisions, some procedures to follow for a given situation can be speci-
fied in advance, but not to the extent where a specific recommendation can be made. For 
example, a business intelligence system could provide a production manager at Nike with per-
formance analytics and forecasts about sales for multiple product lines, inventory levels, and 
overall production capacity. The metrics deemed most critical to assessing progress toward a 
Executive
Level
Managerial Level
Operational Level
Who: 
Foremen and Supervisors
What: Automate Routine and
 
Repetitive Activities and
 
Events
Why: 
Improve Organizational
 
Eﬃciency
FIGURE 2.3
Information systems at 
the operational level of an 
organization help to improve 
efficiency by automating routine 
and repetitive activities.
Who: Midlevel Managers and
 
Functional Managers
What: Automate the Monitoring 
 
and Controlling of
 
Operational Activities
Why: Improve Organizational
 
Eﬀectiveness
Executive
Level
Managerial Level
Operational Level
FIGURE 2.4
Information systems at 
the managerial level of an 
organization help to improve 
effectiveness by automating the 
monitoring and controlling of 
operational activities.

80    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
certain goal (referred to as key performance indicators [KPIs]) are displayed on digital dash-
boards (see Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics”). The 
manager could use this information to create multiple hypothetical production schedules. With 
these schedules, the manager could then perform predictive analyses to examine inventory levels 
and potential sales profitability, depending on the order in which manufacturing resources were 
used to produce each type of product.
EXECUTIVE/STRATEGIC LEVEL.  At the executive level (or strategic level) of the organization, 
managers focus on long-term strategic questions facing the organization, such as which 
products to produce, which countries to compete in, and what organizational strategy to follow 
(Figure 2.5). Managers at this level include the president and chief executive officer, chief 
information officer, vice presidents, and possibly the board of directors; they are referred to as 
“executives.” Executive-level decisions deal with complex problems with broad and long-term 
ramifications for the organization. Executive-level decisions are referred to as unstructured 
decisions because the problems are relatively complex and nonroutine. In addition, executives 
must consider the ramifications of their decisions in terms of the overall organization. For 
unstructured decisions, few or no procedures to follow for a given situation can be specified 
in advance. For example, top managers may decide to develop a new product or discontinue 
an existing one. Such a decision may have vast, long-term effects on the organization’s levels 
of employment and profitability. To assist executive-level decision making, information 
systems are used to obtain aggregate summaries of trends and projections of the future. At the 
executive level, information systems provide KPIs that are focused on balancing performance 
across the organization, such that, for example, product launches are staggered to smooth out 
the effects of spikes in demand on the supply chain. Other KPIs are used to benchmark the 
organization’s performance against its competitors. Likewise, information systems used for 
executive-level decisions need to take into account various types of unstructured data, such 
as data related to global economic factors, demographic changes, or changing customer tastes 
and preferences.
In summary, most organizations have three general decision-making levels: operational, 
managerial, and executive. Each level has unique activities and business processes, each requir-
ing different types of information. In other words, it is common that each decision-making level 
is supported by different types of information systems.
Organizational Functional Areas
In addition to different decision-making levels within an organization, there are also different 
functional areas. A functional area represents a discrete area of an organization that focuses on a 
specific set of activities. For example, people in the marketing function focus on the activities 
that promote the organization and its products in a way that attracts and retains customers; peo-
ple in the accounting and finance functions focus on managing and controlling capital assets and 
Executive
Level
Managerial Level
Who: Executive-Level Managers
What: Aggregate Summaries of
 
Past Organizational Data
 
and Projections of the Future
Why: 
Improve Organizational
 
Strategy and Planning
Operational Level
FIGURE 2.5
Information systems at the 
executive level of an organization 
help to improve strategy and 
planning by providing summaries 
of past data and projections of the 
future.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    81
financial resources of the organization. Table 2.1 lists various organizational functions and lists 
examples of the types of information systems that are commonly used. These functional area 
information systems are designed to support the unique business processes of specific func-
tional areas (Figure 2.6).
When deploying information systems across organizational levels and functions, there are 
three general ways the information system can provide value: to enable automating activities, to 
enable learning, and to enable the execution of organizational strategy (Figure 2.7). These three 
ways are not necessarily mutually exclusive, but we believe that each is progressively more use-
ful to the firm and thus adds more value to the business. This is examined next.
Information Systems for Automating: Doing Things Faster
Someone with an automating perspective thinks of technology as a way to help complete a task 
within an organization faster, more cheaply, and perhaps with greater accuracy and/or consis-
tency. Let us look at a typical example. A person with an automating mentality would take a loan 
application screening process and automate it by inputting the loan applications into a computer 
database so that those involved in decision making for the loans could process the applications 
faster, more easily, and with fewer errors. Such a system might also enable customers to com-
plete the loan application online. A transition from a manual to an automated loan application 
process might enable the organization to deploy employees more efficiently, leading to even 
more cost savings (Table 2.2). Likewise, advances in Internet of Things technologies can help 
automate business process in various sectors; for example, the Industrial Internet of Things can 
tremendously improve the performance of companies in the manufacturing sector. Information 
systems at the operational level of an organization often help in automating repetitive activities, 
Accounting
Information
Systems
Financial
Information
Systems
Human
Resource
Information
Systems
Marketing
Information
Systems
Operational
Information
Systems
Ratio Analysis
Portfolio Management
Personnel Forecasting
Advertising and Promotion Planning
Manufacturing Resource Planning
Payroll Processing
Cash Management
Employee Skill Inventory
Pricing and Sales Analysis
Manufacturing Resource Utilization
Order Processing
Financial Forecasting
Compensation Analysis
Sales Force Automation
Inventory Management
FIGURE 2.6
Business processes supported 
by various functional area 
information systems.
Business
Value
Added
Automating
Learning
Strategizing
FIGURE 2.7
The business value added from 
automating, learning, and 
strategizing with information 
systems.

82    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
TABLE 2.1   Organizational Functions and Representative Information Systems
Functional Area
Information System
Sample Applications
Accounting and finance
Systems used for managing, controlling, and audit-
ing the financial resources of the organization
■ Accounts payable
■ Expense accounts
■ Cash management
■ Payroll processing
Human resources
Systems used for managing, controlling, and audit-
ing the human resources of the organization
■ Recruiting and hiring
■ Education and training
■ Benefits management
■ Employee termination
■ Workforce planning
Marketing
Systems used for managing new product develop-
ment, distribution, pricing, promotional effective-
ness, and sales forecasting of the products and 
services offered by the organization
■ Market research and analysis
■ New product development
■ Promotion and advertising
■ Pricing and sales analysis
■ Product location analysis
Production and operations
Systems used for managing, controlling, and audit-
ing the production and operations resources of the 
organization
■ Inventory management
■ Cost and quality tracking
■ Materials and resource planning
■ Job costing
■ Resource utilization
TABLE 2.2   Activities Involved Under Three Different Loan Application Processes and the Average Time for 
Each Activity
Primary Activity
Manual Loan  
Process (Time)
Technology-Supported 
Process (Time)
Fully Automated  
Process (Time)
	 1.	 Complete and submit loan 
application
Customer takes the applica-
tion home, completes it, and 
returns it (1.5 days)
Customer takes the applica-
tion home, completes it, and 
returns it (1.5 days)
Customer fills out application 
from home via the web  
(15 minutes)
	 2.	 Check application for 
errors
Employee does this in batches 
(2.5 days)
Employee does this in 
batches (2.5 days)
Computer does this as it is 
being completed (1 second)
	 3.	 Input data from application 
into the information system
Applications are kept in paper 
form, although there is han-
dling time involved (1 hour)
Employee does this in 
batches (2.5 days)
Done as part of the online 
application process (no extra 
time needed)
	 4.	 Assess loan applications 
under $250,000 to deter-
mine whether to fund them
Employee does this completely 
by hand (15 days)
Employee does this with the 
help of the computer (1 hour)
Computer does this automati-
cally (1 second)
	 5.	 Committee decides on any 
loan over $250,000
(15 days)
(15 days)
(15 days)
	 6.	 Applicant notified
Employee generates letters 
manually in batches (1 week)
Employee generates letters 
with the help of a computer 
(1 day)
System notifies applicant via 
e-mail (1 second)
Total time
Anywhere from 25–40 days, 
depending on size of loan
Anywhere from 5–20 days, 
depending on size of loan
Anywhere from 15 minutes to 
15 days, depending on size of 
loan
Note: Many online loan application services can now give you instant “tentative” approval pending verification of data you report in your online application. 
Also, only some of the activities within the manual and technology-supported processes can occur in parallel.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    83
but they can also help to gather valuable data for higher decision-making levels within the 
organization.
Information Systems for Organizational Learning: Doing Things Better
We can also use information systems to learn and improve. By analyzing data created when 
automating a process, improved understanding about the underlying work processes can be 
developed. The learning mentality builds on the automating mentality because it recognizes that 
information systems can be used as a vehicle for organizational learning—the ability of an 
organization to use past behavior and data to improve its business processes—and for change as 
well as for automation.
To illustrate a learning mentality, let us think again about our loan processing example. 
Figure 2.8 shows how a computer-based loan processing system can track types of loan appli-
cations by date, month, or season. The manager can easily see the trends and plan for the 
timely staffing and training of personnel in the loan department. The manager can also more 
efficiently manage the funds used to fulfill loans. This computer-based loan processing sys-
tem, focusing on learning, is an example of an information system used at the managerial level 
of an organization.
A learning approach allows managers to track and learn about the types of applications filed 
by certain types of people at certain times of the year (e.g., more auto loan applications in the 
fall, mostly from men in their 20s and 30s), the patterns of the loan decisions made, or the subse-
quent performance of those loans. This new system creates data about the underlying business 
process that can be used to better monitor, control, and change that process. In other words, you 
learn from this information system about loan applications and approvals; as a result, you can do 
a better job at evaluating loan applications.
A combined automating and learning approach, in the long run, is more effective than an 
automating approach alone. If the underlying business process supported by technology is inher-
ently flawed, a learning use of the technology might help you detect problems with the process 
and change it. For instance, in our loan processing example, a learning use of technology may 
help us uncover a pattern among the accepted loans that enables us to distinguish between low- 
and high-performing loans over their lives and subsequently to change the criteria for loan 
acceptance.
If, however, the underlying business process is bad and you are using technology only for 
automating (i.e., you would not uncover the data that would tell you this process is bad), you are 
more likely to continue with a flawed or less-than-optimal business process. In fact, such an 
automating use of technology may mask the process problems.
With a bad underlying set of loan acceptance criteria (e.g., rules that would allow you to 
approve a loan for someone who had a high level of debt as long as he or she had not been late 
on any payments recently), a person might manually review four applications in a day and, 
because of the problematic criteria used, inadvertently accept on average two “bad” applications 
per week. If you automated the same faulty process, with no learning aspects built in, the system 
might help a person review 12 applications per day, resulting in up to six “bad” applications 
accepted per week on average. The technology would serve only to magnify the existing 
Spring
Summer
Fall
Winter
Auto Loan
RV and Boat Loan
Holiday Credit Line
Home Mortgage
FIGURE 2.8
A computer-based loan processing 
system enables the bank manager 
to identify trends in loan 
applications.

84    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
business problems (Figure 2.9). Without learning, it is more difficult to uncover bad business 
processes underlying the information system.
Information Systems for Supporting Strategy: Doing Things Smarter
Using information systems to automate or improve processes has advantages, as described pre-
viously. In most cases, however, the best way to use an information system is to support the 
organization’s strategy. To understand why, think about organizational strategy—a firm’s plan 
to accomplish its mission and goals as well as to gain or sustain competitive advantage over 
rivals—and how it relates to information systems. When senior managers—at the executive level 
of the organization—conduct strategic planning, they form a vision of where the organization 
needs to head, convert that vision into measurable objectives and performance targets, and craft 
a strategy to achieve the desired results. A person with a strategic mentality toward information 
systems goes beyond mere automating and learning and instead tries to find ways to use infor-
mation systems to achieve the organization’s chosen strategy, such as by innovating, streamlin-
ing operations, optimizing the supply chain, or better understanding customers. This person 
wants the benefits of automating and learning but also looks for some strategic, competitive 
advantage from the system. In fact, in today’s business environment, if a proposed information 
system isn’t going to clearly deliver some strategic value (i.e., help to improve the business so 
that it can compete better) while also helping people to work smarter and save money in the pro-
cess, then it isn’t likely to be funded. Returning to our loan example, a person with a strategic 
view of information systems would choose a computer-based loan application process because it 
can help achieve the organization’s strategic plan to process loan applications faster and better 
than rivals and to improve the selection criteria for loans. This process and the supporting infor-
mation system add value to the organization and match the organization’s strategy. The system 
is, therefore, essential to the long-term survival of the organization. If, on the other hand, manag-
ers determine that the organization’s strategy is to grow and generate new products and services, 
the computer-based loan application process and the underlying system might not be an effi-
cient, effective use of resources, even though the system could provide automating and learning 
benefits.
Identifying Where to Compete: Analyzing Competitive Forces
Organizations struggle with identifying the best uses of their resources to execute their strategy. 
Whereas some companies have a competitive advantage by being the first to enter a market (i.e., 
having a first-mover advantage), most organizations have to compete within established indus-
tries. Given that every industry is different, organizations need to analyze the competitive forces 
within their industry to better understand where to focus their resources. One framework often 
used to analyze an industry is Porter’s (1979) notion of the five primary competitive forces: (1) 
the rivalry among competing sellers in your industry, (2) the threat of potential new entrants into 
your industry, (3) the bargaining power that customers have within your industry, (4) the bar-
gaining power that suppliers have within your industry, and (5) the potential for substitute prod-
ucts or services from other industries (Figure 2.10). Table 2.3 provides examples of how the 
Internet has influenced the various competitive forces in an industry. Porter’s five-forces model 
of competition can help you determine which forces may be most important and which specific 
technologies could be used to address these forces. You can then use this knowledge as the basis 
for identifying particular investments.
Cumulative Errors
Increasing Automation
FIGURE 2.9
Automating a loan processing 
system requires sound underlying 
business processes, or errors will 
rapidly increase.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    85
Identifying How to Compete: Choosing a Generic Strategy
In order to achieve superior returns, a company needs to position itself within the industry it 
operates in so as to be able to counter the effects of the five forces and gain a competitive advan-
tage (Porter, 1985, 2001). In Figure 2.11, we show some common organizational strategies orga-
nizations use to position themselves within the industry. An organization might decide to pursue 
a low-cost leadership strategy, as does Walmart, by which it offers the best prices in its indus-
try on its goods and/or services. Alternatively, an organization might decide to pursue a differ-
entiation strategy, as do Porsche, Nordstrom, and IBM, by which it tries to provide better 
products or services than its competitors. A company might aim that differentiation broadly at 
many different types of consumers, or it might focus on a particular segment of consumers, as 
Apple did for many years with its focus on high-quality computers for home and educational 
markets. Still other organizations might pursue a middle-of-the-road strategy, following a best-
cost provider strategy, offering products or services of reasonably good quality at competitive 
prices, as does Dell.
Rivalry
Among
Existing
Firms
Bargaining
 Power of 
Suppliers
Threat of 
New 
Entrants
Bargaining
Power of 
Buyers
Threat of
Substitute
Products or
Services
TABLE 2.3   The Influence of the Internet on the Competitive Forces
Competitive Force
Implication for Firm
Influence of the Internet
Traditional rivals within your 
industry
Competition in price, product distribution, 
and service
Increase of competitors due to wider geographic 
reach; customers can more easily compare products, 
so competition focuses more on price.
Threat of new entrants into 
your market
Increased capacity in the industry, reduced 
prices, and decreased market share
Reduced barriers to entry, as the Internet reduces the 
difficulty of obtaining critical resources or entering 
new markets.
Customers’ bargaining power
Reduced prices, need for increased quality, 
and demand for more services
Wider choices for customers lead to lower switching 
costs and higher bargaining power of customers.
Suppliers’ bargaining power
Increased costs and reduced quality
Companies have equal access to suppliers; easier to 
find new suppliers; suppliers have access to more 
potential buyers.
Threat of substitute products or 
services from other industries
Product returns from customers, decreased 
market share, and losing customers for life
New substitutes are created by the Internet and other 
information technologies.
Source: Based on Corporate Information Strategy and Management, 8e by Lynda Applegate, Robert Austin, F. Warren McFarlan, published by McGraw-Hill, 2008.
FIGURE 2.10
Five forces influence the profit 
potential of an industry.

86    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Identifying How to Compete: Resources and Capabilities
Choosing the right position not only helps a company attract customers but also helps focus invest-
ments in resources such as information systems and technologies to help gain a competitive advan-
tage. In other words, no matter what generic strategy an organization chooses to pursue, it must 
have resources and/or capabilities that are superior to those of its competitors so as to gain or sus-
tain a competitive advantage. Resources reflect the organization’s specific assets that are utilized 
to achieve cost or product differentiation from its competitors. Examples of resources might 
include proprietary technology, brand equity, or a loyal and established customer base. Capabili-
ties reflect the organization’s ability to leverage these resources in the marketplace. For example, 
design quality or efficient operations could be capabilities that help a firm effectively utilize its 
resources. Together, the resources and capabilities provide the organization with distinctive com-
petencies—such as innovation, agility, quality, or low cost—in the marketplace. These competen-
cies help to pursue the organizational strategy (low-cost leadership, differentiation, etc.) and make 
the organization’s product valuable to its customers relative to its competitors; superior value crea-
tion occurs when an organization can provide products at a lower cost or with superior (differenti-
ated) benefits to the customer (Figure 2.12). This is how organizations gain a competitive 
advantage. For many organizations, information systems are at the heart of the different resources, 
capabilities, or distinctive competencies. Figure 2.13 provides examples of resources, capabilities, 
and distinctive competencies used by companies to sustain competitive advantage.
Broad Market,
Low-Cost
Strategy
Broader
Market Focus
Narrow
Low Cost
Uniqueness
Diﬀerentiating Attribute
Broad Market,
Diﬀerentiation
Strategy
Narrow Market,
Low-Cost
Strategy
Narrow Market,
Diﬀerentiation
Strategy
Best-Cost
Provider
Strategy
FIGURE 2.11
Five general types of 
organizational strategy: 
broad differentiation, focused 
differentiation, focused low-
cost leadership, overall low-cost 
leadership, and best-cost provider.
Resources:
• Proprietary technology
• Brand recognition
• Etc…
Distinctive Competencies:
• Product value
• Lower cost
• Higher quality
• Etc…
Cost or Diﬀerentiation
Advantage
Sustained
Competitive
Advantage
Capabilities:
• Shorter lead times
• Engineering design quality
• Etc…
FIGURE 2.12
Distinctive competencies lead to 
value creation and a sustained 
competitive advantage.
Source: Based on Competitive Advantage, 
published by Quick MBA.com.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    87
Quality
Toyota 
Service
IBM 
User Base
Facebook
Proprietary
Coca-Cola
Innovation
Apple 
Brand
Nike
Value
Nintendo
Data
Uber
Sources of Competitive
Advantage
FIGURE 2.13
Sources of competitive advantage.
GREEN IT 
The Electric Navy
To effectively execute its mission, the U.S. Navy is constantly 
testing and developing new technology. On common feature 
of these new technologies is an increased thirst for electric 
power. With geopolitical instability threatening access to tradi-
tional fuels and environmental concerns ever increasing, the 
Navy is seeking newer, greener options for powering the next 
generation of ships.
Modern naval combat can be as much about technological 
prowess as it is about brute force. The U.S. Navy’s new Zum-
walt-class destroyers are intended to up the technological 
ante. Designed with stealth features, the ship has the radar 
cross-section of a small fishing boat. However, introducing 
state of-the-art technologies also introduces new challenges. 
The ship’s radar, sonar, and command and control systems 
draw tremendous amounts of power that on previous genera-
tions of ships would have had to come from generators. Next-
generation weapons like rail guns, lasers, and particle weapons 
that are currently under development will increase the need for 
electric power even more. To help address this challenge, the 
USS Zumwalt, the first ship of the class, is the first Navy ship 
with a hybrid propulsion system. Just like a hybrid automobile, 
the ship has fuel-burning motors that power generators to fill 
storage batteries. Power from the batteries is then used to run 
both electric propulsion motors and the ship’s systems. This 
arrangement allows for more efficient generation and flexible 
distribution of power between propulsion, sensors, and weap-
ons systems.
Given the ever-increasing need for power and fuel, the 
Navy is also looking for alternatives to fossil fuels. Because 
technologies like nuclear power generation are too large and 
complex for smaller ships, the Navy is investigating biofuels as 
a greener, more available solution. In 2016, the Navy pur-
chased 77 million gallons of biofuel made from beef fat to 
launch a fleet tour partially powered by green fuel. The fuel 
only constitutes 10 percent of the fleet’s needs, however. The 
use of biofuels has also been criticized by politicians and envi-
ronmentalists for not being particularly green—the amount of 
energy and petrochemicals that goes into growing the biomass 
used to produce the biofuel can be more than what would be 
used with traditional fossil fuels. Unfortunately, the use of 
renewable sources of power like solar and wind has its own 
challenges, such as requiring great leaps in energy storage 
technology. Until a better solution is found, the Navy will keep 
steaming ahead.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016, February 16). Navy to launch carrier group powered partly 
by biofuels. CBS8.com. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from http://www.cbs8.com/
story/31016171/navy-to-launch-carrier-group-powered-partly-by-biofuels
Biomass. (2016, May 20). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Biomass&oldid=721248424
Zumwalt-class destroyer. (2016, May 18). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Zumwalt-class_destroyer&oldid=720944689

88    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Identifying How to Compete: Analyzing the Value Chain
Managers use value chain analysis to identify opportunities where information systems can be 
used to gain a competitive advantage (Porter, 1985, 2001; Shank & Govindarajan, 1993). Think 
of an organization as a big input/output process. At one end, supplies are purchased and brought 
into the organization. The organization integrates those supplies to create products and services 
that it markets, sells, and then distributes to customers. The organization also provides customer 
service after the sale of these products and services. Throughout this process, opportunities arise 
for employees to use information systems to add value to the product or service by acquiring 
supplies in a more effective manner, improving products, and selling more products. This set of 
activities that add value throughout the organization is known as the value chain within an 
organization.
Whereas the value chain model was initially created to focus on manufacturing, it can also 
be applied to service industries (sometimes with different activities being performed). For exam-
ple, in a hotel, inbound logistics activities may include the receiving of supplies as well as han-
dling reservations, and operations would include the day-to-day activities of checking guests in 
or out, cleaning rooms, preparing breakfast, and so on. Sales and marketing activities include 
promoting the hotel or attracting business meetings and conventions. Finally, customer service 
activities performed after the guest has left may include registering or resolving guest com-
plaints. A typical hotel may, however, not perform any activities related to outbound logistics. 
Nevertheless, the supporting activities are likely to resemble those of other organizations. Other 
organizations may even lack both inbound and outbound logistics activities, and different activi-
ties may be classified differently. In the end, however, you should note that the value chain 
should serve as a tool to identify and analyze the different activities performed.
Value chain analysis is the process of analyzing an organization’s activities to determine 
where value is added to products and/or services and what costs are incurred for doing so. In 
value chain analysis, you first draw the value chain for your organization by fleshing out each of 
the activities, functions, and processes where value is or should be added and where perfor-
mance can be improved. Next, you determine the costs—and the factors that drive costs or cause 
them to fluctuate—within each of the areas in your value chain diagram. You then determine 
which activities need to be optimized so as to improve performance, cut costs, and ultimately 
gain or sustain competitive advantage.
The Role of Information Systems in Value Chain Analysis
Because information systems can automate and optimize many activities along the value chain, 
the use of information systems has become one of the primary ways that organizations improve 
their value chains. In Figure 2.14, we show a sample value chain and some ways that informa-
tion systems can improve productivity within it. For example, many organizations use the 
Inbound
Logistics
Operations
Administration
Firm Infrastructure
Human Resources
Product Research and Development (R&D), Technology,
and Systems Development
Procurement
Outbound
Logistics
Sales and
Marketing
Service
Supply Chain and Customer 
Relationship Management Systems
Computer-Aided
Manufacturing
Systems
Websites, Facebook, 
and Twitter
Customer Service
System
Financial Decision
Support System
Private Cloud
Computer-Aided
Design Systems
Employee Self-Service
Portal
Supply Chain
Management System
FIGURE 2.14
Information systems can improve an organization’s value chain.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    89
Internet to connect businesses with one another electronically so that they can exchange orders, 
invoices, and receipts online in real time. Likewise, organizations use various social media such 
as blogs, Twitter, or Facebook to connect with their customers.
The Technology/Strategy Fit
You might be asking, if any information system helps do things faster and better and helps save 
money, who cares whether it matches the company’s strategy? Good question. If money grew on 
trees, you probably would build and use just about every information system you could imagine. 
Organizations could build or acquire many different valuable systems, but they are constrained 
by time and money to build or acquire only those that add the most value: those that help auto-
mate and learn as well as have strategic value. The old way for managers to think about informa-
tion systems was that they were a necessary service, a necessary evil, and a necessary, distasteful 
expense that was to be minimized. Managers cannot afford to think this way anymore. Success-
ful managers now think of information systems as a competitive asset to be nurtured and invested 
in and think of them as an enabler of opportunities and mechanism for supporting or executing 
their business model. In other words, organizations are trying to maximize business/IT align-
ment, and in most cases, they do not want systems that do not match the strategy, even if they 
offer automating and learning benefits. Further, while spending on information systems is rising, 
most companies are willing to spend money on projects only when they can see clear, significant 
value. Often, however, organizations have no choice in making some types of investments that 
may or may not coincide with their overall strategy. Such investments are called a strategic 
necessity—something the organization must do in order to survive.
Given this focus on the value that the system will add, an organization probably does not 
want a system that helps differentiate its products based on high quality when the organizational 
strategy is to be the overall industry low-cost leader. In other words, if a firm were pursuing a 
strategy for low-cost leadership, investments to help drive costs down would be valued over 
those that didn’t. Throughout this book, we introduce various technologies, infrastructures, and 
services that can help to support an organization’s competitive strategy.
We should also caution that merely choosing and implementing new or innovative informa-
tion systems is not sufficient to gain or sustain competitive advantage. In any significant IS 
implementation, there must be commensurate, significant organizational change. This typically 
comes in the form of business process management and other similar methods of improving the 
functioning of the organization as opposed to merely dropping in an information system with no 
attempts at changing and improving the organization. We will talk more in Chapter 7, “Enhanc-
ing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems,” about the role of business pro-
cess management for transforming organizational business processes. Further, an information 
system can be only as effective as the business model that it serves, and bad business models 
can’t be overcome by good information systems. Next, we will discuss different business models 
in the digital world.
Business Models in the Digital World
We have examined how organizations can leverage technology investments to accomplish things 
faster, smarter, and more strategically. We also examined how to focus technology investments 
toward activities that provide competitive advantage and improve the performance of the organi-
zation’s value chain. Taken together, organizations need to align their technology investments 
with their business model. A business model is a summary of a business’s strategic direction 
that outlines how the objectives will be achieved; a business model specifies the value proposi-
tion as well as how a company will create, deliver, and capture value (Osterwalder & Pigneur, 
2010) and identifies its customer segments, value propositions, channels, customer relationships, 
revenue streams, key resources, key activities, key partners, and cost structure. In other words, a 
business model reflects the following:
1.	What does a company do?
2.	How does a company uniquely do it?
3.	In what way (or ways) does the company get paid for doing it?
4.	What are the key resources and activities needed?
5.	What are the costs involved?

90    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
How a company answers these questions dictates how and where information systems 
investments can be utilized to execute a competitive strategy and sustain an advantage over com-
petitors. There are several components of a proper business model (Table 2.4). Each component 
plays a critical role in shaping all aspects of the business, including such factors as the expenses, 
revenues, operating strategies, corporate structure, and sales and marketing procedures. Gener-
ally speaking, anything that has to do with the day-to-day functioning of the organization is part 
of its business model, and information systems can be utilized to support and execute many 
aspects of the business model.
Revenue Models in the Digital World
Perhaps the most important ingredient for any organization is determining how to generate rev-
enue. A revenue model describes how the firm will earn revenue, generate profits, and produce 
a superior return on invested capital (even nonprofit organizations need a revenue model). In 
addition to sales, transaction fees, and advertising-based business models common in the offline 
world, the Internet has enabled or enhanced other revenue models, such as affiliate marketing 
(see Table 2.5). Many companies selling products or services (such as Amazon.com) use the web 
as an economic medium to reach a large customer base; large numbers of customers allow these 
companies to turn over their inventory quickly, thus enabling the company to offer low prices 
while still making a profit. Other companies (such as Netflix.com) generate revenue using a sub-
scription model where customers pay a monthly or annual fee for using the product or service. In 
addition, the freemium model has become a popular way of providing digital products or ser-
vices in the digital world. This is discussed next.
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Digital Nomads
The widespread availability of the Internet and the ever-
increasing performance and capabilities of mobile technology 
have changed the way we work even while we’re traveling. 
E-mail can be checked from the beach and documents edited 
from the airport. One side effect of these changes has been 
the opportunity to work in a location-independent way. If you 
can stay connected from wherever you are, why does it matter 
where you are when you work? This new approach has 
enabled the lifestyle of the “digital nomads.” Digital nomads 
are people who live and work wherever they feel like, using 
the Internet and mobile technologies to connect with their 
customers or employers.
Popular locations for digital nomads share a few impor-
tant criteria. The location must be an appealing place to live. 
As low cost of living and good weather are key drivers for 
many, digital nomads often choose places like Thailand, Indo-
nesia, and Morocco. Those who seek more urban activities 
have located in cities like Bangkok, while beaches and resort 
towns are a draw for those looking to escape urban life. Next 
is good network connectivity. For digital nomads to be able 
to function effectively, they need to be able to connect to the 
Internet via Wi-Fi or cellular networks or otherwise in a reli-
able manner. Finally, community is important. The types of 
enterprises and business activities that are conducive to the 
digital nomad lifestyle often require collaboration. For exam-
ple, entrepreneurial activities are more successful when you 
have access to like-minded individuals to share and develop 
ideas.
While the digital nomad lifestyle may seem like a dream 
come true, there are many challenges. For a digital nomad, it 
can be hard to earn as much money as a traditional employee, 
even with the same skill set—nomads often are challenged to 
maintain the kinds of relationships with their customers and 
employers that lead to lucrative contracts and more interesting 
assignments. There can also be a degree of resentment when 
customers and employers see pictures of nomads working in a 
hammock on the beach—whether or not this affects the qual-
ity of their work.
To be a successful digital nomad, it is not enough to just 
live location free through technology. The job you do must be 
conducive to the work style, and the skills you need will be dif-
ferent from those of a traditional employee. More emphasis is 
placed on building and retaining networks in order to keep the 
pipeline of opportunities full. However, with the right skill set, 
the right opportunities, and some careful planning, a digital 
nomad lifestyle may be right for you.
Based on:
Altringer, B. (2015, December 22). Globetrotting digital nomads: 
The future of work or too good to be true? Forbes. Retrieved May 
29, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesleadershipforum 
/2015/12/22/globetrotting-digital-nomads-the-future-of-work-or-too-
good-to-be-true


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    91
TABLE 2.4   Components of a Business Model
Component
Description
Questions to Ask
Customer 
segments
The customers targeted with the product/
service offering
Who will be our target customers? Who are the most important 
customers?
Value 
proposition
The utility that the product/service has to 
offer to customers
Why do customers need our product/service? What problems will our 
product/service solve? Why would customers choose our product/ser-
vice over our competitors’ products/services?
Channels
The ways in which the product/service 
offerings reach the target customers
How will our customers be reached? Which channels are best in terms 
of cost and convenience for the customers?
Customer 
relationships
The relationships formed with the target 
customers
What types of relationships do we build with our customers (e.g., one-
off vs. long-term)? How do we maintain these relationships?
Revenue 
streams
The way a firm generates income
How do we generate income? What are we selling? What are customers 
willing to pay for?
Key resources
The most important assets needed to make 
the business model work
What key resources are needed to enable our value proposition, chan-
nels, customer relationships, and revenue streams?
Key activities
The most important activities needed to 
make the business model work
What key activities are needed to enable our value proposition, chan-
nels, customer relationships, and revenue streams?
Key partners
The network of partners and suppliers 
needed to make the business model work
Who are our key partners and suppliers? What resources do they offer, 
and what activities do they perform?
Cost structure
The costs incurred when operating the 
business model
What are the costs incurred when operating the business model? Which 
resources and activities are most expensive?
Source: Based on Business Model Generation by Alexander Osterwalder, Yves Pigneur, published by Wiley, 2010.
TABLE 2.5   Typical Revenue Models in the Digital World
Revenue Type
Description
Who Is Doing This?
Affiliate marketing
Paying businesses that bring or refer customers to another business. Rev-
enue sharing is typically used.
Amazon’s Associates program
Advertising
Free services are provided to customers and paid for by a third party.
Yahoo!, Google, Facebook, 
Twitter
Subscription
Users pay a monthly or yearly recurring fee for the use of the product/
service.
Netflix, World of Warcraft, 
Spotify
Licensing
Users pay a fee for using protected intellectual property (e.g., software).
Symantec, Norton
Transaction fees/
Brokerage
A commission is paid to the business for aiding in the transaction.
PayPal, eBay, Groupon, 
Scottrade, Airbnb, Uber
Traditional sales
A consumer buys a product/service from the website.
Amazon, Zappos, Nordstrom 
.com, iTunes
Freemium
Basic services are offered for free, but a premium is charged for special 
features.
Flickr, Skype, Dropbox.com

92    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
FREEMIUM.  According to basic economics within a competitive marketplace, the price of 
something is set by its marginal cost—the cost of producing an additional unit of output. In 
recent years, the prices of computer processing, storage, and bandwidth—the fundamental 
building blocks for providing digital products or services—have been in a free fall, and cloud 
computing has turned many of these costs into variable costs. As the marginal costs of providing 
digital products of services continues to decrease, organizations are able to use a freemium 
(“free” + “premium”) approach; using a freemium approach, an organization gives away limited 
versions of a product or service for free in order to build a large customer base and charges a 
premium for unrestricted versions (typically on a subscription basis). For example, the online 
photo-sharing application Flickr (owned by Yahoo!) allows users to store, share, organize, and 
tag a limited number of pictures for free, and users can upgrade to a paid “pro account,” providing 
additional features, such as unlimited storage and advertisement-free browsing. Likewise, the 
cloud storage provider Dropbox offers free accounts with limited storage capacity and allows 
users to subscribe to accounts with larger storage space. Depending on the product or service 
offered, the restrictions of free versions can include limitations of features, bandwidth, storage, 
or number of users, or the product or service can be restricted to a certain class of users, such as 
educational users (see Figure 2.15).
Internet startups and app developers alike benefit from the ability to scale up quickly under 
the freemium approach; further, companies benefit from the paying subscribers as well as the 
free users, many of whom are likely to refer the product or service to their friends. However, a 
company choosing to use a freemium model has to carefully choose which features to offer for 
free. On the one hand, the free offerings have to be compelling enough to attract new users; on 
the other hand, if too many features are offered in the free versions, few people will be willing to 
pay for the more feature-rich versions. Often, a process of fine tuning and adjustments is needed 
to strike this balance; this is especially difficult if it involves reducing service levels of the free 
offering (as was the case when Microsoft reduced the free storage space of its OneDrive service 
from 15GB to 5GB in 2016).
The freemium business model has become extremely popular with mobile apps and, in 
particular, games. Mobile games such as Candy Crush Saga or Clash of Clans are free to down-
load but offer players the option to make in-app purchases, allowing them to purchase access 
to extra features, content, or in-game currency. This allows the games to quickly build a huge 
user base in addition to generating continuous revenue streams. For example, in 2015, the free 
30
40 50 60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
MPH
0 9 7 5 3 67
VS.
FIGURE 2.15
Under the freemium approach, typical restrictions of free versions include limitations of features, 
bandwidth, storage, type of user, or number of users.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    93
game Clash of Clans raked in more than US$1.3 billion, merely through in-app purchases. 
This, in turn, is beneficial for the players as well, as the game’s developers depend on the reve-
nue stream and are therefore incentivized to continuously update and upgrade the game 
experience.
Platform-Based Business Models and the Sharing Economy
Traditionally, many business models functioned like pipes, where products were produced and 
pushed to the customers (Choudary, 2013). The advent of the Internet, together with the mega-
trends mobile, social, and cloud computing, has enabled new business models, which are built 
around the concept of a platform. Rather than providing a product or service, a digital platform 
enables others—both other businesses and users—to co-create value (see Table 2.6). In essence, 
these business models are creating digital ecosystems where some users create value and other 
users consume. For example, users uploading content to Flickr or Wikipedia are producers of 
value that is consumed by others. Likewise, Uber and Airbnb are successful platforms that do not 
offer services themselves but depend on users to offer and consume services. As a result, the suc-
cess of a platform is dependent on the network effect, and a platform only has value if users par-
ticipate in the production or consumption; thus, any platform-based business model has to be 
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
The Pains of Uber in China
Using a combination of social, mobile, and Big Data, the car 
hailing service Uber has built a successful business in many 
locations around the world by disrupting the local transporta-
tion industry. Entrenched, protected taxi monopolies have a 
hard time reacting and competing. What happens when the 
local transportation industry is willing to be just as disruptive? 
Many locales have attempted to protect their existing taxi sys-
tems legislatively or through the courts—Uber has been sued 
countless times. In China a competitor has taken a different 
tact—”out-disrupt” Uber.
Didi Kuaidi was formed by the merger of rival taxi-hailing 
services from Alibaba and Tencent—two of China’s Internet 
giants. The service competed directly with Uber in the private 
car ride-sharing market but also went much further. Later 
renamed Didi Chuxing, the service let users select between a 
taxi, private car, shared car, shuttle van, or even bus. This gave 
Didi Chuxing enormous reach and market potential. In 2015, it 
arranged more than 1.4 billion rides—more than Uber has 
done worldwide since it was founded in 2009. In China’s pri-
vate car ride-sharing market, it was estimated that Uber had 
captured about a third while Didi Chuxing had the entire 
remaining two-thirds. However, as Uber first launched in China 
in 2014 and as of early 2016 only operated in the country’s 
four largest cities, the question remained as to whether Uber 
would be able to recapture market share from Didi Chuxing as 
it expanded throughout the country.
At the same time, Didi Chuxing was not just sitting still and 
waiting for Uber to catch up. In addition to transportation ser-
vices, Didi Chuxing planned to take advantage of the informa-
tion it collected about users and usage, and even planned to 
start offering car loans to drivers and potentially even passen-
gers. Further, Didi Chuxing let passengers book test drives of 
new cars from a variety of manufacturers—nearly 1.4 million 
test drives had taken place in less than a year. Lastly, Didi 
Chuxing was exploring the matchmaking business. The service 
let drivers and passengers select each other based on shared 
interests; started in partnership with LinkedIn, it allowed peo-
ple to join their accounts across the two networks. Didi 
Chuxing has also invested in and forged partnerships with 
Uber’s rivals in other markets like India and the United States. 
While Uber has been successful by following a strategy to dis-
rupt traditional markets and power structures and to compete 
ruthlessly, it learned—as companies from Amazon to Google 
did before—that the regulatory environment in China often 
tends to favor local businesses. Facing an increasingly hostile 
regulatory environment, Uber was unable to compete with the 
powerful state-backed rival, and in mid-2016, decided to with-
draw from the Chinese market, selling all its assets to its Chi-
nese competitor in return for a minority stake in the company.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016, January 30). More than mobility. The Economist. 
Retrieved May 29, 2016, from http://www.economist.com/news/ 
business-and-finance/21689487-companys-ambitions-go-far-
beyond-taxi-hailing-didi-kuaidi-dominating-uber-chinas
Kirby, W. C. (2016, August 2). The real reason Uber is giving up in 
China. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved August 9, 2016, from 
https://hbr.org/2016/08/the-real-reason-uber-is-giving-up-in-china
Naughton, J. (2016, August 7). Why Uber has been taken for 
a ride in China. The Guardian. Retrieved August 8, 2016, from 
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/07/
uber-china-free-trade-brexit
Uber (company). (2016, May 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Uber_(company)&oldid=722506162

94    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
attractive to both producers and consumers. Whereas platforms tend to be attractive as they often 
have negligible (or zero) marginal costs, they carefully have to think about how to monetize their 
services. For instance, Airbnb uses a transaction fee–based revenue model (charging both parties), 
whereas YouTube charges neither the producers nor the consumers but a third party (advertisers). 
Today, many pipe-based businesses include platform elements, such as reviews created by users. 
As we move further into the digital future, every business has to consider in how far its business 
model will include platform elements and how these will influence its business strategy.
Many of these platforms match producers and consumers directly without the need for tra-
ditional middlemen, a concept referred to as disintermediation (see Chapter 4, “Enabling Busi-
ness-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce”). As increasingly, individuals are sharing not only 
content (such as opinions or media) but physical goods or services on dedicated platforms, many 
believe that we are moving toward a sharing economy. A sharing economy (sometimes referred 
to as collaborative economy) has been defined as “an economic system in which assets or ser-
vices are shared between private individuals, either free or for a fee, typically by means of the 
Internet” (Oxford Dictionary, 2016). As ownership is shared, assets can often be used more 
effectively. For example, increasing population density makes individual car ownership increas-
ingly infeasible but enables efficient car sharing. At the same time, shared ownership, facilitated 
by technological platforms, can help to utilize the car during (otherwise) idle times. In other 
words, it is not ownership that counts but being able to access the asset or resource. While ini-
tially, the concept of a sharing economy included social goals, such as waste reduction or 
increasing human interaction, this is now of lesser importance. Yet many companies within the 
sharing economy contribute to achieving greater social welfare. For example, research has 
shown that a vehicle used by a car-sharing platform such as car2go (a subsidiary of German 
automaker Daimler) can replace up to 13 privately owned vehicles, and for some, Uber replaces 
the need for owning a vehicle (see Figure 2.16). Likewise, platforms such as Craigslist or eBay 
encourage the selling of used goods, extending the usable life of many products.
Platform-based business models and the sharing economy are touted as offering many prom-
ises. In addition to benefits such as reduced car ownership or the reuse of otherwise-discarded 
goods, often-cited benefits include increasingly flexible work arrangements or people’s ability to 
earn extra income by renting out their apartments to strangers using Airbnb or working as drivers 
for Uber. These business models, however, are not without criticism. For example, whereas the 
business models used by Uber or Airbnb disrupt traditional business models, often promising 
greater choices for end customers, they do so at a cost for humans and society. In this “gig 
economy,” workers are not employed by the company, but are only hired for short-term, tempo-
rary jobs. In many cases, worker’s rights—which people have fought for since the industrial 
revolution—are neglected, with workers having no protection against discrimination, no social 
security, little job security, and so on; likewise, income opportunities as well as social interactions 
TABLE 2.6   Examples of Platform-Based Business Models
Value Created/Exchanged
Examples
Products
Amazon Marketplace, eBay
Services
Airbnb, Uber
Payments
Square, PayPal
Investments and funding
Kickstarter, Lending Club
Content
Wikipedia, Twitter, YouTube
Communication
WhatsApp, Skype
Collaboration
Dropbox
Social relationships
Facebook, LinkedIn
Source: Based on What is a Platform? by Alex Moazed, May 1, 2016, http://www.applicoinc.com/blog/what-is-a-
platform-business-model/. Published by APPLICO INC.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    95
with coworkers are often severely limited. Further, in their endeavor to disrupt traditional business 
models (such as hotels or limousine services), companies such as Uber and Airbnb try to gain a 
competitive advantage over traditional businesses by breaking (or at least bypassing) existing 
laws and regulations. While arguably, laws and regulations will (have to) adapt to new technolo-
gies in the short or long term, such behavior can often be regarded as unfair competition.
Service-Based Business Models
The Internet of Things, the rise in mobile devices, Big Data, and cloud computing have 
enabled another type of business models, centered around not selling products but providing 
these as services (sometimes referred to as XaaS, or “X as a service”). Many traditional man-
ufacturers use pipe-based business models to produce goods which are then sold to the end 
users. Under a service-based business model, a manufacturer can offer equipment services, 
such as offering the product itself as a service or offering operations and optimization ser-
vices, or information services, such as selling data or insights generated by the customer’s 
usage of the product (see Figure 2.17). For example, manufacturers of jet engines, such as 
Rolls-Royce or GE, traditionally would sell engines to the owners of aircraft (such as air-
lines); however, as the bargaining power of buyers is high in the industry, the market for new 
engines is competitive, so much of the manufacturers’ revenue typically comes from perform-
ing maintenance and selling spare parts. Under a service-based business model, in contrast, a 
manufacturer such as GE is being paid for guaranteeing continuous uptime, essentially 
Traditional
Economy
Sharing
Economy
FIGURE 2.16
In the sharing economy, shared ownership reduces the need for individual ownership of cars and other goods.
Pipe‐based business model
 
Service‐based business model
Equipment services:
Thrust as a service
 
 
Information services:
Fleet eﬃciency analytics
  
Sell engines and parts
 
FIGURE 2.17
Under a service-based business 
model, a manufacturer can offer 
equipment services or information 
services.
Source: Sergioboccardo/Shutterstock; 
Christian42/Fotolia.

96    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
providing “thrust as a service.” The customer thus does not have to purchase the engine or 
spare parts but pays for hours of usage, transforming fixed costs into variable costs; the engine 
manufacturer only earns money for operating engines and thus has an incentive to improve 
the engine’s design and perform preventive maintenance. Obviously, such business models are 
only possible through rapid advances in Internet of Things technology; using a multitude of 
sensors integrated throughout the engines and connected to the Internet, GE can continuously 
monitor and analyze engine performance and use advanced analytics to predict potential 
engine failure and better schedule maintenance events. Similarly, Philips provides lighting as a 
service for 25 parking garages of the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority; the 
transit authority needs no upfront capital for the lighting, and Philips installs and maintains 
the lighting and earns revenue through continuous energy-cost savings. These business mod-
els, however, require new thinking by the players involved. First of all, rather than focusing on 
minimizing manufacturing costs so as to increase profit margins, the manufacturers have to 
focus on life span and ease of maintenance/repair. Likewise, in order to maximize revenues, 
the manufacturers have to be able to monitor performance, predict outages, and schedule 
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
The Ethics of the Sharing Economy
The sharing economy is taking off. Two standouts have been 
Uber and Airbnb. Uber is a service that connects people in 
need of rides with drivers willing to give one. As of early 2016, 
Uber was available in more than 60 countries and 400 cities 
worldwide. Airbnb is a service that connects people looking for 
a place to stay with people who have a room or a house avail-
able to rent. As of early 2016, Airbnb had more than 1.5 mil-
lion listings in 34,000 cities in 190 countries. As with any 
successful new business, many people are looking to duplicate 
successful business models and try to understand the secrets 
of success. Since both Uber and Airbnb have thrived on dis-
rupting existing markets that are heavily regulated (i.e., taxi 
services and hotels), the question that comes to many people’s 
mind is: Are Uber and Airbnb breaking any laws or regulations 
to drive their success?
Taxi services are heavily regulated. To provide for rider safety, 
drivers must undergo extensive screening and background 
checks, and vehicles are regularly inspected. In addition, to con-
trol markets and limit the number of taxis in the street, the eco-
nomics of taxi systems are often regulated at the city level. A 
medallion (taxi permit) is required to provide taxi services, and 
there are a limited number of them available. To own a medal-
lion, a driver (or taxi company) must comply with all of the regu-
lations and pay an often-substantial fee. To drive for Uber, no 
such fees or inspections are required—though the service has 
added background checks in certain jurisdictions. Likewise, 
hotels and other forms of lodging are regulated as well. In addi-
tion to the properties themselves being regulated for safety and 
security, many jurisdictions are interested in maintaining consis-
tency in their zoning laws and ensuring the proper collection of 
tax revenue. Those renting out their apartment or house via 
Airbnb are not affected (or ignore) such regulations; further, as 
Airbnb hosts typically do not collect lodging (or occupancy) 
taxes from the guests, municipalities typically lose out on consid-
erable tax revenues. Another criticism is the reduction of long-
term housing associated with the unregulated renting of 
properties in residential neighborhoods.
Both Uber and Airbnb would argue that they are simply 
removing transactional friction from markets for services that 
are already permissible under existing laws. Others argue that 
Uber and Airbnb are simply shifting costs to others involved in 
the value chain for these services, such as drivers and home-
owners. The challenge remains that the existing laws and regu-
latory frameworks provide for and protect existing economic 
stakeholders and interests. Whether new sharing economy 
entities like Uber and Airbnb are playing fair or not, these 
stakeholders will not take such challenges lying down. Expect 
more challenges and highly public disputes to come.
Questions
1.	 Should services like Uber and Airbnb have to follow the 
same rules and regulations as a taxi company or hotel? 
Why or why not? Explain.
2.	 Imagine creating a platform for individuals to connect and 
sell meals out of their home or apartment to paying custom-
ers in a way similar to Uber. What concerns could this raise?
Based on:
Airbnb. (2016, May 22). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Airbn
b&oldid=721592341
Millard, D. (2015, February 11). The sharing economy is not your 
friend. Vice. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from http://www.vice.com/read/
the-case-against-Airbnb-and-uber
Uber (company). (2016, May 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Uber_(company)&oldid=722506162


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    97
maintenance; all of this would not be possible without sensors connected to the Internet that 
provide continuous data streams and advanced Big Data analytics.
Making the transition from a product-oriented toward a service-based business model, 
however, is not without challenges. For example, whereas selling a product typically involves 
negotiating price and features, selling services involves not only developing new pricing mod-
els and implementing new business processes but also negotiating service level agreements 
with the customers (see Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and 
Services”). Likewise, managing inventories and capacities is more challenging due to fluctua-
tions in demand for services. Finally, the targeted customer segment for products is often dif-
ferent from that for services, which necessitates changes to marketing and communication 
with customers.
Valuing Innovations
Innovation is key for organizations attempting to gain or sustain a competitive advantage, be it 
through cost or differentiation. Companies that are leaders in their respective markets or have 
strong brands often tend to find it difficult to react appropriately to new trends, and Cisco’s for-
mer CEO John Chambers predicted that almost half of today’s leading businesses might not see 
the next decade (EY, 2016a). For organizations, innovation involves creating new products, pro-
cesses, or services that return value to the organization (note that in contrast to merely inventing 
new products, services, or processes, innovation involves realizing the value). The most common 
form of innovation is incremental innovation, which involves enhancing or upgrading existing 
products, services, or processes. In contrast, radical innovations (sometimes called disruptive 
innovations) use a markedly new or different technology to access new customer segments and/
or provide significantly greater benefits to existing customers and eventually marginalize or 
replace existing products or services (Chandy & Tellis, 1998) (see Table 2.7). When hearing 
innovation, people often only think about innovative products or services. Innovative products or 
services (even radical innovations), however, can easily be copied, and only focusing on these 
can be a dangerous path; in fact, many leading companies, ranging from Apple to Dyson, all too 
frequently have to engage in lawsuits to protect their innovations from copycats. Successful 
organizations thus go beyond product and service innovation and introduce other innovations 
such as new ways of earning revenue or entirely new business models. In their book Ten Types of 
Innovation, Keeley et al. (2013) outline how different types of innovations can help organiza-
tions gain or sustain competitive advantage (see Table 2.8).
Given that product performance innovations can often be easily copied, companies often 
combine multiple types of innovations to sustain competitive advantage. For example, Apple is 
typically known for its product innovations; yet, while the design and functionality of 
Apple’s innovative products have been widely imitated, other companies find it difficult to copy 
Apple’s product system innovations or customer engagement innovations. Likewise, computer 
manufacturer Dell combined profit model innovations (collecting money before building the 
product), process innovations (the built-to-order model), and channel innovations (selling com-
puters online rather than in stores) as well as other types of innovation to challenge established 
computer manufacturers.
Most (if not all) of these innovations are enabled by or would not even be possible without 
information systems. For example, platform-based business models, such as used by Airbnb, 
would not be possible without the Internet; likewise, Uber’s business model could not exist with-
out mobile devices used by riders and drivers, and Uber would not be able to implement its 
dynamic pricing feature (called “surge pricing”) without real-time analysis and prediction of 
traffic conditions and demand for services. For companies manufacturing physical products, 
process innovations enabled by robotics and the Industrial Internet of Things offer tremendous 
improvements in efficiency, product quality, agility, and flexibility, allowing companies to mass-
produce customized products (see Chapter 4). Thus, an organization often must deploy new, 
state-of-the-art technologies to gain or sustain a competitive advantage. Although firms can 
choose to continually upgrade older systems rather than investing in new systems, these improve-
ments can often at best give only a short-lived competitive edge.
To gain and sustain significant competitive advantage, firms must often deploy the latest 
technologies or redeploy and reinvest in existing technologies in clever, new ways. For example, 
architects and interior designers use virtual reality (VR) headsets—head-mounted devices 

98    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
enabling immersive three-dimensional experiences—such as Oculus Rift to allow customers to 
virtually explore planned buildings or offices before construction has started; likewise, Marriott 
used the Oculus Rift headset to “teleport” users to vacation destinations, and the tourism board 
of British Columbia produced 360-degree tours of the province. Virtual reality headsets are 
quickly becoming mainstream, with companies such as Samsung offering virtual reality cameras 
that allow capturing 360-degree videos that can be edited and viewed using Samsung’s own 
“Gear 360” virtual reality headset. Similar to virtual reality, augmented reality uses information 
systems to enhance a person’s perception of reality by providing relevant information about the 
user’s surroundings; typically, special glasses or other devices are used to augment the user’s 
view of the real-world environment with computer-generated content. An early application of 
augmented reality was Google Glass, eyeglasses with a tiny embedded screen, which augmented 
reality by displaying information about the wearer’s surroundings, including weather informa-
tion, public transportation schedules, reviews about a restaurant the wearer is looking at, and 
other useful information. Microsoft’s HoloLens takes this concept a step further by enabling 
mixed reality, where the user’s view of the real-world environment is augmented with 3D holo-
graphic content. While as of 2016, Google Glass was on hold, Microsoft’s HoloLens was 
shipped to developers. No matter which products will eventually succeed in the marketplace, 
exciting new technologies are on the horizon.
But with the plethora of new information technologies and systems available, how can you 
possibly choose winners? Indeed, how can you even keep track of all the new breakthroughs, 
TABLE 2.7   Examples of Radical Innovations and Their Associated Displaced or 
Marginalized Technology
Radical Innovation
Displaced or Marginalized Technology
Digital photography
Chemical photography
Desktop publishing
Traditional publishing
Online stock brokerage
Full-service stock brokerage
Online retailing
Brick-and-mortar retailing
Free, downloadable greeting cards
Printed greeting cards
Distance education
Classroom education
Unmanned aircraft
Manned aircraft
Nurse practitioners
Medical doctors
Semiconductors
Vacuum tubes
Automobiles
Horses
Airplanes
Trains
Compact discs
Cassettes and records
MP3 players, music downloading, streaming
Compact discs and music stores
Smartphones
MP3 players, dedicated GPS navigation
Mobile telephony
Wire-line telephony
Tablets
Notebook computers
Xbox, PlayStation, smartphones
Desktop computers
3D printing
CNC milling
Camera drones
Helicopters for aerial filming/photography


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    99
new products, new versions, and new ways of using technologies? For example, in Figure 2.18 
we present a small subset of some new information technologies and systems, ranging from 
some that are here now and currently being used to some that are easily a decade away from 
being a reality. Which one is important for you? Which one will make or break your business? 
Does this list even include the ones that you need to be concerned about?
The Need for Constant IS Innovation
Sir John Maddox, a physicist and the editor of the influential scientific journal Nature for 
22 years, was quoted in Scientific American in 1999 as saying, “The most important discoveries 
of the next 50 years are likely to be ones of which we cannot now even conceive.” Think about 
that for a moment. Most of the important discoveries of the next 50 years are likely to be things 
that, at present, we have no clue about. To illustrate that point, think back to the state of the 
Internet back in 1999. Then the Internet was not on the radar screens of many business organiza-
tions. Those that had websites were mostly providing an electronic brochure to customers and 
weren’t exploiting the technology to streamline business processes as is the norm today. Look 
now at how the Internet has transformed modern business. How could something so transforma-
tional not have been easier for businesses to imagine or predict a decade earlier? It is difficult to 
see these things coming. Next, we examine how you can improve your ability to spot and exploit 
new innovations.
TABLE 2.8   Ten Types of Innovation
Innovation
Description
Examples
Profit model 
innovation
Finding novel ways of generating rev-
enues from offerings
Dropbox using a freemium approach; Microsoft offering Office 365 
on a subscription basis; GE selling “thrust as a service”
Network innovation
Harnessing the capabilities and strengths 
of others
GlaxoSmithKline or Marriott using open innovation for new prod-
uct or service ideas; Netflix running contests for improving movie 
recommendation algorithm; luxury hotels partnering with fashion 
designers
Structure 
innovations
Using the company’s talent and assets in 
innovative ways
Southwest Airlines focusing on one aircraft type; Google allowing 
employees to use of 20 percent of their time for own projects
Process innovations
Changing primary processes used to pro-
duce product or service
Toyota pioneering lean production; Zara moving fashion from initial 
design to stores in 3 weeks
Product perfor-
mance innovations
Creating novel products or improving 
existing products through differentiation
Dyson’s Airblade hand dryers; Corning’s “unbreakable” Gorilla 
Glass; Coke’s customizable Coke bottles
Product system 
innovations
Creating bundles of complementary 
offerings
Microsoft bundling individual office programs into Office suite; 
Apple offering developer tools and app store to enable developers 
to create novel apps; Marriott letting users test drive GoPro HERO 
action cams
Service innovations
Supporting and enhancing value of 
offering
Zappos’s WOW philosophy of delivering excellent customer service; 
Men’s Wearhouse offering its customers to purchase free lifetime 
pressing
Channel 
innovations
Using innovative ways to connect offer-
ings with customers
Niketown offering immersive experiences; Nespresso partnering 
with hotels and airlines
Brand innovations
Positioning the brand in innovative ways
Virgin family of brands; German discount grocer Aldi’s Trader Joe’s 
markets
Customer engage-
ment innovations
Developing meaningful connections 
with customers
Swarm encouraging users to frequently “check in” to places; Apple 
tying customers to its ecosystem
Source: Based on Ten Types of Innovation: The Discipline of Building Breakthroughs by Larry Keeley, Helen Walters, Ryan Pikkel, Brian Quinn, published by 
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.

100    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Successful Innovation Is Difficult
As we hinted at previously, there are limits to using emerging information systems to innovate 
and gain or sustain a competitive advantage. Information systems are often bought from or built 
by someone else. They are often either purchased from a vendor or developed by a consultant or 
outsourcing partner. In these situations, the information systems are usually not proprietary tech-
nologies owned by the organization. For example, although a soft-drink company can patent the 
formula of a cola or a pharmaceutical company can patent a new drug, an organization typically 
cannot patent its use of an information system, particularly if someone else developed it. The 
data in the system may be proprietary, but the information system typically is not.
INNOVATION IS OFTEN FLEETING.  Given the pace of change in the digital world, advantages 
gained by innovations often have a limited life span. For example, even in situations where an 
organization has developed an innovative information system in-house, it usually did so with 
hardware, software, and networking components that others can also purchase. In other words, 
rivals can copy innovative information systems, so this form of competitive advantage can 
be short-lived. Indeed, if use of the new system causes one organization to gain a significant 
advantage over others, smart rivals are quick to duplicate or improve on that use of the 
system. Likewise, rivals can copy innovative products, services, or processes. One classic 
counterexample, however, is Amazon.com’s patented “one-click” ordering process that has been 
successfully defended in the courts.
INNOVATION IS OFTEN RISKY.  Choosing among innovative IS-related investments or potential 
product, service, or process innovations always entails risk. The classic example from consumer 
electronics is the choice of a videocassette recorder (VCR) in the early days of that technology 
and the competing Betamax (developed by Sony) and VHS (developed by JVC) formats. Most 
experts agreed that the Betamax had superior recording and playback quality, but VHS ultimately 
won the battle in the marketplace. People who made the “smart” choice at the time probably 
would have chosen a VCR with the Betamax format. Ultimately, however, that turned out to 
be an unfortunate choice. Recently, consumers again had to choose between two competing 
formats, namely, for high-definition (HD) DVD players, where the Blu-ray and HD DVD 
formats competed to become the industry standard. In this battle, Microsoft, Toshiba, and many 
others backed the HD DVD format, while Sony led the fight for Blu-ray (and even incorporated 
it into its PlayStation 3 gaming console). This time around, Sony (and the Blu-ray format) 
won the “format war,” with the dissolution of the HD DVD Promotion Group in early 2008, 
effectively making Blu-ray the dominant format for HD video discs (Figure 2.19). Choosing 
among innovative IS-related investments is just as risky as choosing consumer electronics. In 
fact, for organizations, choosing among the plethora of available innovative technologies is far 
Sooner
Later
What’s on the Horizon?
Flexible
Displays
Quantum
Computing
Brainwave
Interface
Solid-State
Supercomputers
Voice Print
Nanotubes
Augmented
Reality
Intelligent
Searching
Massively
Multiplayer
Educational
Gaming
Context-
Aware
Computing
Knowledge
Webs
Glasses-Free
3D Movies
Optical
WLAN
Laser-Based
Hard Drives
Nano-Scale
Processors
Programmable
Cells
FIGURE 2.18
Some enabling technologies  
on the horizon.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    101
riskier, given the size and often mission-critical nature of the investment. Choosing a suboptimal 
DVD player, although disappointing, is usually not devastating.
INNOVATION CHOICES ARE OFTEN DIFFICULT.  Choosing new technologies in the IS area to 
develop innovative products, services, or processes is like trying to hit one of several equally 
attractive fast-moving targets. You can find examples of the difficulty of forecasting emerging 
technologies in the experiences that many organizations have had in forecasting the growth, use, 
and importance of the Internet. The 1994 Technology Forecast prepared by the major consulting 
firm Price Waterhouse (now PwC) mentioned the word Internet on only five pages of the 750-
page document. The next year, more than 75 pages addressed the Internet. Only 3 years later, 
in the 1997 briefing, the Internet was a pervasive topic throughout. Back in 1994, it would have 
been difficult, perhaps even foolish, to forecast such pervasive, rapidly growing business use of 
the Internet today. Table 2.9 illustrates how many people and organizations have had difficulty 
making technology-related predictions.
Given the pace of research and development in the IS and components area, staying current 
has been nearly impossible. Probably one of the most famous metrics of computer evolution has 
been “Moore’s law.” Intel founder Gordon Moore predicted that the number of transistors that 
could be squeezed onto a silicon chip would double every 24 months (this number is now often 
reduced to 18 months), and this prediction has proven itself over the past 40 years (see Chapter 3). 
In fact, some computer hardware and software firms roll out new versions of their products 
every 3 months. Keeping up with this pace of change can be difficult for any organization.
Open Innovation
Given the difficulties associated with innovation, organizations increasingly realize that potential 
for innovation often exists outside of their boundaries and try to harness the creativity of external 
stakeholders. Open innovation, or the process of integrating external stakeholders into the inno-
vation process, can thus prove very beneficial. For example, pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly cre-
ated a site called InnoCentive, where companies can post scientific problems and everybody can 
take a shot at solving the problem. Usually, a reward is paid to a successful solver. This way, an ad 
hoc research-and-development network is created, and companies have to rely less on a dedicated 
research-and-development department or on hiring specialists to solve a certain problem. At the 
same time, people can use their spare time and expertise to solve problems and earn rewards for 
their contributions. Other companies, such as P&G (Connect + Develop), Starbucks (My Star-
bucks Idea), Lego (Lego Ideas), Heineken (Innovators Brewhouse), and Marriott (Travel Bril-
liantly), successfully use open innovation to solicit ideas for novel products, services, or processes. 
Integrating external stakeholders into the innovation process, however, often involves making 
organizational data and knowledge accessible to the external stakeholders, so companies have to 
carefully balance the benefits and potential drawbacks of engaging in such initiatives.
FIGURE 2.19
Blu-ray has become the industry 
standard for high-definition 
DVD players.
Source: Matthew Jacques/Shutterstock.

102    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
TABLE 2.9   Some Predictions About Technology That Were Not Quite Correct
Year
Source
Quote
1876
Western Union, internal memo
“This ‘telephone’ has too many shortcomings to be seriously considered as a means of 
communication. The device is inherently of no value to us.”
1895
Lord Kelvin, president, British 
Royal Society
“Radio has no future. Heavier-than-air flying machines are impossible. X-rays will prove 
to be a hoax.”
1899
C. H. Duell, commissioner, 
U.S. Office of Patents
“Everything that can be invented has been invented.”
1927
H. M. Warner, Warner Brothers
“Who the hell wants to hear actors talk?”
1943
Thomas Watson, chairman, 
IBM
“I think there is a world market for maybe five computers.”
1949
Popular Mechanics
“Where a calculator on the ENIAC is equipped with 18,000 vacuum tubes and weighs 30 
tons, computers in the future may have only 1,000 vacuum tubes and weigh only 1.5 tons.”
1957
Editor, business books, Prentice 
Hall
“I have traveled the length and breadth of this country and talked with the best people, and 
I can assure you that data processing is a fad that won’t last out the year.”
1968
BusinessWeek
“With over 50 foreign cars already on sale here, the Japanese auto industry isn’t likely to 
carve out a big slice of the U.S. market.”
1977
Ken Olsen, president, Digital 
Equipment Corporation
“There is no reason anyone would want a computer in their home.”
1989
Bill Gates, Microsoft
“We will never make a 32-bit operating system.”
2004
Bill Gates, Microsoft
“Spam will be a thing of the past in two years’ time.”
2005
Sir Alan Sugar
“Next Christmas the iPod will be dead, finished, gone, kaput.”
2007
Steve Ballmer, Microsoft
“There’s no chance that the iPhone is going to get any significant market share.”
2010
Steve Jobs, Apple
“This size is useless unless you include sandpaper so users can sand their fingers down to 
a quarter of their size.” (speaking about 7-inch tablets)
Organizational Requirements for Innovation
Certain types of competitive environments require that organizations remain at the cutting edge in 
their use of information systems. For example, consider an organization that operates within an 
environment with strong competitive forces (Porter, 1979). The organization has competitive pres-
sures coming from existing rival firms or from the threat of entry of new rivals. It is critical for 
these organizations to do things better, faster, and more cheaply than rivals. These organizations 
are driven to use information systems to develop innovative products, services, or processes.
These environmental characteristics alone, however, are not enough to determine whether 
an organization should deploy a particular information system. Before an organization can 
deploy any new system well, its processes, resources, and risk tolerance must be capable of 
adapting to and sustaining the development and implementation processes.
PROCESS REQUIREMENTS.  To sustain competitive advantage through innovation, people 
in the organization must be willing to do whatever they can to bypass and eliminate internal 
bureaucracy, set aside political squabbles, and pull together for the common good. Can you 
imagine, for example, a firm trying to deploy a web-based order entry system that enables 
customers to access inventory information directly when people in that firm do not even share 
such information with each other?
RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS.  Organizations focusing on innovation must also have the human 
capital necessary to implement innovative systems or to develop innovative products, services, 


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    103
or processes. The organization must have enough employees available with the proper 
systems knowledge, skills, time, and other resources to deploy these systems. Alternatively, 
the organization must have resources and able systems partners available to outsource the 
development of such systems if necessary.
RISK TOLERANCE REQUIREMENTS.  The last characteristic of an organization focusing on 
innovation is that its members must have the appropriate tolerance for risk and uncertainty as 
well as the willingness to deploy and use new systems that may not be as proven and pervasive 
as more traditional technologies. If people within the organization desire low risk in their use of 
information systems, then gambling on cutting-edge systems will probably not be desirable or 
tolerable for them. Likewise, open innovation initiatives typically require sharing organizational 
knowledge with outside partners, and organizations trying to leverage outsiders in their 
innovation process have to be willing to accept the potential risks involved.
The Innovation Process
As you can see, using innovation to gain and sustain competitive advantage is difficult. For 
example, if you are using information systems to gain a competitive advantage in the area of 
operating efficiencies, it is likely that your rivals can just as easily adopt the same types of infor-
mation systems and achieve the same gains. There are certainly ways to use information systems 
to create innovative products, services, or processes to gain a longer-lasting, sustainable com-
petitive advantage; if you can use information systems to make your products or services unique 
or to cause your customers to invest so heavily in you that their switching costs are high (i.e., if 
switching to a competitor’s product involves significant investment in terms of time and/or 
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
The CITE Project
Smart technology is popping up in more and more places. 
Everything from our watches to our toasters to our cars can 
communicate on the Internet. However, not every smart tech 
idea will integrate well with the real world. How can manufac-
turers and innovators test their technologies prior to bringing 
them to market to avoid risking complete failure? The CITE 
Project may be the answer.
When an innovative technology is released into the real 
world, it is not always used the way the inventor originally 
envisioned. The so-called “law of unintended consequences” 
can yield some interesting side effects based on how people 
actually use technologies. Texting while driving, for example, 
has only recently been realized to be a substantial safety issue. 
New and innovative approaches are needed to mitigate these 
types of risks. In order to get a better handle on what some of 
these potential issues may be before technologies are widely 
deployed, the telecommunications and tech firm Pegasus 
Global Holdings is working with a variety of partners to build a 
complete city in the desert.
The Center for Innovation, Testing, and Evaluation (CITE) 
will be a full-scale city designed to represent a broad swath of 
environments from across the United States. There will be a 
city center with civic buildings and parks, office space, indus-
trial parks, and a variety of residential areas. The goal is to be 
as realistic as possible, with the exception of actual residents. 
The plan is to build CITE in the desert of southern New Mexico, 
between the White Sands Missile Test Range (where the atomic 
bombs were tested) and the Mexico border.
CITE will allow new innovations to be tested at scale 
with minimal risk to the public. Everything from self-driving 
cars to smart homes to advanced thorium-based power 
supplies can be tried out in a controlled environment. This 
will give inventors the opportunity to see how their inven-
tions actually behave in a real environment and make 
adjustments and improvements prior to bringing the tech-
nology to market. If successful, then maybe some of the 
pitfalls of widespread deployment of new technologies can 
be avoided. The challenge however, is that many of the 
unintended consequences of technologies are not realized 
until real people are allowed to use, misuse, and abuse 
them. Without actual residents and a real-world social con-
text, critics doubt that CITE will be able to do more than 
serve as a glorified playground. As with any technology, 
though, the proof is in the doing—CITE could be opera-
tional as soon as 2018.
Based on:
Monks, K. (2015, October 6). CITE: The $1 billion city that nobody 
calls home. CNN. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from http://edition.cnn 
.com/2015/10/06/business/test-city/index.html
The Center, New Mexico. (2016, March 12). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia 
.org/w/index.php?title=The_Center,_New_Mexico&oldid=709651961

104    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
money for the customer), then you are better able to develop a competitive advantage that is sus-
tainable over the long haul. For example, you might combine heavy investments in computer-
aided design systems with very bright engineers in order to perfect your product and make it 
unique and something relatively difficult to copy. Alternatively, you might use a customer rela-
tionship management system to build an extensive database containing the entire history of your 
interaction with each of your customers and then use that system to provide very high-quality, 
intimate, rapid, and customized service that would convince customers that if they switched to a 
rival, it would take them years to build up that kind of relationship with the other firm.
ORGANIZING TO MAKE INNOVATION CHOICES.  Given the need for constant innovation, how 
do organizations make decisions on which innovations to embrace and which to ignore? In the 
book The Innovator’s Solution, Christensen and Raynor (2003) outline a process called the 
disruptive growth engine, which all organizations can follow to more effectively respond to 
radical innovations in their industry. This process has the following steps:
1.	Start Early.  To gain the greatest opportunities, become a leader in identifying, tracking, 
and adopting radical innovations by making these processes a formal part of the organiza-
tion (budgets, personnel, and so on).
2.	Display Executive Leadership.  To gain credibility as well as to bridge sustaining and radi-
cal product development, visible and credible leadership is required.
3.	Build a Team of Expert Innovators.  To most effectively identify and evaluate potential 
radical innovations, build a competent team of expert innovators.
4.	Educate the Organization.  To see opportunities, those closest to customers and competi-
tors (e.g., marketing, customer support, and engineering) need to understand how to iden-
tify radical innovations.
In addition to formalizing the identification of innovations within the organization, shifts in 
business processes and fundamental thinking about radical innovations are needed. Next, we 
examine how to implement the innovation identification process.
IMPLEMENTING THE INNOVATION PROCESS.  Executives today who are serious about using 
information technology in innovative ways have made it a point to have their people be 
continually on the lookout for new radical innovations that will have a significant impact on their 
business. Wheeler (2002) has summarized this process nicely as the disruptive innovation cycle 
(Figure 2.20). The model essentially holds that the key to success for modern organizations is the 
Org
ani
zati
ona
l Le
arni
ng 
ET
Time
Value Potential
Value Realization
Low
Low
Hi
Hi
External Market
Internal Organization
Taking Value
Propositions
to Market
Communicating
E-business Initiatives
Conveying New
IT Insights
ET
ET
Choosing
Enabling/Emerging
Technologies (ET)
Matching
with Economic
Opportunities
Executing
Business Innovation
for Growth
Assessing
External Customer &
Internal Client
Value
FIGURE 2.20
The disruptive innovation cycle.
Source: Based on Information Systems 
Research, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 125–146, 
2002.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    105
extent to which they use information technologies and systems in timely, innovative ways. The 
vertical dimension of the disruptive innovation cycle shows the extent to which an organization 
derives value from a particular information technology, and the horizontal dimension shows 
time. Next, we examine the cycle.
Choosing Enabling/Emerging Technologies  The first bubble (lower-left) shows that 
successful organizations first create jobs, groups, and processes that are all devoted to scanning 
the environment for new emerging and enabling technologies (i.e., information technologies 
that enable a firm to accomplish a task or goal or to gain or sustain competitive advantage in 
some way) that appear to be relevant for the organization. For example, an organization might 
designate a small group within the IS department as the “Emerging Technologies” unit and 
charge the group with looking for new technologies that will have an impact on the business. 
As part of its job, this group will pore over current technology magazines, participate in Internet 
discussion forums on technology topics, go to technology conferences and conventions, and 
have strong, active relationships with technology researchers at universities and technology 
companies.
Matching Technologies to Opportunities  Next, in the second bubble, the organization 
matches the most promising new technologies with current economic opportunities. For 
example, the Emerging Technologies group might have identified advances in 3D printing as 
a key enabling technology that now makes faster and cheaper prototyping feasible. In addition, 
managers within the marketing function of the firm have recognized that competitors have not 
released new models recently, and reducing product development cycle times can provide an 
opportunity to gain customers and market share.
Executing Business Innovation for Growth  The third bubble represents the process of 
selecting—among myriad opportunities to take advantage of—those emerging technologies 
that have the biggest potential to address the current opportunities. The organization decides 
to acquire 3D printers that enable it to create prototypes much faster, helping the company to 
release new product models at shorter intervals, in order to attract new customers.
Assessing Value  The fourth bubble represents the process of assessing the value of that use 
of technology, not only to customers but also to internal clients (sales representatives, marketing 
managers, the chief operating officer, and so on).
THINKING ABOUT INVESTMENTS IN RADICAL INNOVATIONS.  The disruptive innovation cycle 
suggests three new ways to think about investments in radical innovations:
1.	Put Technology Ahead of Strategy.  This approach says that technology is so important to 
strategy and to success that you have to begin with technology. Notice that the first bubble 
involves understanding, identifying, and choosing technologies that are important. The first 
bubble does not begin with strategy, as a traditional approach to running a business orga-
nization would suggest. In fact, many would argue that given how important technology is 
today and how fast it changes, if you start with a strategy and then try to retrofit technology 
into your aging strategy, you are doomed. This approach argues that you begin by under-
standing technology and develop a strategy from there. This approach is admittedly very 
uncomfortable for people who think in traditional ways and/or who are not comfortable 
with technology. We believe, however, that for many modern organizations, thinking about 
technology in this way is key.
2.	Put Technology Ahead of Marketing.  The second way that this approach turns conven-
tional wisdom on its head is that, like strategy, marketing also takes a backseat to technol-
ogy. Think about it carefully, and you will see that marketing does not come into play until 
later in this model. A very traditional marketing-oriented approach would be to go first 
to your customers and find out from them what their needs are and what you ought to be 
doing with technology. The trouble with this approach is that, given the rapid evolution 
of technology, your customers are not likely to know about new technologies and their 
capabilities. In some sense, they are the last place you ought to be looking for ideas about 
new technologies and their impact on your business. Indeed, if they know about the new 
technology, then chances are your competitors already do too, meaning that this technology 

106    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
is not the one to rest your competitive advantage on. As Steve Jobs of Apple put it, “You 
can’t just ask people what they want and then try to give that to them. By the time you get 
it built, they’ll want something new.”
3.	Innovation Is Continuous.  The third way that this approach is interesting—and potentially 
troubling—is that the process has to be ongoing. As shown along the time dimension at the 
bottom of the graph, the first bubble repeats over and over again as the Emerging Technolo-
gies group is constantly on the lookout for the “next new thing” that will revolutionize the 
business. The rate of information technology evolution is not likely to slow down, and inno-
vative organizations truly cannot—and do not—ever rest.
Today, dealing with rapid change caused by radical innovations is a reality for most industries. 
If you are a leader in an industry, you must continually learn to embrace and exploit radical innova-
tions, potentially destroying your existing core business while at the same time building a new 
business around the radical innovation. If you fail to do this, your competition may do it for you.
Startups and Crowdfunding
In recent years, we have witnessed the emergence of many highly successful innovative start-
ups, with some having quickly developed into multibillion-dollar companies. 
SECURITY MATTERS 
The Bangladesh SWIFT Theft
Information systems have made business faster and more effi-
cient in almost any industry, from agriculture to banking. This 
has widely benefitted our society, but the flip side is that crime 
and theft can be faster and more efficient as well. Two banks 
in Southeast Asia recently learned the hard way that cybertheft 
can be massive and quick, with nearly US$81 million disap-
pearing almost instantly and without a trace.
The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommu-
nication (SWIFT) is an organization that enables banks to rap-
idly clear financial transactions on a global basis. The society is 
owned by its members, who pay fees to provide for the tech-
nological infrastructure that enables quick and seamless finan-
cial transactions, such as clearing international money orders 
or settling very large transactions between governments and 
large financial services entities. The system has been in place 
since the 1970s and, as of September 2010, linked more than 
9,000 financial institutions in 209 countries and territories, 
which were exchanging an average of more than 15 million 
messages per day.
In February 2016, attackers successfully penetrated the 
central banking system of Bangladesh and used the SWIFT sys-
tem to initiate the transfer of nearly a billion dollars out of the 
country’s accounts. US$81 million worth of these transactions 
cleared before a spelling error caught the attention of a recipi-
ent institution and the transfers were halted. The hackers not 
only gained access to the system and initiated the transfers, 
but they used malware to cover up their activity as well—as all 
transactions were logged to a hard-copy printer, the hackers 
intercepted the print jobs, effectively making the transactions 
invisible. This type of combined social-engineering and 
malware-based attack is very difficult to defend against and 
serves to illustrate the disparity in the level of sophistication 
between the attackers and the bank employees charged with 
protecting their systems. A few months later, the attackers 
struck again and moved an undisclosed amount of money in 
the Philippines.
One of the more disturbing aspects of these crimes is the 
fact that the SWIFT system itself was not compromised. However, 
attackers were able to exploit the weaknesses in security at a 
member organization bank and use that organization as a step-
ping-off point to the broader network. Once they were inside the 
system, they were assumed to be trusted actors executing legiti-
mate transactions. SWIFT is investigating the implementation of 
additional network level security protocols and procedures but is 
simultaneously reminding member banks of the pressing need to 
secure their own houses as well. Still, the issues continue; in mid-
2016, attackers had stolen large sums not only in Bangladesh 
but also from banks in Ecuador and the Ukraine.
Based on:
Corkery, M. (2016, May 12). Once again, thieves enter Swift financial 
network and steal. The New York Times. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/13/business/dealbook/swift-global-
bank-network-attack.html
Gladstone, R. (2016, March 15). Bangladesh bank chief resigns 
after cyber theft of $81 million. The New York Times. Retrieved May 
29, 2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/16/world/asia/
bangladesh-bank-chief-resigns-after-cyber-theft-of-81-million.html
Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication. 
(2016, May 27). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved May 
29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Society_
for_Worldwide_Interbank_Financial_Telecommunication&ol
did=722327785


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    107
Startups—typically technology-based new ventures with high potential for scalability and 
growth—are often cofounded by entrepreneurs, developers, designers, or others with a prom-
ising idea. In the past, startups have been founded around services or platforms enabled by 
information systems. Advances in technologies such as 3D printing (see Chapter 1) have 
enabled hardware startups that build their business models around innovative physical 
objects, ranging from Coin’s electronic credit card to the Square Reader developed by pay-
ment startup Square (which in early 2016 filed to go public). At the same time, 3D printing 
has the potential to disrupt traditional supply chains, as consumers will eventually be able to 
produce products in their own homes, opening up an even larger market for new, innovative 
ventures (EY, 2016b).
However, even with the ability to relatively quickly develop prototypes of innovative prod-
ucts, going from invention to developing product designs and manufacturing processes and then 
manufacturing enough stock to meet the planned initial demand requires not only a great idea for 
an excellent product but also knowledge about the business environment, connections with the 
business community, and often substantial financial resources. To obtain the needed support, 
many startups turn to so-called startup incubators, which provide various types of education and 
other resources. Relatedly, startup accelerators typically provide education, investment, and 
intense mentorship for cohorts of startups. On the other hand, angel investors can be a valuable 
source for funding (but often only provide limited education or mentorship). Recently, crowd-
funding—though platforms such as Kickstarter or Indiegogo—has emerged as a novel form of 
obtaining project funding. Crowdfunding is the securing of business financing from individuals 
in the marketplace—the “crowd”—to fund an initiative (see Figure 2.21). Individuals who sup-
port a given initiative—called “backers”—pledge a certain amount of financial support to the 
project in return for certain benefits. In the case of Kickstarter, a funding campaign usually cen-
ters around a product—such as a smartphone case, a belt, an electronic gadget, or even a board 
game. Interested backers pledge money in support of the product, generally above a minimum 
FIGURE 2.21
Inventors and startups can draw on 
many sources for support.

108    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
amount in return for one count of the item being backed. If (and only if) the campaign reaches its 
funding goal, the backers are charged the amount they pledged and the product goes into pro-
duction. If too few backers are interested and the goal is not met, the campaign fails and no 
backers are charged any money. Kickstarter in particular has been very successful and has helped 
many campaigns get funded, totaling more than 135,000 projects with more than US$1 billion 
generated in pledges. Similarly, equity crowdfunding (sometimes called crowdinvesting) is the 
securing of financing from individuals, but the backers receive equity in return for their 
investment.
In this chapter, we examined how organizations can use information systems strategically, 
enabling them to gain or sustain competitive advantage over their rivals. As ongoing success 
depends on a sustained commitment to continuously learn and innovate, organizations must con-
tinuously search and apply the most effective business models.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Education
For decades, the cost of higher education in the United States 
has steadily increased (an average increase of 16 percent 
every 5 years for the past four decades), and the average col-
lege graduate entered the workforce with about US$37,000 
in student loans in 2016. Several emerging changes in the 
education industry hold the promise of bringing those costs 
down. Information systems are at the core of these exciting 
developments.
One way education is changing is through globalization. 
Universities increasingly partner with other universities around 
the world, encouraging collaboration among researchers, con-
sistency in curriculum design, and cross-border movement of 
students, graduates, and faculty. Many countries outside of 
the United States and other Western countries are investing 
heavily in their education systems, and there are now many 
universities in less developed parts of the world that can com-
pete with the best of the “old-school” Ivy League universities. 
The global economy has produced an equally global education 
system.
Along with the trend of globalization, many universities 
are extending their reach by implementing online courses or, 
in many cases, whole degrees that can be obtained via remote, 
self-directed courses delivered over the Internet. These pro-
grams are typically far less expensive to administer because 
once the materials are produced and refined, they can be 
used repeatedly by large groups of (paying) students. Some 
argue that such courses are less engaging and/or less effective, 
and there may be some truth to that. Regardless, universities 
continue to forge ahead in finding new ways to reach more 
students.
Another recent trend in education is the proliferation of so-
called massively open online courses (MOOCs). These courses, 
which are freely available to the public, are able to effectively 
reach millions of students. Some very prestigious schools par-
ticipate in providing these free courses, including Stanford, 
Wharton School of Business, UC Berkley, MIT, and Harvard. 
While the course content is provided free of charge, many of 
these institutions generate revenue by charging students for 
certifications or tutoring services.
Clearly, higher education is changing rapidly and in very 
significant ways, and technology has enabled each of these 
changes.
Questions
1.	 Are online courses better or worse as compared with tradi-
tional, face-to-face courses? Why?
2.	 In what ways could technology be used to improve on the 
deficiencies of online courses?
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016, May 2). African Universities urged to utilize online inter-
actions. Citi FM Online. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from http://citifmonline 
.com/2016/05/02/african-universities-urged-utilize-online-interactions
Anonymous. (2016). A look at the shocking student loan debt statistics 
for 2016. Student Loan Hero. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://
studentloanhero.com/student-loan-debt-statistics-2016
Friedman, J. (2016, May 12). 3 reasons to try out MOOCs before 
applying to college. US News and World Report. Retrieved May 29, 
2016, from http://www.usnews.com/education/online-education/
articles/2016-05-12/3-reasons-to-try-out-moocs-before-applying-to-
college
Massive open online course. (2016, May 24). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved May 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Massive_open_online_course&oldid=721913401


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    109
Key Points Review
1.	 Discuss how information systems can be used for 
automation, organizational learning, and strategic 
advantage. Information systems are used at different 
levels of an organization to support automating and 
organizational learning and to support strategy. To 
apply information systems strategically, you must 
understand the organization’s competitive landscape as 
well as the value chain and be able to identify 
opportunities in which you can use information 
systems to make changes or improvements in the value 
chain to gain or sustain a competitive advantage.
2.	 Describe how information systems support business 
models used by companies operating in the digital 
world. Organizations utilize information systems 
investments as a central component for executing their 
business models and delivering their value proposition. 
Common revenue models include affiliate marketing, 
subscriptions, licensing, transactions fees, sales, and 
web advertising revenue. The freemium model for 
providing digital products or services has become a 
widely used strategy for quickly building a large user 
base and monetizing additional features provided. 
Fueled by information systems, many organizations are 
extremely successful by building platforms or offering 
their products as services.
3.	 Explain why and how companies are continually 
looking for innovative ways to use information 
systems for competitive advantage. In order to gain or 
sustain competitive advantage, organizations have to 
continuously innovate. As product innovations are 
often easily copied, organizations have to combine 
various types of innovation in their business models. 
Given that new technologies are not as stable as 
traditional ones, being at the technological cutting edge 
is typically quite difficult to execute. To best deploy 
new technologies, organizations must be ready for the 
business process changes that will ensue, have the 
resources necessary to deploy new technologies 
successfully, and be tolerant of the risk and problems 
involved in being at the cutting edge. Deploying 
emerging information systems is an ongoing process in 
which organizations should continuously scan the 
environment for emerging and enabling (and 
potentially disruptive) technologies, narrow down the 
list to those technologies that match with the 
challenges the firm faces or that create economic 
opportunities, choose a particular technology, 
implement it in a way that enables them to gain or 
sustain a competitive advantage, and assess the value 
of the technology.
Key Terms
affiliate marketing  90
augmented reality  98
automating  81
best-cost provider strategy  85
business/IT alignment  89
business model  89
business process  78
capabilities  86
collaborative economy  94
crowdfunding  107
differentiation strategy  85
disruptive innovation  97
disruptive innovation cycle  104
distinctive competency  86
economic opportunities  105
effectiveness  79
efficiency  78
enabling technology  105
executive level  80
first-mover advantage  84
freemium  92
functional area information system  81
gig economy  94
in-app purchases  92
innovation  97
key performance indicator (KPI)  80
low-cost leadership strategy  85
managerial level  79
open innovation  101
operational level  78
organizational learning  83
organizational strategy  84
platform  93
radical innovation  97
resources  86
revenue model  90
semistructured decision  79
sharing economy  94
startup  106
strategic necessity  89
strategic planning  84
structured decision  78
transaction  78
unstructured decision  80
value chain  88
value chain analysis  88
value creation  86
value proposition  89
virtual reality (VR) headset  97
XaaS  95
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM

110    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Review Questions
	 2-1. 	Compare and contrast the characteristics of 
the operational, managerial, and executive 
levels of an organization.
	 2-2. 	Compare and contrast automating and learning.
	 2-3. 	Describe competitive advantage and list six 
sources.
	 2-4. 	How do an organization’s resources and capa-
bilities result in a competitive advantage?
	 2-5. 	Compare and contrast pipe- and platform-
based business models.
MyLab MIS
	 2-6. 	What is the freemium model, and how can a 
business successfully use this approach?
	 2-7. 	Why is successful application of innovative 
technologies and systems often difficult?
	 2-8. 	How can information systems help in com-
bining multiple types of innovation?
	 2-9. 	Using past examples, explain what is meant 
by a radical innovation.
	 2-10. 	Describe the disruptive innovation cycle.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 2-11. 	______________ is using technology as a way to help 
complete a task within an organization faster and, per-
haps, more cheaply.
A.	Automating
B.	Learning
C.	Strategizing
D.	Processing
	 2-12. 	What are new technologies, products, or services that 
eventually surpass the existing dominant technology or 
product in a market called?
A.	open innovation
B.	radical innovation
C.	incremental innovation
D.	radical change
	 2-13. 	Which of the following is not improving the value 
chain?
A.	improving procurement processes
B.	increasing operating costs
C.	minimizing marketing expenditures
D.	streamlining production processes
	 2-14. 	A company is said to have ______________ when it 
has gained an edge over its rivals.
A.	monopoly
B.	profitability
C.	competitive advantage
D.	computer advantage
	 2-15. 	Each of the following was described in this chap-
ter as a source of competitive advantage except for 
______________.
A.	delivering superior customer service
B.	achieving lower cost than rivals
C.	being the subject of a hostile takeover
D.	having shorter lead times in developing and testing 
new products
	 2-16. 	______________ involves creating new products, pro-
cesses, or services that return value to the organization.
A.	Startup culture
B.	Creativity
C.	Invention
D.	Innovation
	 2-17. 	What is the process of choosing, matching, executing, 
and assessing innovative technologies called?
A.	environmental scanning
B.	disruptive innovation cycle
C.	strategic planning
D.	none of the above
	 2-18. 	The revenue model involving the referring of custom-
ers to another business is called ______________.
A.	referral marketing
B.	Internet marketing
C.	affiliate marketing
D.	ad marketing
	 2-19. 	At the ______________ level of the organization, 
functional managers (e.g., marketing managers, 
finance managers, manufacturing managers, and 
human resource managers) focus on monitoring and 
controlling operational-level activities and providing 
information to higher levels of the organization.
A.	operational
B.	managerial
C.	organizational
D.	executive
	 2-20. 	A supervisor’s having to decide when to reor-
der supplies or how best to allocate personnel for 
the completion of a project is an example of a(n) 
______________ decision.
A.	structured
B.	unstructured
C.	automated
D.	delegated
Answers are on page 112.


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    111
Problems and Exercises
	 2-21. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 value chain analysis
ii.	 freemium
iii.	 managerial level
iv.	 value chain
v.	 disruptive innovation cycle
vi.	 sharing economy
vii.	 platform
viii.	 open innovation
ix.	 radical innovation
x.	 operational level
a.	 A business model that enables others—both other 
businesses and users—to co-create value, such that 
some users create value and other users consume
b.	 The process of analyzing an organization’s activi-
ties to determine where value is added to products 
and/or services and the costs that are incurred for 
doing so
c.	 An economic system in which assets or services are 
shared between private individuals, either free or 
for a fee, typically by means of the Internet
d.	 The middle level of the organization, where func-
tional managers focus on monitoring and control-
ling operational-level activities and providing 
information to higher levels of the organization
e.	 A model suggesting that the extent to which mod-
ern organizations use information technologies and 
systems in timely, innovative ways is the key to 
success
f.	 Giving away limited versions of a digital product 
or service for free in order to build a large customer 
base, and charging a premium for unrestricted 
versions
g.	 The set of primary and support activities in an 
organization where value is added to a product or 
service
h.	 An innovation that uses markedly new or differ-
ent technology to provide significantly greater 
customer benefits, and eventually marginalizes or 
replaces existing products or services
i.	 The process of integrating external stakeholders 
into the innovation process
j.	 The bottom level of an organization, where the rou-
tine day-to-day interactions with customers occur
	 2-22. 	Interview the owner of a small local store. How many 
decision-making levels does this business have? What 
are the types of short-term and long-term decisions and 
information needs?
	 2-23. 	Compare and contrast structured and unstructured 
decisions you had to make. Which ones were more dif-
ficult? Why?
	 2-24. 	Identify a company utilizing the distinct competitive 
strategies shown in Figure 2.11; provide evidence to 
support your selection.
	 2-25. 	Of the five competitive forces presented in the chapter 
(Porter’s model), which is the most significant for an 
organization in terms of making IS investment deci-
sions? Why? Which is the least significant? Why?
	 2-26. 	Using a company you are familiar with, identify the 
areas of the value chain where the company can save 
costs or improve processes through IS.
	 2-27. 	Using an organization you are familiar with, analyze 
the different components of its business model. What 
are the biggest drivers of costs, and how could the 
organization use IS to reduce costs?
	 2-28. 	Search the Web for different ways in which you could 
use advertising to generate money from your website. 
How do different models work?
	 2-29. 	Do you use any freemium-based services? Would you 
pay for additional functionality? Why or why not?
	 2-30. 	Find and describe an example not discussed in this 
chapter that demonstrates the use of multiple types of 
innovation.
	 2-31. 	Find and describe an example not discussed in this 
chapter that demonstrates the transition from a 
product-based to a service-based business model.
	 2-32. 	Describe a company you are familiar with. How inno-
vative is it? How does it fare on the organizational 
requirements for innovation?
	 2-33. 	Find an example (not mentioned in the chapter) of a 
disruptive innovation. What product/service is being dis-
rupted? What is the impact on the industry/customers? 
	 2-34. 	Go to a website that generates revenue through adver-
tising. In how far do the online ads appear to be rel-
evant to your interests or browsing history? If you visit 
the same websites from a public computer, do the ads 
differ? Why?
	 2-35. 	What are the benefits of open innovation? For an orga-
nization, why may open innovation be problematic?

112    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application: Valuing Information 
Systems
	 2-36. 	The cost of maintaining information systems is high 
for Campus Travel. You have been assigned to evalu-
ate the total cost of ownership (TCO) of a few systems 
that are currently in use by Campus Travel employees. 
Take a look at the TCO.csv file to obtain the list of 
systems that are in use and the costs associated with 
maintaining the software, hardware, and the associated 
personnel for each type of system. Calculate the fol-
lowing for your operations manager:
■
■The costs for server hardware by adding a new row 
to include web servers. This includes US$4,500 
for the main campus and US$2,200 for the other 
campuses.
■
■The TCO for the entire information system used at 
Campus Travel. Hint: Sum all the values for all the 
systems together.
■
■The TCO for servers and network components of 
the information system.
■
■Make sure that you format the table, including using 
the currency format, in a professional manner.
Database Application: Building a System Usage 
Database
	 2-37. 	To understand the assets in Campus Travel, the IS 
manager has asked you to design a database that would 
be able to store all the assets. Your manager asks you 
to do the following:
■
■Create a new blank database called asset.mdb.
■
■Create a new table called “assets” in the asset data-
base with the following fields:
a.	 Item ID (Text field)
b.	 Item Name (Text field)
c.	 Description (Memo field)
d.	 Category (hardware, software, other)
e.	 Condition (new, good, fair, poor)
f.	 Acquisition Date (Date field)
g.	 Purchase Price (Currency field)
h.	 Current Value (Currency field)
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats:  
Online Searching
The Google search engine has become so popular with Internet 
users that the word Google is often used as a verb (“I Googled 
the restaurant to see its reviews”), but there are other well-
known search engines, such as Yahoo! and Microsoft’s Bing. 
Table 2.10 shows the percentage of Internet surfers who used 
each search engine (i.e., the search engines’ market share) in 
June 2016 as compared with June 2014.
Questions and Exercises
	 2-38. 	Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics about 
the search engine market.
	 2-39. 	As a team, interpret these numbers. What is striking/
important about these statistics? How do the numbers 
compare to your own search behavior?
	 2-40. 	How have the numbers changed? Will there be other 
important players in the search engine market?
	 2-41. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, create a 
graph/figure that effectively visualizes the statistics/
changes you consider most important.
TABLE 2.10  Top Search Engines by Market Share, June 2016 Compared with June 2014
Search Engine
June 2016 Market Share (%)
June 2014 Market Share (%)
Change (percentage points)
Google
77.6
73.4
3.2
Baidu
  6.0
14.4
–8.4
Yahoo!
  6.2
  6.6
–0.4
Bing
  8.7
  4.9
3.8
Others
  1.5
  0.8
0.7
Source: Based on Top Search Engine Share Trend, published by Net Applications.com, 2015.
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 2-11.	  A, p. 81
	 2-12.	  B, p. 105
	 2-13.	  B, p. 88
	 2-14.	  C, p. 84
	 2-15.	  C, p. 88
	 2-16.	  D, p. 97
	 2-17.	  B, p. 97
	 2-18.	  C, p. 90
	 2-19.	  B, p. 79
	 2-20.	  A, p. 78


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    113
The Internet and the emergence of mobile, 
social, and cloud computing have enabled 
new business models, of which the platform-
based business model is one of the most 
interesting. Many of today’s revolutionary 
businesses are based on providing digital 
platforms through which users create value 
as well as consume user-created content. 
One example of a platform-based business is 
LinkedIn, a social networking service used 
for professional networking.
LinkedIn was founded in 2002 and 
launched in 2003. It is mainly used by job 
seekers to post their CVs and by employers 
to post job applications. In 2016, it had more 
than 467 million user accounts, of which 106 
million were active users across more than 
200 countries and territories, and it was 
available in 24 languages.
The vast number of users is one critical 
factor for LinkedIn’s success. Since platform- 
based businesses do not require the company 
itself to provide services and products, they 
depend largely on their users to offer and 
consume services. The network only has 
value if users participate, and this dictates 
the success or failure of the business. 
­LinkedIn is constantly growing its user base, 
which is not only enabling its business model 
but also strengthening its competitive advan-
tage against possible rivals.
LinkedIn’s revenue model is based on 
taking advantage of the many possibilities 
offered by information systems that support 
business models. According to LinkedIn, the 
company’s revenues come from talent solu-
tions, marketing solutions, and premium 
subscription products. Talent solutions offer 
recruiters and companies the ability to search 
for employees and advertise job openings. 
Marketing solutions let other companies add 
sponsored content and ads to the service. The 
premium subscriptions product gives users 
access to advanced services, such as tools for 
job seeking that are not available in the free 
profile, for a fee. By Q3 in 2016, most of 
LinkedIn’s revenue came from talent solu-
tions (65 percent), while marketing solutions 
and premium subscriptions added up to 
almost 20 percent of the revenue each. The 
company’s total revenue by this time was 
$960 million.
With help of information systems, 
LinkedIn has proven itself capable of provid-
ing added value to its users compared to the 
traditional job-seeking process offline. When 
it was first launched in 2003, LinkedIn 
wasn’t the first service to enter the market 
using information systems for job searches, 
but it managed to differentiate itself from 
other social networking services and grow its 
user base before similar services caught up. 
At the moment, current competitors such as 
Viadeo and XING are far behind LinkedIn, 
with significantly fewer users. LinkedIn is 
fairly well protected against new competitors 
as users are reluctant to change to a totally 
new service when they have invested in cre-
ating content and networks through one ser-
vice. The most relevant competitive threat 
comes from other established social net-
works with a wide user base; one example is 
Facebook, which announced a new service 
called Facebook Jobs in the fall of 2016.
In order to stay ahead of the competition, 
it is important for LinkedIn to use informa-
tion systems in innovative ways to differenti-
ate its services. LinkedIn continuously 
provides users with new features in order to 
expand the ways people use the service. For 
example, in 2008 LinkedIn added an applica-
tions platform that lets users link external 
services such as blog postings to their pro-
file. Another example is LinkedIn Salary, a 
feature announced on November 2016, 
which lets users submit and browse salary 
information anonymously. In addition to 
adding new features in-house, LinkedIn has 
also delivered new services for users via 
business purchases. LinkedIn has made sev-
eral acquisitions such as online education 
company Lynda.com in 2015, which pro-
vided users with access to Lynda.com’s 
9,000 online courses via an online learning 
platform called LinkedIn Learning. The idea 
was to help professionals gain the specific 
skills that are required by companies as well 
as to help companies provide tailored course 
entities for their employees while following 
their progress.
What the future of LinkedIn will be 
remains to be seen. In June 2016, Microsoft 
announced that it was acquiring LinkedIn for 
$26.2 billion, the software giant’s biggest 
acquisition so far. The deal was finalized in 
December 2016. One reason for Microsoft’s 
interest in LinkedIn was to connect the ser-
vice to its assets, such as Office 365, 
Exchange, and Outlook. In addition, Micro-
soft also gained access to LinkedIn’s data-
base, with the personal profiles and 
professional connections of over 400 million 
users. Although Microsoft has announced 
that LinkedIn will continue to operate as an 
independent business, the turbulence around 
the acquisition might give an opening for 
competitors like Facebook Jobs.
CASE 1
LinkedIn
Questions
	 2-42. 	 Using examples, describe possible revenue models related to 
social networking services.
	 2-43. 	 How has LinkedIn provided users with added value in 
­comparison to traditional job seeking?
	 2-44. 	 In what ways has LinkedIn protected itself from 
competition?
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016). About us. LinkedIn. Retrieved November 20, 2016, from 
https://press.linkedin.com/about-linkedin.
Constine, Josh. (2016, November 7). Facebook threatens LinkedIn with job 
opening features. Techcrunch. Retrieved November 20, 2016, from https://
techcrunch.com/2016/11/07/jobbook/.
DeNisco, Alison (2016, October 24). Can LinkedIn Learning help train your 
employees? TechRepublic. Retrieved December 19, 2016, from http://www 
.techrepublic.com/article/can-linkedin-learning-help-train-your-employees/.
Feller, Grant (2016, June 14). This is the real reason Microsoft bought 
LinkedIn. Forbes. Retrieved December 19, 2016, from http://www.forbes 
.com/sites/grantfeller/2016/06/14/this-is-the-real-reason-microsoft-bought- 
linkedin/#48fb42f4acd4.
Waters, Richard (2016, November 3). Microsoft-LinkedIn deal raises new 
competition concerns. Financial Times. Retrieved November 20, 2016, from 
https://www.ft.com/content/d5ceda60-a1e1-11e6-82c3-4351ce86813f.

114    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Remember the old brick-and-mortar movie 
rental services? You drove to the physical 
location, scanned shelves for your movie of 
choice (too frequently, it wasn’t in), paid the 
clerk, and left. The flick was due back in 24 
hours (or, at most, 3 to 5 days later), or you 
were billed a hefty late fee. In some cases, 
forgetful customers answered the door to 
find a police officer asking why they hadn’t 
returned a rental movie.
Movie rental stores still exist but in 
quickly dwindling numbers. Many alterna-
tives have spawned, beginning with Netflix, 
the first and now the world’s largest online 
movie service. Though originally started as a 
mail-order DVD rental service, Netflix has 
rapidly embraced the streaming video mar-
ket. As of December 2013, Netflix offered 
its 81 million subscribers in 190 countries 
tens of thousands of movie and television 
titles and, in 2015, accounted for 37 percent 
of all downstream web traffic during prime-
time hours (the major streaming services 
combined accounted for a whopping 70 per-
cent). Though Netflix continues to battle ris-
ing costs as movie and TV studios raise their 
licensing fees, the company continues to 
dominate in the streaming market.
Other competitors have entered the mar-
ket as well. Amazon’s Prime subscription 
service, in addition to providing discounts on 
fast shipping for all products, provides sub-
scribers access to a vast library of movie and 
TV content. This content is available to users 
via Amazon’s mobile devices, like the 
Kindle Fire, as well as the recently released 
Amazon FireTV, a US$99 set-top box that 
also supports gaming.
Apple and Google also compete in this 
space, though currently with a slightly differ-
ent approach. iTunes has long been the 
leader in digital music distribution, and 
Apple moved seamlessly to movie and TV 
distribution as those became popular. The 
distinction from the Netflix and Amazon 
models is that iTunes provides a rental and 
purchasing marketplace, where customers 
can pay for temporary rights to a movie 
(rental) or may pay a higher price to pur-
chase the movie for indefinite ownership. 
The Google Play store uses a similar rental/
purchase model. The advantage of this model 
is that movie and TV studios are much more 
willing to participate in this type of distribu-
tion (which mirrors physical movie and TV 
distribution and the accompanying reve-
nues). As a result, these marketplaces typi-
cally provide the latest, most popular movies. 
In contrast, a drawback of Netflix and Ama-
zon’s streaming services is their limited 
selection of popular or recent titles, as their 
streaming libraries are dependent on content 
deals they have made with individual 
studios.
One of the major advantages to these 
digital video distribution services is their 
ability to personalize a customer’s experi-
ence to a degree previously not possible. 
These personalized services learn about a 
user’s preferences according to the movies 
they frequently watch. From this data, the 
company creates a profile of each customer 
and a list of recommended movies. If, for 
example, a customer liked the movie Pro-
metheus, he or she may also like the 1979 
sci-fi classic Alien, and that movie will be 
included in a list of suggested movies. Cus-
tomers can refine the recommendations by 
rating titles according to their preferences. 
These systems allow customers to tap large 
databases of movies, many of which they 
may not have been aware of at all.
Consider how fast things are changing. 
Just a few years ago, the only way to watch 
a movie other than paying to purchase it 
was to drive to a movie rental store like 
Blockbuster or Hollywood Video and pay 
to borrow a DVD for a few days. Today, 
that same entertainment can be obtained via 
any computer or mobile device or through 
an increasing number of “connected” TVs, 
Blu-ray players, or small video-streaming 
devices like the Amazon FireTV, AppleTV, 
or Google’s Chromecast. These services 
and devices have completely disrupted the 
movie rental business. Hollywood Video, 
once a major competitor to Blockbuster 
Video with stores all over the U.S., declared 
bankruptcy in 2010 and closed all of its 
stores. Blockbuster Video slowly bled cus-
tomers until it too declared bankruptcy in 
2010. Some stores remained open for a few 
years, but as of June 2016, customers could 
find the Blockbuster name on a mere 
19 locations.
CASE 2 
Streaming Video
Questions
	 2-45. 	 In what ways has technology enabled the transformation and 
destruction of the traditional video rental industry?
	 2-46. 	 Paid programming from cable companies still largely follows 
the model it has been following for the past few decades. 
How will technology and the public’s appetite for on-
demand, streaming video change the cable television indus-
try in the coming years?
	 2-47. 	 Discuss whether and how Netflix or Amazon can continue 
to grow their business and revenues in the streaming video 
market.
Based on:
Blockbuster LLC. (2016, June 26). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved June 26, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Blockbuster_LLC&oldid=727037281
Netflix. (2016, June 24). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
June 26, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Netflix&ol
did=726823307
The Canadian Press. (2015, December 7). Netflix, YouTube video streaming 
dominate internet traffic in North America. CBC news. Retrieved June 26, 2016, 
from http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/video-streaming-traffic-1.3354182
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions.
MyLab MIS
TM
	 2-48. 	 List and describe five general types of organizational strategy.
	 2-49. 	 What is a business model, and what are its primary components?


CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems    115
References
Alavi, M., & Young, G. (1992). Information technologies in an inter-
national enterprise: An organizing framework. In S. Palvia, P. 
Palvia, & R. Zigli (Eds.), Global issues in information technology 
management (pp. 495–516). Harrisburg, PA: Idea Group.
Applegate, L. M., Austin, R. D., & Soule, D. L. (2009). Corporate 
information strategy and management (8th ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Avakian, T. (2015, July 28). Oculus Rift is letting travelers experi-
ence destinations in a whole new way before they visit. Business 
Insider. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from http://www.businessinsider 
.com/how-oculus-rift-is-impacting-travel-2015-7
Bakos, J. Y., & Treacy, M. E. (1986). Information technology and 
corporate strategy: A research perspective. MIS Quarterly, 10(2), 
107–120.
Bonchek, M., & Chuodary, S.P. (2013, January 31). Three ele-
ments of a successful platform strategy. Harvard Business 
Review. Retrieved March 22, 2016, from https://hbr.org/2013/01/
three-elements-of-a-successful-platform
Casanova, S. (2013, November 12). Washington Metro goes green 
& saves green with Philips performance lighting contract, 
delivering on sustainability goals with 15 million kWh saved 
annually. Philips.com. Retrieved April 7, 2016, from http://
www.usa.philips.com/a-w/about/news/archive/standard/news/
press/2013/20131112-Philips-WMATA.html
Chandy. R. K., & Tellis, G. J. (1998). Organizing for radical product 
innovation: The overlooked role of willingness to cannibalize. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 35(4).
Chelen, M. (2016, January 26). SuperData’s 2015 stats place League 
of Legends and Clash of Clans at the top. MMOS.com. Retrieved 
April 6, 2016, from http://mmos.com/news/superdatas-2015-stats-
place-league-of-legends-and-clash-of-clans-at-the-top
Chesbrough, H. (2012, November 4). Open services innovation. 
Innovation Excellence. Retrieved April 7, 2016, from http://www 
.innovationexcellence.com/blog/2012/11/04/open-services- 
innovation
Christensen, C. M. (1997). The innovator’s dilemma. Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press.
Christensen, C. M., & Raynor, M. E. (2003). The innovator’s solu-
tion: Creating and sustaining successful growth. Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press.
Christensen, C. M., Roth, E. A., & Anthony, S. D. (2004). Seeing 
what’s next: Using theories of innovation to predict industry 
change. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Choudary, S. P. (2013). Why business models fail: 
Pipes vs. platforms. Wired.com. Retrieved March 23, 
2016, from http://www.wired.com/insights/2013/10/
why-business-models-fail-pipes-vs-platforms
Daugherty, P., Banerjee, P., Negm, W. & Alter, A. E. (2015). Driving 
unconventional growth through the Industrial Internet of Things. 
Accenture. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://www.accenture 
.com/us-en/_acnmedia/Accenture/next-gen/reassembling-industry/
pdf/Accenture-Driving-Unconventional-Growth-through-IIoT.pdf
Economist. (2013, May 9). The rise of the shar-
ing economy. Economist. Retrieved March 22, 
2016, from http://www.economist.com/news/
leaders/21573104-internet-everything-hire-rise-sharing-economy
EY. (2016a). Can corporate venture help companies solve 
the innovation paradox? EY.com. Retrieved April 15, 
2016, from https://betterworkingworld.ey.com/disruption/
corporate-venture-solve-innovation-paradox
EY. (2016b). The Internet of Everything is closer than you think. 
EY.com. Retrieved April 16, 2016, from https://betterworkingworld 
.ey.com/better-questions/internet-of-things-everything
Garvin, D. A. (1993). Building a learning organization. Harvard 
Business Review, 71(4), 78–91.
Gaudiosi, J. (2015, September 2). This company is redesigning how it 
works with virtual reality. Fortune. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from 
http://fortune.com/2015/09/02/virtual-reality-interior-design
Hathaway, I. (2016, March 1). What startup accelerators really do. 
Harvard Business Review. Retrieved June 26, 2016, from https://
hbr.org/2016/03/what-startup-accelerators-really-do
Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R. D., & Hoskisson, R. E. (2015). Strategic man-
agement: Competitiveness and globalization (11th ed.). Boston: 
South-Western.
Jacobs, H. (2015, March 19). Gaming guru explains why “freemium” 
is actually the best business model for multiplayer video games. 
Business Insider. Retrieved April 6, 2016, from http://www 
.businessinsider.com/sean-plott-explains-why-he-thinks-
freemium-games-are-the-best-business-model-for-both-players-
and-developers-2015-3
Karimi, J., & Konsynski, B. R. (1991). Globalization and informa-
tion management strategies. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 7(4), 7–26.
Keeley, L., Pikkel, R., Quinn, B., & Walters, H. (2013). Ten types of 
innovation: The discipline of building breakthroughs. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley.
Kumar, V. (2014, May). Making freemium work. Harvard Business 
Review. Retrieved April 6, 2016, from https://hbr.org/2014/05/
making-freemium-work
Maddox, J. (1999, December). The unexpected science to come. Sci-
entific American, 281, 62–67.
McKeen, J. D., Guimaraes, T., & Wetherbe, J. C. (1994). A compara-
tive analysis of MIS project selection mechanisms. Database, 
25(2), 43–59.
Moazed, A. (2016, May 1). What is a platform? Applico. Retrieved 
June 22, 2016, from http://www.applicoinc.com/blog/
what-is-a-platform-business-model
Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2010). Business model generation. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Owyang, J., Tran, C., & Silva, C. (2013, June 4). The collaborative 
economy. Altimeter. Retrieved June 22, 2016, from http://www 
.altimetergroup.com/2013/06/new-research-the-collaborative-
economy-products-services-and-market-relationships-have-
changed-as-sharing-startups-impact-business-models-to-
avoid-disruption-companies-must-adopt-the-collabora
Oxford Dictionary. (2016). Sharing economy. Retrieved April 7, 
2016, from http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/
sharing-economy
Porter, M. E. (1979, March–April). How competitive forces shape 
strategy. Harvard Business Review, 57, 137–145.
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage: Creating and sustain-
ing superior performance. New York: Free Press.
Porter, M. E. (2001). Strategy and the internet. Harvard Business 
Review, 79(3), 62–78.
Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free 
Press.
Rubin, H. (2004, June 1). Real value: The elusive value of infrastruc-
ture. CIO.com. Retrieved June 26, 2016, from http://www 
.cio.com/article/2439613/it-organization/real-value----the-elusive-
value-of-infrastructure.html

116    CHAPTER 2  •  Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems 
Shank, J., & Govindarajan, V. (1993). Strategic cost management: Three 
key themes for managing costs effectively. New York: Free Press.
Sundararajan, A. (2015, July 26). The ‘gig economy’ is com-
ing. What will it mean for work? The Guardian. Retrieved 
September 22, 2016, from https://www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2015/jul/26/will-we-get-by-gig-economy
Swartz, E. (2014, September 15). The transformation of GE: From 
“we bring good things to life” to industrial machines in the cloud. 
Metratech. Retrieved April 7, 2016, from http://www.metratech 
.com/blog/industrial-machines-in-the-cloud
Vitasek, K. (2012, June 12). The Rolls-Royce of effec-
tive performance-based collaboration. Mainte-
nance Technology. Retrieved March 22, 2016, from 
http://www.maintenancetechnology.com/2012/06/
the-rolls-royce-of-effective-performance-based-collaboration
Wheeler, B. C. (2002). NeBIC: A dynamic capabilities theory for 
assessing net-enablement. Information Systems Research, 13(2), 
125–146.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machine: The future of 
work and power. New York: Basic Books.

This page intentionally left blank

118
118
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
From Google to Alphabet
N
early everyone in the entire world knows a few 
global brands such as Apple, Coca-Cola, Sam-
sung, and Toyota. Another powerful brand, 
Google, has become known around the world for its 
ubiquitous search engine (Figure 3.1). But Google is 
much more than a search engine. Google has very 
diverse interests, from driverless cars and other technol-
ogies to life sciences, investment capital, and space 
exploration through investments in SpaceX. Given this 
diversity, many things that Google was exploring didn’t 
fall neatly under a search engine company, not to men-
tion spending billions of dollars on many “blue ocean” 
R&D projects that were not always viewed favorably by 
investors. To make the point that Google is interested in 
far more than search engines and to help sharpen the 
focus of the various Google-owned companies, a hold-
ing company called Alphabet was created. This giant 
restructuring of the Google empire has placed 10 com-
panies under the Alphabet umbrella (in early 2016) and 
allows Alphabet to have different types of companies, 
allowing investors the choice of investing in Alphabet 
or in one of the subsidiary companies that are publicly 
traded.
With this move to Alphabet, it has become much eas-
ier for investors to understand the Google business 
model and how each of the various companies are con-
tributing to (or harming) Alphabet’s bottom line. For 
example, Alphabet owns the robotics business Boston 
Dynamics, life sciences company Verily, and home 
Managing the Information 
Systems Infrastructure 
and Services
3
Just as any city depends on a functioning infrastructure, 
companies operating in the digital world are relying on a 
comprehensive information systems (IS) infrastructure to 
support their business processes and competitive strategy. 
Transactions are conducted with ever-increasing speed; like-
wise, with ever-increasing amounts of data to be captured, 
analyzed, and stored, companies have to thoroughly plan 
and manage their infrastructure needs in order to gain the 
greatest returns on their IS investments. When planning and 
managing their IS architectures, organizations must answer 
many important and difficult questions. For example, how 
will we utilize information systems to enable our competitive 
strategy? What technologies and systems best support our 
core business processes? Which vendors should we partner 
with, which technologies do we adopt, and which do we 
avoid? What hardware, software, or services do we buy, 
build, or have managed by an outside service provider? How 
can we use cloud computing to increase our agility? Clearly, 
effectively managing an organization’s IS infrastructure is a 
complex but necessary activity in today’s digital world.
This chapter focuses on helping managers understand 
the key components of a comprehensive IS infrastructure 
and why its careful management is necessary. With the 
increasing complexity of an organization’s information 
needs and the increasing complexity of the systems 
needed to satisfy these requirements, the topic of infra-
structure management is fundamental for managing in 
the digital world.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

119
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
the intention is for the various Alphabet companies to 
be independent and develop their own brands and 
innovations. This way, the likelihood of finding the next 
new idea that can change the world is much higher.
Brin and Page believe that large companies get com-
fortable with their success and business model. Both 
want to continue to innovate and create inventions that 
can transform the world. For now, Google’s search 
engine is bringing in most of the revenue and is highly 
profitable. But these tech pioneers are looking toward 
the future, aiming to take a long term view and 
“improving the lives of as many people as [they] can.”
Clearly, Alphabet is about more than search engines, 
and its founders are about more than resting on prior 
accomplishments.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How does Google benefit from a well-functioning 
infrastructure?
2.	What are the major components of Google’s 
infrastructure?
3.	What are the factors organizations should consider 
when building on infrastructure provided by Google?
Based on:
Anonymous. (n.d.). Our history in depth. Retrieved April 7, 2016, from 
http://www.google.com/about/company/history
Hempel, J. (2016, April 1). Google’s Alphabet transition has been 
tougher than A-B-C. Wired. Retrieved April 7, 2016, from http://www 
.wired.com/2016/04/googles-alphabet-transition-tougher-b-c
Nieva, R. (2016, January 29). Alphabet? Google? Either way, it’s ready 
to rumble. CNet.com. Retrieved April 7, 2016, from http://www.cnet 
.com/google-alphabet
Page, L. (2015). 2015 Update from the CEO. Alphabet.com. Retrieved 
April 7, 2016, from https://abc.xyz/investor/founders-letters/2015
automation company Nest Labs. With the restructuring, 
financial reporting shows where revenue is generated 
and where investments in new ideas are made. Investors 
are thrilled with this new transparency, and many feel 
that Alphabet will be more disciplined about where it 
will place investment bets as successes and failures will 
be more visible and tightly associated with a particular 
company.
Alphabet is now one of the biggest companies in the 
world. For most of us who use Gmail and Google Docs or 
watch countless YouTube videos, the shift to Alphabet 
won’t even be noticeable. However, for those in the 
business and technology world, they better take notice! 
Google’s founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page don’t 
want to relax as simply the giants of online search; they 
have “always strived to do more, and to do important 
and meaningful things with the resources [they] have.” 
Alphabet is not intended to be a big consumer brand; 
1.	 Describe how changes in businesses’ competitive landscape influence changing 
IS infrastructure needs.
2.	 Describe the essential components of an organization’s IS infrastructure.
3.	 Discuss managerial issues associated with managing an organization’s 
IS infrastructure.
4.	 Describe cloud computing and other current trends that can help an organization 
address IS infrastructure–related challenges.
FIGURE 3.1
Google search page inside Google’s Chrome browser.
Source: 2016 Google Inc. All rights reserved. Google and the Google Logo are 
registered trademarks of Google Inc.

120    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
The IS Infrastructure
Most people expect a variety of basic municipal services, such as sanitation, security, transporta-
tion, provision of energy and water, and so on, to be provided by the city they live in. Any area 
where people live or work needs a supporting infrastructure, which entails the technical struc-
tures enabling the provision of services (Figure 3.2); many infrastructure components, such as 
power, telephone, water, and sewage lines, are “invisible” to the users, meaning that the users 
typically do not know (or even care) where, for example, their water comes from, as long as it 
flows when they open their faucets. Other, more visible, infrastructure components include 
streets, schools, hospitals, and parks. Both the area’s inhabitants and businesses depend on the 
services provided by that infrastructure, and cities with a good infrastructure are considered 
more livable than cities with poorer infrastructure and are much more likely to attract businesses 
and residents.
For organizations, many decisions are based on the provision of such services, such as when 
choosing a site for a new manufacturing plant or company headquarters. Indeed, many munici-
palities attempt to attract new businesses and industries by setting up new commercial zones 
with a well-planned infrastructure. In some cases, specific infrastructure components are of spe-
cial importance, such as access to freeways or rail tracks or sufficient availability of cheap 
energy. Just as an aluminum smelter needs access to rail tracks or an ample supply of energy, the 
data centers powering much of the digital world need connectivity to the Internet backbone and 
energy for powering and cooling the computers. With rising costs of energy, companies such as 
Google, Apple, and Facebook are not only looking for technological advances to increase the 
efficiency of their data centers but also trying to find geographical locations where energy effi-
ciency can be optimized (Figure 3.3). One such example is search engine giant Google, which 
built a data center in an abandoned paper mill in Hamina, Finland, where the cool climate 
reduced the need for cooling. This location also provided the necessary connectivity and allowed 
for using seawater for cooling. Likewise, Apple and Facebook built data centers in the high des-
ert in Oregon, where power is cheap and the cool climate significantly reduces the need for 
cooling.
For organizations operating globally, local differences in infrastructure pose additional chal-
lenges, particularly when operating in developing nations. For example, in many parts of the 
Sanitation
Transportation
Provision of Water
and Energy…
FIGURE 3.2
Infrastructure components of a 
city enable the provision of basic 
services.
Source: Edin Ramic/Shutterstock.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    121
world, organizations cannot count on an uninterrupted supply of water or electricity. Conse-
quently, many of the large call centers in India that support customers around the world for com-
panies like Dell Computers or Citibank have installed massive power generators to minimize the 
effects of frequent power outages or have set up their own satellite links to be independent from 
the local, unreliable communications networks.
Just as people and companies rely on basic municipal services to function, businesses rely 
on an information systems infrastructure (also referred to as digital infrastructure) (consist-
ing of hardware, system software, storage, networking, and data centers) to support their deci-
sion making, business processes, and competitive strategy. Earlier, we defined business processes 
as the activities organizations perform in order to reach their business goals, including core 
activities that transform inputs and produce outputs and supporting activities that enable the core 
activities to take place. To enable such processes, organizations rely on three basic capabilities 
supported by information systems: processing, storage, and transmission of data (Figure 3.4). 
Hence, almost all of an organization’s business processes depend on the underlying IS infra-
structure, albeit to different degrees.
Organizations nowadays are facing continuously changing business environments. Tradition-
ally, companies were operating in relatively stable markets and could gain or sustain competitive 
advantage from relatively few innovations. Advances in information and communication technol-
ogies have leveled the playing field, allowing even small companies from all over the world to 
compete on a global scale. As new competitors can literally come out of nowhere, any competi-
tive advantage will be increasingly short-lived, forcing organizations to keep innovating.
This suggests that digital infrastructures can have a profound influence on not only busi-
nesses but also individuals and society in at least three important ways. First, over time, new 
systems and capabilities are built on top of prior systems, acting to refine and extend the capa-
bilities of prior generations of systems in ways much easier than physical infrastructure like 
roads and electrical grids, which are much more difficult to fundamentally change. This acts to 
accelerate innovation and change in ways never before possible. Second, again in contrast to 
other types of traditional infrastructure components, digital infrastructures are typically not con-
trolled by a single business or government actor but are provided by companies such as Amazon, 
Google, and Switch. In other words, there is a competitive and market-based environment that 
acts to accelerate innovation and change. Third, digital infrastructures allow for platform-based 
business models that permeate almost every aspect of our daily lives, from having your Fitbit 
monitor your sleep and waking you in the morning, to making a Skype call with a friend in 
FIGURE 3.3
Google uses solar energy to power 
its main campus in Mountain 
View, California.
Source: Kimberly White/Thomson Reuters 
(Markets) LLC.

122    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Mobile Payments Are Transforming Developing Countries
In a relatively short period of time, mobile technologies have 
transformed the technology scene in many developing coun-
tries. These countries have historically had poor infrastructure 
for communications technologies such as telephone lines. 
With the comparatively low cost of cellular communications 
technologies, however, citizens of developing nations have 
rapidly adopted cell phones and, increasingly, smartphones. 
For many people in developing countries, these devices are the 
only point of connection to the Internet and worldwide com-
munications. But these devices have not only enabled individ-
ual users to connect with the Internet, they have also 
transformed whole economies and societies.
In the United States and other Western countries, there is 
frequent talk of mobile payment systems using cell phones. 
Many payment platforms have been developed, but none has 
obtained wide enough adoption for the service to become 
ubiquitous. Slow adoption in Western countries is likely due to 
the widespread use of alternatives such as credit and debit 
cards and easy access to cash through banks and ATMs. These 
established methods are comfortable and relatively secure.
However, in the developing world, such established and 
secure infrastructure, for the most part, is nonexistent. As 
such, the developing world is embracing mobile payment. In 
fact, do you care to make a guess where the largest of such 
mobile payment platforms is located? M-Pesa, located in 
Kenya, has revolutionized mobile technology for millions. As in 
much of the developing world, widespread banking 
infrastructure does not exist in Kenya. So, when people need 
to pay for a meal or a cab ride, especially in rural locations, 
mobile payments have become mainstream. In Kenya, it is eas-
ier to pay for a cab ride with your mobile phone than it is just 
about anywhere else in the world. Nearly 60 percent of 
Kenyans with cell phones use them for mobile payment and 
banking, primarily through the M-Pesa system, and using 
mobile payments is rapidly spreading throughout the develop-
ing world, from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe.
Mobile phones are still on the rise in the developing world. 
But their use is transforming society in many developing coun-
tries. The ability to make and accept payments is fueling com-
merce, resulting in many positive developments and change.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2014, February 13). Emerging nations embrace 
Internet, mobile technology. Pew Research. Retrieved April 9,  
2016, from http://www.pewglobal.org/2014/02/13/emerging- 
nations-embrace-internet-mobile-technology
Anonymous. (2015, May 5). Why are mobile payments so success-
ful in developing countries? BBVA Innovation Center. Retrieved 
April 9, 2016, from http://www.centrodeinnovacionbbva.com/en/
news/why-are-mobile-payments-so-successful-developing-countries
Anonymous. (2016, March 9). The financial inclusion revolution. Thom-
son Reuters. Retrieved April 9, 2016, from https://blogs.thomsonreuters 
.com/answerson/financial-inclusion-mobile-money-revolution
Fingas, J. (2016, March 2). Apple leads the (tiny) mobile payment 
world. Engadget. Retrieved April 9, 2016, from http://www.engadget 
.com/2016/03/02/mobile-payment-market-share
Processing
Storing
 Transmitting
FIGURE 3.4
The information systems 
infrastructure enables processing, 
storing, and transmission of data.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    123
Europe, to working on your homework on the train, to Liking a post on Facebook in the evening. 
All day, everywhere, digital infrastructures are a key part of your life, whether you are a student, 
working full time, or retired. Given this pervasiveness, new digital ventures are leveraging these 
infrastructures to innovate and create value for customers. Likewise, with all this change and 
innovation, governments struggle to introduce policies that can enable adequate security and 
privacy without stifling innovation.
Facing this accelerating change enabled by digital infrastructures, organizations have to 
adapt or will sooner or later go out of business. Quickly adapting to a constantly changing com-
petitive environment necessitates that businesses are increasingly flexible and agile. To achieve 
this flexibility and agility, organizations seek to align their organizational strategy and business 
processes with the right collection of systems and capabilities in the IS infrastructure. The for-
mal definition of an organization’s technologies, systems, and processes that support an organi-
zation’s specific business processes and strategy is referred to as the information systems 
architecture. In other words, the IS infrastructure has a broad and flexible set of capabilities that 
can be utilized in a variety of ways. The IS architecture reflects the specific capabilities from this 
overarching set of capabilities to support the specific strategy and processes of an organization. 
As discussed in Chapter 2, “Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems,” 
business–IT alignment is a continuous process of adjusting business goals and the IS architec-
ture to achieve business objectives (Figure 3.5). To achieve alignment, changing business condi-
tions drive changes in what IS infrastructure components and capabilities are utilized, resulting 
in a refinement of the organization’s IS architecture. Likewise, changes and enhancements in the 
IS infrastructure enable innovative business models and processes and associated refinements to 
the IS architecture. In addition, any lack of availability, performance, or security (e.g., the news 
of an organization’s website being attacked by hackers or collapsing under unanticipated cus-
tomer demand) is often immediately visible to customers or other stakeholders, potentially lead-
ing to loss of business, trust, and goodwill. Thus, organizations’ business processes need to be 
supported by the right applications and the right data, which in turn rely on a robust and evolving 
IS infrastructure (Figure 3.6). In sum, organizations rely on a complex, interrelated IS infrastruc-
ture to thrive in the ever-increasingly competitive digital world.
To get a better understanding of an IS infrastructure, we first provide a brief overview of 
how applications and databases support business processes and then discuss how hardware, 
Business
Changes Drive
Changing
Needs
IS
Infrastructure
Enables
Innovation
FIGURE 3.5
Business–IT alignment drives 
IS infrastructure changes to enable 
innovative business models and 
processes.
Business Processes
Applications 
Databases
Infrastructure
Hardware
System Software
Storage
Networking
Data Centers
FIGURE 3.6
A robust and evolving IS 
infrastructure is needed to support 
an organization’s strategy and 
business processes.

124    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
system software, storage, networking, and data centers interact to form an organization’s IS 
infrastructure. Note that in this chapter, we will primarily focus on these components from a 
business perspective. For more technical details, please refer to the Technology Briefing.
Applications and Databases Supporting Business Processes
Data are probably among the most important assets an organization has, as data are essential for 
both executing business processes and gaining business intelligence. No matter what the business 
process is, data are used, processed, or generated along the way. For example, business processes 
associated with manufacturing products need data about inventory levels of raw materials, pro-
duction capacities, and demand forecasts; likewise, back-office business processes associated 
with accounts receivable need data about customers, sales, receipts, and so on. In addition, 
increasing amounts of data are used for gaining business intelligence. Data once taken for granted 
or never collected at all are now used to make organizations more productive and competitive. 
Stock prices in the market, potential customers who meet a company’s criteria for its products’ 
target audiences, as well as the credit rating of wholesalers and customers are all types of data that 
organizations collect and analyze to turn into useful information. Yet just having access to data is 
not sufficient; it is through applications that the data can be used effectively. Next, we briefly 
describe the role of application software in supporting an organization’s business processes.
APPLICATION SOFTWARE.  Organizations are continuously looking for ways to streamline and 
automate business processes so as to generate more revenue or reduce costs and make the 
organization more profitable. Application software helps to automate business processes and 
enables processes that would otherwise not even be possible. Accountants have for centuries 
used thick books for maintaining the accounting records of a business; automating the associated 
tasks using accounting software applications not only has helped to make the tasks less effortful 
and reduce error rates but in addition allows quick analysis of accounting records so as to 
examine sales trends, delinquencies, profit margins, and the like. Similarly, automating inventory 
management functions using specialized inventory management software not only helps keep a 
more accurate and up-to-date inventory but can also generate a wealth of data that can be used 
to optimize inventory levels, taking into account the costs of keeping inventory and the potential 
costs of stockouts. E-commerce websites such as Amazon.com would not be possible without 
the applications needed for automatically processing transactions.
In addition to various types of application software for different business functions, other 
types of application software let users perform tasks such as writing business letters, managing 
stock portfolios, or manipulating forecasts to come up with the most efficient allocation of 
resources for a project. Application software also includes personal productivity software such 
as Microsoft Office; supply chain management systems to support the coordination of suppliers 
as well as the production and distribution of products or services; or customer relationship man-
agement (CRM) systems to help companies win and retain customers, gain marketing and cus-
tomer insights, and focus on customer service (as discussed in Chapter 1, “Managing in the 
Digital World”).
Many types of application software supporting business processes interact with databases, 
which allow them to efficiently retrieve and store the data needed for executing business pro-
cesses and gaining business intelligence. Databases are discussed next.
DATABASES.  Databases, which are collections of related data organized in a way that facilitates 
data searches, are vital to an organization’s operations and often are vital to competitive 
advantage and success. In organizations, databases are performing various important functions. 
On the most fundamental level, databases are used to store data and to make the data accessible 
where and when needed. More specifically, the use of databases to store organizational data 
ranging from inventory to demand forecasts to customer data enables applications from across 
an organization to access the data needed. Typically, various business processes throughout an 
organization make use of the same data, and providing the associated applications with quick 
and easy access to the data can help streamline and optimize these processes. For example, if 
a salesperson has access to inventory levels, she can quickly give precise estimates of delivery 
times, which may help close the sale. Similarly, if business processes associated with inbound 
logistics or operations have access to order forecasts, this can help to streamline procurement 
and production processes, helping to avoid stockouts and minimize money tied up in excess 
inventory. Likewise, the use of databases enables the automation of various processes in the 


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    125
organization. Well-managed databases can help to provide organization-wide access to the data 
needed for different business processes.
Additionally, database technology fuels electronic commerce, from helping to display avail-
able products for sale to providing customer service. For example, any product information you 
see on e-commerce sites such as Amazon.com is dynamically retrieved from databases; any 
changes to product information, pricing, or shipping estimates do not require changes to the 
product’s web page itself but can be accomplished by simply changing the associated entry in 
the database. A customer viewing a product on Amazon.com receives a web page that is assem-
bled by a web server using data coming from different databases (e.g., containing data about 
products, inventory, pricing, or customer reviews), a content server (e.g., for product images), 
and other sources (Figure 3.7); the actual transaction then involves product data, inventory data, 
customer data, payment data, confirmation e-mails, and so on. In order to harness the power of 
the data contained in the databases, organizations use database management systems 
(DBMSs), which are a type of software that allows organizations to more easily store, retrieve, 
and analyze data.
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
Putting People’s Lives Online
Is that a man breaking into an apartment? There’s obviously a 
house on fire. The lady in this picture looks exactly like my next-
door neighbor, and those are obviously my clothes drying in my 
backyard. Search a random location on Google Maps, and you 
may find—via the Street View feature—the most unexpected 
candid shots of people walking on the street, waiting for a bus, 
or even hanging out in places they may not want others to know 
about. Without doubt, Google Maps can be tremendously use-
ful; combining traditional maps, information from the web, and 
innovative technology, the application is a helpful assistant for 
planning trips, locating businesses, and so on. However, Google 
Maps has been under fire since the introduction of the Street 
View feature, with many questioning whether a strict line has 
been unnecessarily crossed in the invasion of public privacy.
The biggest argument behind the dilemma is the collective 
sense of intrusion that has stimulated concerns of losing one’s 
privacy—parents are worried pictures of their children could 
possibly make them targets of child predators, and people vis-
iting adult shops simply do not find it essential for the entire 
world to know where they went last Saturday afternoon. 
Although Google has so far attempted to ease public concern 
by blurring the faces of people, license plate numbers, and 
house numbers, it still is rather awkward to find, say, a good 
shot of your underclothes hanging on the clothesline and be 
informed about it by another person. The way Street View 
operates indeed creates a sense of insecurity; many critics erro-
neously believe that Street View resembles having a gigantic 
security camera capturing their every move without their con-
sent or further, even without their being aware of it. Addition-
ally, when collecting pictures for Street View, Google conceded 
that it violated privacy when it scooped up passwords, e-mail, 
and other personal information from unsuspecting computers 
as it drove through cities and neighborhoods.
The issues surrounding Google’s Street View highlight an 
even broader issue: With ever more (often very personal) data 
being stored, shared, and exchanged in the cloud, companies 
such as Google, Facebook, and Apple effectively become the 
custodians of data that have the potential to ruin the lives of 
an untold number of people. Having access to vast amounts of 
data provides the potential of monetizing the data in some 
way.
Questions
1.	 What laws should govern how Facebook, Google, and 
other companies handle their customers’ online data? 
What should be the penalties of misuse?
2.	 How can a company balance the responsibility that comes 
with having access to the data with the responsibility 
toward the company’s shareholders to maximize profits?
Based on:
Anonymous. (2014, May 17). Cut that link. The Economist. 
Retrieved April 9, 2016, from http://www.economist.com/news/
business/21602239-european-court-justice-forces-google-
remove-links-some-personal-information-cut
Google Street View privacy concerns. (2016, March 25). In 
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved April 10, 2016, 
from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Google_ 
Street_View_privacy_concerns&oldid=711939470
Scott, M. (2016, March 24). Google fined by French privacy regula-
tor. The New York Times. Retrieved April 9, 2016, from http://www 
.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/technology/google-fined-by-french-privacy-
regulator.html
Streitfeld, D. (2013, March 12). Google concedes that drive-by prying 
violated privacy. The New York Times. Retrieved April 9, 2016, from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/13/technology/google-pays-fine-
over-street-view-privacy-breach.html

126    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
Finally, databases support storing and analyzing Big Data from a variety of sources. Gain-
ing insights from internal and external sources (such as social media) can provide valuable busi-
ness intelligence for organizations.
How these data are collected, stored, and manipulated is a significant factor influencing the 
success of modern organizations. As databases have become a critical component for most orga-
nizations, they rely on a solid underlying IS infrastructure (note that sometimes, databases are 
considered part of the infrastructure; given their importance and role in an organization’s busi-
ness processes, we do not consider them infrastructure). In Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business 
Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics,” we talk more about the benefits of effectively and 
efficiently collecting, storing, and manipulating data stored in databases.
IS Infrastructure Components
Computing, storage, and networking technologies can create value by enabling efficiency, effec-
tiveness, and agility. In recent times, fueled by globalization, e-commerce, and advances in tech-
nology, a well-functioning IS infrastructure has become increasingly important for organizations, 
leading to the need for making informed infrastructure decisions. In this section, we will intro-
duce hardware, system software, storage, networking, and data centers and discuss how making 
the right choices about the IS infrastructure can contribute to business success.
Hardware
A fundamental component of the IS infrastructure is the hardware—that is, the computers that 
run the applications and databases necessary for processing transactions or analyzing business 
data. As organizations need to carry out hundreds or thousands of different activities belonging 
to various business processes, they need different types of computers to support these processes. 
The six general classes of computers are supercomputer, mainframe, server, workstation, per-
sonal computer, and mobile device (Table 3.1). A supercomputer is the most expensive and 
most powerful kind of computer. Typically, supercomputers are not used by business organiza-
tions; they are used primarily to assist in solving massive scientific problems. In contrast, large 
mainframe computers are used primarily as the main, central computing system for major cor-
porations; optimized for high availability, resource utilization, and security, mainframes are typi-
cally used for mission-critical applications, such as transaction processing. A server is any 
computer on a network that makes access to files, printing, communications, and other services 
available to users of the network. Servers are used to provide services to users within large orga-
nizations or to web users. Servers are optimized for access by many concurrent users and there-
fore have more advanced microprocessors, more memory, and more disk storage than single-user 
computers; servers also boast high reliability and fast network connectivity. To support different 
business processes, organizations often have many different servers in different configurations. 
For example, whereas some web servers display the same static web pages for every visitor (as 
is the case with many informational websites), others are designed to dynamically create web 
pages based on user requests (e.g., Facebook displays content based on each individual user’s 
network of friends); such servers have different requirements (e.g., in terms of processing power, 
network connectivity, or software) than e-mail servers, print servers, or other types of servers.
Inventory
Database
Content
Server
Product
Database
Web
Server
FIGURE 3.7
Dynamic web pages are assembled 
using data from various databases.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    127
In contrast to mainframes and servers, which are designed for multiple concurrent users, 
workstations and personal computers are typically used by one user at a time. Workstations, 
designed for medical, engineering, architectural, or animation and graphics design uses, are 
optimized for visualization and rendering of 3D models and typically have fast processors, large 
memory, and advanced video cards. Personal computers (PCs) and notebook computers are 
used for personal computing and small business computing. Finally, mobile devices—tablets 
and smartphones—have increasingly become part of an organization’s information systems 
infrastructure. In contrast to general-purpose computers, embedded systems are optimized to 
perform a well-defined set of tasks, ranging from playing MP3 music files to controlling engine 
performance, traffic lights, or DVD players. Relatedly, programmable logic controllers (PLCs) 
are used to automate machines and can control everything from manufacturing processes to ski 
lifts. In addition to the processing components, IS hardware also encompasses input devices 
(such as computer mice, touch screens, or cameras) and output devices (such as monitors, print-
ers, or speakers). With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), various sensors, controllers, 
and other single-purpose, nontraditional computing devices are used to provide valuable data as 
input to different processing technologies. For example, in one of the electronics factories of 
Siemens, a combination of sensors, PLCs, and manufacturing machines handles 75 percent of 
the entire production process (and, along the way, generates 50 million pieces of data per day); 
further, the use of Industrial Internet of Things devices such as sensors and intelligent product 
codes enables the products to tell the machines what should be done, enabling self-organizing 
production processes. Another key IoT technology helping to monitor product flows is radio 
frequency identification (RFID), which is rapidly replacing the standard bar codes you find on 
almost every product. RFID uses electromagnetic energy to transmit data between a reader 
(transceiver) and a processing device, or RFID tag.
TABLE 3.1   Characteristics of Computers Currently Being Used in Organizations
Type of 
Computer
Number of 
Simultaneous 
Users
Physical Size
Typical Use
Random 
Access 
Memory
Typical Cost 
(in US$)
Supercomputer
One to many
Like an 
automobile 
to as large 
as multiple 
rooms
Scientific 
research
5,000+ 
GB
Up to 
$200 million
Mainframe
1,000+
Like a 
refrigerator
Transaction 
processing, 
enterprise-
wide 
applications
Up to 
3,000+ 
GB
Up to 
$10 million
Server
10,000+
Like a DVD 
player and 
mounted 
in a rack to 
fitting on a 
desktop
Providing 
websites or 
access to data-
bases, applica-
tions, or files
Up to  
512 GB
Up to 
$50,000
Workstation
Typically 
one
Fitting on a 
desktop to 
the size of a 
file cabinet
Engineering,  
medical, 
graphic design
Up to  
512 GB
Up to 
$10,000
Personal 
computer
One
Fitting on a 
desktop
Personal 
productivity
512 MB 
to 32 GB
Up to 
$5,000
Mobile device
One
Handheld
Personal 
productivity
512 MB 
to 6 GB
Up to $750

128    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
RFID tags can be used just about anywhere a unique identification system might be needed, 
such as on clothing, pets, cars, keys, missiles, or manufactured parts. RFID tags can range in size 
from being a fraction of an inch, which can be inserted beneath an animal’s skin, up to several 
inches across and affixed to a product or shipping container (Figure 3.8). The tag can carry data 
as simple as the name of the owner of a pet or as complex as how a product is to be manufac-
tured on the shop floor.
RFID systems offer advantages over standard bar code technologies in that RFID eliminates 
the need for line-of-sight reading. RFID also does not require time-consuming hand scanning, 
and RFID data is readable regardless of the entity’s position or whether the tag is plainly visible. 
RFID tags can also contain more data than bar codes. Further, a company can program any data 
that it wants or needs onto an RFID tag, enabling a vast array of potential uses. Thus, it is possi-
ble to retrieve data about an entity’s version, origin, location, maintenance history, and other 
important data and to manipulate that data on the tag. RFID scanning can also be done at greater 
distances than can bar code scanning. Passive tags are small and relatively inexpensive (starting 
from a few cents) and typically have a range up to several feet. Active tags, on the other hand, 
cost upward of US$5, include a battery, and can transmit hundreds of feet. Together with other 
IoT devices and Big Data, RFID systems have the potential to revolutionize production pro-
cesses in countless industries (see Chapter 8, “Strengthening Business-to-Business Relation-
ships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management”).
The application software used for various business processes cannot directly interact with 
these various types of hardware. Rather, the application software interacts with the system soft-
ware, which, in turn, interacts with the computer hardware.
System Software
System software is the collection of programs that control the basic operations of computer 
hardware. The most prominent type of system software, the operating system (e.g., Windows, 
OS X, Ubuntu Linux), coordinates the interaction between hardware components (e.g., the CPU 
and the monitor), peripherals (e.g., printers), application software (e.g., office programs), and 
users, as shown in Figure 3.9. Operating systems are often written in assembly language, a very 
low-level computer programming language that allows the computer to operate quickly and effi-
ciently. The operating system is designed to insulate you from this low-level language and make 
computer operations unobtrusive. Further, the operating system provides a common layer for 
different underlying devices so that applications only have to be developed for different operat-
ing systems rather than for each different computer model (Figure 3.10); device drivers allow 
the computer to communicate with various different hardware devices. The operating system 
performs all of the day-to-day operations that we often take for granted when using a computer, 
such as updating the system clock, printing documents, or saving data to a hard drive. Just as our 
brain and nervous system control our body’s breathing, heartbeat, and senses without our con-
scious realization, the system software transparently controls the computer’s basic operations. 
Mobile operating systems, such as Android, Windows 10 Mobile, or iOS, are optimized for 
mobile devices.
FIGURE 3.8
RFID tags can range in size from 
being a fraction of an inch up to 
several inches across.
Source: Albert Lozano-Nieto/Fotolia.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    129
COMMON OPERATING SYSTEM FUNCTIONS.  Many tasks are common to almost all computers. 
These include getting input from a keyboard or mouse, reading from and/or writing to a storage 
device (such as a hard disk drive), and presenting information to you via a monitor. Each of 
these tasks is performed by the operating system. For example, if you want to copy a word 
processing file from a flash drive onto your computer, the operating system makes this very 
easy for you, as all it takes is simply using the mouse to point at a graphic icon of the word 
processing file on the flash drive, then clicking and dragging it onto an icon of your hard disk. 
The operating system makes this process appear easy. However, underlying the icons and simple 
dragging operations is a complex set of coded instructions that tell the electronic components 
of the computer that you are transferring a set of bits and bytes located on the flash drive to a 
location on your internal hard disk. Imagine if you had to type sets of instructions every time 
O
P
E
R
A
TI
N
G
 S
Y
S
T
E
M
 
Users
Peripherals
Application
Software
Word
Processing
Software
FIGURE 3.9
Operating systems coordinate 
the interaction between users, 
application software, hardware, 
and peripherals.
Application
Operating System
FIGURE 3.10
Operating systems provide a 
common layer for different 
underlying devices so that 
applications only have to be 
developed for different operating 
systems rather than for each 
different computer model.

130    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
you wanted to copy a file from one place to another. The operating system manages and executes 
these types of system operations so that you can spend your time on more important tasks.
Storage
In addition to processing and analyzing vast amounts of data, efficiently storing and retrieving 
data is key for organizational success. Further, governmental regulations such as the Sarbanes–
Oxley Act mandate archiving business documents and relevant internal communication, includ-
ing e-mail and instant messages. Hence, organizations are faced with the need to reliably process 
and store tremendous amounts of data, and this storage requirement is growing at an increasing 
rate. Earlier, we discussed the role of databases in supporting organization-wide business pro-
cesses. To enable efficient storage and retrieval of the content of such databases (as well as digi-
tal content not stored in databases), organizations need to have a solid storage infrastructure. 
One can distinguish between three distinct types of data, based on their purpose, each with dis-
tinct requirements in terms of timeliness, searchability, access speed, and life span (Figure 3.11):
■
■Operational data—data used for managing business processes, such as for processing trans-
actions or for data analysis
■
■Backup data—short-term copies of organizational data, used to recover from system-
related disaster (Backup data are frequently overwritten with newer backups.)
■
■Archival data—long-term copies of organizational data, often used for compliance and 
reporting purposes
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Making Death Optional?
As medical science races forward with brain-controlled artificial 
limbs, nano-implants, and life-saving and extending treat-
ments, it seems that almost anything is possible. Many compa-
nies, including Google, are working on ways to extend our 
lives by tens if not hundreds of years, but Humai, a small Los 
Angeles-based research company, wants to turn this idea on 
its head. Humai researchers are actually trying to extend the 
human lifetime indefinitely by being able to upload your con-
sciousness onto computers that can control a robot. Humai will 
use artificial intelligences techniques to capture and store a 
person’s conversational styles, behavior, and thought pro-
cesses. Its plan is to take this data and fuse it with a brain from 
a deceased human, which will then control an artificial body. It 
sounds like a movie plot from nearby Hollywood, but this is 
not fiction. At this time, Humai believes that it may take up to 
30 years to solve the various technical challenges.
To achieve this vision, Humai will need to solve many tech-
nical challenges. Between now and the time it is possible to 
complete the process, Humai will collect an extensive amount 
of data for years prior to a person’s death. At a person’s death, 
it will freeze the brain using cryonics technology until it is able 
to implant the brain into an artificial body. It believes that the 
embedded brain will be able to control the artificial body much 
like we control our own.
Humans have always been fascinated with living forever, 
from the myth of a “fountain of youth” that would restore 
youth to anyone who drinks or bathes in its waters to many 
popular movies including the classic Dracula, Avatar, and 
Forever Young. Many skeptics believe that Humai is not likely 
to succeed with its 30-year projection, but many prominent 
scientists believe that such advances are possible and may 
eventually be achieved someday. Do you want to live forever, 
even if it’s in a body of a robot?
Based on:
Gershgorn, D., & Fecht, S. (2015, November 24). Humai wants to res-
urrect humans within 30 years. Australian Popular Science. Retrieved 
May 20, 2016, from http://www.popsci.com.au/science/medicine/
humai-wants-to-resurrect-humans-within-30-years,412164
Humai. (n.d.). Retrieved May 20, 2016, from http://humaitech.com
Lambrechts, S. (2015, November 25). New startup could make 
death obsolete within 3 decades. TechRadar. Retrieved May 
20, 2016, from http://www.techradar.com/news/world-of-tech/
new-startup-could-make-death-obsolete-within-3-decades-1309696
Moye, D. (2015, November 28). Dear future dead people, don’t 
trust this guy’s plan to resurrect you. The Huffington Post. Retrieved 
May 20, 2016, from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/tech-
company-humai-aims-to-resurrect-dead-people-within-30-years_
us_56549096e4b0879a5b0c7b65
Woollaston, V. (2015, November 26). Bringing people back from the 
DEAD using Artificial Intelligence: Humai plans to wire brains of the 
deceased to “personality” chips. The Daily Mail. Retrieved May 20, 
2016, from http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3335080/
Bringing-people-DEAD-using-artificial-intelligence-Humai-plans-wire-
brains-deceased-personality-chips.html


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    131
These different uses of organizational data call for different physical storage technologies. 
For example, operational data are typically stored in databases (e.g., data from transaction pro-
cessing systems or customer data) or files (e.g., business documents, images, or company bro-
chures) using disk-based storage media such as hard drives. Hard drives offer high access speeds 
and are thus preferred for data that are frequently accessed or where response time is of the 
essence (as in an e-commerce website); in addition, flash-based storage is increasingly used for 
situations where access speed is of crucial importance. To ensure continuous business operations 
in case disaster strikes, organizations periodically back up their data to a secure location; often, 
companies have completely redundant systems so as to be able to seamlessly continue business 
if the primary systems fail (see Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”). Storing backup 
data on hard drives enables quick recovery without slowing the company’s operations. Data that 
are no longer used for operational purposes (such as old internal e-mails) are archived for long-
term storage, typically on magnetic tapes. As data are stored sequentially on magnetic tapes, 
access speed can be very slow and data is not quickly searchable; however, magnetic tape has a 
shelf life of up to 30 years, is very low cost as compared to other storage media, and is remov-
able, meaning that it is highly expandable and tapes can be easily stored in a secure, remote 
location (see the Technology Briefing for more on different storage technologies).
Networking
As you have seen, organizations depend on a variety of different applications, hardware, and 
storage technologies to support their business processes: Organizations have servers, main-
frames, personal computers, storage devices, mobile devices, environmental control systems, 
and various other devices. Yet, taken alone, each individual piece of technology has little value; 
it is through connecting the different pieces that business value can be realized: For example, the 
best-performing database would be useless if it could not be accessed by those people or appli-
cations throughout the organization that depend on the data. Further, one of the reasons why 
information systems have become so powerful and important is the ability to interconnect, 
allowing internal and external constituents to communicate and collaborate with each other, and 
many innovative business models would not exist without the Internet. The infrastructure sup-
porting this consists of a variety of components, such as the networking hardware and software 
that facilitate the interconnection of different computers, enabling collaboration within organiza-
tions, across organizations, and literally around the world.
HUMAN COMMUNICATION AND COMPUTER NETWORKING.  Human communication involves 
the sharing of information and messages between senders and receivers. The sender of a 
message formulates the message in his brain and codes the message into a form that can be 
communicated to the receiver—through voice, for example. The message is then transmitted 
Access Speed
Searchability
Timeliness
Life Span
Recovery
NEXT EXIT
FIGURE 3.11
Operational, backup, and archival 
data have different requirements.

132    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
along a communication pathway to the receiver. The receiver, using her ears and brain, 
then attempts to decode the message, as shown in Figure 3.12. This basic model of human 
communication helps us to understand telecommunications or computer networking. Computer 
networking is the sharing of data or services. The information source produces a message, 
which is encoded so that it can be transmitted via a communication channel; a receiver then 
decodes the message so that it can be understood by the destination. Thus, analogous to human 
communication, computer networks require three things:
■
■A sender (source) and a receiver (destination) that have something to share (a message)
■
■A pathway or transmission medium, such as a cable, to send the message
■
■Rules or protocols governing communication between senders and receivers
The easiest way to understand computer networking is through the human communication 
model. Suppose you are applying for a job in France after graduation. You need information 
about different employers. The first requirement for a network—information to share—has now 
been met. After contacting a few potential employers, a company sends you information about 
its hiring process (the encoded message) via e-mail. This is the second requirement: a means of 
transmitting the coded message. The Internet is the pathway or transmission medium used to 
send the message. Transmission media refers to the physical pathway—cable(s) and wireless—
used to transmit data. At this point, you may run into some difficulties. If the potential employer 
has sent you information in French, you may not understand what he or she has written—that is, 
decode the message—if you don’t speak French; if the message is not understood by the receiver, 
there is no communication. Although you have contacted the receiver, you and the receiver of 
your message must meet the third requirement for successful communication: You must estab-
lish a language of communication—the rules or protocols governing your communication. Pro-
tocols define the procedures that different computers follow when they transmit and receive 
data. You both might decide that one communication protocol will be that you communicate in 
English. This communication session is illustrated in Figure 3.13.
1. Sender develops
 
and codes message
2. Sends message
3. Receiver receives and
 decodes message
Sender
Receiver
How are you?
How are you?
FIGURE 3.12
Communication requires senders, 
a message to share, and receivers.
1. Coding message
2. Sending message
3. Receiving and
 
decoding message
@
Is this French?
I speak only English.
"Monsieur,..."
FIGURE 3.13
Coding, sending, and decoding a 
message.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    133
COMPUTER NETWORKS.  A fundamental difference between human and computer communication 
is that human communication consists of words, whereas computer communication consists of 
bits, the smallest unit of data used by computers. Virtually all types of content can be transmitted 
on a computer network—documents, art, music, or film—although each type has vastly different 
requirements for effective transmission. For example, a page of text is approximately 14 KB of 
data, whereas a publication-quality photograph could be larger than 200 MB of data. Similarly, 
to support different business processes, businesses operating in the digital world transmit vast 
amounts of data, ranging from customer data to sales data to design blueprints. To transmit such 
vast amounts of data in a timely manner from one location to another, adequate bandwidth is 
needed. Bandwidth is the transmission capacity of a computer or communications channel, 
measured in bits per second (bps) or multiples thereof, and represents how much binary data 
can be reliably transmitted over the medium in one second. To appreciate the importance of 
bandwidth for speed, consider how long it would take to download a 45-minute TV show 
(about 200 megabytes) from iTunes. It would take about six minutes at 1 megabit per second 
(Mbps) (regular cable or DSL connection) and two minutes at 15 Mbps (high-speed cable or 
DSL connection). In contrast, using an old-fashioned PC modem that transmits data at a rate of 
56 kilobits per second (Kbps), it would take almost nine hours to download the same TV show. 
Hence, different types of information have different communication bandwidth requirements 
(see www.numion.com/Calculators/Time.html for a tool that helps you calculate download 
times). Typical local area networks have a bandwidth of 10 Mbps to 1 Gbps.
Telecommunications advances have enabled individual computer networks—constructed 
with different hardware and software—to connect together in what appears to be a single net-
work. Networks are increasingly being used to dynamically exchange relevant, value-adding 
information and knowledge throughout global organizations and institutions. The following sec-
tions take a closer look at the fundamental building blocks of these complex networks and the 
services they provide.
Servers, Clients, and Peers  Computers in a network typically have one of three distinct 
roles—servers, clients, and peers—as depicted in Figure 3.14. A server is any computer on the 
network that makes access to files, printing, communications, and other services available to 
users of the network. Servers only provide services. A client is any computer, such as a user’s 
PC or laptop, on the network or any software application, such as Microsoft’s Outlook e-mail 
client, that uses the services provided by the server. Clients only request services. A client usually 
has only one user, whereas many different users share the server. So-called thin clients—
microcomputers with minimal memory, storage, and processing capabilities—use desktop 
virtualization to provide workers with a virtual desktop environment, helping to reduce costs 
for software licensing or maintenance and to comply with stringent privacy and data protection 
laws. A peer is any computer that may both request and provide services. Businesses typically 
use client-server networks, in which servers and clients have defined roles. With ubiquitous 
access to company local area networks (LANs) and the Internet, almost everyone works in a 
client-server environment today. In contrast, peer-to-peer (P2P) networks enable any computer 
Server
Client
Client
Peer
Peer
FIGURE 3.14
A server is a computer on the 
network that enables multiple 
computers (or “clients”) to access 
data or services. A peer is a 
computer that may both request 
and provide services.

134    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
or device on the network to provide and request services; these networks can be found in small 
offices and homes. In P2P networks, all peers have equivalent capabilities and responsibilities; 
this is the network architecture behind the Internet telephony service Skype and popular file-
sharing protocols such as BitTorrent, which allow peers to connect directly to the hard drives of 
other peers on the Internet that are utilizing the software.
Types of Networks  Computing networks are commonly classified by size, distance covered, 
and structure. The most commonly used types are personal area networks, local area networks, 
and wide area networks (Table 3.2). These networks are typically used to connect devices 
within an organization or across organizational subunits. Wide area networks can range from 
spanning multiple buildings (sometimes called a campus area network) to covering the area of 
a city (sometimes called a metropolitan area network) to worldwide (the Internet). To enable 
the connection of mobile devices or to install a network where running cables is infeasible, 
organizations install wireless local area networks (WLANs) using high-frequency radio-wave 
technology; WLANs are also referred to as Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) networks. The ease of 
installation has made WLANs popular for business and home use, and public WLANs can be 
found in many coffee shops, airports, or university campuses. For more on the different types of 
networks, see the Technology Briefing.
THE INTERNET.  One global network that has enabled organizations and individuals to 
interconnect in a variety of ways is the Internet, a large worldwide collection of networks that 
use a common protocol to communicate with each other. The name Internet is derived from 
the concept of internetworking, which means connecting host computers and their networks 
together to form even larger networks.
WORLD WIDE WEB.  One of the most powerful uses of the Internet is something that you 
probably use almost every day—the World Wide Web. The World Wide Web is a system of 
interlinked documents on the Internet, or a graphical user interface to the Internet that provides 
users with a simple, consistent interface to access a wide variety of content. A web browser is a 
software application that can be used to locate and display web pages, including text, graphics, 
and multimedia content.
A key feature of the web is hypertext. A hypertext document, otherwise known as a web 
page, contains not only content but also hyperlinks, which are references or links to other docu-
ments. The standard method of specifying the structure and content of web pages is called 
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). Specific content within each web page is enclosed 
within codes, or markup tags, that specify the structure and content of a document. These web 
pages are stored on web servers, which process user requests for pages using the Hypertext 
Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Web servers typically host a collection of interlinked web pages 
(called a website) that are owned by the same organization or by an individual. Websites and 
specific web pages within those sites have a unique Internet address. A user who wants to access 
a web page enters the address, and the web server hosting the website retrieves the desired page 
TABLE 3.2   Types of Networks
Type
Usage
Size
Personal area network (PAN)
Wireless communication 
between devices, using tech-
nologies such as Bluetooth
Under 10 meters
Local area network (LAN)
Sharing of data, software 
applications, or other resources 
between several users
Typically within a building
Wide area network (WAN)
Connect multiple LANs, often 
with distributed ownership and 
management
Large physical distance, 
from spanning multiple 
buildings or the area of a city 
to worldwide (Internet)


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    135
from its hard drive and delivers it to the user. In addition, web servers often employ scripting 
languages to assemble pages on the fly or retrieve data from databases and insert it into the page 
presented to the user (see the Technology Briefing). As data traveling between a server and a the 
user’s computer can easily be intercepted and there are growing concerns about legitimate and 
illegitimate monitoring of web traffic, many organizations now routinely use the more secure 
HTTPS protocol for any data that are being transmitted over the web (a padlock icon in your 
browser’s address bar signals that a secure protocol is being used).
Web Domain Names and Addresses  A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is used to 
identify and locate a particular web page. For example, www.google.com is the URL used to 
find the main Google web server. The URL has three distinct parts: the domain, the top-level 
domain, and the host name (Figure 3.15).
The domain name is a term that helps people recognize the company or person that the 
domain name represents. For example, Google’s domain name is google.com. The prefix google 
lets you know that it is very likely that this domain name will lead you to the website of Google. 
Domain names also have a suffix that indicates which top-level domain they belong to. For 
example, the “.com” suffix is reserved for commercial organizations. Some other popular suf-
fixes are listed here:
■
■.edu—educational institutions
■
■.org—organizations (typically nonprofit organizations)
■
■.gov—U.S. government entity
■
■.de—Germany (there are more than 240 two-letter country code top-level domains)
Domain names can be registered through many different companies (known as registrars) 
that compete with one another. Given the proliferation of domain names, more generic top-level 
domains (gTLDs) have been added, such as .aero for the air transport industry, .name for indi-
viduals, .coop for business industry cooperatives, and .museum for museums. In 2012, the 
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers—the organization that coordi-
nates the domain name system) relaxed the strict rules for gTLDs so that regions, businesses, or 
other entities can apply for their own gTLD. For example, new gTLDs include .bike, .club, .tips, 
and .cab as well as many other gTLDs coming soon. The new gTLDs also allow for the use of 
non-Latin characters, such as in the Russian gTLD .онлайн (meaning “online”).
The host name is the particular web server or group of web servers (if it is a larger website) 
that will respond to the request. In most cases, the “www” host name refers to the default web-
site including the home page of the particular domain. Other host names can be used. For exam-
ple, drive.google.com will take you to the group of web servers that are responsible for serving 
up Google’s cloud-based storage for documents. Larger companies have several host names for 
their different functions. Some examples used by Google are the following:
■
■mail.google.com (Google’s free e-mail service)
■
■photos.google.com (Google’s application for organizing and editing photos)
■
■maps.google.com (Google’s mapping application)
All the domain names and the host names are associated with one or more Internet protocol 
(IP) addresses. IP addresses serve to identify all the computers or devices on the Internet. The 
IP address serves as the destination address of that computer or device and enables the network 
Host Name
Domain Name
Top-Level Domain Name
www.google.com
FIGURE 3.15
Dissecting a URL.

136    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
to route messages to the proper destination. Traditionally, the format of an IP address (version 4) 
is a 32-bit numeric address written as four numbers separated by periods (the latest version, IPv6 
uses 128-bit addresses, enabling more devices to be connected to the Internet). Each of the four 
numbers can be any number between 0 and 255. For example, 128.196.134.37 is an underlying 
IP address of www.arizona.edu, the University of Arizona’s main web page.
IP addresses can also be used instead of URLs to navigate to particular web addresses. This 
practice is not done regularly, as IP addresses are far more difficult to remember than domain 
names, and an organization may assign its domain name to a server with a different IP address; 
for example, whereas the IP address behind google.com may change, the domain name stays the 
same.
In addition to specifying the address of the web server, URLs typically also include the path 
to the requested resource, such as a particular page located in a particular directory (e.g., http://
mis.eller.arizona.edu/faculty/index.asp).
World Wide Web Architecture  The web consists of a large number of interconnected 
web servers, which host the pages users access with their web browsers. The Internet uses the 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) to facilitate the transmission 
of web pages and other information. Users can access web pages by entering the URL of 
the web page into their web browser. Once the user enters the URL into the address bar of 
the web browser, TCP/IP breaks the request into packets and routes them over the Internet to the 
web server where the requested web page is stored. When the packets reach their destination, 
TCP/IP reassembles them and passes the request to the web server. The web server understands 
that the user is requesting a web page (indicated by the “http://” prefix in the URL) and retrieves 
the web page, which is packetized by TCP/IP and transmitted over the Internet back to the user’s 
computer. TCP/IP reassembles the packets at the destination and delivers the web page to the 
web browser. In turn, the web browser translates the HTML code contained in the web page, 
formats its visual appearance, and displays the results. If the web page contains a hyperlink, the 
user can click on it and the process repeats.
The Deep Web  In addition to searchable content on the web, much content cannot be indexed 
by search engines such as Google. The term deep web refers to those parts of the web that 
cannot be indexed by conventional search engines. The common web (called “surface web”) 
that you know and use every day—sites like YouTube, Google, Wikipedia, and news agencies—
comprises as little as 1 percent of the total size of the web. Beyond this surface, the deep web 
is composed of tens of trillions of web pages that most people have never seen. The deep web 
consists of private areas requiring authentication, dynamic web pages created from connected 
databases, and static web pages that are not connected to other pages via hyperlinks. Some of 
this content is in public databases, such as data from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, NASA, or the Patent and Trademark Office. Search engines cannot traverse 
such pages because their contents are dynamically generated from databases and displayed on 
demand based on database queries. Other databases are private or behind a paywall, such as 
the government documents on LexisNexis and Westlaw or the academic journals on Elsevier. 
Organizations that maintain these databases charge users and institutions for access, and their 
contents are thus not freely available for search engine indexing. In addition, internal content 
behind corporate or university firewalls is not accessible to search engines. Not to be confused 
with the deep web, the term dark web is used to refer to those areas of the World Wide Web that 
are used for various nefarious purposes (such as trading drugs, stolen credit card information, or 
illegal porn) and that are typically only accessible using specialized browsers that anonymize the 
user and hide traces (see Case 2 at the end of the chapter).
INTRANETS AND EXTRANETS.  As organizations have realized the advantage of using the Internet 
and web to communicate public information outside corporate boundaries, they can also 
leverage web-based technologies to support proprietary, internal communications through the 
implementation of an intranet. An intranet looks and acts just like a publicly accessible website 
and uses the same software, hardware, and networking technologies to transmit and display 
data. All intranet pages are behind the company’s firewall, which secures proprietary data stored 
within the corporate local area network and/or wide area network so that the data can be viewed 
only by authorized users.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    137
In the simplest form of an intranet, communications take place only within the confines of 
organizational boundaries and do not travel across the Internet. Organizations can use intranets 
for disseminating corporate information, employee training, project management, collaboration, 
or enabling employee self-service for administering benefits, managing retirement plans, or 
other human resources–based applications through employee portals.
Increases in employees’ mobility necessitate that an intranet be accessible from anywhere. 
Thus, most companies allow their employees to use virtual private networks (VPNs) to securely 
connect to the company’s intranet while on the road or working from home (i.e., telecommut-
ing). Figure 3.16 depicts a typical intranet system architecture (see Chapter 10 for more on fire-
walls and VPNs).
Similar to an intranet, an extranet, which can be regarded as a private part of the Internet 
that is cordoned off from ordinary users, enables two or more firms to use the Internet to do busi-
ness together. Although the content is “on the web,” only authorized users can access it after 
logging on to the company’s extranet website. As an extranet uses the public (and normally inse-
cure) Internet infrastructure to connect two or more business partners, it often uses VPNs to 
ensure the secured transmission of proprietary information between business partners 
(Figure 3.17). To access information on an extranet, authorized business partners access their 
GREEN IT 
Alphabet Renewables
Running the Alphabet (i.e., Google) empire requires a tremen-
dous amount of electricity, not just in the United States but 
throughout the world. To reduce its carbon footprint, Alphabet 
is aggressively transitioning to renewable sources. The com-
pany has a widely publicized goal to use 100 percent clean 
energy by 2025. To reach this goal, Alphabet is signing long-
term contracts with clean energy providers, investing in clean 
energy companies, and building its own “green” facilities. 
Alphabet has focused on renewable energy for a long time. In 
2007, for example, Google had the largest corporate solar 
panel installation of its kind, generating 1.7 megawatts on its 
Mountain View, California, campus. It also operates a natural 
gas–powered generator at the local landfill, producing 
990 kilowatts to provide for its electrical needs.
Alphabet is truly a global leader in renewable energy; long-
term contracts with clean energy providers range from a 
51-megawatt solar project by Duke Energy in North Carolina 
to a 76-megawatt wind generation project in Sweden and an 
80-megawatt project in Chile. In addition to these contracts, it 
is also investing throughout the world to improve the clean 
energy infrastructure. For example, in early 2016, Alphabet 
announced a US$12 million investment in the Lake Turkana 
Wind Power Project in Kenya to build the largest wind genera-
tion project in Africa. This project is the largest single private 
investment project in the history of the country. In total, Alpha-
bet has made 22 investments in clean energy infrastructure at 
a total of more than US$2 billion.
In late 2015, Alphabet had increased its renewable energy 
capacity to nearly 2 gigawatts. To put that another way, 
Google has enough clean energy to power a city twice the size 
of San Francisco. In addition, other tech giants such as 
Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, and Apple are also embracing 
the move to renewable energy. And it is not just the tech com-
panies; Alcoa, Bank of America, Coca-Cola, UPS, and Walmart, 
to name a few, are making strong commitments to renewable 
energy. While the move to renewable is good corporate 
responsibility, it is also good business. Developing a compre-
hensive plan that includes long-term contracts and investments 
will help to lock in prices, improve reliability throughout the 
world, and signal customers about the company’s commitment 
to a clean energy and sustainability.
Based on:
Brueck, H. (2016, April 7). Google backs renewable energy in Asia. For-
tune. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from http://fortune.com/2016/04/07/
google-backs-renewable-energy-in-asia
Chow, L. (2015, December 3). Google announces “largest purchase 
of renewable energy ever.” Ecowatch. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from 
http://ecowatch.com/2015/12/03/google-renewables-purchase
Lozanova, S. (2016, March). How Google became the world’s 
largest corporate purchaser of renewable energy. Triple Pundit. 
Retrieved May 22, 2016, from http://www.triplepundit.com/2016/03/
google-became-worlds-largest-corporate-purchaser-renewable-energy
Metz, C. (2015, December 3). Google buys enough clean energy  
to power two San Franciscos. Wired. Retrieved May 22, 2016, 
from http://www.wired.com/2015/12/google-buys-enough- 
clean-energy-to-power-two-san-franciscos
Sverdlik, Y. (2015, July 20). Cleaning up data center power is 
dirty work. Data Center Knowledge. Retrieved May 22, 2016, 
from http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2015/07/20/
cleaning-data-center-power-dirty-work

138    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
Client Inside Local Network
Firewall
Internet
Server/Data
Corporate Network
Corporate Client Outside Local Network
Virtual Private Network Connection (VPN)
FIGURE 3.16
Typical intranet system 
architecture.
Client
Firewall
Firewall
Internet
Server/Data
Supplier’s
 Network
Corporate  Network
Virtual Private Network Connection (VPN)
FIGURE 3.17
Typical extranet system 
architecture.
business partner’s main extranet web page using their web browsers. Table 3.3 summarizes the 
similarities and differences between intranets, extranets, and the Internet.
Extranets benefit corporations in a number of ways. For example, extranets can dramati-
cally improve the timeliness and accuracy of communications, reducing the potential for mis-
understandings within the organization as well as with business partners and customers. In 
the business world, very little information is static; therefore, information must be continu-
ally updated and disseminated as it changes. Extranets facilitate this process by providing a 
cost-effective, global medium over which proprietary information can be distributed. Fur-
thermore, they allow central management of documents, thus reducing the number of ver-
sions and the amount of out-of-date information that may be stored throughout the 
organization. While security is still considered to be better on proprietary networks, the 
Internet can be used as a relatively secure medium for business. Further, a company can use 
extranets to automate business transactions, reducing processing costs and achieving short-
ened cycle times. Extranets can also reduce errors by providing a single point of data entry 
from which the data can be updated on disparate corporate computing platforms without 


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    139
having to reenter the data. Management can then obtain real-time data to track and analyze 
business activities.
Data Centers
To satisfy the increasing requirements for processing and storing the ever-growing volume of 
data, large organizations need hundreds or even thousands of servers. Organizations such as 
UPS need tremendous amounts of computing power to route and track packages, online stores 
such as Zappos need to provide product information and track customer orders, and social net-
working game developers such as Riot Games need to track each and every action users take on 
the popular game League of Legends. As you can imagine, an organization’s hardware and stor-
age infrastructure can quickly grow quite large, and companies typically set aside dedicated 
space for their infrastructure components (such data centers can range in size from a single dedi-
cated server room to buildings the size of a large warehouse). Storing and processing massive 
amounts of data requires lots of power as well as air-conditioning to keep the equipment running 
within the optimal temperature range (which helps to increase the life span of the equipment). 
Keeping this infrastructure in one location helps in managing, repairing, upgrading, and secur-
ing the equipment, and organizations go to great lengths in selecting locations that strike the 
optimal balance between protection from the elements (such as earthquakes or hurricanes) and 
proximity to the customers/users (to reduce latency).
Today, almost any business can be considered an e-business. Given that data are the life-
blood of almost all organizations, reliably accessing these data is a key concern. This is espe-
cially true for data-intensive organizations, ranging from e-commerce companies to logistics 
companies to government agencies. All such organizations are striving for the highest level of 
availability of their hardware, storage, and networking components, often reaching for “five-
nines” (i.e., 99.999 percent availability, which translates into just over five minutes of down-
time per year). To ensure this availability, there are not only specific demands for the individual 
components (e.g., being able to quickly swap hard drives or other parts in case of failure) but 
also for the data center overall (e.g., in terms of connectivity, floor space, provision of energy 
and cooling, and security). In addition, data centers need to be modular so as to be easily 
expandable in case of changing needs. The facilities for UPS in Atlanta, Georgia, and Mahwah, 
New Jersey, are prime examples of such high-availability facilities. To ensure uninterrupted 
service, the data centers are self-sufficient, and each can operate for up to 2 days on self-gener-
ated power. The power is needed not only for the computers but also for air-conditioning, as 
each facility needs air-conditioning capacity equaling that of more than 2,000 homes. In case 
power fails, the cooling is provided using more than 600,000 gallons of chilled water, and the 
UPS facilities even have backup wells in case the municipal water supply should fail. Other 
protective measures include raised floors (to protect from floods) and buildings designed to 
withstand winds of 200 miles per hour. Alternatively, organizations can rent space for their 
TABLE 3.3   Characteristics of the Internet, Intranet, and Extranet
Focus
Type of  
Content
Users
Access
Internet
External 
communications
General, public 
content
Any user with 
an Internet 
connection
Public and not 
restricted
Intranet
Internal 
communications
Specific, 
corporate, and 
proprietary 
content
Authorized 
employees
Private and 
restricted
Extranet
External 
communications
Communications 
between business 
partners
Authorized 
business 
partners
Private and 
restricted

140    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
servers in collocation facilities, which are data centers managed by a third party that rents out 
space to multiple organizational customers (see Chapter 10 for more on securing data centers 
and collocation facilities).
Issues Associated with Managing the 
IS Infrastructure
Needless to say, for organizations, obtaining, operating, maintaining, and upgrading the infor-
mation systems infrastructure can be a tremendous challenge, especially when these tasks are 
not part of their core business.
As you have undoubtedly noticed, computing technology has evolved rapidly and will most 
likely continue to evolve rapidly in the future. In general, because of the increasing pace of 
change with modern technologies, most organizations face accelerating obsolescence of their 
hardware and software investments as well as increasing storage and space constraints, demand 
fluctuations, and increasing energy costs (Figure 3.18). In the following section, we discuss how 
the interplay between the different infrastructure components both encourages and necessitates 
continuous upgrading of the infrastructure.
Rapid Obsolescence and Shorter IT Cycles
Over the past 75 years, information systems have gone through many radical changes. Rapid 
advances in both hardware and software capabilities have enabled or facilitated many business 
processes, and organizations are continuously faced with the need to upgrade the IS infrastruc-
ture so as to gain or maintain competitive advantage. In this section, we discuss the history of 
computing as well as the effects of rapid advances in technology.
Increasing
Obsolescence
Expanding
Storage
Expanding
Consumption
Fluctuating
Demand
Diminishing
Space
FIGURE 3.18
Information systems infrastructure 
challenges for modern 
organizations.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    141
TABLE 3.4   Six Generations of Computing
Generation
Time Period
Major Characteristic
Events
1
1946–1958
Vacuum tubes
•	 Mainframe era begins
•	 ENIAC and UNIVAC were 
developed
2
1958–1964
Transistors
•	 Mainframe era expands
•	 UNIVAC is updated with transistors
3
1964–1990s
Integrated circuits
•	 Mainframe era ends
•	 Personal computer era begins
•	 IBM 360 with general purpose 
operating system
•	 Microprocessor revolution: Intel, 
Microsoft, Apple, IBM PC, MS-DOS
4
1990s–2000
Multimedia and low-
cost PCs
•	 Personal computer era ends
•	 Interpersonal computing era begins
•	 High-speed microprocessors and 
networks
•	 High-capacity storage
•	 Low-cost, high-performance 
integrated video, audio, and data
5
2000–2010
Widespread Internet 
accessibility
•	 Interpersonal computing era ends
•	 Internetworking era begins
•	 Ubiquitous access to Internet with a 
broad variety of devices
•	 Prices continue to drop; performance 
continues to expand
6
2010–present
Ubiquitous mobile 
connectivity
•	 Advent of powerful mobile devices 
and ubiquitous mobile connectivity
•	 Big Data
•	 Cloud computing
•	 Internet of Things
•	 Social networking
BRIEF HISTORY OF COMPUTING.  When the Zuse Z1 Computer (a mechanical computer using 
program punch cards) was introduced in 1936, almost all business and government information 
systems consisted of file folders, filing cabinets, and document repositories. Huge rooms 
were dedicated to the storage of these records. Information was often difficult to find, and 
corporate knowledge and history were difficult to maintain. Only certain employees knew 
specific information. When these employees left the firm, so did all their knowledge about 
the organization. The computer provided the solution to the information storage and retrieval 
problems facing organizations up to the 1940s. Shifts in computing eras were facilitated by 
fundamental changes in the way computing technologies worked. Each of these fundamental 
changes is referred to as a distinct generation of computing. Table 3.4 highlights the technology 
that defined the six generations of computing.
MOORE’S LAW.  In 1965, Intel cofounder Dr. Gordon Moore hypothesized that the number of 
transistors on a chip would double about every 2 years. When Moore made this bold prediction, 
he did not limit it to any specified period of time. This prediction became known as Moore’s 
law. Interestingly, whereas the first CPU had 2,200 transistors, the newest models have broken 
the 5-billion-transistor mark, so Dr. Moore’s prediction has been fairly accurate so far (see www 
.intel.com/technology/mooreslaw). The number of transistors that can be packed into a modern 
CPU and the speed at which processing and other activities occur are remarkable. For example, 

142    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
the Intel Core i7 Extreme CPU can complete hundreds of millions of operations every second. 
Given technological and economic limitations, today gains in computing power are increasingly 
being realized by adding more computing cores that can perform tasks in parallel. Further, 
advances in quantum computing promise a leap in computing power.
FASTER IT CYCLES AND CONSUMERIZATION.  For organizations, this increase in capabilities is 
both a blessing and a curse. On the one hand, increases in processing power enable applications 
that were previously not possible; on the other hand, managers have to continuously think about 
when to upgrade the hardware components of the IS infrastructure. Beyond Moore’s law, there 
are two other factors exacerbating this problem. First, IT cycles are becoming increasingly faster, 
with manufacturers releasing new devices at an ever-increasing pace. Whereas traditionally, 
IS managers would think in terms of 5 years, nowadays new versions of devices are released 
every 6–12 months. Second, with the increasing trend toward consumerization of IT, managers 
have to consider how to integrate their users’ various mobile devices into the organization’s IS 
infrastructure. We discuss mobile device management in Chapter 10.
SOFTWARE OBSOLESCENCE.  In addition to constant increases in hardware capabilities, 
companies such as Microsoft are continuously developing new and improved software that 
uses this power to help people be more productive. New operating systems such as Windows 
10 can use new processor architectures and offer a richer set of features than older operating 
systems such as Windows XP. However, these new operating systems often require new 
hardware, and older-generation application software may not be compatible with the new 
operating system (Figure 3.19). Further, new generations of application software promise 
better performance and more (or improved) features, enabling higher productivity. One 
example is Microsoft Office 2007 (and its most recent successor Office 2016); when 
developing Office 2007, Microsoft conducted many usability studies to improve the human–
computer interface (see Chapter 9, “Developing and Acquiring Information Systems”) so 
as to facilitate the execution of common tasks and, as a result, introduced the so-called 
“Ribbon” interface. Although people used to the “old” interface were initially reluctant to 
switch—because of the associated learning curve—many have now realized the benefits 
this new feature brings. Manufacturers of hardware and software often apply the concept of 
planned obsolescence, meaning that the product is designed to last only for a certain life 
span. For hardware, this can mean that certain components are not built to be serviceable, 
and the device has to be replaced once one of these components breaks down; similarly, older 
versions of software may not be able to open newer file formats, or a company may cease 
support for a product (mainstream support for the Windows XP operating system ended 
in 2009, and paid support as well as critical security updates ended in 2014), effectively 
forcing users to switch to newer versions. Hence, organizations are constantly faced with 
the decision of when and how to upgrade their current information systems infrastructure. 
Although such upgrades may increase productivity, often they do not but are still a large 
cost factor, both in terms of costs for hardware and software and in terms of the time and 
resources needed for upgrading tens, hundreds, or thousands of computers. Further, the 
Powerful Hardware
Powerful Software
Requires
Enables
FIGURE 3.19
New hardware enables more 
powerful software; more powerful 
software often requires new 
hardware.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    143
rapid obsolescence of computer hardware carries a high price tag for the environment in 
terms of resources needed both to manufacture the new systems and to dispose of the old 
ones (Figure 3.20).
Big Data and Rapidly Increasing Storage Needs
Another issue facing organizations is the amount of data available and the amount of data 
needed to stay ahead of the competition. Today, organizations can collect and analyze vast 
amounts of data for business intelligence (see Chapter 6) and other purposes (such as compli-
ance). For example, organizations can analyze each visitor’s actions on the company’s website 
in order to improve the site’s performance. Similarly, organizations are increasingly trying to 
make use of Big Data, that is, trying to analyze structured and unstructured data from media 
reports, social media, customer support calls, and other sources. Obviously, capturing more 
data requires ever more storage space and ever more powerful computing hardware and data-
base management systems for managing and analyzing the data. Further, Internet bandwidth 
grew tremendously during the dot-com bubble, allowing organizations to provide their custom-
ers with richer (and more bandwidth-hungry) content. At the same time, services such as You-
Tube and videos streamed by Netflix create a need for even more bandwidth. Hence, this is 
another example of a “vicious circle” where enhanced capabilities enable new applications, 
which in turn require a certain level of capabilities in terms of both data and communications 
infrastructure.
Demand Fluctuations
An additional challenge for many organizations is that the demands for computing resources are 
often fluctuating, leading to either having too few resources at some times or having too many 
idle resources most of the time (according to estimates, up to 70 percent of organizations’ 
IS infrastructures are utilized at only 20 percent of their capacity). Companies engaged in (or 
supporting) business-to-consumer electronic commerce (such as Amazon.com or FedEx; see 
Chapter 4, “Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce”), for instance, face large 
spikes in demand during the pre-holiday season in December; consequently, increased capacity 
is needed to handle this demand. While it is relatively easy to hire temporary staff to handle an 
increase in orders, it is typically not that easy to make quick changes to the IS infrastructure 
based on changing needs. Just a few years ago, launching a startup involved purchasing lots of 
FIGURE 3.20
The rapid obsolescence of 
computer hardware carries a high 
price tag for the environment.
Source: Tonis Valing/Shutterstock.

144    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
hardware and installing web servers in one’s basement, with no real idea of how much demand 
would need to be met; fluctuation in demand for computing resources is especially difficult to 
cope with for new entrants who are not able to forecast demand and may not have the resources 
to quickly expand their IS infrastructure to meet increases in demand for their products or 
services.
For organizations with a growing customer (or user) base, the facilities infrastructure has 
to grow along with any increase in computing needs (as Google grew, it eventually had to move 
its equipment out of a friend’s garage; now Google is said to have more than 30 major data 
centers). This can be especially problematic for fast-growing companies, as renting (let alone 
building) additional facilities is expensive and significant time is needed for locating the right 
facilities, contract negotiations, and setup of the hardware and software; further, long-term 
contracts limit the companies’ flexibility to scale the infrastructure down in times of lower 
demand.
Increasing Energy Needs
Finally, the worldwide increase in demand for energy has become another concern for organiza-
tions. As computers process data, they consume electricity; further, various components (such as 
the CPU and the power supply) generate heat, and most computers have multiple fans to control 
the temperature. More powerful hardware needs more energy to enable the increase in comput-
ing power; at the same time, having more powerful hardware requires more energy for cooling. 
A typical desktop uses between 40 and 170 watts when idling and can use up to 300 watts or 
more under full load. A typical server rack (holding multiple servers) in a data center can easily 
consume 15–17 kilowatts, the equivalent of power needed for more than 10 homes. Although 
you may not feel the impact of your personal computer usage on your home energy bill, for 
organizations having hundreds or thousands of computers, rising energy costs are becoming a 
major issue. Further, power consumption and heat emissions continue to rise as hardware manu-
facturers pack more and more processing power into servers, often without providing much 
improvement in energy efficiency. Thus, power and cooling can be a significant cost factor for 
companies. Google has invested many resources into developing more efficient data centers. 
Google now uses modular data centers that use specially equipped shipping containers for hous-
ing servers so as to be able to maximize efficiency by optimizing airflow, cooling, and power 
transformation (we will talk more about another trend, “green computing,” later in the chapter as 
well as throughout the book in the Green IT case).
Given these issues, organizations have been looking for ways to better manage their IS 
infrastructure so as to enhance flexibility and agility while reducing costs. In the following sec-
tion, we will discuss cloud computing and how it can address some of these infrastructure-
related challenges.
Cloud Computing
Managing the IS infrastructure can be a challenge for many organizations due to the evolution of 
hardware and software, the demand for more storage and networking bandwidth, and the rising 
costs of energy. Further, organizations need dedicated staff to support their infrastructure, which 
incurs further costs; often, managing the IS infrastructure is not among the organization’s core 
competencies, so others may be better at managing the infrastructure for them.
In many organizations, the infrastructure has grown over the years, leading to a fragmented 
infrastructure that tends to be difficult to consolidate. However, efficiency, effectiveness, and 
agility are key for successfully competing in the digital world, and organizations require a flexi-
ble, scalable infrastructure for their applications and databases. As a result, over the past decades, 
there has been a shift away from thinking about developing and maintaining the IS infrastructure 
toward thinking about what services the infrastructure should deliver. For example, people and 
organizations just want to be able to use e-mail rather than having to think about purchasing an 
e-mail server and dealing with associated issues such as administration, maintenance, storage, 
energy consumption, and so on. In addition, organizations increasingly buy or rent, rather than 
build, applications (except for highly specialized systems that help gain or sustain competitive 
advantage, as is the case with Amazon.com or Dell) to support their business processes; in other 
words, organizations leave the building of applications to other parties and assume that these 
applications will work. Given this trend, a solid infrastructure is important, as the infrastructure 


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    145
determines how quickly new systems can be implemented and how well they will function; turn-
ing over the responsibility for the lower levels of the infrastructure to other organizations allows 
a business to focus on developing and implementing those applications that help to gain or sus-
tain competitive advantage. This becomes even more important as any lack of robustness or 
integration of an organization’s infrastructure will be immediately noticed by customers or other 
stakeholders, potentially leading to loss of business, trust, or goodwill.
What Is Cloud Computing?
Technological advances such as increasing Internet bandwidth and advances in virtualization 
have given rise to cloud computing (the “cloud” is a metaphor for the Internet; see Figure 3.21). 
As defined by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), “Cloud computing 
is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) 
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Old and Dirty Energy Drives Global Internet Growth
The Internet has become central to nearly every aspect of the 
modern economy. While traditional web browsing, shopping, 
and sending e-mail on a desktop or notebook computer are 
still important and widely performed activities, the Internet is 
being increasingly utilized for entertainment where high-defi-
nition video can be viewed from every corner of world on a 
smartphone, a tablet, or even a watch. In the coming years, 
IoT gadgets and sensors will communicate with massive data 
centers through ubiquitous networks, and autonomous vehi-
cles will take you to work or deliver your online purchases. 
Clearly, the reliance of society on the Internet, and all its 
related infrastructural components, is going to continue to 
rapidly increase throughout the world. In fact, the amount of 
data generated by all of this activity is growing at an estimated 
20 percent a year. Additionally, as smartphones become main-
stream in the developing world, nearly 80 percent of the 
world’s adult population will be connected to the Internet by 
2020. And, with IoT, the number of devices connected to the 
Internet will be roughly twice the global population by 2018 
(more than 15 billion). In fact, Internet traffic from mobile 
devices increased 69 percent in 2014 alone. The biggest driver 
of data usage has been online video, where TV and movies 
accessed through streaming services like YouTube, Netflix and 
Hulu have become a method of mainstream information gath-
ering and entertainment across the globe.
These increases in the number of users, the amount of 
data storage, and the desire for bandwidth-hungry applica-
tions like video suggest that energy consumption to drive the 
Internet will continue to increase rapidly over the next decades. 
Many of the largest tech companies are aggressively pursuing 
renewable and sustainable energy sources to power their facili-
ties; much of the energy generated within the developing 
world, however, still comes from cheap energy sources like 
coal. In 2013, coal provided approximately 41 percent of the 
world’s electricity needs. China, the world’s leading emitter of 
greenhouse gases from coal, has been slow to move toward 
greener, and more expensive, energy sources. A recent Green-
peace report, Clicking Clean: A Guide to Building the Green 
Internet, reports that Apple is the most aggressive tech com-
pany in powering its data center operations with renewable 
energy, with other name brand companies like Facebook, 
Google, Amazon, and Microsoft also making great strides at 
reducing their dirty energy usage.
One of the challenges for transforming the world to clearer 
and more renewable energy is not only the relatively low price 
for coal but also the subsidies funneled into fossil fuel produc-
tion, estimated to be near US$5 trillion worldwide each year. 
Energy activists like Elon Musk (the founder of Tesla Motors) 
are asking people to rise up against big fossil fuel companies. 
With environmental awareness fast on the rise, tech giants 
believe they can help lead such change. But as the world relies 
more on the Internet, we are also relying more on old and dirty 
energy sources.
Based on:
Buckley, C. (2015, November 3). China burns much more coal than 
reported, complicating climate talks. The New York Times. Retrieved 
May 22, 2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/04/world/asia/
china-burns-much-more-coal-than-reported-complicating-climate-
talks.html
Greenpeace. (2015). Clicking clean: A guide to building the green 
Internet. Greenpeace. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from http://www 
.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/legacy/Global/usa/planet3/
PDFs/2015ClickingClean.pdf
IEA. (n.d.). Coal. International Energy Agency. Retrieved May 22, 
2016, from http://www.iea.org/aboutus/faqs/coal
Medlock, K. (2015, May 9). Elon Musk calls for a global revolt against 
dirty energy. Inhabitat. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from http://inhabitat 
.com/elon-musk-calls-for-a-global-revolt-against-dirty-energy
Zik, O., & Shapiro, A. (2016). Coal computing: how companies mis-
understand their dirty data centers. Lux Research. Retrieved May 22, 
2016, from http://web.luxresearchinc.com/how-dirty-is-your-cloud-
download-the-complimentary-lux-research-white-paper

146    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service pro-
vider interaction” (NIST, 2011). Using a utility computing model (i.e., organizations “rent-
ing” resources such as processing, data storage, or networking from an external provider on an 
as-needed basis, and paying only for what is actually used), cloud computing thus helps to 
transform IS infrastructure costs from a capital expenditure to an operational expenditure 
(Figure 3.22). One prime example of a cloud computing provider is Amazon Web Services; 
having built an immense infrastructure (in terms of both information technology and logistics) 
for supporting its online store, Amazon.com has decided to use these resources to generate 
additional revenue streams. For example, individuals and organizations can rent storage space 
on Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (S3) or computing time on Amazon’s Elastic Compute 
Cloud (EC2), all on an as-needed basis. The ability to create an entire infrastructure by com-
bining Amazon’s various services has facilitated many successful startup companies, such as 
the social scrapbooking site Pinterest and the community travel marketplace Airbnb. As 
Processing
Storage
Transmission
FIGURE 3.21
Processing, storage, and 
transmission of data taking place 
in the cloud.
FIGURE 3.22
Cloud computing uses a utility 
computing model, allowing 
companies to pay for computing 
resources on an as-needed basis.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    147
Airbnb grew in popularity with travelers all over the globe, the company found itself being 
limited by challenges and constraints imposed by its original service provider. Moving to 
Amazon Web Services allowed Airbnb to quickly obtain 200 servers without needing to nego-
tiate service contracts or commit to minimum usage. Flexibly scaling the infrastructure would 
have been close to impossible were Airbnb using its own data center because of both the time 
and the money needed to acquire this number of servers, and at the time, who knew whether 
Airbnb’s business would actually take off? With a traditional in-house infrastructure, Airbnb 
would have had to add capacity in “chunks,” leading to either having too many unused 
resources or not being able to satisfy its users’ demand; using a cloud infrastructure, Airbnb 
can elastically scale the resources to be just above what is needed to keep the users satisfied 
(Figure 3.23).
CLOUD CHARACTERISTICS.  The cloud computing model has several unique and essential 
characteristics that distinguish cloud computing from an in-house infrastructure and provide 
various benefits to users (NIST, 2011). These characteristics are discussed next.
On-Demand Self-Service  To allow for most flexibility, users can access cloud resources in 
a buffet-style fashion on an as-needed basis without the need for lengthy negotiations with the 
service provider; in many cases, resources in the cloud are accessible by the customer with no 
need for human interaction with the provider. In the case of Amazon Web Services, a customer 
needs only a credit card (for billing purposes) and can set up server instances or expand storage 
space via a web-based control panel. For businesses whose needs may rapidly change, this 
allows for unprecedented flexibility, as it greatly facilitates scaling the infrastructure up or down 
as needed.
Rapid Elasticity  Typically, servers and other elements of an IS infrastructure take several 
weeks to be delivered and days or weeks to be configured (as a company’s IS personnel has to 
install and configure system software, databases, and application software, depending on the 
organization’s needs); in contrast, in a cloud environment, computing resources can be scaled 
up or down almost instantaneously and often automatically, based on user needs. Hence, there is 
no need to purchase expensive equipment to prepare for an anticipated surge in demand (which 
ultimately may not materialize) during the holiday season. If, however, the surge in demand does 
materialize, businesses can access the required resources instantaneously at almost any quantity.
Broad Network Access  As cloud services are accessed via the Internet, they are accessible 
from almost anywhere and from almost any web-enabled device. For organizations, this enables 
real-time management of business processes, as applications hosted in the cloud can be accessed 
whenever needed, from any location, be it from one’s desktop or laptop or using an iPhone, iPad, 
or Android smartphone app. Thus, knowledge workers can swiftly respond to anything that may 
require their immediate attention without having to be physically in their office.
Resource Pooling  Rather than renting out space or time to each customer on one specific, 
physical machine, cloud providers manage multiple distributed resources that are dynamically 
assigned to multiple customers based on their needs. Hence, the customer only rents a resource 
Demand
Demand
Capacity
Capacity 
In-House Infrastructure
Cloud Infrastructure
FIGURE 3.23
It is difficult to match demand 
using an in-house infrastructure; 
with a cloud infrastructure, 
resources can be added 
incrementally, on an as-needed 
basis.

148    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
with no knowledge or control over how it is provided or where it is located. In some cases, 
however, service providers allow for specifying particular geographic areas of the resources; 
for example, a California company may want to rent resources located in California (close to its 
customers) so as to reduce response latency, or a European company may need to rent storage 
space on servers located in Europe so as to comply with data protection directives.
Measured Service  Measured service is typically used in a utility computing model, where 
providers monitor usage and customers pay only for what they use. Different resources can have 
different types of metering. For example, customers could either be charged on an hourly basis 
for the use of server instances (the price typically depends on the instance’s computing power, 
memory, and operating system), or be charged based on volume of data stored and/or transferred 
into or out of the cloud. For customers, the fixed costs associated with the IS infrastructure are 
thus transformed into variable costs, which are very easy to track and monitor.
SERVICE MODELS.  As can be seen from the previously mentioned examples, various services 
are provided in the cloud. Whereas some users require access only to certain software, others 
want to have more control and be able to run the software of their choice on a server in the cloud 
(Figure 3.24). Different cloud computing service models (NIST, 2011) are discussed next.
Infrastructure as a Service  In the infrastructure as a service (IaaS) model, only the basic 
capabilities of processing, storage, and networking are provided. Hence, the customer has the 
most control over the resources. For example, using Amazon Web Services, customers can 
choose computing power, memory, operating system, and storage based on individual needs and 
requirements, thus being able to build (almost) their entire infrastructure in the cloud. Using such 
infrastructure, Netflix migrated its own IS infrastructure to Amazon Web Services to transcode 
movies into various formats, power its customer-focused website, and host other mission-critical 
applications. The IaaS model provides the customer with the greatest flexibility; on the other 
hand, while the infrastructure is provided, managing software licenses is still the responsibility 
of the customer, and setup costs are relatively high.
Platform as a Service  In the platform as a service (PaaS) model, customers can run their 
own applications, which are typically designed using tools provided by the service provider. 
In this model, the user has control over the applications but has limited or no control over the 
underlying infrastructure. One example is Microsoft’s Windows Azure, which acts as a cloud 
services operating system that customers can use to deploy custom applications. Using this 
platform, Outback Steakhouse launched a viral marketing campaign when it first introduced its 
Facebook Fan Page. To support the spikes in demand, Outback developed and deployed an e-mail 
marketing campaign using Windows Azure. As the underlying computing platform is provided, 
the customer does not have to worry about purchasing software licenses, for example, for the web 
servers’ operating systems or for database management systems, and the service provider manages 
PaaS
IaaS
Operating System
Web Server
Database Management System
Programming Language
Application Software
Salesforce.com
SaaS
FIGURE 3.24
Services by IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS 
providers.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    149
the functioning and updating of the platform provided. A new trend is serverless computing. 
Designed to free users from having to set up virtual machines, serverless computing platforms 
such as Amazon’s AWS Lambda allow for simply running small, specific functions, which can 
be integrated to develop applications. The service takes care of all management of the underlying 
platform, enabling continuous scaling, and the user is charged on the basis of usage time.
Software as a Service  In the software as a service (SaaS) model, the customer uses only 
applications provided via a cloud infrastructure. Typically, such applications include web-
based e-mail services (e.g., Google’s Gmail) and web-based productivity suites (such as 
Zoho or Google Docs) but also advanced applications such as CRM systems, as provided by 
Salesforce.com (see Chapter 8). Typically, the customer cares only about the application, with 
no knowledge or control over the underlying infrastructure and typically has only limited ability 
to control or configure application-specific settings. Applications under the SaaS model are 
typically easiest to deploy because the customer does not have to worry about maintaining or 
updating the software, the underlying platform, or the hardware infrastructure.
TYPES OF CLOUDS.  Cloud service providers such as Amazon.com offer what is referred to as a 
public cloud. Services in a public cloud can be used by any interested party on a pay-per-use 
basis; hence, they are often used for applications that need rapid scalability (i.e., the ability to 
adapt to increases or decreases in demand for processing or data storage) or in cases where there 
is insufficient capital or other resources to build or expand an IS infrastructure. In contrast, a 
private cloud (or internal cloud) is internal to an organization and can help the organization 
balance demand and supply of computing resources within the organization; similar to a public 
cloud, a private cloud provides self-service access to resources, allowing business users to 
provision resources on-demand using a utility computing model. A private cloud does not free 
an organization from the issues associated with managing the cloud infrastructure, but it does 
give the organization a high degree of customizability, flexibility, and control over its data and 
applications (Figure 3.25).
Managing the Cloud
Because of its various benefits, cloud computing has gained much popularity, especially among 
executives who try to harness the potential of scalability and increase the business’ agility. How-
ever, there are also various issues management should consider when moving infrastructure to 
the public cloud. The first consideration is which applications, services, or data to move to the 
cloud. Typically, there is no single cloud computing provider that can meet all needs of an orga-
nization. Rather, organizations often have to partner with different service providers, selecting 
IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS models based on the business’s needs and often combining public and 
Private Cloud
Availability
Control
Privacy
Security
Increased 
eﬃciency
Capital
expenditure
Owned by client
Centralized
Public Cloud
Operational
expenditure
Flexible
Standardized
Fast & easy setup
Owned by 
service provider
Measured service
Elastic
FIGURE 3.25
Public clouds versus private clouds.

150    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
private clouds; as there is not one solution that fits all, organizations have to carefully weigh the 
benefits and downsides of cloud computing. In addition, organizations must carefully consider 
which cloud services provider to choose. Some of the long-term, strategic issues that manage-
ment should consider when evaluating different public cloud service providers include availabil-
ity, reliability, scalability, viability, security, privacy, compliance, diversity of offerings, openness, 
and, not least, cost (Figure 3.26). These are discussed next (see also Hofmann & Woods, 2010).
AVAILABILITY/RELIABILITY.  The availability of the service is a primary concern for most 
organizations. As shown by examples from Google, Amazon, and Microsoft, not even the 
largest public cloud computing providers are immune from problems, be it hardware failures, 
programming errors, or some network outage. Organizations thus have to evaluate which 
applications to move to the cloud and how to ensure the availability of cloud-based applications. 
In addition to examining what the promised uptime of the application/system is, what backups 
are made to the servers and storage, or whether sufficient bandwidth will be provided to access 
large amounts of data, organizations have to implement their own precautionary measures. As it 
is often too costly (e.g., in terms of lost business or goodwill) to be affected by negative events, 
organizations should plan ahead and replicate their cloud-based infrastructure in different 
locations. Related to this, an important criterion to consider is the provider’s support policies. In 
case something does not work as promised, how will issues be resolved? One of the advantages 
of cloud computing is self-service, allowing clients to provision resources as needed. At the 
same time, this can be a potential downside, as there is not always the guarantee of having help 
available if needed. Thus, organizations must ensure that acceptable support capabilities and 
personnel are available, especially for mission-critical applications, to rapidly solve technical 
issues when they arise.
SCALABILITY.  One of the biggest promises of cloud computing is scalability, such that 
organizations can scale up or down their infrastructure as needed. Yet not every provider will 
be able to meet every organization’s demands. Thus, organizations have to carefully evaluate to 
what extent the provider will be able to meet current and future business needs in terms of data 
storage, transaction volumes, and so on.
VIABILITY.  Another important issue is associated with the viability and stability of the provider 
in the long run. As an organization moves to a public cloud infrastructure, it puts much data and 
processing capabilities into the hands of an outside entity. If this outside entity happens to go 
out of business, this can have many repercussions for the organization, such as costs and efforts 
involved in setting up a new infrastructure, migrating applications, or transferring the data from 
the old provider to the new infrastructure.
SECURITY, PRIVACY, AND COMPLIANCE.  In addition to concerns related to availability, reliability, 
scalability, and viability of the vendor, security, privacy, and compliance are critical aspects to 
consider when deciding which data and applications to move to the cloud and which provider to 
select. Especially when sensitive data are concerned, organizations have to question how secure 
the data will be from outside intruders, how the privacy of customer data will be protected, 
and whether the data storage complies with regulations such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and standards such as the 
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard. By definition, a public cloud infrastructure is 
shared among different companies with different applications running on the same hardware; 
as a result, it is impossible for organizations to know where exactly (physically) the data are 
located, and thus auditing who has access to the data is extremely difficult if not impossible. 
Viability
Costs
Openness
Privacy
Security
Availability
Reliability
Compliance
Diversity of Oﬀerings
Scalability
FIGURE 3.26
Organizations have to consider 
various issues when managing 
their cloud infrastructure.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    151
Whereas using an in-house infrastructure, a company has complete control over its own data, 
this control is lost in a cloud infrastructure, and organizations have fewer legal rights if their 
data are stored in the cloud. Similarly, cloud computing providers may be asked to hand over 
sensitive data stored on their servers to law enforcement, leaving the organization with little 
control. Especially for industries heavily concerned with privacy and data protection, such as 
firms in the medical or legal fields, these issues are of critical importance. On the other hand, 
public cloud computing providers are certainly aware of these issues, and organizations have to 
weigh which applications or data to move to the cloud and which to keep in-house.
Issues such as availability, reliability, and security are normally covered in service-level 
agreements (SLAs), which are contracts specifying the level of service provided in terms of 
performance (e.g., as measured by uptime), warranties, disaster recovery, and so on. A big caveat 
is that such service-level agreements do not guarantee the availability of resources; rather, they 
only promise certain service levels and provide for refunds or discounts if these promises are not 
met and can thus be regarded mostly as a vehicle for resolving conflicts in case of problems.
For businesses, this poses a serious dilemma, as such refunds and discounts normally only 
cover the costs paid for the service but can never offset the opportunity costs arising from lost 
business. On the other hand, when evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of moving the infra-
structure to the public cloud, organizations also have to critically evaluate in how far they would 
be able to maintain certain uptime using an in-house infrastructure and at what costs; often, 
organizations realize that even though certain SLAs may not be met by the provider, the provider 
can still offer better uptime than a poorly managed in-house infrastructure. In evaluating their 
options, organizations often choose a hybrid approach, having certain mission-critical applica-
tions in-house while moving other, less demanding applications (in terms of uptime, etc.) to the 
public cloud.
DIVERSITY OF OFFERINGS.  As discussed earlier, there are various providers of cloud computing 
services, ranging from IaaS to SaaS. As a larger number and diversity of providers is more 
difficult to manage, many organizations prefer to deal with fewer providers that can meet all 
needs. Thus, an important question to ask is which provider can offer the services needed both 
presently and in the future.
OPENNESS.  A related question organizations face is the issue of interoperability. Most cloud 
providers use different infrastructures, different ways to store data, and so on. This, however, 
makes migrating data between providers extremely difficult and can lead a company to be 
locked in by a certain provider. In addition to different infrastructures and storage models, 
existing network bandwidth (and data transmission costs) poses an additional limitation to 
interoperability, as moving terabytes of data from one provider to another, even using very 
high-speed networks, can prove extremely time-consuming and expensive (as cloud computing 
providers often charge for transferring data into or out of their infrastructure).
COSTS.  A final issue to consider when moving to a public cloud infrastructure is costs. The 
utility computing model used by cloud computing providers gives organizations control over 
the resources used and paid for—the organization only pays for the resources used and can 
scale the resources up or down when needed. Thus, this provides the organization with much 
transparency in the cost of the resources. Yet there is considerable disagreement over whether 
moving to the public cloud is cheaper than maintaining an in-house infrastructure. For example, 
the online game developer Zynga moved from a public cloud infrastructure to an in-house 
private cloud and decided to own, rather than rent, its infrastructure. Comparing the costs of 
owning versus renting is not an easy feat. Whereas it is easy to calculate the costs per month of 
a server in Amazon’s EC2 cloud, many organizations do not know how much exactly it costs to 
run a comparable server in an in-house infrastructure, including the costs of the server itself, the 
fees for software licenses, the electricity, the data center, the staff, and so on. Thus, organizations 
have to carefully balance the benefits and costs of the flexibility and scalability the cloud offers, 
such as by using a cloud infrastructure only for periods of peak demand; needless to say, this 
adds another layer of complexity to the IT operations.
In sum, there are various issues to consider when moving to a cloud infrastructure, and each 
organization has to make various informed choices about how to harness the opportunities the 
cloud offers while minimizing potential drawbacks. In the next section, we will provide a brief 
discussion of various other applications enabled by the cloud.

152    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
Advanced Cloud Applications
Clearly, the cloud offers many ways for businesses to solve their IS infrastructure–related issues. 
In addition to the different cloud services models, the cloud has enabled other trends, such as 
using a service-oriented architecture for flexibly deploying new applications, grid computing to 
help solve large-scale computing problems, content delivery networks for increasing web appli-
cation performance, and IP convergence for transmitting voice and video communication over 
the Internet. These applications are discussed next.
SERVICE-ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE.  In order to achieve greater flexibility and agility, 
organizations have tried to move away from deploying large, monolithic applications in favor 
of a service-oriented architecture (SOA). Using SOA, business processes are broken down 
into individual components (or services) that are designed to achieve the desired results for the 
service consumer (which can either be an application, another service, or a person). To illustrate 
this concept, think about the next oil change for your car. As you can’t be expert in everything, 
it is probably more effective to have someone change the oil for you. You may take your car 
to the dealership, you may go to an independent garage or oil change service, or you may ask 
your friend to do it for you. For you, all that matters is that the service will be provided at the 
expected level of quality and cost, but you typically do not care if different service providers do 
things differently or use different tools.
By breaking down business processes into individual services, organizations can more 
swiftly react to changing business needs. For example, using an SOA approach, multiple ser-
vices (such as “check inventory” or “order supplies”) would be orchestrated to handle the indi-
vidual tasks associated with processing customer orders and could be changed relatively easily if 
the business process changes.
To facilitate online collaboration with suppliers, business partners, and customers, SOA 
uses and reuses individual services as “building blocks” so that systems can be easily built and 
reconfigured as requirements change. To achieve these benefits, services have to follow three 
main principles:
■
■Reusability.  A service should be usable in many different applications.
■
■Interoperability.  A service should work with any other service.
■
■Componentization.  A service should be simple and modular.
Following these principles, multiple applications can invoke the same services. For exam-
ple, both an organization’s point-of-sale system and e-commerce website could invoke the ser-
vice “process credit card,” and a digital dashboard could invoke the services “display products,” 
“display inventory,” and “display sales” (Figure 3.27). Hosting and deploying such services in 
the cloud can help in building applications using SOA. In addition, various services an organiza-
tion may need are available in the cloud, eliminating the need to “reinvent the wheel.” However, 
whereas an SOA approach appears to be appealing for many companies, it requires tremendous 
Services
Applications
Process
Credit
Card
Ship
Product
Display
Sales
Display
Inventory
Display
Product
E-commerce
Website
Point-of-Sale
System
Digital
Dashboard
FIGURE 3.27
Using SOA, multiple applications 
can invoke multiple services.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    153
effort and expertise to plan the architecture, select the right services from hundreds or thousands 
of available services, and orchestrate and deploy the services. Hence, while an SOA approach 
helps to increase flexibility, the integration of various services can be extremely complex and 
can be well beyond the means of small enterprises.
GRID COMPUTING.  Businesses and public organizations heavily involved in research and 
development face an ever-increasing need for computing performance. For example, auto 
manufacturers, such as the GM German subsidiary Opel or Japanese Toyota, use large 
supercomputers to simulate automobile crashes and to evaluate design changes for vibrations and 
wind noise. Research facilities such as the Oak Ridge National Laboratory use supercomputers 
to model neutron transport in nuclear reactors or to study climate change scenarios (Figure 3.28), 
while others simulate earthquakes using supercomputers; such research sites have a tremendously 
complex hardware infrastructure.
Although today’s supercomputers have tremendous computing power, some tasks are even 
beyond the capacity of a supercomputer. Indeed, some complex simulations can take a year or 
longer to calculate even on a supercomputer. Sometimes an organization or a research facility 
would have the need for a supercomputer but may not be able to afford one because of the 
extremely high cost. For example, the fastest supercomputers can cost more than US$200 mil-
lion, and this does not represent the “total cost of ownership,” which also includes all the other 
related costs for making the system operational (e.g., personnel, facilities, storage, software, and 
so on; see Chapter 9). Additionally, the organization may not be able to justify the costs because 
the supercomputer may be needed only occasionally to solve a few complex problems. In these 
situations, organizations either have had to rent time on a supercomputer or have decided simply 
not to solve the problem.
One way for overcoming cost or use limitations is to utilize grid computing. Grid comput-
ing refers to combining the computing power of a large number of smaller, independent, net-
worked computers (often regular desktop PCs) into a cohesive system in order to solve problems 
that only supercomputers were previously capable of solving. Similar to cloud computing, grid 
computing makes use of distributed resources; however, in contrast to cloud computing, the 
resources in a grid are typically applied to a single large problem. To make grid computing work, 
large computing tasks are broken into small chunks, which can then be completed by individual 
computers (Figure 3.29).
However, as you can imagine, grid computing poses a number of demands in terms of the 
underlying network infrastructure or the software managing the distribution of the tasks. Further, 
the slowest computer often creates a bottleneck, thus slowing down the entire grid. 
FIGURE 3.28
The Titan supercomputer can 
perform more than 20,000 trillion 
calculations per second.
Source: Courtesy of Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, U.S. Dept. of Energy.

154    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
SECURITY MATTERS 
Car Hacking
The thought of riding down the highway in an automobile or 
bus and having the driver lose control because a malicious 
hacker has embedded malware into one of the vehicle’s 
onboard computers is frightening. In many high-visibility dem-
onstrations in a variety of magazines and news programs, 
hackers (or maybe it is better to call them researchers) have 
shown how they can break into many of these onboard 
systems.
Many potential onboard systems are vulnerable to hacking. 
Modern vehicles have a number of control units—essentially 
small computers—to operate and integrate a variety of sys-
tems, including the engine and transmission, airbags, steering 
and braking, remote keyless entry, and many others. Each of 
these systems is coupled together through a maze of net-
works. Modern vehicles also contain Bluetooth so the driver 
can connect a smartphone for hands-free mobile phone calls 
and even Wi-Fi hotspots to provide connectivity for gadgets, 
entertainment, and passengers. There is a tremendous amount 
of programming code in modern vehicles, and most of this 
code is from a broad range of vendors, making it virtually 
impossible for vehicle manufacturers to understand all poten-
tial vulnerabilities. Each of these systems has the potential to 
be exploited by hackers if design or security flaws are not 
identified.
A successful break-in typically isn’t easy, however, often 
requiring several researchers several months to figure out. 
Because of this, some view this vulnerability as more hype than 
reality, suggesting that hacking into such onboard systems 
should not be viewed as being a huge safety or security con-
cern. The truth is likely somewhere in the middle between 
hype and reality. While it may take a particular team a long 
time to figure out a particular hack into an onboard system, 
others can learn from these successful efforts to greatly 
shorten the learning curve. To address this, both technology 
and vehicle component vendors are working together to stan-
dardize approaches, share information, and make supply 
chains more secure to prevent tampering or counterfeit parts 
entering a vehicle. At the same time, manufacturers must also 
learn about vulnerabilities so that any security flaws can be 
quickly repaired.
Based on:
Greenberg, A. (2016, March 17). The FBI warns that car hacking is 
a real risk. Wired. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from http://www.wired 
.com/2016/03/fbi-warns-car-hacking-real-risk
Huddleston, Jr., T. (2015, September 15). This graphic shows all the 
ways your car can be hacked. Fortune. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from 
http://fortune.com/2015/09/15/intel-car-hacking
Intel. (n.d.). Automotive security best practices. Intel. Retrieved 
April 8, 2016, from http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/
automotive/automotive-security-best-practices-white-paper.html
Pogue, D. (2016, February 22). Why car hacking is nearly impossible. 
Scientific American. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from http://www 
.scientificamerican.com/article/why-car-hacking-is-nearly-impossible
Vanian, J. (2016, January 26). Security experts say that hacking 
cars is easy. Fortune. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from http://fortune 
.com/2016/01/26/security-experts-hack-cars
FIGURE 3.29
Grid computing: Computers 
located around the world work on 
parts of a large, complex problem.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    155
A dedicated grid, consisting of a large number of homogeneous computers (and not relying on 
underutilized resources), can help overcome these problems. A dedicated grid is easier to set up 
and manage and, for many companies, much more cost effective than purchasing a 
supercomputer.
CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS.  Another recent trend in IS hardware infrastructure 
management is the use of content delivery networks to increase performance of websites. 
Typically, the larger the geographical distance between a user and the web server hosting certain 
content, the longer it takes to transmit the content; this can be especially noticeable for content 
such as streaming media but also for other content presented on a web page. Content delivery 
networks help reduce this latency by providing a network of servers in various geographical 
locations, which store copies of particular websites. If a user in a particular geographic location 
requests a certain web page, the content delivery server closest to the user’s location delivers 
the content, significantly speeding up the delivery of the content (Figure 3.30), a process 
that is normally unnoticed by the user. This process not only saves valuable resources such 
as bandwidth but also offers superior performance that would otherwise be too expensive for 
organizations to offer.
CONVERGENCE OF COMPUTING AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Today, much of an organization’s 
communication and collaboration needs are supported by Internet technologies; for example, 
texting and e-mail have become the communications methods of choice for many people. 
However, for some topics, other forms of communication are more suited, so managers turn 
to the telephone, instant messaging, meetings, or videoconferences. The growing convergence 
of computing and telecommunications can help satisfy such diverse communication and 
collaboration needs. The computing industry is experiencing an ever-increasing convergence of 
functionality of various devices. Whereas just a few years ago a cell phone was just capable of 
making phone calls and people used personal digital assistants to support mobile computing 
needs, such devices are now converging such that the boundaries between devices are becoming 
increasingly blurred. Today, smartphones, such as the iPhone 7 or Samsung’s Galaxy S7, offer 
a variety of different functionalities—formerly often available only on separate dedicated 
devices—to address differing needs of knowledge workers and consumers alike (e.g., phone, 
e-mail, web browser, navigation system, camera, music player, and so on).
In addition to a convergence of capabilities of devices, there is also increasing convergence 
within the underlying infrastructures. For example, in the past, the backbone networks for the 
Internet
Content
Delivery
Server
Content
Delivery
Server
Content
Delivery Server
Washington State
Data Center
Germany
China
FIGURE 3.30
Content delivery networks store 
copies of content closer to the end 
user.

156    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
IP Network
FIGURE 3.31
IP convergence allows various 
devices to communicate using 
IP technologies.
telephone and Internet were distinct. Today, increasingly, voice and data traffic share a common 
network infrastructure. IP convergence, or the use of the Internet protocol (IP) for transporting 
voice, video, fax, and data traffic, has allowed enterprises to make use of new forms of commu-
nication and collaboration (e.g., instant messaging and online whiteboard collaboration) as well 
as traditional forms of communication (such as phone and fax) at much lower costs (Figure 3.31). 
In the following sections, we discuss two uses of IP for communication: voice over IP and vid-
eoconferencing over IP.
Voice over IP  Voice over IP (VoIP) (or IP telephony) refers to the use of Internet 
technologies for placing telephone calls. Whereas just a few years ago the quality of VoIP 
calls was substandard, recent technological advances now allow the quality of calls to equal 
or even surpass the quality of traditional calls over (wired) telephone lines. In addition to the 
quality, VoIP offers a number of other benefits; for example, users can receive calls from almost 
anywhere they connect to the Internet. In other words, knowledge workers are not bound to 
their desk to receive VoIP calls; instead, using IP routing, their telephone number “follows” 
them to wherever they connect to the Internet. For example, Christoph, who lives in Hong 
Kong, has VoIP telephone numbers in the United States and Germany so that friends and family 
members living in these countries can call him at local rates. Organizations can also benefit 
from tremendous cost savings, as often there is little cost incurred over and above the costs 
for a broadband Internet connection (e.g., VoIP software such as Skype allows users to make 
Skype-to-Skype calls for free).
Videoconferencing over IP  In addition to voice communications, IP can also be used to 
transmit video data. Traditionally, videoconferences were held either via traditional phone lines, 
which were not made to handle the transfer of data needed for high-quality videoconferencing, 
or via dedicated digital lines, which was a very costly option. Similar to VoIP, the Internet also 
helped to significantly reduce costs and enhance the versatility of videoconferences by enabling 
videoconferencing over IP.
For some videoconferences, desktop videoconferencing equipment (consisting of a web-
cam, a microphone, speakers, and software such as Google Hangouts or Skype) may be 


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    157
sufficient (Figure 3.32); for others, higher-end equipment may be needed. Such infrastructure 
can include specific videoconferencing hardware, or it can be a dedicated virtual meeting room 
featuring life-sized images allowing people from across the globe to meet as if they were sitting 
in the same room.We discuss videoconferencing in more detail in Chapter 5, “Enhancing Orga-
nizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media.”
Green Computing
Fueled by the rapid advances of developing nations, the world has seen a tremendous increase 
in demand for and cost of energy. For organizations having hundreds or thousands of comput-
ers, rising energy costs are becoming a major issue. Further, organizations are being increas-
ingly scrutinized for their contribution to societal issues such as climate change (see Chapter 
1); more and more organizations are trying to portray a “greener” image when it comes to the 
use of energy and natural resources, as company executives have realized that they cannot 
afford the consequences of inaction on the company’s reputation. As “green” efforts can save 
money on energy and water use, waste disposal, and carbon taxes and can be subsidized by 
grants, rebates, or free technical advice, they can also have positive impacts on a company’s 
bottom line.
Green computing, or attempts to use computing resources more efficiently to reduce envi-
ronmental impacts, as well as the use of information systems to reduce negative environmental 
impacts, can contribute to these efforts by helping to use computers more efficiently, doing the 
same (or more) with less. For example, organizations can save large amounts of money for 
power and cooling by using virtualization to replace hundreds of individual servers with just a 
few powerful mainframe computers. As studies have shown, computing resources in organiza-
tions are often very much underutilized, and using virtualization can help lower an organiza-
tion’s energy bill and carbon footprint. Similarly, cloud computing has been argued to contribute 
to reduced energy consumption, as the service provider’s infrastructure is shared by many users. 
FIGURE 3.32
Desktop videoconferencing 
equipment helps organizations 
and individuals to reduce their 
telecommunications costs.

158    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
Installing sophisticated power management software on individual desktops can save much 
energy that is wasted by leaving computers idling or on standby overnight. Further, discouraging 
employees from printing out e-mails or business documents can help to reduce the waste of 
paper—an average office worker prints more than a tree’s worth of paper each year.
A related issue is the retiring of obsolete hardware. Today, companies cannot just send 
retired equipment to a landfill. Rather, companies as well as individuals have to evaluate how to 
best dispose of unwanted computers, monitors, and parts. Whereas the first step is to make the 
decision when to retire equipment, the next steps are equally important. Needless to say, it has to 
be ensured that old computers are wiped of all user data. Many third-party outsourcers (“IT asset 
disposition” vendors) offer services including wiping all computer hard drives and either refur-
bishing and selling usable equipment or dismantling the components to recycle valuable raw 
materials and properly dispose of hazardous waste.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Movie Industry
Do you remember the original Star Wars movies or movies 
such as King Kong (1976) or Godzilla (1954)? Compare these 
to recent box office hits such as Star Wars VII: The Force Awak-
ens (2015), Deadpool (2016), or animated movies such as 
Finding Dory (2016). With each new generation of movies, 
there is also a tremendous increase in computing power, 
enabling film studios such as Dreamworks and Universal Stu-
dios or special effects studios such as Weta Digital and Pixar to 
create animations and special effects of hitherto unimaginable 
quality using specialized powerful software and hardware for 
computer-generated imagery (CGI, also known as computer 
graphics).
As for major studios, rapidly evolving digital technology 
(specifically, recording hardware and sophisticated yet easy-
to-use digital editing software) has opened vast opportunities 
for independent filmmakers who are producing studio-quality 
films without having to rely on expensive lighting, film devel-
opment, and postproduction facilities. Thus, people who could 
never afford all the necessary equipment can now produce 
movies digitally. Further, digital cameras and projectors and 
advances in software have made the transition from celluloid 
to digital more attainable for filmmakers who until recently 
used traditional technology. And it is not just the little indepen-
dent filmmakers embracing the digital trend. Today, most films 
made by large studios such a Paramount Studios and Warner 
Brothers are shot and edited using 100 percent digital formats. 
Another big innovation is the use of drones for recording the 
action. Drones are a very low-cost alternative to expensive heli-
copters and have the added benefit of being able to go places 
that humans or helicopters simply cannot due to size or safety 
constraints. This is a particular advantage for independently 
developed movies that don’t have the budget of major block-
busters as well as for sports reporting.
The impact of technology on the movie industry does not 
stop with movie production. Many movie theaters across the 
world have shifted to digital projection technologies, reducing 
the need for duplicating and shipping large reels of film and 
reducing distribution costs by up to 90 percent while speeding 
up the time from the studio to the theater. Rather than on reels 
of film (that are susceptible to out-of-focus projection, scratches, 
or “pops”), the movies are stored on central servers, from which 
they are accessed and downloaded via the Internet by individual 
theaters. Theater owners can much more swiftly react to fluctu-
ating demand and easily show movies on more than one screen 
in case of high demand. Clearly, the use of information systems 
has tremendously changed the movie industry.
Questions
1.	 Can digital technologies help movie theaters compete with 
the increasing trend toward more sophisticated home the-
aters? If so, how?
2.	 What are the ethical issues associated with special effects 
becoming more and more realistic with the help of digital 
technologies?
3.	 From the perspective of movie studios and theaters, list the 
pros and cons of using digital distribution technologies.
Based on:
Alexander, H., & Blakely, R. (2014, September 12). The triumph of 
digital will be the death of many movies. New Republic. Retrieved 
April 8, 2016, from https://newrepublic.com/article/119431/
how-digital-cinema-took-over-35mm-film
Digital cinematography. (2016, March 4). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Digital_cinematography&oldid=708195035
Jardin, X. (2005, July 28). Hollywood plots end of film reels. Wired. 
Retrieved April 8, 2016, http://archive.wired.com/entertainment/music/
news/2005/07/68332
Watercutter, A. (2015, March 6). Drones are about to change how 
directors make movies. Wired. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from http://
www.wired.com/2015/03/drone-filmmaking


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    159
Key Points Review
1.	 Describe how changes in businesses’ competitive 
landscape influence changing IS infrastructure 
needs. Organizations are facing continuously changing 
business environments, and quickly adapting to a 
constantly changing competitive environment 
necessitates that businesses are increasingly flexible 
and agile. Modern organizations use various 
applications and databases to support their business 
processes; these applications and databases rely on a 
solid underlying IS infrastructure consisting of 
hardware, system software, storage, networking, 
and data.
2.	 Describe the essential components of an 
organization’s IS infrastructure. Organizations use 
various types of IS hardware to meet their diverse 
computing needs. The most prominent type of system 
software, the operating system, coordinates the 
interaction between hardware devices, peripherals, 
application software, and users. Further, organizations 
need to store massive amounts of data for operational, 
backup, and archival purposes. Networking is one of 
the reasons why information systems have become so 
powerful and important to modern organizations. 
Finally, organizations use data centers to house the 
different infrastructure components so as to ensure 
security and availability.
3.	 Discuss managerial issues associated with managing 
an organization’s IS infrastructure. Radical advances 
in information technology have opened many 
opportunities for organizations but have also brought 
about challenges. Advances in hardware have enabled 
advances in software. Hardware and software 
obsolescence, faster IT cycles, and consumerization 
present issues such as when and how to upgrade the 
current infrastructure. Further, organizations’ storage 
needs are growing at an ever-increasing pace, and 
organizations also have to deal with fluctuations in 
demand for computing power while often being unable 
to quickly scale the IS infrastructure accordingly. The 
increasing need for both computing power and storage 
fuels an increasing demand for energy, which can 
affect a company’s image as well as its bottom line.
4.	 Describe cloud computing and other current trends 
that can help an organization address IS 
infrastructure–related challenges. Cloud computing 
uses a utility computing business model where 
customers can draw on a variety of computing 
resources that can be accessed on demand with 
minimal human interaction. Characteristics of cloud 
computing include on-demand self-service, rapid 
elasticity, broad network access, resource pooling, and 
measured service. Typical cloud computing service 
models are infrastructure as a service (IaaS), platform 
as a service (PaaS), and software as a service (SaaS). 
When considering the move to a public cloud-based 
infrastructure, organizations have to weigh issues such 
as availability, reliability, scalability, viability, security, 
privacy, compliance, openness, diversity of offerings, 
and, not least, cost. Other applications in the cloud 
include SOA, grid computing, content delivery 
networks, voice over IP, and videoconferencing over 
IP. Finally, a recent trend is green computing, as 
companies realize potential cost savings and a positive 
effect on the company’s image by implementing ways 
to reduce energy consumption and waste.
Key Terms
application software  124
bandwidth  133
campus area network  134
client  133
client-server network  133
computer networking  132
content delivery network  155
database  124
database management system 
(DBMS)  125
dedicated grid  155
deep web  136
desktop virtualization  133
device driver  128
digital infrastructure  121
domain name  135
embedded system  127
extranet  137
green computing  157
grid computing  134
hyperlink  134
hypertext  134
Hypertext Markup Language 
(HTML)  134
Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP)  134
information systems architecture  123
information systems infrastructure  121
infrastructure  120
infrastructure as a service (IaaS)  148
Internet  134
intranet  136
IP address  135
IP convergence  156
local area network (LAN)  134
mainframe  126
measured service  148
metropolitan area network  134
Moore’s law  141
network  133
operating system  128
peer  133
peer-to-peer (P2P) network  133
peripheral  128
personal area network  134
personal computer (PC)  127
planned obsolescence  142
platform as a service (PaaS)  148
private cloud  149
protocols  132
public cloud  149
radio frequency identification 
(RFID)  127
RFID tag  128

160    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
scalability  149
server  126
service  152
service-level agreement (SLA)  151
service-oriented architecture (SOA)  152
software as a service (SaaS)  149
supercomputer  126
system software  128
thin client  133
top-level domain  135
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol (TCP/IP)  136
transmission media  132
Uniform Resource Locator (URL)  135
utility computing  146
videoconferencing over IP  156
voice over IP (VoIP)  156
web browser  134
web page  134
web server  134
website  134
wide area network  134
Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) network  134
wireless local area network 
(WLAN)  134
workstation  127
World Wide Web (www)  134
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM
Self-Study Questions
	 3-15. 	All of the following are examples of infrastructure 
components except
A.	hardware
B.	system software
C.	data centers
D.	applications
	 3-16. 	Which of the following is not a consequence of lack of 
availability, performance, or security?
A.	loss of managerial oversight
B.	loss of business
C.	loss of trust
D.	loss of goodwill
	 3-17. 	Engineering drawings are typically prepared using 
______________.
A.	mainframes
B.	servers
C.	personal computers
D.	workstations
	 3-18. 	Magnetic tape is typically used for ______________.
A.	storing operational data
B.	backing up critical data
C.	maintaining customer records
D.	archiving data
	 3-19. 	Which of the following is the protocol of the Internet?
A.	URL
B.	HTML
C.	TCP/IP
D.	ARPA
	 3-20. 	All of the following are correct domain suffixes except
A.	.edu —educational institutions
B.	.gov—U.S. government
C.	.neo—network organizations
D.	.com—commercial businesses
	 3-21. 	The ability to adapt to increases or decreases in 
demand for processing or storage is referred to as 
______________.
A.	adaptability
B.	flexibility
C.	scalability
D.	agility
	 3-22. 	In cloud computing, services are typically offered 
using ______________.
A.	private clouds
B.	heterogeneous grids
C.	a utility computing model
D.	edge computing
Review Questions
	 3-1. 	How do applications support organizational 
business processes?
	 3-2. 	How do databases support organizational 
business processes?
	 3-3. 	Describe the key functions of system 
software.
	 3-4. 	For which purposes are data stored in 
organizations?
	 3-5. 	What are the distinguishing characteristics of 
different storage media?
	 3-6. 	How does computer networking work?
	 3-7. 	What are the major types of networks?
	 3-8. 	What is the World Wide Web, and what is its 
relationship to the Internet?
MyLab MIS
	 3-9. 	What are URLs, and why are they important 
to the World Wide Web?
	 3-10. 	What are the problems associated with soft-
ware obsolescence?
	 3-11. 	Describe the characteristics of the cloud com-
puting model.
	 3-12. 	Define grid computing and describe its advan-
tages and disadvantages.
	 3-13. 	Describe what is meant by the term IP 
convergence.
	 3-14. 	Describe why green computing has become 
so important to modern organizations.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    161
	 3-23. 	For the most flexibility in the use of computing 
resources, companies choose a(n) ______________ 
provider.
A.	utility computing
B.	software as a service
C.	platform as a service
D.	infrastructure as a service
	 3-24. 	Large-scale computing problems can be solved using 
______________ computing.
A.	grid
B.	utility
C.	cloud
D.	edge
Answers are on page 163.
Problems and Exercises
	 3-25. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Utility computing
ii.	 Service-level agreement
iii.	 System software
iv.	 Software as a service
v.	 Voice over IP
vi.	 Cloud computing
vii.	 Bandwidth
viii.	 Server
ix.	 Planned obsolescence
x.	 Scalability
a.	 The incorporation of a life span into the design of a 
product
b.	 The use of Internet technology for placing tele-
phone calls
c.	 A cloud computing model in which the customer 
uses an application provided via a cloud 
infrastructure
d.	 A model for enabling convenient, on-demand net-
work access to a shared pool of configurable com-
puting resources
e.	 Any computer on a network that makes access to 
files, printing, communications, and other services 
available to users of the network
f.	 The transmission capacity of a computer or com-
munications channel
g.	 A business model where computing resources are 
rented on an as-needed basis
h.	 Contracts specifying the level of service provided 
in terms of performance, warranties, disaster 
recovery, and so on
i.	 The collection of programs that control the basic 
operations of computer hardware
j.	 The ability to adapt to increases or decreases in 
demand for processing or data storage
	 3-26. 	Take a look at the website of an online social network. 
Which pieces of information are likely coming from 
information stored in databases?
	 3-27. 	Which applications are mission-critical for an online 
retailer? For a bank? Justify your assessment.
	 3-28. 	How often do you update software on your computer? 
Do newer versions offer more features, better perfor-
mance, or both? Give examples of updates that did not 
bring about the expected results.
	 3-29. 	Interview an IS professional about the different types 
of computers used within the organization. What types 
are most important? Why?
	 3-30. 	Search the web for information about hard drives, tape 
drives, and cloud backup services. What would you 
use for backing up your data? Why?
	 3-31. 	Scan the popular press and/or the web for clues con-
cerning emerging technologies for computer network-
ing. This may include new uses for current technologies 
or new technologies altogether. Discuss as a group the 
“hot” issues. Do you feel they will become a reality in 
the near future? Why or why not? Prepare a 10-minute 
presentation of your findings to be given to the class.
	 3-32. 	Choose a popular smartphone or tablet and compare 
and contrast the newest model and an older, heavily 
discounted one. What are the benefits and drawbacks 
of choosing one over the other?
	 3-33. 	How does hardware and software obsolescence affect 
your life? Give examples of experiences with outdated 
hardware or software. How did you deal with these 
situations?
	 3-34. 	Compare your computer’s energy use with that of 
other appliances. What is the energy primarily used 
for? How much energy seems wasted?
	 3-35. 	Imagine you would want to launch a startup for a 
music streaming service, and research cloud service 
providers for your infrastructure needs. What options 
do you have? Which one would you choose and why?
	 3-36. 	Try out a cloud based provider of presentation soft-
ware (such as www.prezi.com). How does the service 
compare to locally installed software? Would you 
switch to the cloud based provider? Why or why not?
	 3-37. 	Search the web for services allowing you to store and 
manage your medical information online. Would you 
entrust such services with your medical information? 
Why or why not?
	 3-38. 	Research the web for service-level agreements of two 
different providers of cloud services and compare 
these based on availability, security, and privacy. What 
do the providers promise in case the promised levels of 
service are not delivered? Is the customer compensated 
for any data losses due to the provider’s fault?
	 3-39. 	Compare and contrast major VoIP providers focusing 
on end consumers. How do the services differ? Which 
service would you choose? Why?

162    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application:  
Tracking Frequent-Flier Mileage
	 3-40. 	You have recently landed a part-time job as a busi-
ness analyst for Campus Travel. In your first meeting, 
the operations manager learned that you are taking an 
introductory MIS class. As the manager is not very 
proficient in using office software tools, he is doing 
all frequent-flier mileage in two separate Excel work-
books. One is the customer’s contact information, and 
the second is the miles flown. Being familiar with the 
possibilities of spreadsheet applications, you suggest 
setting up one workbook to handle both functions. To 
complete this, you must do the following:
■
■Open the spreadsheet frequentflier2.csv. You will 
see a tab for customers and a tab labeled “miles 
flown.”
■
■Use the vlookup function to enter the miles flown 
column by looking up the frequent-flier number. 
(Hint: If done correctly with absolute references, 
you should be able to enter the vlookup formula in 
the first cell in the “miles flown” column and copy 
it down for all the cells.)
■
■Use conditional formatting to highlight all frequent 
fliers who have less than 4,000 total miles.
■
■Finally, sort the frequent fliers by total miles in 
descending order.
Database Application: Building a Knowledge 
Database
	 3-41. 	Campus Travel seems to be growing quite rapidly. 
Now it has franchises in three different states, totaling 
16 locations. As the company has grown tremendously 
over the past few years, it has become increasingly 
difficult to keep track of the areas of expertise of each 
travel consultant; often, consultants waste valuable 
time trying to find out who in the company possesses 
the knowledge about a particular region. Impressed 
with your skills, the general manager of Campus 
Travel has asked you to add, modify, and delete the 
following records from its employee database:
■
■Open employeedata.mdb.
■
■Select the “employee” tab.
■
■Add the following records:
a.	 Eric Tang, Spokane Office, Expert in Southwest, 
Phone (509) 555-2311
b.	 Janna Connell, Spokane Office, Expert in Delta, 
Phone (509) 555-1144
■
■Delete the following record:
a.	 Carl Looney from the Pullman office
■
■Modify the following:
a.	 Change Frank Herman from the Pullman office 
to the Spokane office
b.	 Change Ramon Sanchez’s home number to 
(208) 549-2544
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats:  
Mobile broadband is growing substantially
An Internet broadband connection can be delivered through 
either a fixed-line or a mobile connection. Mobile broadband 
connections make it easy to connect mobile devices such as 
smartphones, laptops, and tablets to the Internet on-the-go via a 
3G or 4G network or data cards. Mobile broadband has been 
growing substantially since 2007. In late 2015, over 47 percent 
of the world’s total population were active mobile-broadband 
subscribers, a figure that has increased twelve-fold since 2007. 
The percentage is projected to reach almost 50 percent by late 
2016. In the developed world, 87 percent of the population is 
accessing the Internet on the go, whereas only 35 percent of the 
population of the developing world are active mobile-broad-
band subscribers. For the year 2016, in terms of continents, 
North and South America come first with 78 percent, Europe 
with 76 percent, Asia-Pacific with nearly 43 percent, and Africa 
with 29 percent. Recently, on average, mobile broadband has 
been becoming more affordable than fixed-line broadband, and 
this has contributed partially to its substantial grow in the last 
eight years.
Questions and Exercises
	 3-42. 	Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics.
	 3-43. 	As a team, interpret these numbers. What is striking or 
important about these statistics?
	 3-44. 	As a team, discuss how these numbers may look in five 
years and ten years. What changes have to be made to 
global mobile networking? What issues and opportuni-
ties do you see arising? 
	 3-45. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, create a 
graph or figure to effectively visualize the statistics or 
changes you consider most important.
Based on:
ITU. (2016). ICT Facts Figures 2016. Itu.int. Retrieved October 24, 2016, from 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2016 
.pdf
Anonymous. (n.d). ICT Statistics. Itu.int. Retrieved October 24, 2016, from 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
Anonymous. (n.d). OECD Broadband Portal.Oecd.org. Retrieved October 24, 
2016, from http://www.oecd.org/sti/broadband/oecdbroadbandportal.htm


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    163
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 3-15.	 D, p. 121
	 3-16.	 A, p. 123
	 3-17.	 D, p. 127
	 3-18.	 D, p. 131
	 3-19.	 C, p. 136
DBS Bank Limited (DBS) is a leading finan-
cial services group in Asia with more than 
280 branches, 200,000 institutional custom-
ers, 6 million retail customers, and more than 
22,000 employees across 18 distinct markets. 
Headquartered and registered in Singapore 
since 1968, DBS provides wealth manage-
ment, consumer banking, and institutional 
banking services. The bank’s capital standing, 
as well as “AA-” and “Aa1” credit ratings 
(these ratings indicate the risk of the institu-
tion defaulting on its financial obligations), is 
one of the highest in the Asia-Pacific region.
DBS is at the front line of digital tech-
nology leveraging, because of which it has 
been named the “World’s Best Digital Bank” 
by Euromoney in 2016, “Asia’s Best Bank” 
by The Banker and Euromoney in 2016, and 
“Asian Bank of the Year” by IFR Asia in 
2015. DBS has also been named the “Safest 
Bank in Asia” by Global Finance for seven 
consecutive years from 2009 to 2015.
DBS is transforming itself using a hybrid 
cloud environment through which it experi-
ments with digital strategies alongside its 
traditional data centers. This innovative 
approach has made it a pioneer in the use of 
cloud computing in Asia.
One anchor of its cloud implementation 
is the use of Amazon Web Services (AWS) 
for DBS’ Treasury and Markets (T&M) 
business, whose pricing and valuing finan-
cial instruments demand power-hungry 
computing. Prior to working with AWS, 
DBS performed a comprehensive evaluation 
and a proof-of-concept. This was to ensure 
that their cloud implementation met the stan-
dards of the Monetary Authority of Singa-
pore’s Technology Risk Management 
guidelines. The bank also further established 
technology standards, internal approval toll 
gates, and data encryption standards regard-
ing its cloud implementation.
DBS is also the first bank in Singapore to 
utilize cloud-based productivity technology 
like Office 365, which allows employees to 
seamlessly access their work even outside the 
office. The imperative was to meet the service 
levels offered by smaller, more nimble finan-
cial technology companies; thus, DBS 
equipped its employees with a set of produc-
tivity tools that allow them to handle custom-
ers’ requests more swiftly and efficiently.
DBS is testing Microsoft Office 365 
among its 1,000 staff locally, and over the 
span of one year aims to roll this out to the 
entire workforce of 22,000 employees across 
18 markets. This will unshackle its work-
force so that they can perform collabora-
tively from anywhere, with any smart device, 
and also allow conferences through Skype 
for business and other collaboration.
Another unique aspect of DBS cloud 
architecture is the use of Pivotal Cloud 
Foundry, a cloud development platform for 
accelerating the delivery of new application 
solutions. DBS will use Pivotal’s cloud plat-
form to develop next-generation credit risk 
management systems and funds-transfer 
pricing applications. In addition, Pivotal will 
provide DBS’s application development 
team with the software development services 
of Pivotal Labs so that the bank can “think 
and act like a technology company and inno-
vate at agile start-up speeds.”
The cloud architecture deployed by DBS 
will be the key to managing many future 
challenges. For example, AWS will enable 
DBS to swiftly and cost-effectively manage 
short-term surges in trading volumes caused 
by global events. In the past, by contrast, 
DBS rode out the Brexit turmoil by deploy-
ing their full team of traders and taking pre-
cautions to ensure that their IT systems could 
cope with the anticipated increase in queries 
and trading volume.
DBS’s vision for the cloud is even big-
ger; it plans to migrate 50 percent of its com-
puting workload to the cloud in the next two 
years to allow even more dramatic savings in 
cost, increased resilience, and the ability to 
rapidly respond to customer demand.
Overall, DBS is leading the transition 
toward digital banking technology in Asia by 
integrating cloud computing with its tradi-
tional architecture, enabling it to innovate at 
the speed of the new-economy companies 
while still maintaining its core values of high 
security and reliability.
CASE 1
 DBS Singapore Moves to the Cloud
Questions
	 3-46. 	 What are the various cloud initiatives undertaken by DBS? 
Categorize them into IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS.
	 3-47. 	 What are the advantages of each of the cloud initiatives to 
DBS?
	 3-48. 	 How well is DBS prepared for the future?
Based on:
Chng, C. (2016, July 27). The Brexit test for DBS’ cloud strategy. Convergence 
Asia. Retrieved December 14, 2016, from http://www.convergenceasia.com/
story/brexit-test-dbs-cloud-strategy
DBS Bank Ltd. (2015). Live more, bank less. DBS Website. Retrieved Decem-
ber 14, 2016, from https://www.dbs.com/annualreports/2015/pdfs/dbs-annual-
report-2015.pdf
DBS Bank Ltd. (2016, August 29). DBS partners with Pivotal to accel-
erate innovation for customers. DBS Website. Retrieved December 14, 
2016, from https://www.dbs.com/newsroom/DBS_partners_with_Pivotal_ 
to_accelerate_innovation_for_customers
DBS Bank Ltd. (2016, July 27). DBS to leverage Amazon Web Services 
Cloud. DBS Website. Retrieved December 14, 2016, from https://www.dbs 
.com/newsroom/DBS_to_leverage_Amazon_Web_Services_Cloud
Singapore News Center. (2016, June 28). DBS—First Singapore bank to adopt 
cloud-based productivity technology in the workplace. Microsoft Website. Retrieved 
December 14, 2016, from https://news.microsoft.com/en-sg/2016/06/28/dbs-first-
singapore-bank-to-adopt-cloud-based-productivity-technology-in-the-workplace/
#sm.0000w5zfxc9z2ddcux62nv34f8aep
Yahya, Y., & Lee, S. (2016, June 19). Many expect there will be jump in trad-
ing activity, especially if Britons vote to leave the EU. The Straits Times. 
Retrieved December 14, 2016, from http://www.straitstimes.com/business/
companies-markets/banks-put-traders-on-standby-for-poll-results.
	 3-20.	 C, p. 135
	 3-21.	 C, p. 149
	 3-22.	 C, p. 146
	 3-23.	 D, p. 148
	 3-24.	 A, p. 152

164    CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services 
Most people don’t think too much about the 
web as long as they are able to visit their 
favorite websites. Popular websites like 
nytimes.com reside on what is called the sur-
face web—meaning that they display content 
that a search engine like Bing or Google can 
find when you are searching the web. In addi-
tion to the surface web, there is a vast amount 
of non-indexed content that cannot be found 
with a normal search engine. This non-
indexed content is collectively referred to as 
the deep web. The deep web is many times 
larger than the surface web. It has been sug-
gested that the Internet can be visualized as a 
giant iceberg of information, with the content 
of the surface web being relatively smaller 
and visible and the deep web having a mas-
sive amount of content that is unseen by 
search engines and is typically more difficult 
to find and navigate.
The deep web contains a variety of con-
tent, both lawful and unlawful. Lawful con-
tent that resides on the deep web includes 
corporate and academic databases that can-
not be found with a search engine but can be 
viewed with a normal browser. The deep 
web also houses content from mainstream 
websites, like Facebook posts that are only 
visible to a poster’s friends or transaction 
data that you provide to Amazon when plac-
ing an order. All of this lawful content 
resides on the deep web, and much of it is 
only available to those authorized by the 
owner of the system to view or access it.
There is also a vast amount of unlawful 
content on the deep web, and this content is 
referred to as the dark web. Interest in the 
dark web has been on the rise following 
several high-profile data leaks that have 
been extensively discussed in the media. 
For example, after the hacking group called 
“The Impact Team” stole user data from the 
extramarital cheating website Ashley Madi-
son, it posted this data on the dark web. 
Content on the dark web is arranged in a 
special way in order to provide anonymity 
to those who browse and share content. As 
such, you cannot access the dark web with a 
normal web browser. The most popular part 
of the dark web is called Tor. To access 
Tor, you need a special version of the 
Firefox browser. Tor, an acronym of The 
Onion Router, directs Internet traffic 
through a worldwide volunteer network of 
relays and virtual tunnels (rather than the 
usual direct connections to Internet sites)—
each representing a layer of the onion. 
These relays allow users to conceal their 
location or usage from anyone conducting 
network surveillance or traffic analysis and 
are intended to protect the personal privacy 
of users. There are additional ways to fur-
ther increase your anonymity on Tor by uti-
lizing the Tails operating system, made 
famous by Edward Snowden, who used it to 
evade NSA watchdogs.
This high level of privacy within Tor 
allows people to conduct a wide range of 
confidential activities. Some use it for sensi-
tive communications, including political dis-
sent. But in the past decade, it’s also become 
a hub for black markets that sell or distribute 
weapons, drugs, stolen credit cards, illegal 
pornography, pirated media, and more. You 
can even hire assassins. It is important to 
note, however, that Tor was initially created 
by researchers supported by the U.S. govern-
ment’s Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency, or DARPA, as a tool for fostering 
democracy in repressive regimes. So, while 
the dark web has many nefarious uses, it also 
has great value in many parts of the world 
where free expression is outlawed.
Because of the noted difficulties in 
searching and accessing the massive dark 
web, very little has been done to make it 
more accessible to the general public. Given 
the tremendous infrastructure resources 
required to search just the surface web, it is 
difficult to imagine the technologies, hard-
ware, and software that would be required to 
allow the same search capabilities in the dark 
web. And given the nefarious nature of much 
of the dark web’s content, perhaps society is 
better off making it difficult for most to navi-
gate and utilize its content.
CASE 2
 The Dark Web
Questions
	 3-49. 	 What infrastructure components are most important for pro-
viding the surface web to the public users of the Internet?
	 3-50. 	 Should more effort be expended to enable wider access to the 
dark web? Why or why not?
	 3-51. 	 What are the implications of the dark web for individuals? 
Companies? Governments?
Based on:
Ashley Madison data breach. (2016, May 19). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 23, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Ashley_Madison_data_breach&oldid=721001290
Dark web. (2016, May 22). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved May 22, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Dark_web&oldid=721467067
Tor (anonymity network). (2016, May 19). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Tor_(anonymity_network)&oldid=721032200
Vilches, J. (2016, May 20). The dark web: What is it and how to access 
it. TechSpot. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from http://www.techspot.com/
article/1177-dark-web
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 3-52. 	 Describe the difference between SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS.
	 3-53. 	 Describe the different types of computers and their key distinguishing characteristics.


CHAPTER 3  •  Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services    165
References
Amazon. (2016). Amazon Web Services. Amazon.com. Retrieved 
May 23, 2016, from http://aws.amazon.com
Belson, D. (2015). The state of the Internet. 4th quarter, 2015 report. 
Akamai. Retrieved May 23, 2016, from https://www.akamai.com/
us/en/our-thinking/state-of-the-internet-report/index.jsp
Comer, D. E. (2015). Computer networks and internets (6th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson.
Constantinides, P., Henfridsson, O., & Parker, G. (2016). Special 
issue on digital infrastructure and platforms. Information Systems 
Research. Retrieved April 20, 2016, from http://pubsonline 
.informs.org/page/isre/calls-for-papers
Evans, A., Martin, K., & Poatsy, M.A. (2017). Technology in action 
complete (13th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Finley, K. (2014, April 17). It’s time to encrypt the Internet. 
Wired.com. Retrieved April 18, 2016, from http://www.wired 
.com/2014/04/https
Green computing. (2016, May 18). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo-
pedia. Retrieved May 23, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Green_computing&oldid=720941132
Greenpeace (2015, May). Clicking clean: A guide to building the 
Green Internet. Retrieved May 23, 2016, from http://www 
.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/legacy/Global/usa/
planet3/PDFs/2015ClickingClean.pdf
Google. (2016). Google green. Google.com. Retrieved May 23, 2016, 
from http://www.google.com/green
Hoffer, J., Ramesh, V., & Topi, H. (2016). Modern database manage-
ment (12th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hofmann, P., & Woods, D. (2010, November/December). Cloud 
computing: The limits of public clouds for business applications. 
IEEE Internet Computing, 90–93.
Kreutzer, U. (2014, October 1). Defects: A vanishing species? 
Siemens.com. Retrieved April 18, 2016, from http://www.siemens 
.com/innovation/en/home/pictures-of-the-future/industry-and- 
automation/digital-factories-defects-a-vanishing-species.html
McKendrick, J. (2016, May 23). The new cloud computing eco-
nomics: Too big to measure. Forbes. Retrieved May 23, 2016, 
from http://www.forbes.com/sites/joemckendrick/2016/05/23/
the-new-cloud-computing-economics-too-big-to-measure
NIST. (2011, September). The NIST definition of cloud computing. 
Retrieved May 23, 2016, from http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/
Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-145.pdf
Netcraft. (2016, April 21). April 2016 web server survey. Netcraft 
.com. Retrieved May 23, 2016, from http://news.netcraft.com/
archives/2016/04/21/april-2016-web-server-survey.html
Panko, R., & Panko, J. (2015). Business data networks and security 
(10th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Stallings, W. (2017). Cryptography and network security: Principles 
and practice (7th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Te’eni, D., Carey, J. M., & Zhang, P. (2007). Human-computer inter-
action: Developing effective organizational information systems. 
New York: Wiley.
Top 500. (2016, June). Retrieved July 26, 2016, from http://www 
.top500.org/lists/2016/06
Laudon, K.C., & Traver, C. (2017). E-commerce 2016: Business, 
technology, society (12th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Valacich, J.S., & George, J. F. (2017). Modern systems analysis and 
design (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Weinman, J. (2012). Cloudnomics: The business value of cloud  
computing. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Weinman, J., (2015). Digital disciplines: Attaining market leadership 
via the cloud, Big Data, social, mobile, and the Internet of Things. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

166
166
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD:
Taobao and the World 
of E-commerce
M
ost people in this world have heard of eBay 
and Amazon.com, two U.S.-based online 
retail sites where one can typically find any 
desired product. The online shopping fever has spread 
to China in the form of companies like Taobao and JD 
.com. Taobao, owned by Alibaba, was founded in 2003 
and only 8 years later had 370 million registered users, 
more than the entire population of the United States. If 
you have tried any of Taobao’s services, you know that it 
has various branches. There’s Taobao Marketplace, Chi-
na’s eBay, which dominates the country’s online con-
sumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce business with its 
90 percent market share. Then there’s Tmall.com, a sep-
arate site where renowned brands sell directly to con-
sumers in a business-to-consumer (B2C) manner. In fact, 
Taobao has fostered such a holistic shopping experience 
that international names like Gap, Adidas, and Levi’s, 
just to name a few, decided to launch their own official 
online retail storefronts in the virtual mall. By 2014, Tao-
bao, Tmall.com, and Juhuasuan (another Alibaba site 
for “flash sales”) had more than 231 million active buy-
ers and 8 million sellers and took 11.3 billion orders a 
year. On the Chinese “Single’s Day” alone, the Alibaba 
Group recorded US$9.3 billion in sales and shipped 278 
million orders.
However, shoppers should beware. Taobao might be 
the talk of the town, but it is also known as a notorious 
Enabling Business-to-
Consumer Electronic 
Commerce
4
This chapter focuses on electronic commerce (e-commerce, 
or EC), explaining how companies conduct business with 
customers over the Internet. The Internet and information 
technology (IT) megatrends, such as increases in mobile 
devices and social connectivity, have introduced unprece-
dented opportunities for the marketing of products and 
services, accompanied by features, functionality, and inno-
vative methods to serve and support consumers. At the 
same time, conducting business transactions online has 
introduced various challenges. With e-commerce repre-
senting a growing proportion of overall retail sales, an 
understanding of e-commerce can be a powerful tool in 
your arsenal. People with e-commerce skills are in high 
demand in the marketplace; therefore, the more you 
know about e-commerce, the more valuable you will 
become.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

167
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
3.	How can these companies address issues related to 
trust and fraud?
Based on:
JD.com. (2016, June 16). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
June 24, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JD.com
Steimle, J. (2015, January 26). A beginner’s guide to Alibaba Group. 
Forbes. Retrieved May 31, 2016 from http://www.forbes.com/sites/
joshsteimle/2015/01/26/a-beginners-guide-to-alibaba-group
Taobao. (2016, June 24). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
June 24, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taobao
market for piracy and counterfeit goods. You 
may want to try out JD.com instead (short for 
Jingdong Mall, formerly 360Buy) which has 
not made it to the list of notorious markets. 
The company is expanding fast, with an 
ambitious plan of solving logistics and deliv-
ery troubles that are a hallmark of the Chi-
nese market, given the country’s size and 
differences in population density (Figure 4.1). 
JD.com hopes to build a trucking fleet of 
close to 300 trucks and enter the logistics and 
distribution market, specifically to get rid of 
long-distance transport headaches. The 
greatest barrier to online shopping in China 
remains trust; within China, people fear 
being defrauded or receiving substandard 
products. Outside China, potential customers 
often face language barriers when attempt-
ing to communicate with the suppliers. While 
low-priced offers directly from Chinese sup-
pliers may seem tempting, these factors can 
easily convince overseas consumers to turn to the more 
familiar Amazon.com or eBay.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How have Taobao and JD.com evolved their e-com-
merce strategies to remain competitive in the global 
marketplace?
2.	How does the proliferation of mobile devices change 
the competitive landscape for these companies?
1.	 Describe different approaches to competing in cyberspace as well as different forms 
of electronic government and e-finance.
2.	 Describe business-to-consumer electronic commerce strategies.
3.	 Understand the keys to successful electronic commerce websites and explain the 
different forms of Internet marketing.
4.	 Describe mobile commerce, consumer-to-consumer electronic commerce, and 
consumer-to-business electronic commerce.
5.	 Describe how to conduct financial transactions and navigate the legal issues of 
electronic commerce.
Xinjiang
Tibet
Qinghai
Gansu
Ningxia
Inner Mongolia
Heilongjiang
Jilin
Liaoning
Tianjin
Beijing
Hebei
Shanxi
Shandong
Henan
Hubei
Shaanxi
Anhui
Jiangsu
Zhejiang
Fujian
Jiangxi
Taiwan
Hong Kong
Guangdong
Macau
Hainan
Guangxi
Yunnan
Guizhou
Sichuan
Hunan
Chongqing
Shanghai
> 900 people/km2
800–900 people/km2
700–800 people/km2
600–700 people/km2
500–600 people/km2
400–500 people/km2
300–400 people/km2
200–300 people/km2
100–200 people/km2
50–100 people/km2
0–50 people/km2
FIGURE 4.1
Companies serving the Chinese market face tremendous logistical challenges.

168    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
E-Commerce and E-Government
The Internet provides a set of interconnected networks for individuals and businesses to com-
plete transactions electronically. Electronic commerce (EC) refers to the exchange of goods, 
services, and money1 among firms, between firms and their customers, and between customers, 
supported by communication technologies and, in particular, the Internet. The Census Bureau of 
the Department of Commerce reported that while total U.S. annual retail sales in 2015 increased 
by 1.5 percent from 2014, online retail sales were up by nearly 15 percent and that EC accounted 
for 7.2 percent of total retail sales, resulting in sales of more than US$341.8 billion (Figure 4.2). 
Research firm eMarketer forecasts steady growth, anticipating global business-to-consumer 
e-commerce sales to exceed US$3.6 trillion by 2017. Considering all online markets, it is clear 
that online transactions have become a major segment of the global economy. With this much 
money at stake, it is little wonder that no other information systems (IS) issue has captured as 
much attention as has EC. Already during the Berlin airlift in 1948, the foundations for EC trans-
actions between businesses were laid, as the Military Air Transport Service of the U.S. Air Force 
in Europe realized that the airlifted cargo was important but that information about the cargo—
such as what exactly was contained in a shipment, where it was located, or when it was sched-
uled to arrive—was equally important and devised standard universal codes for transmitting 
these data via teletype (Seideman, 1996). The emergence of the Internet and web further facili-
tated EC and, in addition, paved the way for marketing and selling products and services to indi-
vidual consumers. This has led to the creation of an electronic marketplace where a virtually 
limitless array of services, features, and functionality can be offered. As a result, a presence on 
the web has become a strategic necessity for most companies.
Types of Electronic Commerce
Contrary to popular belief, EC goes beyond consumers merely buying and selling products 
online. EC can involve the events leading up to the purchase of a product as well as customer 
service after the sale. Furthermore, EC is not limited to transactions between businesses and 
1Q
2005
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2006
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2007
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2008
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2009
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2010
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2011
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2012
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2013
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2014
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2015
2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q
2016
6.0
6.4
6.8
7.2
7.6
8.0
8.4
8.8
5.6
5.2
4.8
4.4
4.0
3.6
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
Percent of Total
Not Adjusted
Adjusted
FIGURE 4.2
Online retailing continues to grow rapidly.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau News, U.S. Department of Commerce.
1EC can also include the distribution of digital products, such as software, e-books, music, movies, and 
digital images.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    169
consumers, which is known as business-to-consumer (B2C) EC. EC is also used by organiza-
tions to conduct business with business partners such as suppliers and intermediaries. This form 
of EC, not involving the end consumer, is commonly referred to as business-to-business (B2B) 
EC. As many firms concentrate solely on B2B transactions, B2B EC is by far the largest form of 
EC in terms of revenues, with U.S manufacturers reporting e-commerce shipments totaling 
US$3.6 trillion in 2014 and wholesalers reporting e-commerce sales of US$2 trillion. Further, 
almost all companies focusing on the B2C arena, such as the clothing and home furnishing 
retailer Eddie Bauer, also engage in B2B EC. In the process of producing goods and services, a 
business typically sources its raw materials from a variety of specialized suppliers (in B2B trans-
actions); after the production, the business sells each finished product to a distributor or whole-
saler (in a B2B transaction) or directly to the end consumer (in a B2C transaction). We will 
discuss B2B EC in Chapter 8, “Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply 
Chain and Customer Relationship Management.”
Some forms of EC do not even involve business firms, as would be the case with transac-
tions between consumers on an online auction site such as eBay; these forms of EC are referred 
to as consumer-to-consumer (C2C) EC. A related EC model is consumer-to-business (C2B) 
EC, where consumers offer products, labor, and services to companies, a complete reversal of 
the traditional B2C model. These basic types of EC are summarized in Table 4.1.
The five megatrends—social, cloud computing, the Internet of Things, mobile, and Big 
Data—have influenced various aspects of the digital world, and e-commerce is no exception. 
Fueled by the rise of social media, organizations are trying to leverage social networks to build 
lasting customer relationships, advertise products, or otherwise create value—a trend referred to 
as social commerce. Digital products and services are provided through the cloud (think iTunes, 
Dropbox, or Gmail). The Internet of Things enables companies to offer various innovative prod-
ucts and services that go beyond the initial purchase (such as the Nest thermostat that not only 
can be controlled from one’s smartphone but also learns the user’s schedules and habits, opti-
mizing home energy use). The tremendous increase in the use of mobile devices has given rise to 
mobile commerce (m-commerce)—that is, any electronic transaction or information interaction 
conducted using a wireless, mobile device and mobile networks (wireless or switched public 
network) that leads to the transfer of real or perceived value in exchange for information, ser-
vices, or goods (MobileInfo, 2016). Forrester Research estimates that U.S. B2C m-commerce 
sales will exceed US$142 billion in 2016, accounting for 38 percent of retail e-commerce sales; 
by 2020, 49 percent of retail e-commerce transactions will be made on mobile devices, for a 
forecast total of US$252 billion. In addition, B2B transactions are increasingly taking place on 
mobile platforms. Together, these megatrends generate a wealth of data, allowing companies to 
obtain an in-depth understanding of each individual customer so as to deliver individualized 
value propositions and build long-lasting customer relationships. Next, we examine the use of 
information systems for interactions with and between governments.
E-government
E-government is the use of information systems to provide citizens, organizations, and other 
governmental agencies with information about public services and to allow for interaction with 
TABLE 4.1  Types of EC
Type of EC
Description
Example
Business-to-consumer 
(B2C)
Transactions between businesses 
and their customers
A person buys a book from Ama-
zon.com.
Business-to-business 
(B2B)
Transactions among businesses
A manufacturer conducts business 
over the web with its suppliers.
Consumer-to-business 
(C2B)
Transactions between customers 
and businesses
A person offers his or her 
photography at shutterstock.com.
Consumer-to-
consumer (C2C)
Transactions between people not 
necessarily working together
A person purchases some memora-
bilia from another person via eBay.

170    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
the government. Similar to the EC business models, e-government involves three distinct rela-
tionships (Figure 4.3).
GOVERNMENT-TO-CITIZENS.  Government-to-citizen (G2C) EC allows for interactions between 
federal, state, and local governments and their constituents. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service’s 
Internet tax filing, or e-filing, is one of the more recognizable G2C services, saving resources in terms 
of time and paper. Other services provided by governments include the online application for ID cards 
and municipal services, e-voting, or the provision of electronic access to public government data.
GOVERNMENT-TO-BUSINESS.  Government-to-business (G2B) is similar to G2C, but this 
form of EC involves businesses’ relationships with all levels of government. This includes 
e-procurement, or a government’s streamlining its supply chain by purchasing materials directly 
from suppliers using proprietary Internet-enabled procurement systems. Also included in G2B 
initiatives are forward auctions that allow businesses to buy seized goods and surplus government 
equipment (these transactions can take place on a G2C level as well). Other G2B services include 
online applications for export licenses, verification of employees’ Social Security numbers, and 
online tax filing.
GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT.  Finally, government-to-government (G2G) EC is used 
for electronic interactions that take place between countries or between different levels of 
government within a country. Since 2002, the U.S. government has provided comprehensive 
e-government tools that allow foreign entities to find government-wide information related 
to foreign trade or business topics. Other G2G transactions relate to the intergovernmental 
collaboration at the local, state, federal, and tribal levels.
E-finance
As we move further into the digital age, various products, services, and industries are being dis-
rupted (see Chapter 2, “Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems”), and 
the financial industry is no exception. E-finance is the use of information systems to provide 
financial services and markets. Ubiquitous accessibility, the proliferation of mobile devices, 
advances in cloud computing, and Big Data analytics have brought about many radical changes 
for the financial services industry, and many foresee further radical changes in the near future. 
For example, financial companies can now operate on a global scale, and many services tradi-
tionally offered by banks can now be offered by other, nontraditional players. Likewise, 
Internet
E-government Initiative
Corporations
Citizens
Other Governments
FIGURE 4.3
E-government initiatives 
include interaction with 
citizens, corporations, and other 
governments.
Source: Photographs in the Carol M. 
Highsmith Archive, Library of Congress, 
Prints and Photographs Division.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    171
disintermediation has enabled firms to provide many financial services directly to the end cus-
tomers, and the Internet has enabled customers to easily compare prices for financial services. 
These changes have affected not only traditional banks but also brokerage firms, insurance com-
panies, and other players in the financial market.
E-BANKING AND ONLINE BROKERAGE.  One type of services frequently offered online is 
managing financial transactions. Whereas traditionally consumers had to visit their bank to 
conduct financial transactions, they can now manage credit card, checking, or savings accounts 
online using online banking or pay their bills using electronic bill pay services. Increasingly, 
financial service providers offer ways for their customers to use their mobile devices for 
conducting banking transactions. For example, many banks created mobile banking apps for 
checking account balances or initiating transactions. Large banks like Chase, Citibank, USAA, 
Capital One, and Charles Schwab offer mobile check deposit apps, allowing customers to 
deposit a check by simply taking a picture of the check with a smartphone’s camera. E-finance 
has also had a large impact on payment services as well as the development of cryptocurrencies; 
we will discuss these later in the chapter.
In addition to online banking, online brokerage has seen steady growth over the past sev-
eral years. For example, many people turn to sites such as MSN Money, Yahoo! Finance, or 
CNN Money to get the latest information about stock prices, firm performance, or mortgage 
rates, and use online brokerage firms to buy or sell stocks. Further, most large online brokerage 
services offer trading apps for various smartphone platforms. In addition, e-finance has brought 
about tremendous changes to financial markets. For example, many stock markets around the 
world now use electronic trading, such that stock traders from around the world can trade with-
out having to be at the stock market’s physical location. Further, electronic trading greatly 
increases trading speed and reduces transaction costs. Likewise, foreign exchange markets now 
operate electronically.
FINTECH.  Fintech (financial technology) refers to technologies that support activities in 
the financial sector. Often, fintech is associated with companies (often startups) that use 
technologies in innovative ways to disrupt activities in the financial sector; many fintech startups 
focus on specific types of interactions, segments, or business processes. For example, successful 
fintech startups range from crowdfunding platforms such as Indiegogo or Kickstarter to mobile 
payment processors such as Square, peer-to-peer lenders such as Prosper and Lending Club, 
small-business lenders such as Behalf, or digital investment managers such as FutureAdvisor. 
Another fintech innovation is the use of artificial intelligence for providing investment advice 
or managing financial portfolios. However, many of the innovative services provided by fintech 
startups are not captured by traditional financial regulations. Therefore, many innovations in the 
fintech sector will necessitate changes in regulation of financial services and public policy, often 
on a global scale; likewise, for organizations and individuals alike, managing risks becomes 
paramount, especially when dealing with players who are not established in the market.
Business-To-Consumer E-Commerce
Technological forces are driving business, lowering barriers to entry and leveling the playing field, 
allowing small and large businesses from around the globe to sell products to a global customer 
base. For small companies, this opens up vast opportunities. Unlike in international sports tourna-
ments such as the Ironman World Championship, where athletes first have to compete locally to 
qualify for the big event, online businesses can “participate in the world championships” (i.e., com-
pete on a global scale) right from the start. Companies are exploiting the capabilities of the web to 
reach a wider customer base, offer a broader range of products, and develop closer relationships 
with customers by striving to meet their unique needs (Valacich, Parboteeah, & Wells, 2007).
While it is beneficial for many small companies to access a global marketplace, this also 
means that every company participating in a market faces increased competition, and companies 
must strategically position themselves. Before the Internet, retailers (except for catalog mer-
chants) operated solely using traditional physical stores; today, this approach is referred to as 
brick-and-mortar business strategy. Companies following this strategy solely operate physical 
locations such as retail stores and do not offer their products or services online. The advent of 
the web has enabled companies to move beyond their physical location and engage in the online 

172    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
sales of goods and services, or e-tailing. In the most extreme form of e-tailing, companies fol-
low a click-only business strategy and only conduct business electronically in cyberspace. 
These firms (sometimes called virtual companies) have no physical store locations, allowing 
them to focus purely on EC. An example of a click-only company is the online retailer Amazon 
.com, which does not have a physical storefront in the classic sense. In e-business terminology, 
click-only companies are sometimes called “pure play companies,” focusing on one very distinct 
way of doing business; other firms, such as the bookseller Barnes & Noble, choose to utilize the 
Internet to extend their traditional offline retail channels. These firms employ a click-and-mor-
tar business strategy approach (also referred to as a bricks-and-clicks business strategy). The 
three general approaches are depicted in Figure 4.4.
THE CLICK-AND-MORTAR STRATEGY.  The greatest impact of the web-based EC revolution has 
occurred in companies adopting the click-and-mortar approach. Click-and-mortars continue to 
operate their physical locations and have added an EC component to their business activities. 
With transactions occurring in both physical and virtual environments, it is imperative that 
click-and-mortars learn how to exploit commercial opportunities in both domains. Conducting 
physical and virtual operations presents special challenges for these firms, as business activities 
must be tailored to each of these different environments in order for the firms to compete 
effectively (e.g., differential pricing or shipping and inventory management can suddenly 
become huge concerns for companies selling physical products). Traditionally, a company 
would only offer its customers a single channel, be it the physical retail store, a catalog, or 
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
The AI Hedge Fund
For many years hedge funds and money managers have relied 
on statistical models to improve their trading strategies. Trained 
in a variety of mathematical disciplines, specialists called 
“quants” use historical data and other sources of information 
to develop sophisticated models. However, these models tend 
to be highly complex and can be challenging to update and 
adapt to changing market conditions. To speed up the process 
of developing and refining these models, several startup hedge 
funds are turning to techniques from artificial intelligence (AI).
The field of AI is vast and varied. Many different approaches 
have been developed in attempts to emulate the intelligence 
and capabilities of humans (see Chapter 6, “Enhancing Busi-
ness Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics”), with some 
being very successful and others less so. Recent innovations in 
the sub-discipline of machine learning have led to widespread 
practical application; in particular, improvements in genetic 
algorithms (where many approaches are tried out and only the 
best survive) and deep learning (where multiple layers of neu-
ral networks are trained simultaneously) have enabled applica-
tions such as improved image and voice recognition and 
processing—Siri, Cortana, and Alexa are but a few examples.
Typically, machine learning algorithms are able to bring 
together data from many sources and use historical outcome 
information to train and improve their models. Whereas 
humans can operate in a similar way, the difference is that the 
machines can consider hundreds of thousands, even millions, 
of possibilities, evaluate them automatically, and then choose 
the ones that generate the best outcomes. The settings that 
led to the better outcomes, called “parameters,” can then be 
fed back into the models for another iteration of improvement. 
While the resulting models can be extremely complex, the 
question is how to design the models such that the parameters 
and outcomes are actually useful for making trading decisions. 
Critics doubt that in the long run, the new machine learning 
based funds will be any better at this than existing players. For 
example, David Harding, the billionaire founder and CEO of 
Winton Capital Management is generally skeptical of the hype 
over machine learning and AI. “If I squinted a little and looked 
at Winton, I’d say that’s more or less what we’ve been doing 
for the past 30 years,” he says. Even believers in AI-based trad-
ing foresee other issues. As AI-based trading is expected to 
level the playing field, in the long run, everyone is likely to 
have access to the same intelligence. Yet if everyone is having 
access to the same intelligence, how could anyone outperform 
the market?
Based on:
Knight, W. (2016, February 1). Will AI-powered hedge funds 
outsmart the market? MIT Technology Review. Retrieved June 
27, 2016, from https://www.technologyreview.com/s/600695/
will-ai-powered-hedge-funds-outsmart-the-market
Metz, C. (2016, January 25). The rise of the artificially intelligent 
hedge fund. Wired. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://www.wired 
.com/2016/01/the-rise-of-the-artificially-intelligent-hedge-fund
Wigglesworth, R. (2016, March 25). AI progress fails to convince all 
investors. Financial Times. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://www 
.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/1c249b10-ed49-11e5-888e-2eadd5fbc4a4.html


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    173
an online store. As companies grew, many started using a multichannel approach, offering the 
customer different (independent) touchpoints, such as a retail store and a catalog (a concept 
referred to as multichannel retailing). Increasingly—and especially due to the proliferation of 
mobile devices—transactions take place across multiple environments, a concept referred to 
as cross-channel retailing. For example, in-store pickup refers to situations where a customer 
orders a product online and picks it up in a retail store; similarly, customers may evaluate 
products offline and purchase the products through the retailer’s website. Finally, omni-channel 
retailing entails providing seamless, simultaneous interactions using different channels, such 
that a customer does not interact with a single channel but with the brand as a whole (see 
Figure 4.5). For example, a shopper in a retail store of electronics retailer Best Buy can scan 
a QR code to receive more information or product reviews, which are located on Best Buy’s 
mobile site. Likewise, sales beacons—Bluetooth devices that can detect proximate smartphones 
and send messages—are likely to become a widely used way to send marketing messages or 
personalized coupons to the mobile phones of in-store shoppers.
No matter which approach click-and-mortars pursue, they face various challenges due to 
increasing IS complexity. Design and development of complex computing systems are required 
to support each aspect of the click-and-mortar approach, especially when attempting to offer 
seamless experiences across channels.
THE CLICK-ONLY STRATEGY.  Click-only companies can often compete more effectively on price 
because they do not need to support the physical aspects of the click-and-mortar approach. Thus, 
these companies can reduce prices to rock-bottom levels (although a relatively small click-only 
firm may not sell enough products and/or may not order enough from suppliers to be able to 
Brick and
Mortar
Physical
Virtual
Click Only
Click and
Mortar
FIGURE 4.4
General approaches to conducting 
commerce.
Multichannel
retailing
Cross-channel
retailing
Omni-channel
retailing
FIGURE 4.5
Supported by information systems, companies can interact with their customers using various touchpoints.

174    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
realize economies of scale and thus reduce prices). Click-only firms, such as Amazon.com 
or eBay, also tend to be highly adept with technology and can innovate very rapidly as new 
technologies become available. This can enable them to stay one step ahead of their competition. 
However, conducting business in cyberspace has some problematic aspects. For example, it is 
more difficult for a customer to return a product to a purely online company than simply to return 
it to a local department store. In addition, some consumers may not be comfortable making 
purchases online. Individuals may be leery about the security of giving credit card numbers to a 
virtual company. We will discuss these potential drawbacks later in this chapter.
E-tailing: Capabilities and Opportunities
Powerful web technologies have given rise to a global platform where firms from across the 
world can effectively compete for customers and gain access to new markets. Global customers 
do not have to rely on potentially outdated information from printed catalogs or account state-
ments that arrive in the mail once a month but can access websites that are linked to corporate 
databases to provide real-time access to personalized information. Likewise, companies in the 
travel industry, such as airlines, can dynamically adjust fares based on availability, booking 
time, current and historical demand, forecast demand, and other factors to maximize revenues 
(a practice referred to as yield management) and disseminate the most current fares in real time 
on the company’s website. Further, the web has opened new avenues for communication 
between companies and their customers; firms have augmented telephone-based ordering and 
customer support with web-based support, electronic mail, online text or video chat applica-
tions, and social media. In many cases, these are provided to allow customers to communicate 
with a customer service representative in real time through the corporate website. The web not 
only has facilitated the dissemination of information and facilitated communication with cus-
tomers but often is used to facilitate all stages of a transaction, allowing companies to conduct 
business online without human assistance, greatly reducing transaction costs while enhancing 
operational efficiency. For example, once a customer places an order, the customer’s address 
and payment information are stored in the company’s customer database, the customer’s credit 
card is automatically charged, the inventory is checked, and the order is routed to the fulfill-
ment center, where the shipping label is automatically generated. Aside from picking and pack-
ing the actual product, most of the transaction requires little to no human interaction. For the 
business, this tremendously reduces the costs associated with the transactions by reducing the 
demand for phone representatives taking the order or back-office staff handling the orders. In 
addition, the Internet has enabled various new approaches to doing business. These are dis-
cussed next.
DISINTERMEDIATION.  The web has disrupted many traditional business models by offering 
the ability to sell products directly to the end customers without the need for distributors or 
retailers. This phenomenon of cutting out the “middleman” and reaching customers more 
directly and efficiently is known as disintermediation. Disintermediation creates both 
opportunities and challenges. On the one hand, producers or service providers can offer 
products at lower prices (or reap greater profits) by bypassing traditional distribution and retail 
channels; on the other hand, they also have to take on those activities previously performed by 
these middlemen. For example, when airlines started selling tickets online and dealing directly 
with customers, they disintermediated travel agents. As a result, the airlines directly had to 
deal with upset travelers in case of delays or cancellations, while the travel agents had to 
find ways to make up for lost revenue, such as by charging booking fees when arranging a 
person’s travel. In contrast, reintermediation refers to the design of business models that 
reintroduce middlemen in order to reduce the chaos brought on by disintermediation. For 
example, without middlemen like Travelocity.com, Orbitz.com, and other travel websites, a 
consumer would have to check all airline websites in order to find the flight with the best 
connection or lowest price.
THE LONG TAIL.  Another opportunity enabled by the web is the ability to focus on the “long 
tails.” Coined by Chris Anderson (2004, 2006), the concept of the long tail refers to catering to 
niche markets in addition to (or instead of) purely selling mainstream products. The distribution 
of consumers’ needs and wants can be compared to a statistical normal distribution: The center 
of the distribution reflects the “mass market,” characterized by relatively similar “mainstream” 


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    175
needs and wants shared by many people; the tails are the niche markets, catering to very diverse 
needs and wants (but comparatively few people share the same needs and wants) (Figure 4.6). 
Because of high storage and distribution costs, most traditional brick-and-mortar retailers and 
service providers are forced to limit their product offerings to serving the needs and wants of the 
mainstream customers in the center of the distribution. For example, large mainstream movie 
productions typically draw a huge audience and are shown in many movie theaters; in contrast, 
most independent movie productions are not shown at local cinemas, as they are unlikely to 
draw a large enough audience to cover the movie theater’s costs to show the movie. Similarly, 
record stores carry only CDs of which a certain number of copies is likely to be sold each year to 
cover the costs for shelf space, sales personnel, and so on. Given the limited local reach of brick-
and-mortar stores, this ultimately limits the stores’ product selection.
In contrast, enabled by their extended reach, many e-tailers can focus on the long tails, that 
is, on products outside the mainstream tastes. For instance, whereas a local video rental store is 
unlikely to have a large selection of documentaries (because of a lack of local demand), Netflix 
can afford to have a very large selection of rather unpopular movies and still make a profit with 
it. Rather than renting a few “blockbusters” to many people, many (often outside the main-
stream) titles are rented to a large number of people spread out on the long tails. Similarly, 
online bookseller Amazon.com can carry a tremendous selection of (often obscure) titles, as the 
costs for storage are far lower than those of its offline competitors. In fact, more than half of 
Amazon.com’s book sales are titles that are not carried by the average physical bookstore, not 
even by megastores such as Barnes & Noble. In other words, focusing on those titles that are on 
the long tails of the distribution of consumers’ wants can be a very successful strategy in the 
digital world.
MASS CUSTOMIZATION.  Mass consumption, one of the hallmarks of modern economic activity, 
is based on the concept of mass production, which reduces costs by producing large numbers 
of identical goods. The Ford Model T is one of the earliest successful examples of mass 
production; all customers were offered the same model, which was produced on an assembly 
line (instead of being handcrafted, as other automobiles at that time); subsequently, mass 
production was adopted as the standard way of producing goods to be sold at affordable prices. 
Web technologies, combined with the ability to interact directly with the end customers, have 
allowed firms to focus on the long tails by tailoring their products and services specifically to 
each customer’s particular needs on a large scale, a model referred to as mass customization. 
Linking online product configuration systems with just-in-time production allows companies 
to assemble each individual product based on a customer’s specifications so that companies are 
able to provide individualized products while at the same time reaping the economies of scale 
provided by mass production. For instance, Dell Computer Corporation allows customers to 
customize their computers based on their specific performance needs. Likewise, customers can 
design personalized tennis shoes at Nike.com, customize their Mini at miniusa.com, or even 
Long Tail
(niche focus)
Demand
Mainstream Tastes
(traditional focus)
Long Tail
(niche focus)
FIGURE 4.6
The long tails.

176    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
have their personalized cookies baked at kekswerkstatt.de. While manufacturing a customized 
product tends to be more expensive than traditional mass production, the product’s value for 
the customer increases, allowing the producer to charge a higher price, leading to higher profit 
margins (Figure 4.7).
GROUP BUYING.  Another innovative business model enabled by the Internet is group buying. 
Companies such as Groupon or LivingSocial negotiate special volume discounts with local 
businesses and offer them to their members in the form of “daily deals”; if enough people agree 
to purchase the product or service, the customers typically get significant discounts over the 
original purchase price. The business offering the product or service uses these deals to either 
reduce unsold inventory or to get new customers “into the door”; yet local businesses face the 
danger of making significant losses on these deals, as the group purchasing site typically takes 
a hefty share of the deal’s price (often about 50 percent), or they may not be able to cope with 
the sudden increase in demand (see Case 1 at the end of Chapter 2 for more on Groupon and its 
business model).
NEW REVENUE AND PRICING MODELS.  As discussed in Chapter 2, the Internet has enabled 
or facilitated various revenue models, with companies earning revenues not only through 
traditional sales but also through subscription, licensing, or transaction fees. Further, 
organizations and individuals alike can generate revenues through web advertisement or affiliate 
marketing programs. Some companies selling products or services have come up with pricing 
models that transcend traditional menu-driven pricing models. Under a menu-driven pricing 
model, companies such as Amazon.com or Travelocity.com set the prices that consumers pay 
for products or services. In contrast, Priceline.com uses a dynamic pricing model to offer 
consumers discounts on airline tickets, hotel rooms, rental cars, and various other products and 
services. Customers specify the product they are looking for and how much they are willing to 
pay for it, and Priceline.com matches the customers’ bids with offers from companies (who often 
use Priceline.com to get rid of excess inventory). After a user searches for a service and submits 
a bid on Priceline.com, the system routes the information to appropriate brand-name companies, 
such as United Airlines and Avis Rent a Car, which either accept or reject the customer’s offer 
(Figure 4.8).
SOCIAL COMMERCE.  Companies operating in the digital world have realized that people’s 
purchasing decisions are increasingly influenced by social media. Using various social 
media, people explore products or engage with others about their purchasing experiences. 
Thus, organizations are trying to leverage social networks to advertise products, build lasting 
relationships, or otherwise create value. Social commerce is the use of social media to influence 
shopping behavior, from the pre-purchase evaluation stage to post-purchase experiences. One 
use of social media is to incorporate social functionality into a company’s website, allowing 
customers to engage with the company or others through reviews or comments. For example, 
Value of
product to
consumer
Increased
surplus and
proﬁts
Costs to
produce
product
Costs to
produce
product
Producer’s
proﬁt
Consumer
surplus
Consumer
surplus
Producer’s
proﬁt
Price
Traditional
(Mass) Product
Mass-
Customized
Product
Additional
value created
with mass
customization
FIGURE 4.7
Mass customization generates 
additional value for customers and 
profits for producers.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    177
Amazon.com presents recommendations based on what other shoppers with similar tastes 
have viewed or purchased and encourages shoppers to share their recent purchases on social 
networking sites. Likewise, online retailers incorporate social sharing functionality into their 
websites so that customers can share their purchases with their social networks, effectively 
promoting the products they purchased. Another use of social media is to use social networks 
such as Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram to advertise products, distribute content, or otherwise 
engage with current or prospective customers. Adding social elements to the online shopping 
experiences not only helps increase sales but also gives the organizations a wealth of data about 
their customers, their motivations, and their experiences (see Chapter 8 for a discussion of social 
media and managing customer relationships).
In addition, several business models are built around social interactions in the online world. 
Consumer-to-consumer marketplaces such as eBay or Etsy allow individuals to sell products to 
other individuals. Group-buying sites such as Groupon use the network effect to increase buying 
power and obtain deals and discounts. Shopping discovery sites such as Pinterest or Polyvore 
allow users to suggest novel and exciting products and let merchants sell these products on the 
site (or app). Social shopping site Wanelo features 30 million products from 550,000 stores, 
allowing users to follow brands, stores, or other users and share their wish lists, allowing them to 
discover new styles or products. Recently, online customers have created their own form of 
social commerce; with the aim of bypassing traditional retail channels, online users have formed 
buying co-ops on social networks such as Facebook in order to purchase goods at wholesale 
prices. Clearly, while social commerce has various facets, it is certain that social aspects will 
play an ever-increasing role in e-commerce interactions.
Benefits of E-tailing
For e-tailers and customers alike, e-tailing can provide many benefits over traditional brick-and-
mortar retailing in terms of the marketing concepts of product, place, and price. These are dis-
cussed next.
PRODUCT.  Websites can offer a virtually unlimited number and variety of products because 
e-tailing is not limited by physical store and shelf space restrictions. For instance, e-tailer 
Amazon.com offers millions of book titles on the web compared with a local brick-and-mortar–
only book retailer, which can offer “only” a few thousand titles in a store because of the restricted 
physical space.
Rental Car: $30/day
Flight to Paris: $600
Hotel Room in
London: $60/Night
Priceline.com
ACME Car Rental
ACME Air Lines
50 Cars in the Lot
ACME Hotel
150 Empty Rooms
ACM
ACM
ACME C
E C
E Car
ar Ren
Rent l
tal
tal
35 Unsold Seats
FIGURE 4.8
Priceline.com lets consumers 
name their own price for travel-
related services.

178    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
The Ethics of Reputation Management
If you’re trying to decide on which book to purchase, which 
movie to watch at the theater, which hotel to stay at, or which 
restaurant to go to for dinner, you are likely to use the power 
of the crowd—that is, you probably consult websites such as 
Amazon.com (books), Rottentomatoes.com (movies), Tripadvi-
sor.com or Booking.com (hotels), or Yelp.com (restaurants) to 
read reviews from others. For consumers, online reviews can 
be a valuable decision aid. On the other hand, online reviews 
can make or break a business. For example, a restaurant receiv-
ing just a few negative reviews on Yelp.com during the pre-
opening phase will be much less likely to attract diners in the 
future, and the restaurant may fail before it even started. For 
the restaurant owner, who has invested her life’s savings, this 
would mean that she would have to declare bankruptcy; fur-
ther, she may have to lay off the chef, the waitstaff, and the 
dishwasher, all of whom have families to feed. The owner is 
tempted to boost the reputation of the restaurant and thinks 
about composing a few reviews herself and publishing those 
under different pseudonyms. Alternatively, she is considering 
giving out free drinks or desserts to diners as an incentive for 
posting positive reviews.
Needless to say, websites that publish customer reviews 
want to provide unbiased reviews and often have (proprietary) 
mechanisms in place to minimize (or at least reduce) the 
potential of biased reviews. In addition, under rules of the U.S. 
Federal Trade Commission, paying someone to post reviews 
may actually be illegal. Yet you may have noticed extensive, 
raving reviews about a 500-page book posted just a day after 
the book was released or reviews that sound suspiciously like 
marketing copy.
The restaurant owner thus faces a dilemma. On the one 
hand, she may just ignore the negative reviews and hope that 
diners keep coming in spite of these reviews; however, this may 
result in having to lay off all her staff and close the restaurant if 
customers are kept away by the reviews. On the other hand, she 
may engage in “reputation management” and try to provide a 
more “balanced” picture of her restaurant on the review site.
Questions
1.	 What would you do? How about not providing any incen-
tives but merely asking all satisfied customers to write 
reviews?
2.	 What would happen if the public found out about the 
owner’s reputation management?
3.	 Imagine the owner knew that the initial negative reviews 
were posted by a competitor trying to drive her out of 
business. Would this change your assessment? If so, how?
Based on:
Roggio, A. (2012, January 31). Fake reviews, a despicable practice? 
Practical eCommerce. Retrieved April 25, 2016, from http://www 
.practicalecommerce.com/articles/3330-Fake-Reviews-a-Despicable-
Practice-
Tijerina, A. (2011, February 11). The ethics of online reviews. Driv-
ingsales.com. Retrieved April 25, 2016, from http://www.drivingsales 
.com/blogs/arnoldtijerina/2011/02/11/the-ethics-of-online-reviews
For online customers, comparison shopping is much easier on the web. In particular, numer-
ous comparison shopping services that focus on aggregating content are available to consumers. 
Some companies fulfilling this niche are Google Shopping, Shopping.com, and PriceGrabber 
(focusing on a wide range of products); AllBookstores.com (books); and Booking.com (hotel 
rooms). By displaying information about prices, sellers’ ratings, or shipping options, these com-
parison shopping sites can literally force sellers to focus on providing the best value in order to 
be successful. If sellers do not have the lowest price, they must be able to offer better quality, 
better service, or some other advantage. These comparison shopping sites generate revenue by 
charging a small commission on transactions, by charging usage fees to sellers, and/or through 
advertising on their site.
PLACE.  As company storefronts can (virtually) exist on every computer that is connected to 
the web, e-tailers can compete more effectively for customers, giving e-tailers an advantage. 
Whereas traditional retailers are bound to physical store locations and open hours, e-tailers can 
conduct business anywhere at any time.
The ubiquity of the Internet has enabled companies to sell goods and services on a global 
scale. Consumers looking for a particular product are not limited to merchants from their own 
city or country; rather, they can search for the product where they are most likely to get it, where 
they may get the best quality, or where prices may be lowest. This has enabled customers to pur-
chase goods from all over the world (such as various gadgets sold at www.dx.com). At the same 
time, this has created competition for domestic businesses, as often, overseas e-tailers can offer 
products much cheaper and may even offer free shipping (due to international postal agree-
ments, as in the case of www.madeinchina.com).


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    179
PRICE.  E-tailers can also compete on price effectively as they can turn their inventory more often 
because of the sheer volume of products and customers who purchase them. Companies can sell 
more products, reducing prices for consumers while at the same time enhancing profits for the 
company. Further, virtual companies have no need to rent expensive retail space or employ sales 
clerks, allowing them to further reduce prices.
Drawbacks of E-tailing
Despite all the hype associated with e-tailing, there are some downsides to this approach, in par-
ticular, issues associated with trust.
TRUST.  One of the main factors keeping many consumers from purchasing goods and services 
online is trust. Especially for new online businesses, this tends to be challenging, as customers 
may be hesitant to purchase from companies they have never heard of. Often, trust becomes an 
issue due to the customer’s inability to adequately experience the capabilities and characteristics 
of a product prior to purchase as well as due to uncertainties surrounding product delivery and 
returns.
Direct Product Experience  For many products, customers desire not only information 
about product characteristics but also sensory information, such as taste, smell, and feel. When 
shopping for clothes at Lands’ End, how can you be sure that you will like the feel of the 
material? Or what if you discover that the pair of size 9 EE hockey skates you just purchased 
online fits you like an 8 D? Likewise, products such as fragrances and foods can be difficult for 
consumers to assess via the web. Does the strawberry cheesecake offered online actually taste 
as good as it looks? How do you know if you will really like the smell of a perfume without 
actually sampling it? Finally, e-tailing eliminates the social aspects of the purchase. Although 
growing in popularity, e-tailers won’t soon replace the local shopping mall because going to the 
mall with some friends or interacting with a knowledgeable salesperson cannot be replicated 
online. On the other hand, online shopping provides certain anonymity, allowing people to shop 
for products they may not feel comfortable buying in a physical retail store.
Product Delivery and Returns  Except for digital products, such as music, games, or 
electronic magazines, e-tailing requires additional time for products to be delivered. If you have 
run out of ink for your printer and your research paper is due this afternoon, chances are that you 
will visit your local office supply store to purchase a new ink cartridge rather than ordering it 
online. The ink cartridge purchased electronically needs to be packaged and shipped, delaying 
use of the product until it is delivered. To combat these issues, large online retailers now offer 
1-day delivery or, as is the case with Amazon.com’s Prime Now, 2-hour delivery in select cities. 
Similarly, many click-and-mortar businesses offer in-store pickup and ship-from-store services 
to address issues associated with product delivery and to effectively compete with click-only 
companies. Other issues can also arise. The credit card information that you provided online may 
not be approved, or the shipper may try to deliver the package when you are not home. Finally, 
the customer may be unsure about product returns in case the product is not of the expected size 
or quality. When purchasing goods offline, people can easily return the product to the store; 
likewise, many click-and-mortar retailers offer in-store returns. However, when interacting with 
a click-only company, customers will have to carefully follow the merchant’s instructions in 
order to receive a replacement or refund, leading to uncertainties for the customer. These issues 
become even more problematic when conducting transactions across national borders.
Electronic Commerce Websites and 
Internet Marketing
The basic rules of commerce are to offer valuable products and services at fair prices; a sound 
underlying business model is key for a successful business both online and offline. However, as 
is the case with effects of retail store layout and design on offline purchasing behavior, the 
design of an online retailer’s website influences online purchasing behavior. In addition, to be 
successful, companies in the digital world have to market their products or services across a 
variety of online channels. These topics are discussed next.

180    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
Designing Websites to Meet Online Consumers’ Needs
Successful companies design their websites to enhance their online customers’ experience when 
interacting with the website. Valacich, Parboteeah, and Wells (2007) found that online consum-
ers’ needs can be categorized in terms of the site’s structural firmness (characteristics that 
influence the website’s security and performance), functional convenience (characteristics that 
make the interaction with the website easier or more convenient), and representational delight 
(characteristics that stimulate a consumer’s senses). These are discussed next.
Structural Firmness  For websites to be successful, structural firmness is a must. Online 
customers are unlikely to trust and revisit a website (let alone make a transaction) if the website 
does not function well (at least reasonably well). For example, the website should not have (or 
at least minimize) bad links, it should provide understandable error messages should something 
go wrong, and it should ensure privacy and security of the customers’ data (EC websites often 
use trust seals to signal that privacy and security are ensured). Further, the website should be 
fast; if online customers have to wait for pages to load, they are not apt to stay at the site long or 
to return. In fact, studies suggest that the average length of time that a web surfer will wait for a 
web page to load is only a couple of seconds.
Functional Convenience  The website must be easy to use. As with nearly all software, 
websites that are easy to use are more popular. If visitors have trouble finding things on a page 
or navigating through the website’s links, they are unlikely to make a transaction or return to 
the site. Thus, websites should provide easy navigation for users to find their way (and back), 
SECURITY MATTERS 
Too Small to Be Hacked?
Stealing secret data is only valuable if someone is willing to 
pay for it, and one of the challenges facing cybercriminals is 
how to turn their exploits into hard currency. In recent years, 
many cybercriminals have turned to stealing data that can be 
easily converted into hard currency. Credit card numbers can 
be used directly to purchase merchandise or gift cards until 
the theft gets reported and the account canceled. Personal 
data can be used to steal someone’s identity in order to apply 
for loans to get cash. However, as consumers, retailers, and 
banks get better at recognizing illicit activity and preventing 
data theft, it is getting more difficult for cybercriminals to 
monetize their activities. A recent trend has been taking data 
hostage.
Many small to medium-sized businesses lack the sophisti-
cation and resources to adequately protect their information 
systems. The data contained in these systems, however, are 
usually of limited value to others outside the business. So, 
instead of stealing the data, cybercriminals lock it up in such a 
way that it cannot be accessed. Usually, instead of transferring 
the data out, criminals simply encrypt the data in place. With-
out properly designed backup systems, many businesses are 
unable to access or recover their data. The cybercriminals then 
demand a ransom payment in order to restore access to the 
data. A small business’s data may not be valuable to others, 
but the data are often extremely important to the operation of 
the business. Without extensive IT support or sophistication, 
the owners of the business may be willing to pay the ransom 
to regain access to their data, thus providing immediate 
income to the criminals. Unfortunately, paying off the crimi-
nals may or may not get the data back, and the vulnerabilities 
that led to the attack in the first place may still be in place.
To prevent becoming a victim in the first place, experts rec-
ommend paying for a third-party service to audit, enhance, 
and maintain system security. While a small business may not 
be able to afford a sophisticated staff and specialized technol-
ogy to monitor and secure its information systems, there are 
many outsourcing providers that can provide the required 
expertise and capabilities for a reasonable fee. As with many 
types of risks, an ounce of prevention can be worth a pound of 
cure. Security audits and enhancements are only part of the 
equation, however. It is also important to ensure that proper 
backup and disaster recovery policies and procedures are in 
place and to test them regularly. Finally, users are a key part of 
the equation. Technology alone cannot protect a business if 
the system user is the weak link, so it is essential to train users 
to recognize phishing scams and not to perform risky actions 
like clicking on unknown links or executing unknown attach-
ments that can contain malware.
Based on:
Gustke, C. (2016, January 13). No business too small to be hacked. 
The New York Times. Retrieved June 26, 2016, from http://www 
.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/business/smallbusiness/no-business-too-
small-to-be-hacked.html


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    181
provide indications about where the users are on the site, and offer help features. Further, 
features such as one-click ordering, offering a variety of payment methods, or order tracking can 
increase the perceived functional convenience of a website.
Representational Delight  Finally, the website must be aesthetically pleasing. People are 
more likely to visit, stay at, and return to a website that looks good, as the design of a website 
can signal other characteristics of an online business, such as professionalism (Wells, Valacich, 
& Hess, 2011). Thus, successful firms have web sites that are nice to look at and have a unique 
look and feel to separate their website from their competition. Aesthetics can include the use of 
color schemes, fonts, backgrounds, and high-quality images. Furthermore, websites should have 
a clear, concise, and consistent layout, taking care to avoid unnecessary clutter.
THE ONLINE CONSUMERS’ HIERARCHY OF NEEDS.  In a perfect world, an organization would 
strive to maximize all three sets of characteristics. In reality, businesses constantly have to make 
trade-offs between complexity, resource limitations, and other factors; thus, it is important 
to understand online consumers’ relative needs. Valacich and colleagues’ (2007) “online 
consumer’s hierarchy of needs” suggests that overall, a site’s structural firmness is most critical; 
once visitors’ needs for structural firmness have been met, functional convenience is the next 
most important set of characteristics, followed by representational delight. In other words, if a 
website is only nice to look at but difficult to navigate or appears not secure, visitors are unlikely 
to stay or make a transaction.
Needless to say, a basic level of structural firmness, functional convenience, and representa-
tional delight should be provided by any website (in other words, online visitors have a “zone of 
intolerance”). Beyond this basic level, the importance of the different sets of characteristics 
depends on the objective of a particular page on a website (Figure 4.9). For example, for a very 
utilitarian web page, such as the login page of your online banking site, structural firmness 
should be emphasized to the user (though both functional convenience and representational 
delight should not be neglected). In contrast, for a relatively more hedonic web page, such as a 
page designed to engage a visitor into considering a new home loan, representational delight 
should be emphasized (again, not neglecting the other factors). Hybrid pages, offering both 
hedonic and utilitarian value, such as those within Amazon.com or eBay, should balance the dif-
ferent factors (though typically checkout pages on such sites emphasize aspects related to struc-
tural firmness).
SETTING UP YOUR ONLINE STORE.  As numerous examples show, the web allows almost anyone 
to set up an online store. The first step in starting a B2C e-commerce business is to set up an 
online storefront that is easy to use, fast, reliable, and aesthetically pleasing. However, especially 
small companies often lack the resources to set up a professional e-commerce site. One solution 
for companies wanting to benefit from being associated with large, successful e-businesses 
is to turn to the e-commerce giants eBay and Amazon.com, which let others sell products on 
their sites on a large scale. In addition, online businesses can choose from various (often freely 
available) e-commerce solutions that offer numerous well-designed store templates. E-commerce 
solutions offered by commercial providers such as Intuit, GoDaddy, Shopify, or Yahoo! or open 
Utilitarian
Web Page
Hybrid
Web Page
Hedonic
Web Page
Zone of  Intolerance 
Low
Minimum
Acceptable
Level
High
Representational Delight
Functional Convenience
Structural Firmness
FIGURE 4.9
Different websites (pages) must 
focus on different design features.
Source: Based on Valacich et al. (2007).

182    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
source solutions such as osCommerce or PrestaShop offer various store templates, an integrated 
shopping cart, and so on; typically, such e-commerce solutions are customizable, giving 
businesses the option of integrating customer reviews, reward programs, or tracking information.
An additional challenge for fledgling online merchants is the effort involved in picking, 
packing, and shipping the orders. To address this problem, many smaller companies choose to 
outsource order fulfillment. For example, Fulfillment by Amazon “rents out” warehouse and 
information systems infrastructure to anyone wanting to run a successful online business, essen-
tially offering fulfilment as a service, where all a company has to do is ship the products (in 
bulk) to Amazon’s warehouses, where the products will be stored until an order is received. 
Employees from the fulfillment service then pick, pack, and ship the order, allowing the compa-
nies to concentrate on managing the online business, attracting new customers, and so on.
Internet Marketing
One fundamental mistake companies can make when taking a current business online or creating 
an online business is assuming that if you build it, they will come. As with an offline business, 
marketing is a critical activity in any online endeavor, and a website cannot be successful with-
out customers. As companies must attract visitors to their site and away from the thousands of 
other sites they could be visiting, companies advertise their firm’s web presence by including the 
website address on all company materials, from business cards and letterheads to advertising 
copy. Further, it is now common to see a company’s URL listed at the end of its television com-
mercials, and more and more companies integrate QR codes into their offline ads. QR codes are 
two-dimensional bar codes with a high storage capacity. In a consumer context, QR codes are 
typically used to point the consumer to a particular web page when he or she scans the bar code 
with a mobile device’s camera (Figure 4.10). Alternatively, QR codes can trigger certain actions, 
such as initiating a phone call to a sales representative or sending a text message to a prespeci-
fied number.
Historically, companies’ advertising budgets were mostly spent on noninteractive advertis-
ing campaigns, such as using billboards or newspaper, radio, or television ads. However, as it is 
becoming the norm to access the Internet multiple times a day from multiple devices and loca-
tions, companies are reallocating their advertising budgets; in 2014, organizations spent 24 per-
cent of their advertising budget on Internet marketing; research firm Forrester estimates that by 
2019, companies will spend 35 percent of their advertising budget on Internet marketing, includ-
ing search marketing, display ads, e-mail marketing, social media, and mobile marketing (Van-
Boskirk, 2014). All of these are discussed next.
FIGURE 4.10
Scanning a QR code can trigger 
certain actions, such as opening a 
web page.
Source: Scanrail1/Shutterstock.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    183
SEARCH MARKETING.  Whereas people would traditionally obtain information about products 
or companies from offline sources, many web surfers now just enter the name of a product into 
a search engine such as Google or Bing and then visit the resulting pages. Given this trend, 
it is not surprising that search marketing is now big business. Research firm Forrester reports 
that by 2019, companies in the United States will spend US$45.4 billion on search marketing 
(Figure 4.11). Included in search marketing are search engine optimization and paid search, both 
of which are discussed next.
Search Engine Optimization  The results presented by search engines such as Google or 
Bing are typically separated into organic results (i.e., based on the page’s content) and sponsored 
results. The organic results of a user’s search are presented based on complex, proprietary 
formulas, and the ranking (position of the link to a particular page) in the search results is largely 
outside the control of the web page’s owner (Figure 4.12). Given the incredible numbers of results 
that are returned for common searches such as “apparel,” “sportswear,” or “digital camera,” most 
surfers visit only the first few links that are presented and rarely venture beyond the first page of 
the search results; thus, companies use search engine optimization (SEO) in an attempt to boost 
their ranking in the organic search engine results. Although the exact formulas for a web page’s 
rank in the organic results of a search engine are kept as trade secrets, the major search engines 
give tips on how to optimize a page’s ranking, including providing unique and valuable content, 
keeping the content updated, and including key words for which a user might query.
There are a multitude of companies promising to improve a page’s ranking, but because 
search engines’ algorithms are usually proprietary and are frequently changed and there can be 
literally hundreds of factors influencing a page’s rank, the success of using such services is often 
limited. Further, search engines such as Google try to detect whether a page is using unethical 
Share in US$ million
3,067
17,342
37,574
45,386
E-mail marketing
Social media
Display advertising
Search marketing
FIGURE 4.11
Search marketing is forecast 
to have the largest share of 
interactive marketing by 2019.
Source: Based on VanBoskirk, S. (2014, 
November 18). US Digital Marketing 
Forecast, 2014 to 2019. Cambridge,  
MA: Forrester Research.
FIGURE 4.12
It is hard to influence the ranking 
of your company’s page in the 
organic search results.
Source: 2016 Google Inc. All rights 
reserved. Google and the Google Logo 
are registered trademarks of Google Inc.

184    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
“tricks” (such as “hidden” key words) to improve its ranking and ban sites using such tricks 
from the listing altogether. Nevertheless, even slight modifications to a page can have a large 
impact on the page’s ranking in search results, and investments in SEO are often worthwhile, 
especially in times of tight marketing budgets.
Paid Search  A way to ensure that your company’s page appears on the first page users see 
when searching for a specific term is using search advertising (or sponsored search). For 
example, using Google’s “AdWords,” a company can bid for being listed in the sponsored search 
results for the term “4K TV” (Figure 4.13). In order to present the most relevant ads to its users, 
Google then determines the relevance of the ad and the content of the linked page to the search 
term, and, depending on the amount of the bid, the company’s web page is listed in the sponsored 
results; Google is paid on a pay-per-click basis (see the following discussion of pricing models). 
As you can imagine, this can quickly become very expensive for advertisers, especially when 
the sponsored link is associated with a popular search term, and the advertiser has to bid against 
many competitors. On the other hand, a system such as Google’s AdWords ensures high-quality 
leads, as the ads are presented only to users actually searching for a specific key word (in 
contrast to traditional ads, which are presented to anyone). As programs such as AdWords can 
be tweaked in myriad ways (such as by key words, negative key words, region, time of day, 
and so on), many companies turn to professional consultants who help to optimize sponsored 
search campaigns. Alternatively, some search engines offer to elevate a page’s position in the 
organic results after paying a fee (paid inclusion). Many search engines that pride themselves 
on offering unbiased results (such as Google), however, do not offer paid inclusion. Overall, 
Forrester Research estimates that spending on paid search will increase from US$25.2 billion to 
US$41.3 billion between 2014 and 2019.
DISPLAY ADS.  In the early days of the web, display advertising was the prevalent form of online 
advertising. Similar to traditional newspaper ads, companies would advertise their presence on 
other popular websites, such as nytimes.com, using static banner ads, video ads, or interactive 
banner ads, which allow users to interact with the advertisement. A recent trend in display 
advertising has been contextual advertising, where the ads placed on a page are in some way 
related to the content of that page. If, for example, you are reading tournament results from 
a PGA golf event at a popular sports website such as espn.com, you will also likely see an 
advertisement to buy new golf equipment or to visit a golf resort. A variety of interactive features, 
rich media ads, and the ability to place ads in online videos as well as the ability to accurately 
measure an ad’s impact contribute to display advertising’s increasing popularity.
E-MAIL MARKETING.  E-mail marketing has been, and continues to be, a very popular aspect of 
advertisers’ overall interactive marketing mix (VanBoskirk, 2014). Given the low cost of less 
FIGURE 4.13
Companies pay per click for being 
included in the sponsored listings.
Source: 2016 Google Inc. All rights 
reserved. Google and the Google Logo 
are registered trademarks of Google Inc.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    185
than US$1 per 1,000 e-mails, advertisers are increasingly trying to move away from direct-mail 
advertising and replace it with e-mail advertising. In addition to low cost, the effectiveness of 
e-mail advertising campaigns can be measured directly (such as by including special links or 
images in the e-mail that allow the sender to track which e-mails the recipients have opened or 
reacted to). Further, e-mail marketing saves tremendous amounts of paper over traditional direct 
mail advertising, allowing a company to build a positive green image.
SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING.  One continuing trend in Internet marketing is harnessing the 
power of social media, such as Facebook or Twitter. More and more people rely on social 
media to stay in contact with their friends or business associates, so including such sites in the 
interactive marketing mix is a natural move for companies. In addition to placing display ads on 
such sites, companies increasingly use social networking sites for interactive communication 
with their customers. For example, the Coca-Cola Company has created a page on Facebook, 
allowing it to interact with its more than 97 million “fans” (i.e., Facebook users who “like” 
the page) in various ways; Coke’s fans can download free virtual goodies, can upload pictures 
related to everything Coke, or can use interactive apps. By creating this page (which is free for 
Coke, except for the time needed to set it up, monitor, and maintain it), Coke can build strong 
relationships with a large group of its target customers. Similarly, people can follow Coke on 
Twitter or visit Coke’s channel on the video-sharing site YouTube. A recent trend for companies 
is establishing “social media listening centers” to feel the pulse of public opinion across a variety 
of social media.We discuss social media marketing in more detail in Chapter 5, “Enhancing 
Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media.”
MOBILE MARKETING.  Finally, mobile marketing is forecast to skyrocket between 2014 and 2019 
(VanBoskirk, 2014). Increasing use of smartphones and tablets has provided marketers with yet 
another channel for highly targeted advertising (such as based on a user’s location). This is true 
especially for tablets (with their relatively large screens), which allow for various innovative 
interactive ad formats. Further placing ads into mobile phone apps allows app developers to 
offer apps for lower prices (or free, under the freemium model; see Chapter 2) and provides 
marketers with another opportunity to reach their target audience through their favorite channels. 
Finally, the growth in mobile commerce further contributes to the growth of mobile marketing, 
as companies are trying to reach their customers wherever, whenever.
PAYMENT MODELS IN INTERNET MARKETING.  In offline advertising, an ad’s exposure can only 
be guessed and pricing is typically fixed. For example, the cost for renting an outdoor billboard 
is determined by the size of the billboard, the location, or the estimated number of cars passing 
by that billboard in a certain time period; likewise, the price for a newspaper ad is determined by 
the ad’s size, the paper’s circulation, and so on. On the web, in contrast, it is possible to determine 
exactly how many people have been exposed to or clicked on an ad. Thus, one common pricing 
model for online advertising is the impression based model; under this model, pricing is based 
on the number of times the page containing an ad is displayed, typically expressed in cost per 
thousand impressions (i.e., cost per mille, or CPM). Depending on advertising volume and the 
popularity of the site where the ad is placed, costs can range from US$8 to US$40 per thousand 
impressions. However, research firms estimate that between 30 and 60 percent of website visits 
may be generated by nonhuman traffic; further, many web surfers do not even look at the online 
ads and web browsers such as Firefox offer the option to block certain ads. Thus, the trend in web 
advertising is moving toward performance-based pricing models, where the return on investment 
is more direct, such as pay-per-click models. Under this type of pricing model, the firm running 
the advertisement pays only when a web surfer actually clicks on the advertisement; the cost per 
click is typically between US$0.01 and US$0.50 per click, depending on the site, its viewers, and 
so on. One drawback, however, of pay-per-click models is the possibility of abuse by repeatedly 
clicking on a link to inflate revenue to the host or increase the costs for the advertiser; this is 
known as click fraud. Click fraud has become increasingly problematic, and companies such as 
Google are constantly monitoring clicks to detect potentially fraudulent activity.
ASSESSING PERFORMANCE OF INTERNET MARKETING.  One major benefit of Internet 
marketing is the ability to target specific recipients based on location, time of day, page content 
surrounding an ad, or the viewer’s demographics, “likes,” or interests (e.g., on a social network 
such as Facebook), making Internet marketing campaigns very effective; further, in contrast 

186    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
to traditional marketing campaigns, it is easy to assess viewer’s reactions to an ad. Given that 
Google and Facebook know (or are able to infer) various characteristics of their users (and 
Google manages ads across a variety of partner websites ranging from AOL to the Washington 
Post), it comes as no surprise that these two companies reap 85 cents of each new online 
advertising dollar spent by companies, according to analysts. How is the success of Internet 
marketing campaigns measured? The performance of Internet marketing can be assessed by 
metrics such as click-through rate, reflecting the number of surfers who click on an ad (i.e., 
clicks) divided by the number of times it was displayed (i.e., impressions), or conversion rate, 
reflecting the percentage of visitors who actually perform the marketer’s desired action (such as 
making a purchase, signing up for a newsletter, watching a video, and so on). Targeting a well-
defined audience with an ad campaign can help to attract high-quality leads, ultimately resulting 
in higher conversion rates. In addition, tracking visitors’ behavior on a website can provide a 
host of useful information. For example, a firm can track the path that visitors take through the 
many pages of its website and record the length of the visits, page views, common entry pages, a 
page’s bounce rate and exit rate, and even the user’s region, browser, or Internet service provider, 
among other statistics. Exit rate is defined as the percentage of visitors who leave the website 
(i.e., terminate the session) after viewing that page; in other words, it reflects the percentage of 
users for whom a particular page is the last page they view before moving on to a different site 
or closing their browser window. In contrast, bounce rate is defined as the percentage of single-
page visits; in other words, it reflects the percentage of users for whom a particular page is the 
only page visited on the website during a session. As the different metrics can be affected by 
the page itself as well as by the quality of the traffic being attracted, the company can use this 
information to improve its website or attempt to attract higher-quality traffic. If the exit rate for a 
particular page is abnormally high, the company can try to find out why this occurs and redesign 
the page to entice the users to stay. Similarly, pages that go unused can be eliminated from the 
site, reducing maintenance and upkeep. This process of analyzing web surfers’ behavior in order 
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Buying Likes
We’ve all seen them in our social network feeds: “Like this 
page for a chance to win a cash prize” or “Share this link to 
help John Doe get a backstage pass to the concert!” Social 
media sites like Facebook are a great platform for businesses to 
generate buzz and, with a well-executed marketing campaign, 
get noticed by millions of users. Many businesses entice users 
to “like” their business page for some reward—a discount or 
chance to win a prize—and in turn, the users who “like” the 
business spread the word to each of their network connections 
automatically. Users of Twitter and Instagram can also promote 
topics or businesses using hashtags (keywords denoted with a 
“#” symbol; see Chapter 5). These campaigns can be very 
effective. For example, in 2015, Starbucks hosted a photo con-
test in which participants who posted a photograph with a red 
Starbucks cup could win US$500. To be eligible to win, the 
contestants had to post the picture on Instagram along with 
the hashtag #RedCupContest. This simple campaign resulted in 
more than 40,000 entries competing for one of five prizes.
Sometimes, however, these campaigns and contests can 
be deeply biased by automated “likes” and submissions, giv-
ing unfair advantage to users who try to game the system. 
There are many services that offer “like buying” and other 
forms of electronic voting fraud. One such company, based in 
Chennai, India, employs dozens of people whose job is to use 
a multitude of social media accounts to “like,” follow, vote for, 
or otherwise promote whatever campaign their clients hire 
them to promote. Some of these companies use special soft-
ware to spoof and rapidly change their IP address, preventing 
filtering from contest sponsors who try to prevent multiple 
votes from the same IP address or who limit valid entries to 
only those within a specified geographical region.
Social media platforms try to suppress this type of devious 
behavior, but, as with many such practices, it turns into a cat-
and-mouse game with both the social networks and the fraud-
sters constantly finding new ways to outsmart the other. Do a 
search for “vote buying services” online and see who is cur-
rently ahead.
Based on:
Permenter, C. (2013, June 6). Buying likes and rigging votes: Facebook’s 
seedy underworld. The Daily Dot. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://
www.dailydot.com/business/facebook-buy-votes-rig-contests-likes
Young, H. (2015, December 14). The 30 most brilliant social media 
campaigns of 2015. Salesforce.com. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from 
https://www.salesforce.com/blog/2015/12/2015-most-brilliant-social-
media-campaigns.html


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    187
to improve website performance (and, ultimately, maximize sales) is known as web analytics 
(for more on this topic, see Case 1 at the end of this chapter and Chapter 6).
Mobile Commerce, Consumer-To-Consumer EC, 
and Consumer-To-Business EC
Fueled by the megatrends, mobile commerce has seen tremendous growth in the past few years. 
As defined earlier in the chapter, m-commerce is any electronic transaction or information inter-
action conducted using a wireless, mobile device and mobile networks (wireless or switched 
public network) that leads to the transfer of real or perceived value in exchange for information, 
services, or goods (MobileInfo, 2016).
Powerful mobile devices such as Apple’s iPhone and iPad or Samsung’s Galaxy, supporting 
high-speed data transfer and “always-on” connectivity, provide a wide variety of services and 
capabilities in addition to voice communication, such as multimedia data transfer, video stream-
ing, video telephony, a sheer unlimited number of useful apps, and full Internet access, allowing 
consumers to access information or make transactions on the go. Mobile payment systems such 
as Apple Pay further facilitate mobile commerce. Indeed, research firm Forrester expects 270 
million U.S. shoppers to use mobile devices by 2020 (up from 244 million in 2015; Lindner, 
2016). In other regions of the world, mobile commerce has an even larger impact, with almost 
50 percent of all e-commerce transactions in China having taken place on a mobile device in 
2015 (a number that is forecast to reach 71 percent by 2019; eMarketer, 2015a).
The increasing use of tablets is seen as another major driver of mobile commerce. 
Although providing for mobility, tablets are often used in people’s living rooms as “couch 
computers”; thus, tablets allow people to shop from the comfort of their homes without being 
tied to a desk and a computer screen (Figure 4.14). In addition, tablets provide larger screen 
sizes, allowing for better product presentation. An analysis of 16.2 billion transactions from 
150 online retailers showed that tablet users tend to spend significantly more per order than 
shoppers using smartphones or personal computers (Adobe, 2012); given that tablet users tend 
to have above-average incomes, tablets may be the perfect channel for selling products or ser-
vices online.
LOCATION-BASED M-COMMERCE.  Another key driver for m-commerce is location-based 
services, which are highly personalized mobile services based on a user’s location. Location-
based services are implemented via the cellular network, Bluetooth and Wi-Fi networks, and 
global positioning system (GPS) functionality, now built into most modern smartphones. 
Location-based services allow the service provider to offer information or services tailored 
to the users’ needs, depending on their location. For example, search engines can provide 
specific information about attractions or restaurants located in the user’s vicinity, retail stores 
FIGURE 4.14
Tablets are often used as “couch 
computers.”
Source: Diego Cervo/Shutterstock.

188    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
can enhance store locators with navigation instructions, or users can receive real-time traffic or 
public transport information (Table 4.2).
INFORMATION ON THE GO.  In the digital world, people have become increasingly used to 
having tremendous amounts of information available. Mobile devices have taken this to the 
next level, in that people now have the information available whenever, wherever (Figure 4.15). 
For instance, when deciding on whether to visit a particular restaurant, people can get further 
information or customer reviews from sites such as Yelp using their mobile devices; similarly, 
when standing in a retail store, customers can easily retrieve a host of information and reviews 
about particular products. For customers, this capability can help tremendously when making 
purchase decisions; for companies operating in the offline world, this has turned into a mixed 
blessing. On the one hand, they can augment the offline shopping experience by being able 
to provide much more information than they would typically be able to, which can open up 
many opportunities for cross-channel and multichannel retailing and can allow bricks-and-clicks 
retailers to compete with their click-only counterparts. On the other hand, the rise in smartphone 
TABLE 4.2   GPS-Enabled Location-Based Services
Service
Example
Location
Determining the basic geographic position of the cell phone
Mapping
Capturing specific locations to be viewed on the phone
Navigation
The ability to give route directions from one point to another
Tracking
The ability to see another person’s location
FIGURE 4.15
Using mobile devices, information 
is always at your fingertips.
Source: 2016 Google Inc. All rights 
reserved. Google and the Google Logo 
are registered trademarks of Google Inc.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    189
use has led to showrooming—that is, shoppers coming into a store to evaluate the look and 
feel of a product to then purchase it online or at a competitor’s store. Obviously, click-only 
companies benefit from this practice; online retailer Amazon.com even offers an app that lets 
the user scan a product’s bar code with the smartphone’s camera and then displays the product 
information and price offered by Amazon.com.
In addition to providing information on the go, service providers offer mobile tickets or 
even mobile boarding passes; typically a QR code is sent to the smartphone of the user, who then 
just has to present the code to a QR code reader to verify the ticket or boarding pass. This adds 
convenience for the user, who does not have to keep track of paper tickets, physical boarding 
passes, and the like, and the service provider can offer additional information and services, such 
as automatic notifications of delays or gate changes for passengers.
PRODUCT AND CONTENT SALES.  Mobile users increasingly use their mobile devices to 
purchase products or content on the go. In an attempt to harness this trend, many online retailers 
design mobile versions of their websites so as to facilitate the shopping process on mobile 
devices. With the increasing popularity of mobile commerce, companies have to strategically 
decide whether to go beyond mobile versions of their websites and create dedicated mobile 
apps, which can offer many features that cannot be provided on mobile websites. However, 
mobile apps are typically costly to develop as they have to be tailored to different platforms 
(e.g., Apple’s iOS versus Android) and device form factors (such as different screen sizes of 
smartphones and tablets) (Figure 4.16). In any case, firms operating in the digital world should 
accommodate for unique aspects of mobile interactions (e.g., interactions are often short 
and fragmented or users face frequent distractions). According to research firm EPiServer, 
mobile users regard user reviews, direct customer support, adaptation to different screen sizes, 
location-based functions, and wish list functions as the most important features of mobile 
retail sites (eMarketer, 2016).
Especially among commuters, accessing content from mobile devices is extremely popular. 
Content providers ranging from newspapers to TV stations are now offering various ways to 
access their content from mobile devices. The increasing field of mobile content is obviously an 
important part of many companies’ mobile marketing mix, as it allows reaching people in more 
places and provides for extremely targeted marketing efforts (such as based on a user’s 
location).
C2C EC
C2C commerce has been with us since the start of commerce itself. Whether it was bartering, 
auctions, or tendering, commerce has always included C2C economics. Electronically facilitated 
interactions create unique opportunities (such as a large pool of potential buyers) and unique 
problems (such as the potential of being defrauded; see Table 4.3). This section discusses 
FIGURE 4.16
Businesses have to decide 
whether to build apps for different 
platforms and form factors.
Source: Scanrail/Fotolia.

190    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
e-auctions and online classifieds, two of the most popular mechanisms consumers use to buy, 
sell, and trade with other consumers.
E-AUCTIONS.  E-auctions provide a place where sellers can post goods and services for sale and 
buyers can bid on these items. Relatedly, bartering typically takes place on a one-on-one basis, 
but websites such as swap.com bring together many people listing items to swap.
The largest e-auction site, as you probably know, is eBay (www.ebay.com). eBay’s revenue 
model is based on small fees that are associated with posting items, but these small fees quickly 
add up, so that in 2015 eBay’s net revenues exceeded US$8.5 billion. Whereas eBay is hugely 
popular, there continue to be cases of fraud. According to the Internet Crime Complaint Center 
(2016), e-auctions are marred with fraud, with e-auction fraud being among the top five most 
common crime types filed with the center. In particular, non-shipment of goods and counterfeit 
items tend to be the biggest problems; with the proliferation of fake goods ranging from hand-
bags to brake pads, air bags, and chain saws, purchasing and using counterfeit goods can not 
only lead to legal complications but can potentially have dangerous or even deadly conse-
quences. Needless to say, online auction sites warn users to exercise caution when purchasing 
goods; in addition, e-auction providers such as eBay offer swift conflict resolution mechanisms 
to preserve people’s trust in the marketplace and use sophisticated business intelligence applica-
tions (see Chapter 6) to detect and minimize e-auction fraud, attempting to make C2C EC a safer 
shopping experience.
ONLINE CLASSIFIEDS.  Another type of C2C e-commerce is online classifieds. Although online 
classifieds sites such as craigslist.com are enabled by web capabilities, no transactions take place 
online. Yet online classifieds have flourished in recent years, enabling people to sell anything 
from flowers to furniture. A related concept that has gained popularity is “freecycling,” that is, 
giving away goods for free to anyone who is willing to pick them up.
PLATFORM-BASED C2C BUSINESS MODELS.  As discussed in Chapter 2, digital platforms enable 
users to co-create value, and fueled by the megatrends social and mobile, many platforms focus 
on enabling C2C interactions. For example, ride-sharing platforms such as Uber, Linq, and Juno 
allow everyday people to use their own vehicles to provide an alternative to traditional cabs. 
Likewise, Airbnb allows people to rent their apartments to others, C2C marketplaces such as 
Etsy allow individuals to sell vintage or handmade products to other consumers, and the mobile 
photo-sharing service Instagram enables people to easily set up online storefronts.
C2B EC
Just as the web has enabled small businesses to participate in global EC, it has also enabled con-
sumers to sell goods or services to businesses, reversing the more typical B2C model. Con-
sumer-to-business (C2B) EC has seen a few implementations. One prime example is microstock 
photo sites such as Shutterstock, which sell pictures, videos, or artwork to publishers, newspa-
pers, web designers, or advertising agencies. Up until a few years ago, clearinghouses such as 
Getty Images were the primary source for stock photography used by advertisers, book publish-
ers such as Pearson Prentice Hall, or publishers of newspapers or magazines; however, the 
images purchased from these clearinghouses tended to be expensive, as the clearinghouses 
sourced the pictures from professional photographers. In contrast, Shutterstock sources much of 
TABLE 4.3  Opportunities and Threats of C2C EC
Opportunities
Threats
Consumers can buy and sell to broader markets
Eliminates the middleman that increases the final 
price of products and services
Always available for consumers, 24/7/365
Market demand is an efficient mechanism for setting 
prices in the electronic environment
Increases the numbers of buyers and sellers who can 
find each other
No quality control
Higher risk of fraud
Harder to use traditional payment meth-
ods (checks, cash, ATM cards)


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    191
its content not from professionals but from amateur photographers (Figure 4.17). Today, high-
quality digital cameras can be had for far less than US$1,000, and with the right editing soft-
ware, amateur photographers can create images that almost match those of professional 
photographers. Amateur photographers can upload their pictures to microstock photo sites, 
where interested parties can license and download the images for US$1 to US$5 per image, 
which is a fraction of the price of a regular stock photo. Given that overhead costs are almost 
negligible, the microstock photo sites can make a profit while still sharing part of the revenue 
with the pictures’ creators. Similarly, companies use crowdsourcing on micro-task marketplaces 
such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (see Chapter 5) in order to have small, well-defined tasks 
(such as tagging pictures or describing products) completed by a scalable ad hoc workforce of 
everyday people. However, it can be argued that consumers who regularly engage in C2B trans-
actions and make parts of their living with such transactions can be considered businesses; 
hence, the line between C2B and B2B transactions is somewhat blurry.
Securing Payments and Navigating 
Legal Issues in EC
Within a short period of time, radical developments in technology and systems have brought EC 
from a fringe economic activity to one of the most prevalent in today’s global economy. This 
innovation has not slowed down and has opened some promising new areas within EC. This sec-
tion outlines web-based financial transactions and legal issues related to engaging in EC.
Securing Payments in the Digital World
One of the most crucial aspects of B2C EC, C2C EC, and m-commerce is ensuring that online 
transactions are secure. Although the transfer of money is a critical factor in online shopping, 
online banking, and online investing, security researchers and software companies are lamenting 
that people are often reluctant to change their habits when surfing the web and carelessly reveal 
sensitive information to unknown or fraudulent sites. In fact, more than 17.6 million consumers 
in the United States (or 7 percent of U.S. adults) became victims of identity theft in 2014 (see 
Chapter 10). Security concerns and other factors (such as impatience, lengthy checkout proce-
dures, or comparison shopping) lead shoppers to frequently abandon their shopping carts and to 
not follow through with a purchase—reports show that more than half of the online shopping 
carts are abandoned. Traditionally, paying for goods and services was limited to using credit and 
debit cards, but using these methods can open up many security issues. To address these issues, 
there are now different ways of exchanging funds when buying and selling goods or services 
online. Issues related to different forms of online payment are discussed next.
PAYMENT SERVICES.  Concerns for security have led to the inception of independent payment 
services such as PayPal (owned by eBay), Apple Pay, Square, or Google Wallet. These services 
allow online customers to purchase goods online without having to reveal much private 
information to the actual sellers. Rather than paying a seller by providing credit card information, 
an online shopper can simply pay by using his or her account with the payment service. Thus, the 
customer has to provide the (sensitive) payment information only to the payment service, which 
keeps this information secure (along with other information such as e-mail address or purchase 
Web designers
Publishers
Advertising
agencies
Newspapers
FIGURE 4.17
Amateur and professional 
photographers can sell their 
creations through microstock photo 
sites such as shutterstock.com.

192    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
history) and does not share it with the online merchant. Google linked its payment service to the 
search results so that Internet users looking for a specific product can immediately see whether 
a merchant offers this payment option; this is intended to ease the online shopping experience 
for consumers, thus reducing the number of people abandoning their shopping carts. Another 
payment service, PayPal, goes a step further by allowing anyone with an e-mail address to send 
and receive money. In other words, using this service, you can send money to your friends or 
family members, or you can receive money for anything you’re selling. This easy way to transfer 
money has been instrumental in the success of eBay, where anyone can sell or buy goods from 
other eBay users. With the increase in mobile interactions, mobile payment services such as 
Apple Pay or Square are seeing an increase in popularity. Such services greatly facilitate making 
in-store payments and offer an alternative to carrying cash or credit cards (e.g., by allowing the 
user to pay for a cup of coffee using a smartphone). A recent development of mobile payment 
services is to allow for peer-to-peer payments, such that a group of friends could easily split the 
bill for a meal at a restaurant. For example, the hugely successful Chinese messaging platform 
WeChat not only allows making online and offline payments but also allows for peer-to-peer 
transactions.
GREEN IT 
Green Online Shopping
Have you ever spent endless hours in different stores looking 
for a particular item? Unless the different stores are located in 
the same mall (or in the same general vicinity), driving between 
the stores requires using fossil fuels and contributes to 
increased pollution and road traffic. When shopping online, in 
contrast, you can easily search for products at different stores 
and compare prices, availability, shipping options, and so on, 
so you only need energy to power the device you use for your 
online “shopping trip.”
Unfortunately, calculating the environmental impact of 
online shopping versus shopping in a brick-and-mortar store is 
not always easy. Products purchased online are typically deliv-
ered by companies such as UPS or DHL; as the delivery vans 
travel optimized routes and deliver packages destined for hun-
dreds of other people, they potentially save hundreds of trips 
taken to a store. Likewise, stores do not have to print out and 
handle paper receipts and other paperwork, lowering the need 
for chopping down trees. On the other hand, incredible 
amounts of cardboard boxes are needed to prevent damage to 
the items in transit.
A study conducted by Carnegie Mellon’s Green Design 
Institute estimated that purchasing a thumb drive from online 
retailer Buy.com (where the products are shipped directly from 
the distributor to the customer) can result in 35 percent sav-
ings in energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions, 
compared with the same product purchased in a physical retail 
store. According to the researchers, the primary drivers for 
energy consumption for online purchases were packaging and 
delivery to the customers, whereas the largest driver of energy 
consumption for traditional retailing was the customer’s drive 
to and from the retail store, accounting for 65 percent of the 
total emissions produced.
Recent research conducted at the University of Delaware, 
however, suggests that online shopping might not be that 
green after all, due to an increase in fine particulate matter 
emissions (PM2.5) produced by the delivery vehicles. Further, 
the comparison is not always easy, as offline shoppers often 
bundle their purchases (such as by going to big box stores or 
shopping malls), online shopping may actually stimulate addi-
tional consumption (and thus need for transporting items), 
and delivery vehicles are often only a quarter full (as estimated 
by London’s transport authority).
The effects of increased particulate emissions and road traffic 
can especially be felt in large cities such as London, which expects 
delivery van traffic to increase by 20 percent until 2030—with 
this increase being entirely due to online shopping. As a result, 
cities are encouraging alternative energy to power these vans. 
For example, the city of London is providing subsidies to Gnewt 
Cargo, a company operating an all-electric delivery fleet, and the 
Norwegian Postal Service has purchased hundreds of electric 
delivery vans. While this is not going to reduce congestion, it can 
at least help make online shopping a little greener.
Based on:
DeWeert, S. (2016, February 17). How green is online shopping? The 
Guardian. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from https://www.theguardian 
.com/environment/2016/feb/17/how-green-is-online-shopping
Shankleman, J. (2016, May 9). As pollution from online shopping 
grows, London funds a solution. Bloomberg. Retrieved June 27, 
2016, from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-05-09/
as-pollution-from-online-shopping-grows-london-funds-a-solution
Swaney, C. & Ordiz, E. (2009, March 3). Carnegie Mellon study finds 
shopping online results in less environmental impact. Carnegie Mellon 
University. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from https://www.cmu.edu/news/
archive/2009/March/march3_onlineshopping.shtml


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    193
CRYPTOCURRENCIES.  One radical innovation in the area of making and receiving payments 
is cryptocurrencies. Cryptocurrencies (the most widely used being Bitcoin) are virtual 
currencies that are not issued by any central bank and use encryption technologies to secure 
transactions and to generate new units of the currency. Often described as being primarily 
used for illicit purposes (such as dealing with drugs or weapons), these cryptocurrencies have 
various useful legitimate applications. Most of us are comfortable with providing credit card 
information to a reputable online retailer such as Amazon.com or NewEgg.com. Likewise, 
many of us have purchased things from other individuals or small companies using a payment 
service like PayPal. Credit card companies and payment services like PayPal act as trusted 
middlemen and provide consumers a safety net, giving them the confidence that their purchase 
will produce the desired good or service and ensuring that their personal financial information 
remains confidential. These services, however, come at a fairly significant cost. Credit 
card companies charge vendors between 1 and 3 percent of the purchase amount of every 
transaction, a cost that is typically passed on to the consumer in the form of higher prices. 
Payment services such as PayPal also charge fees, which can be as high as several percentage 
points of the total price.
In contrast, the technology underlying Bitcoin requires no trusted middleman, reducing the 
transaction costs to negligible amounts. Thus, Bitcoin is very useful for everything from 
micropayments to international transfers. In fact, many major online companies (including Dell, 
Expedia, and Overstock.com) as well as offline retailers now provide ways for customers to pay 
with Bitcoin. In addition to extremely low transaction fees, Bitcoin transactions are anonymous, 
akin to cash payments. How does Bitcoin work?
Bitcoin was launched around the year 2008 by an anonymous developer pseudo-named 
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin is transferred as payment within a completely decentralized 
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Mobile Payments
The advent of the credit card and electronic funds transfer 
(EFT) mechanisms have paved the way for cashless societies. 
Indeed, in the United States, only 7 percent of all transactions 
are made in cash, and in Sweden, the number is only 3 per-
cent. Yet, even though the number of cash transactions seems 
to be on the decline, there are still various scenarios in which 
using EFT or credit cards is cumbersome or downright impossi-
ble. For example, many offline retailers resist accepting credit 
cards for small purchases, mainly due to the high costs 
involved, and many small amounts (such as paying at the park-
ing meter) cannot be paid using credit cards. Similarly, the 
friend who covered the bill for dinner is unlikely to accept 
credit cards, and paying for online purchases on your mobile 
phone (e.g., for movie tickets) is very cumbersome.
With increasing mobility in the digital world, the smart-
phone appears to be a natural payment companion: Just like a 
wallet, most people carry their phone with them at all times. 
To harness this opportunity, companies have devised various 
innovative ways to use a smartphone as a payment device. For 
example, near-field communication (NFC) allows for simply 
waving an NFC-enabled phone in front of a reading device; the 
payment amount is typically billed to a linked credit card. Simi-
larly, the American coffee giant Starbucks developed an app 
that lets users pay for their coffee by having the barista scan a 
bar code generated by the app, and PayPal developed an app 
that allows for sending money to friends or for ordering prod-
ucts by simply scanning a QR code. Other novel payment sys-
tems use people’s selfies or voice recognition to authorize 
payments. Payment provider Visa is even piloting a chip that 
enables the use of a car for making payments; built into the 
vehicle, the chip can communicate with gas pumps or parking 
meters and charge the payment amounts to a linked credit 
card account.
Mobile payment appears to be here to stay. However, it is 
not without problems. For example, critics cite the lack of 
accessibility for older generations as well as costs involved for 
the merchants and, last but not least, privacy concerns: Unlike 
cash transactions, mobile transactions are always stored some-
where, which may put people’s privacy at risk when making 
purchases or even donations. On the other hand, mobile pay-
ments offer a host of opportunities for retailers, enabling them 
to build ever closer relationships with their customers.
Based on:
Cave, A. (2012, April 10). Is mobile the way we’ll all be paying? 
Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://www.telegraph 
.co.uk/finance/festival-of-business/9195540/Is-mobile-the-way-well-
all-be-paying.html
Collins, K. (2016, March 2). Paying with your face and car is the new paying 
with your phone. CNet. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://www.cnet.com/
news/paying-with-your-face-and-car-is-the-new-paying-with-your-phone

194    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
peer-to-peer payment network—the payment processing is handled by thousands of computers 
around the world, each running the open source Bitcoin software. When someone pays for some-
thing using Bitcoin, the transaction is broadcast within the Bitcoin network, and is stored on a 
secure, public ledger that is accessible to any computer that wants to verify it. The authenticity 
of each transaction is ensured by digital signatures corresponding to the sending address of the 
payer and payee, and encryption ensures that the data about the parties involved in the transac-
tions remain anonymous. The public ledger is constantly verified and maintained by the Bitcoin 
network and is thus “open for business” 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and is not subject to any 
national holidays. In the Bitcoin network, this public ledger takes the form of a blockchain, an 
indelible, decentralized public ledger to which transactions are added in blocks, serving as proof 
of all transactions ever made (Figure 4.18). As the ledger is decentralized (i.e., distributed over a 
large number of computers), any changes made require consensus by the majority of nodes, 
making the blockchain highly resilient against tampering, and entries, once made, cannot be 
deleted. While blockchain technology is most widely known as the technology underlying Bit-
coin, organizations from IBM to Wells Fargo are exploring possible ways of using blockchain 
technology for any other types of transactions that require trust, accountability, and 
transparency.
MANAGING RISK IN B2C TRANSACTIONS.  When making an online purchase using a credit or 
debit card, an online customer has to transmit much personal information to a (sometimes 
unknown) merchant, and many Internet users (sometimes rightfully) fear being defrauded by an 
untrustworthy seller or falling victim to some other form of computer crime (see Table 4.4 for 
guidelines on how to conduct safe transactions on the Internet; see also Chapter 10). For online 
Amount:
0.5 Bitcoin
From:
xQdf56yh$$rT28
To:
M&dR41!st98Qt
Joe
Christoph
FIGURE 4.18
In the Bitcoin network, 
transactions are stored on a public 
ledger in form of a blockchain.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    195
merchants, the risk of people using fraudulent credit card data may be equally high. As in offline 
transactions, online consumers at times dispute transactions for various reasons. In such cases, 
the merchant is financially responsible for the transactions, and credit card issuers typically 
charge back transactions that are disputed by cardholders. For the merchants, such chargebacks 
normally result in the loss of the transaction amount, loss of the merchandise, processing costs, 
and chargeback fees; in addition, the merchant’s bank may charge higher fees or even close the 
merchant account if the chargeback rate is excessively high. Thus, minimizing chargebacks is 
of prime concern for online merchants. Some of the reasons for chargebacks, such as unclear 
store policies, product descriptions, shipping terms, or transaction currencies, can be minimized 
through good web store design; other reasons, such as stolen credit cards, require different 
safeguards (Visa, 2008).
Any credit card transactions must be authorized by the issuer of the credit card (typically 
the bank). However, this authorization merely ensures that the credit card was not reported as 
lost or stolen but does not ensure that the person making the transaction is the actual cardholder. 
In such card-not-present transactions, there is no imprint of the physical card and no cardholder 
signature, so online merchants have to be especially careful when deciding whether to make a 
transaction. While online customers demand a quick checkout process, leaving the merchant 
with little time to authenticate whether the customer is indeed the cardholder, the transaction 
date is the date the merchandise is shipped; thus, online merchants typically have one or several 
days to verify the identity of the cardholder (except for digital products or services). One mecha-
nism used to authorize card-not-present transactions is the so-called card security code, a three-
digit code located on the back of the card; this code is not stored in the card’s magnetic stripe 
and is thus only known to a person who is in the possession of the physical card (note that credit 
card company rules prohibit merchants from storing the code). To further minimize risk, online 
merchants often use automated fraud-screening services that provide the merchants with a risk 
score based on a number of variables such as match between shipping address, billing address, 
and phone number; the time of the order and the customer’s time zone; transaction volume; and 
the customer’s IP address and its geographic location. Based on the risk score, merchants can 
then decide whether to let the transaction go through. For such screening services to be most 
TABLE 4.4   Ways to Protect Yourself When Shopping Online
Tip
Example
Use a secure browser
Make sure that your browser has the latest encryption 
capabilities; also, always look for the padlock icon in 
your browser’s status bar before transmitting sensitive 
information
Check the site’s privacy policy
Make sure that the company you’re about to do business 
with does not share any information you would prefer not 
to be shared
Read and understand the refund and 
shipping policies
Make sure that you can return unwanted/defective prod-
ucts for a refund
Keep your personal information 
private
Make sure that you don’t give out sensitive information, 
such as your Social Security number, unless you know 
what the other entity is going to do with it
Give payment information only to 
businesses you know and trust
Make sure that you don’t provide your payment informa-
tion to fly-by-night operations
Keep records of your online transac-
tions and check your e-mail
Make sure that you don’t miss important notifications 
about your purchases
Review your monthly credit card and 
bank statements
Make sure to check for any erroneous or unauthorized 
transactions
Source: Based on Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (2016).

196    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
effective, the merchant should collect as much data as possible during the checkout process, 
which may lead some customers to abandon their shopping carts. In addition, online merchants 
can assess orders based on various fraud indicators (Figure 4.19); Visa recommends looking for 
fraud indicators such as:
■
■E-mail addresses. Legitimate e-mail addresses often contain some parts of the customer’s 
name; in contrast, fraudsters often set up e-mail addresses consisting of meaningless char-
acter combinations with free e-mail providers.
■
■Shipping and billing addresses. Fraudsters often have the merchandise shipped to foreign, 
high-risk countries. Thus, merchants may require billing and shipping addresses to be the 
same. In addition, as many fraudsters come from foreign countries, misspellings of com-
mon words or street names may serve as a potential fraud indicator.
■
■Transaction patterns. Fraudulent transactions often show very distinct patterns. For exam-
ple, the orders may be larger than normal, may consist of multiple items of the same type, 
or may consist largely of big-ticket items. Similarly, fraudulent transactions often consist 
of multiple orders using the same credit card in a short period or multiple orders using dif-
ferent cards shipped to the same address. Further, fraudsters often use overnight shipping 
so as to reduce the merchant’s time for verification checks and to be able to quickly resell 
the merchandise.
Being alert for such fraud indicators can help an online merchant to reduce the risk of fraud-
ulent transactions. Often, it is prudent to either call the customer for verification of the order 
(though this may be problematic for privacy reasons) or outright reject the transaction.
Legal Issues in EC
Although EC is now a viable and well-established business practice, there are issues that 
have changed the landscape for businesses and consumers and continue to do so. Two of the 
most important issues for EC businesses are taxation of online purchases and the protection 
of intellectual property, especially as it pertains to digital products, both of which are out-
lined next.
TAXATION.  Although this issue is a relatively old one, it remains controversial within the 
American legal system. With EC global transactions increasing at an exponential rate, many 
governments are concerned that sales made via electronic sales channels have to be taxed 
in order to make up for the lost revenue in traditional sales methods. As people shop less in 
Email Address:
Xy3561@free.email.com
Shipping Address:
Bellevue Hotel
355 Main Street
Springﬁeld, MA
Billing Address:
Frank Myers
1737 E University Blvd
Tucson, AZ 85719
Shipping Address:
Frank Myers
PO Box 4551
Smallville, TX
Transaction History
IP Address:
85.186.212.75
(Location: Romania)
E-commerce
Fraud?
FIGURE 4.19
Various indicators can signal 
potential e-commerce fraud.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    197
local retail stores, many cities, states, and even countries are now seeing a decrease in their 
sales tax income because of EC. Table 4.5 highlights issues associated with taxation of EC 
transactions.
According to tax laws such as the Internet Tax Freedom Act, sales on the Internet are 
treated the same way as mail-order sales, and a company is required to collect sales tax only 
from customers residing in a state where the business had substantial presence. In other words, 
only if an EC business had office facilities or a shipping warehouse in a certain state (say, 
California), it would have to collect sales tax on sales to customers from that state (in that 
case, California). Many EC businesses thus strategically selected their home bases to offer 
“tax-free shopping” to most customers. For example, Amazon.com tended to be very selective 
in where it located shipping facilities and warehouses to offer favorable tax conditions for 
most customers while still being able to offer fast delivery. Walmart.com, on the other hand, 
collects taxes on all of its U.S. EC transactions, as it is physically present in every U.S. state. 
Note that even if the EC business does not collect sales tax on goods or services you may have 
purchased, you are still liable for paying “use tax” (usually equal to your state’s sales tax) on 
those goods and services. Currently, Amazon has negotiated tax agreements with various 
states, and the U.S. legislature has proposed the Marketplace Fairness Act to simplify taxation 
issues surrounding e-commerce and to allow states to require e-tailers to collect sales tax even 
if the e-tailer has no physical presence. No matter whether (or when) this act is passed, taxa-
tion will remain a difficult issue.
On an international level, taxation is even more difficult. A U.S. customer ordering an 
item from China may be liable for paying use tax in his or her home state; likewise, a cus-
tomer outside the U.S. ordering from a U.S. seller would not have to pay U.S. sales tax but 
may be liable for paying tax (and/or import duty) in his or her home country on the shipment’s 
arrival. For digital products (such as software or music downloads), the movement of the 
product is difficult to track, and the tax revenue is easily lost. Obviously, e-businesses actively 
doing business in other countries have to comply with the various different tax laws in differ-
ent countries.
OTHER LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS.  In addition to taxation, companies selling goods or services 
on the web face a myriad of other issues. For example, companies should ensure they have 
explicit, enforceable terms of contract, terms of sale, and/or terms of website use; such terms 
may also cover questions surrounding the liability for content and its accuracy. Further, 
ownership of content and trademarks can be a virtual minefield. When posting content on 
one’s site, one has to ensure not to infringe on others’ copyrights or trademarks (e.g., by 
posting product photographs without permission or even by having trademarked names in 
one’s domain name). Likewise, care has to be taken if third parties develop content for one’s 
site: Who will own the copyright for that material? However, online businesses should not 
only ensure not to infringe on others’ intellectual property but also make sure to protect their 
own intellectual property, such as by displaying copyright notices and the like. Finally, it is 
important to clearly state the jurisdiction and ensure to comply with the laws and regulations 
of that jurisdiction.
DIGITAL RIGHTS MANAGEMENT.  With consumers increasingly using EC as a viable alternative 
to traditional commerce, the entertainment industry has no choice but to embrace the Internet 
as a distribution medium. Yet digital media are easily copied and shared by many people, as 
TABLE 4.5  Arguments For and Against Taxation of EC Transactions
For
Against
Increases tax income of local, state, and fed-
eral governments
Removes unfair advantage for e-tailers over 
brick-and-mortar stores
Increases accountability for e-tailers
Slows EC growth and opportunity
Creates additional compliance burden for e-tailers
E-tailers located in one state would subsidize other 
states or jurisdictions
Drives EC businesses to other countries

198    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
the entertainment industry has painfully learned after the introduction of the compact disc. 
Hence, the entertainment industry has turned to digital rights management (DRM), which is a 
technological solution that allows publishers to control their digital media (music, movies, and 
so on) to discourage, limit, or prevent illegal copying and distribution. DRM restrictions include 
which devices will play the media, how many devices the media will play on, and even how 
many times the media can be played.
To prevent illegal sharing of DRM-free content, it is often watermarked so that any illegal 
copy can be traced to the original purchaser (e.g., content purchased on iTunes contains the 
e-mail address used for the purchase) (Figure 4.20). A digital watermark is an electronic ver-
sion of physical watermarks placed on paper currency to prevent counterfeiting.
The entertainment industry argues that DRM allows copyright holders to minimize sales 
losses by preventing unauthorized duplication, but critics refer to DRM as “digital restriction 
management,” stating that publishers are arbitrary on how they enforce DRM. Further, critics 
argue that DRM enables publishers to infringe on existing consumer rights and to stifle innova-
tion; for example, restrictions and limitations such as limiting the number of times a game can be 
activated or limiting on which devices media can be accessed cause much inconvenience to users 
(such as when purchasing a new computer) and can thus breed piracy. Finally, critics argue that 
examples such as Amazon.com or Apple’s iTunes show that businesses can be very successful 
with DRM-free content (CNet Australia, 2012).
NET NEUTRALITY.  The Internet was designed as an open network, which means that every 
website, every application, and every type of data (e.g., a game, Skype call, or YouTube video) 
is treated the same. Because of this openness, virtually anyone or any business, well known or 
unknown, can access and be found on the web. For example, unknown bloggers can compete 
with large news providers like CNN for readers. Many believe that this openness has been the 
primary catalyst for countless innovations and some of today’s most successful companies, 
like eBay and Google. Without this openness, many fear that startups and entrepreneurs will be 
muscled out of the marketplace by big corporations that have the money to control what people 
are able to see or do on the web.
In general, net neutrality is the principle that all Internet data should be treated the same. 
Proponents of net neutrality believe that the Internet should forward all data packets on a first-
come, first-served basis, allowing anyone to freely communicate with any application or content 
without interference from a third party. Proponents are worried that without strong laws to pro-
tect the Internet, governments, providers, and large corporations will be able to block Internet 
applications and content and even block out competitors.
Many large corporations and telecommunications providers, however, would like to change 
the way information is accessed and prioritized on the web. Large telecommunication providers 
would like to charge different rates to access different websites, to have adequate speed to run 
certain applications, or even to have permission to plug in certain types of devices. Yet this 
would give larger and more established companies tremendous power over smaller and startup 
firms, and without legal protection, consumers could find that a network operator has blocked 
the website of a competitor or slowed the delivery of content from companies unwilling to pay 
additional fees.
Many believe that retaining net neutrality is critical to preserve current freedoms. It guaran-
tees a level playing field for all websites and Internet technologies. Without net neutrality, many 
of the next generation of innovations may be shut out.
FIGURE 4.20
Digital watermarks are used to 
trace illegal copies of digital 
media to the original purchaser.
Source: Notepad 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    199
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Retailing
You may make many purchases online in order to benefit from 
greater convenience or lower prices, but you will likely set foot 
in a brick-and-mortar retail store at least occasionally, and you 
may have noticed some changes brought by technology. A 
few decades ago, large retail chains started introducing com-
puterized point-of-sale inventory systems consisting of check-
out computers and an inventory control system. A simple bar 
code scan captures a sale, and the item is automatically 
deducted from the store’s inventory, allowing real-time track-
ing of purchases so that the retailer knows when to reorder 
merchandise or restock shelves. In addition to a speedier 
checkout process, such systems help to reduce stockouts, 
increasing customer satisfaction. In many grocery stores, this 
system has been taken a step further, allowing the customers 
to conduct the checkout process themselves, saving time and 
labor costs. In Switzerland, grocery retailer Migros introduced a 
system that allows customers to scan items as they are placed 
into the shopping cart. At the checkout counter, all the cus-
tomer has to do is swipe a credit card.
In the near future, many items may be equipped with radio 
frequency identification (RFID) tags (see Chapter 8), eliminat-
ing the need to scan each individual item, so that the total 
price for a cart full of merchandise can be calculated within 
a second, saving even more time and adding convenience for 
the customer. Imagine the time you’ll save when all you have 
to do is pass with your cart through an RFID reader and swipe 
your credit card.
Payment systems are also changing. A new “Pay by Fin-
gerprint” system allows customers to complete a purchase by 
placing a finger onto a fingerprint scanner without the need 
to sign a sales slip or enter a personal identification number 
(PIN); this makes the checkout process extremely convenient 
and secure. Another innovative way to pay for a purchase is 
via mobile phone. Using a technology called near-field com-
munication (NFC; similar to Bluetooth), the customer’s mobile 
phone communicates with the retailer’s payment terminal, and 
the payment amount is automatically debited from the custom-
er’s bank account. NFC-based payment systems have already 
begun to be implemented; major smartphone manufacturers 
such as Samsung, Nokia, Motorola, and HTC actively support 
this new technology by integrating it into new handsets.
Further, many brick-and-mortar retailers have had to 
respond to the phenomenon of showrooming, in which, as 
discussed earlier, customers examine products in person at a 
store and then leave to order the same product online for less. 
Retailers invest billions to build and maintain their storefronts, 
and online retailers can often undercut physical stores’ prices; 
when a customer takes advantage of this, the brick-and-
mortar retailer cannot recoup the cost of the storefront. Some 
retailers like Best Buy and Target are embracing this trend, 
however, by encouraging consumers to browse their shelves 
and compare prices online. By providing perks such as supe-
rior, personal customer service and instituting price-matching 
policies, these retailers prevent loss of customers due to price 
while benefiting by selling additional products. Other new and 
exciting in-store technologies include smart fitting rooms that 
use augmented reality technology to show how an item would 
look when worn or suggest complementary items. Finally, 
retail stores are increasingly using Bluetooth-enabled sales bea-
cons to provide customers with real-time promotional offers.
As you can see, information systems have had a huge 
impact on retailing, and many more changes are yet to hit the 
shelves.
Questions
1.	 How can technology help brick-and-mortar retailers com-
pete against e-tailers?
2.	 Privacy advocates criticize the use of RFID, as it allows 
better tracking of purchasing habits. How can brick-and-
mortar retailers alleviate these concerns?
3.	 As you have read, part of the “human element” in retailing 
is being replaced by technology. How can brick-and-mortar 
stores avoid becoming too “sterile” when using informa-
tion systems to compete against e-tailers?
Based on:
Davies, S. (2015, December 17). The smart fitting room is the future 
of retail. TechCo. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://tech.co/
smart-fitting-room-future-retail-2015-12
Fitzgerald, D. (2013, November 3). Fear of “showrooming” fades. The Wall  
Street Journal. Retrieved June 26, 2016, from http://online.wsj.com 
/news/articles/SB10001424052702303661404579175690690126298
Nsubuga, J. (2016, February 27). Supermarkets of the future could  
have no staff. Metro.co.uk. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http:// 
metro.co.uk/2016/02/27/supermarkets-of-the-future-could-have-no-
staff-5721663
While electronic commerce has now existed for several decades, it continues to evolve and 
mature. Each year, innovative strategies continue to emerge in virtually all sectors of business 
and government. Technologies evolve as well as how and where people conduct electronic com-
merce, from desktops, to laptops, to tablets, and to smartphones at home and while on the road. 
New capabilities often create unforeseen issues that require new laws and regulations. The best 
prediction about the future is that change will continue in this rapidly evolving space.

200    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
Key Points Review
1.	 Describe different approaches to competing in 
cyberspace as well as different forms of electronic 
government and e-finance. EC is the online exchange 
of goods, services, and money between firms and 
between firms and their customers. Companies and 
individuals are engaging in business-to-business, 
business-to-consumer, consumer-to-consumer, or 
consumer-to-business e-commerce. In addition, 
e-government is a government’s use of IS to provide a 
variety of services to citizens (government-to-citizens), 
businesses (government-to-business), and other 
governmental agencies (either within a country or 
between countries; government-to-government). The 
Internet has also enabled conducting financial 
transactions via online banking or online brokerage and 
has provided the basis for various innovative fintech 
services.
2.	 Describe business-to-consumer electronic commerce 
strategies. Companies must strategically position 
themselves to compete in the EC environment and 
choose between operating as brick-and-mortar 
companies, click-and-mortar (or bricks-and-clicks) 
companies, or click-only (or virtual) companies. 
Capabilities of the web have enabled new business 
models based on mass customization, disintermedia­
tion, or group buying as well as social commerce. 
E-tailers can benefit from being able to offer a wider 
variety of goods to more people at lower prices. On the 
other hand, a major drawback is customers’ lack 
of trust.
3.	 Understand the keys to successful electronic 
commerce websites and explain the different forms of 
Internet marketing. Successful B2C companies have a 
website that meets online customers’ needs. A 
company should also advertise its web presence. 
Popular ways to advertise products or services on the 
web are search marketing, display ads, e-mail 
marketing, social media, and mobile marketing. 
Advertisers pay for search marketing or display ads on 
the basis of either the number of impressions or pay-
per-click. Various metrics and web analytics can 
provide valuable information about the effectiveness of 
Internet marketing campaigns and performance of 
websites.
4.	 Describe mobile commerce, consumer-to-consumer 
electronic commerce, and consumer-to-business 
electronic commerce. M-commerce is rapidly 
expanding with the continued evolution of faster 
cellular networks, more powerful handheld devices, 
and more sophisticated applications. Location-based 
services, based on GPS technology, are a key driver, 
enabling even more innovative m-commerce 
applications. As mobile consumers not only use their 
devices to obtain timely information on the go but also 
increasingly purchase products or content in mobile 
settings, businesses have to consider the specific 
settings and devices of their target customers. Further, 
the Internet has fueled the development of a variety of 
ways people can trade goods, socialize, or voice their 
thoughts and opinions. Specifically, e-auctions allow 
private people to sell goods to large markets. One 
emerging topic in EC is C2B EC, where individuals 
offer products or services to businesses.
5.	 Describe how to conduct financial transactions and 
navigate the legal issues of electronic commerce. The 
ability to pay for products or services is key for any 
form of electronic commerce. Yet securing payments in 
the digital world is still of concern, both for customers 
and for merchants, who have to minimize their risk 
arising from potentially fraudulent credit card 
transactions; as a result, many (especially smaller) 
retailers use online payment services; for some 
applications, cryptocurrencies have become an 
alternative form of payment. Finally, taxation, legal 
issues surrounding website content, contracts, and 
transactions, as well as protecting intellectual property 
and net neutrality continue to be major issues and 
impediments to EC.
Key Terms
brick-and-mortar business strategy  171
bricks-and-clicks business strategy  172
blockchain  194
bounce rate  186
business-to-business (B2B)  169
business-to-consumer (B2C)  169
card security code  195
click fraud  185
click-and-mortar business strategy  172
click-only business strategy  172
click-through rate  186
consumer-to-business (C2B)  169
consumer-to-consumer (C2C)  169
conversion rate  186
cross-channel retailing  173
cryptocurrency  193
digital rights management (DRM)  198
digital watermark  198
disintermediation  174
dynamic pricing model  176
e-auction  190
e-finance  170
e-government  169
electronic bill pay  171
electronic commerce (EC)  168
e-tailing  172
exit rate  186
fintech  171
functional convenience  180
government-to-business (G2B)  170
government-to-citizen (G2C)  170
government-to-government (G2G)  170
group buying  176
impression-based model  185
Internet Tax Freedom Act  197
location-based services  187


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    201
long tail  174
mass customization  175
mobile commerce (m-commerce)  169
menu-driven pricing model  176
mobile banking  171
multichannel retailing  173
net neutrality  198
omni-channel retailing  173
online banking  171
online brokerage  171
paid inclusion  184
pay-per-click model  185
QR code  182
reintermediation  174
representational delight  180
sales beacon  173
search advertising  184
search engine optimization (SEO)  183
showrooming  189
social commerce  176
sponsored search  184
structural firmness  180
virtual company  172
web analytics  187
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM
Review Questions
	 4-1. 	What is EC, and what different approaches to 
competing in cyberspace do companies use?
	 4-2. 	What are the primary forms of e-government? 
Provide examples for each.
	 4-3. 	Compare and contrast the click-only and the 
bricks-and clicks approaches to conducting 
business online.
	 4-4. 	Describe the effects of disintermediation.
	 4-5. 	Describe social commerce and explain how 
companies can leverage consumers’ social 
networks.
	 4-6. 	Describe the benefits and drawbacks of e-tailing.
MyLab MIS
	 4-7. 	What is the online consumer’s hierarchy of 
needs, and why is it important for e-tailers?
	 4-8. 	Describe the differences between SEO, search 
marketing, and sponsored search.
	 4-9. 	Describe m-commerce and explain how it is 
different from regular EC.
	 4-10. 	What is showrooming, and how has it 
affected offline retailers?
	 4-11. 	Compare and contrast online banking and 
online brokerage.
	 4-12. 	How does taxation pose a threat to EC?
	 4-13. 	How does net neutrality pose a threat to EC?
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 4-14. 	EC is the exchange of ______________ among firms, 
between firms and their customers, and between 
customers, supported by communication technologies 
and, in particular, the Internet.
A.	goods
B.	services
C.	money
D.	all of the above
	 4-15. 	______________ are those companies that operate in 
the traditional, physical markets and do not conduct 
business electronically in cyberspace.
A.	Brick-and-mortars
B.	Click-onlys
C.	Both A and B
D.	Dot-coms
	 4-16. 	The ability to sell products directly to the end custom-
ers, without the need for distributors or retailers, is 
called ______________.
A.	disintermediation
B.	disintegration
C.	reintegration
D.	reintermediation
	 4-17. 	Business models based on catering to niche markets in 
addition to (or instead of) purely selling mainstream 
products are said to center on the ______________.
A.	far ends
B.	long ends
C.	niches
D.	long tails
	 4-18. 	______________ reflects the percentage of users for 
whom a particular page is the only page visited on the 
website.
A.	Bounce rate
B.	Exit rate
C.	Click-through rate
D.	Conversion rate
	 4-19. 	Offering the customer different (independent) touch-
points, such as a retail store and a catalogue is referred 
to as ______________.
A.	mixed-channel retailing
B.	cross-channel retailing
C.	omni-channel retailing
D.	multichannel retailing

202    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
	 4-20. 	Trying to “outsmart” a search engine to improve a 
page’s ranking is known as ______________.
A.	rank enhancement
B.	SEO
C.	search engine hacking
D.	Google fooling
	 4-21. 	In order to minimize fraud, e-tailers look for anomalies 
in ______________.
A.	e-mail addresses provided
B.	shipping and billing addresses
C.	transaction patterns
D.	all of the above
	 4-22. 	According to the Internet Tax Freedom Act, e-tailers 
______________.
A.	have to collect sales tax from all customers regard-
less of their location
B.	have to collect sales tax based on the place of the 
customer’s residence
C.	have to collect sales tax based on the prevalent tax 
rate at the e-tailer’s headquarters
D.	have to collect sales tax only from customers resid-
ing in a state where the business has substantial 
presence
Answers are on page 204.
Problems and Exercises
	 4-23. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Click-through rate
ii.	 Reintermediation
iii.	 web analytics
iv.	 Paid inclusion
v.	 Conversion rate
vi.	 Long tails
vii.	 Click fraud
viii.	 Search engine optimization
ix.	 E-government
x.	 Group buying
a.	 Special volume discounts negotiated with local 
businesses and offered to people in the form of 
“daily deals”
b.	 The design of business models that reintroduce 
middlemen in order to reduce the chaos brought on 
by disintermediation
c.	 The large parts of consumer demand that are outside 
the relatively small number of mainstream tastes
d.	 The percentage of visitors who actually perform the 
marketer’s desired action
e.	 The number of surfers who click on an ad divided 
by the number of times it was displayed
f.	 The use of information systems to provide citizens, 
organizations, and other governmental agencies with 
information about and access to public services
g.	 Methods used to improve a site’s ranking
h.	 The analysis of web surfers’ behavior in order to 
improve a site’s performance
i.	 The practice of paying a fee to be included in a 
search engine’s listing
j.	 The abuse of pay-per-click advertising models by 
repeatedly clicking on a link to inflate revenue to 
the host or increase the costs for the advertiser
	 4-24. 	Compare your home country’s government portal to 
that of the United States (www.firstgov.gov). Which 
portal offers more useful services? Which services are 
missing?
	 4-25. 	Test the custom messenger bag builder at www.timbuk2 
.com. Would you be willing to pay a premium for a 
­customized product? If so, how much of a premium  
would you be willing to pay? If not, why not?
	 4-26. 	Search the web for the online presence of a brick-and-
mortar business that you are familiar with. How do the 
online and offline offerings differ? Are there any prod-
ucts or services that you can only find online, or only 
offline? What may be the reason for such differences?
	 4-27. 	Are the advertisements presented to you on various 
web pages directed toward any specific audience or 
product category? Which ads seem to be most preva-
lent? Which ads do you pay attention to, and which 
ones do you ignore? Why?
	 4-28. 	Which five websites do you visit most frequently? 
What makes you come back to these sites? Which ones 
do you spend most time on? Why?
	 4-29. 	For a particular date, compare the rates for a hotel 
room in Dubai on www.booking.com, www.hotels 
.com, www.marriott.com, www.ihg.com, and www 
.hyatt.com. Do the rates differ between the comparison 
sites and the hotel companies’ websites? Why?
	 4-30. 	Search for a recipe for your favorite dish on three dif-
ferent search engines. In how far are the results simi-
lar? Do you prefer one search engine’s results over the 
others’? Why may you obtain different results?
	 4-31. 	Describe your experiences with online shopping. What 
goods would you not buy online? What goods would 
you prefer to buy online? Why?


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    203
	 4-32. 	When shopping online, do you read online customer 
reviews before making a purchase decision? How 
much value do you place in the reviews? Which 
reviews are most influential in your purchasing deci-
sions? Why?
	 4-33. 	If you were to buy music online, would digital rights 
management (DRM) be a consideration? Would you 
purchase music that could only be played on one 
device? Why or why not?
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application:  
Analyzing Server Traffic
	 4-34. 	Campus Travel has recently found that its Internet con-
nections between offices are becoming slow, especially 
during certain periods of the day. Since all the online 
traffic is maintained by another company, an increase 
in bandwidth requires a formal approval from the gen-
eral manager. The IS manager has proposed to increase 
the bandwidth of the company’s network; in a few 
days, he has to present the business case for this pro-
posal at the weekly meeting of the department heads. 
You are asked to prepare graphs for the presentation 
to support the IS manager’s business case. In the file 
ServerLogs.csv, you will find information about the 
network traffic for a 1-week period. Prepare the fol-
lowing graphs:
■
■Total bandwidth used for each day (line graph)
■
■Bandwidth used per day, by time period (line graph)
■
■Average bandwidth used in each two-hour period 
(line graph)
Format the graphs in a professional manner and place 
each graph on a separate page. (Hint: If you are using 
Microsoft Excel’s Chart Wizard, select “Place chart: As 
New Sheet.”)
Database Application:  
Tracking Network Hardware
	 4-35. 	As Campus Travel is new to EC, the management 
suggests following a stepwise approach for using the 
Internet to conduct business. Before using the Internet 
for conducting transactions, the managers recommend 
setting up a site that provides information to custom-
ers. Part of this informational site is an agency locator 
that shows the services each agency has. You have 
been asked to create a new database. This includes cre-
ating relationships between entities. To create this new 
database, do the following:
■
■Create a database called “agency.”
■
■Create a table called “agencies” and include fields 
for agency ID, street address, city, state, ZIP code, 
phone number, number of service agents, and work-
ing hours.
■
■Create a table called “services” that includes service 
ID, name (i.e., type of service), and description.
■
■Create a third table called “agency_services” that 
includes the agency ID field from the agencies table 
and the service ID field from the services table.
■
■Once these tables are created, go to the relation-
ship view and connect the agencies (one side) and 
agency_services (many side) tables and the services 
(one side) and agency_services (many side) tables 
using two one-to-many relationships (i.e., each 
agency can offer many services; each service can be 
offered by many agencies).
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats:  
Online Retailing
Online retailing is growing rapidly and is changing our every-
day life as more and more people turn to shopping from their 
home desktops, laptops, and smartphones. Online retailing is 
becoming very attractive to consumers for a wide selection of 
products and services. Traditional retailers are trying to catch 
up with the new advances in e-commerce, and most of them 
have their version of online stores in addition to their existing 
physical stores. Nowadays, a lot of people are doing their 
shopping online from the comfort of their homes and offices. 
In 2016, worldwide retail e-commerce sales were projected to 
reach close to $2 trillion of total sales, accounting for approx-
imately 9 percent of total global retail sales. That includes 
sales from e-commerce retailers as well as transactions that 
are conducted over consumer-to-consumer shopping 
­platforms such as online bidding and auction Web sites.  
The five largest online retailers in the world based on total 
sales are Alibaba, Amazon, Walmart, Apple, and Staples. In 
Europe and North America, e-commerce is growing fast 
among the retail market. In 2016, its growth was projected to 
reach an average of 17 percent across countries in Europe and 
North America. Sales of store-based retailers were down to an 
average of 1.5–2 percent in the same year due to the growth 
of online sales.

204    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
Questions and Exercises
	 4-36. 	Search the Web for projections for the future of online 
retailing up to 2020.
	 4-37. 	As a team, interpret these projections. How is online 
retailing likely to evolve over the next few years?
	 4-38. 	As a team, discuss how traditional shopping will 
look like over the next few years. What changes have 
to be made to compete with or complement online 
shopping? What issues and opportunities do you see 
arising?
	 4-39. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, create a 
graph showing retail trends and predictions in online 
shopping using real forecasting of total sales growth.
Based on:
Center for Retail Research. (2017). Online Retailing: Britain, Europe, US and 
Canada 2016. Retailresearch.org. Retrieved January 10, 2017, from http://
www.retailresearch.org/onlineretailing.php
Emarketer (2017). Worldwide Retail Ecommerce Sales. Emarketer.com. Retrieved 
January 13, 2017, from http://www.retailresearch.org/onlineretailing.php
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 4-14.	  D, p. 168
	 4-15.	  A, p. 175
	 4-16.	  A, p. 174
	 4-17.	  D, p. 174
	 4-18.	  A, p. 174
	 4-19.	  D, p. 173
	 4-20.	  B, p. 183
	 4-21.	  D, p. 196
	 4-22.	  D, p. 197


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    205
In the 1990s, Josh James enrolled in an infor-
mation systems class as part of his business 
management and entrepreneurship degree 
program. Being not particularly excited about 
the topic, Josh sat near the back of the room. 
During the first class period, Josh noticed a 
student near the front of the class who was 
easily answering all of the questions, and he 
decided he wanted to get to know him. His 
name was John Pestana, and they quickly 
became friends. John—a technology whiz 
with a knack for spinning web code—sug-
gested that he and Josh start building websites 
for companies, and a partnership was born. As 
their student-run business grew amid the dot-
com craze of the late 1990s, their clients 
began to ask about whether their fancy new 
websites were drawing any more web traffic. 
The two young entrepreneurs immediately 
recognized a compelling business opportu-
nity, and they soon founded Omniture, a web 
analytics company that quickly grew to domi-
nate the web analytics market. With innova-
tive analytics tools, Omniture attracted many 
large companies, including Walmart, Com-
cast, NBC Universal, and Hyatt. In 2006, 
Omniture went public and was the number-
two performing technology initial public 
offering (IPO) that year. Three years later, 
Omniture was acquired by technology giant 
Adobe Systems for US$1.8 billion. Adobe 
continues to develop the web analytics tools, 
which have since been integrated into the 
company’s suite of online marketing solu-
tions, the Adobe Marketing Cloud.
Web analytics is the measurement, col-
lection, analysis, and reporting of web traffic 
data with the goal of understanding and opti-
mizing web usage. The key features of most 
web analytics tools are enabled by a small bit 
of programming code that is embedded in 
each of the pages of a website. As a user nav-
igates from page to page, various pieces of 
information about the user are collected. 
These include metadata such as the type of 
browser (Safari versus Chrome versus Inter-
net Explorer), the type of device (mobile ver-
sus desktop), or the viewable resolution of 
the user’s screen; browsing data such as how 
long the user stays on each page or where the 
user clicks; and navigation path data, such as 
which page the user came from or how many 
total pages the user has viewed within the 
website. The data are collected anonymously 
and aggregated for later analysis. For popu-
lar sites like Walmart.com or Amazon.com, 
web analytics software can collect millions 
of points of data within a relatively short 
amount of time.
Many companies employ entire teams 
whose sole purpose is to analyze web analyt-
ics data. These analytics data can be a gold 
mine of valuable information that a company 
can use to inform strategic decisions regard-
ing its website. Consider the value of such 
information to a major online retailer like 
Zappos.com. Using analytics data, Zappos’s 
analysts could study the browsing behaviors 
of thousands of different users to identify 
potential improvements to their website. 
They might find that users get stuck on a cer-
tain type of page and identify changes to the 
menu structure to improve the navigation. 
They may find that many users add items to 
their cart but exit the site without completing 
their order when they are prompted to create 
a user account. This discovery could lead 
them to move the account creation process to 
a different point in the checkout flow or per-
haps even make account creation optional. 
These are only a few of the nearly infinite 
potential discoveries that web analytics data 
can help discover.
Given the large mass of web analytics 
data collected by a site like Walmart.com, 
there is a high potential for information over-
load. Thus, a key feature of successful web 
analytics solutions is the ability for business 
users to filter data in helpful ways, allowing 
them to drill down into items of interest. 
Another way in which analytics platforms 
reduce information overload is through the 
use of easy-to-interpret graphical representa-
tions of the data. These range from simple 
bar charts and line graphs to shaded geo-
graphical maps and complex charts depicting 
users’ flow through a navigational structure. 
These and many other information summari-
zation methods make the vast amount of web 
analytic data digestible so that business lead-
ers can make informed, strategic decisions.
Web analytics is a prime example of 
business analytics in the digital age. For 
companies that conduct the majority of their 
business online, and in particular for retail-
ers, entertainment hubs, and news providers, 
web analytics data provide invaluable insight 
into the behavior of their customers. Those 
companies that learn to effectively leverage 
those data can make significant changes that 
directly affect their bottom line.
CASE 1
Web Analytics
Questions
	 4-40. 	 Why do you think Omniture services were so popular, given 
the time period in which the company was founded?
	 4-41. 	 Think of an online service (not retail) that you use fre-
quently. How could this company use web analytics data to 
improve its website and positively affect its business?
	 4-42. 	 Do you think that capturing usage data for performing web 
analytics is an invasion of privacy? Why or why not?
Based on:
Anonymous. (n.d.). Adobe Marketing Cloud. Adobe. Retrieved June 27, 2016, 
from http://www.adobe.com/marketing-cloud.html
Omniture. (2016, May 8). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
June 27, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Omniture&ol
did=719180958
Web analytics. (2016, June 23). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Web_analytics&oldid=726663475

206    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
As many successful online businesses have 
painfully experienced, innovative business 
models in the digital world can be easily 
copied. Being early players in a new market 
and focusing on rapidly gaining market 
share, many companies enjoy a first-mover 
advantage but, due to their success, are 
cloned by numerous other “impersonators” 
around the globe: The daily deal website 
Groupon has a variety of clones all over the 
world; Uber has been cloned in China but 
has also attracted me-too companies in vari-
ous other countries; Online clothing retailers 
such as Zappos or Asos have been cloned 
numerous times. Cloning successful business 
models can be less risky than coming up 
with and launching an innovative business 
idea, and often, developers of clones manage 
to sell the clones to the original companies 
later on; for example, in 2010, Groupon 
decided to buy up its “clones” to reclaim its 
identity and, most important, fast-track its 
expansion into foreign markets in Europe 
and Asia.
Rocket Internet, one of Europe’s biggest 
Internet companies, has gained notoriety for 
cloning business models. Founded by the 
brothers Marc, Alexander, and Oliver Sam-
wer, Rocket Internet’s mission is “to become 
the world’s largest Internet platform outside 
the United States and China.” To achieve this 
mission, Rocket Internet’s focus is on build-
ing companies rather than innovating; in other 
words, Rocket Internet looks for innovative 
and successful Internet-based business mod-
els and replicates those in other (often emerg-
ing or pre-emerging) markets, striving to 
grow the clone as quickly as possible with the 
aim of later selling the clone. To achieve rapid 
growth of a clone and gain a first-mover 
advantage in the clone’s region, Rocket Inter-
net attempts to increase the clone’s reach, 
offers a wider variety of products or services, 
or tries to price competitors out of the market; 
typically, this approach requires investing sig-
nificant funds not only into building the clone 
but also in marketing (using not only Internet 
marketing, such as Google AdWords cam-
paigns, but often also traditional television 
ads). Using this strategy has proven to be very 
successful; for example, CityDeal (a Groupon 
clone) was sold to Groupon for US$170 mil-
lion less than half a year after the clone was 
launched. Rocket Internet has successfully 
cloned a number of innovative online busi-
ness models, ranging from Airbnb (Wimdu) 
to Uber (EasyTaxi) to grubHub (foodpanda) 
to Zappos (Zalando, one of Europe’s largest 
fashion retailers). Although Rocket Internet is 
often accused of “stealing” business ideas, 
business models cannot be patented, and so 
there is little danger of facing legal conse-
quences for infringing on other’s intellectual 
property.
While cloning successful Internet-based 
business models seems easy, this is not nec-
essarily the case. Often, the originals are 
focused on growing their business in their 
respective home markets. Other markets, 
however, typically require different approa­
ches to operations, marketing, and so on. 
Being extremely effective at adapting busi-
ness models and tailoring them to local mar-
ket conditions has been key to the success of 
Rocket Internet. This is even more astonish-
ing given that Rocket Internet now operates 
in more than 100 countries, and Rocket Inter-
net has built tremendous knowledge about 
which factors (such as cultural, geographic, 
legal, and so on) are important for what types 
of business models. Interestingly, while many 
of the business models copied by Rocket 
Internet were developed in the United States, 
none of Rocket Internet’s clones operates in 
this market, which Rocket Internet considers 
oversaturated. Likewise, Rocket Internet has 
only limited reach in China, facing similar 
restrictions and protectionist policies as many 
other Western Internet businesses.
In spite of its impressive growth, Rocket 
Internet is also facing challenges. Using pro-
prietary technologies and processes, Rocket 
Internet tries to launch a business within less 
than 100 days, after which it decides 
whether to continue pursuing the business 
model. In this process, Rocket Internet 
learned that cloning business ideas that 
heavily rely on communities and the net-
work effect (such as Airbnb) is infeasible 
within a short time frame, given the need for 
building a community and customer trust. 
Further, although many of Rocket Internet’s 
businesses have achieved phenomenal 
growth, many have yet to make a profit, and 
Rocket Internet has been accused of being 
intransparent about the valuation of compa-
nies in its portfolio. However, as long as 
innovators continue to come up with new 
business ideas, there’s a good chance of 
these ideas being cloned, be it by Rocket 
Internet or by other companies.
CASE 2
Rocket Internet—Cloning Business Models
Questions
	 4-43. 	 Rocket Internet has been accused of killing innovation. Is the 
practice of copying business models and selling them back to 
the original ethical? Why or why not?
	 4-44. 	 What types of business models are easiest to clone? What 
types are hardest to clone? Why? Give a specific example of 
each.
	 4-45. 	 Think about an innovative business model you could “clone” 
and launch in a particular market. Which factors (such as 
cultural, geographic, legal, and so on) would be most impor-
tant to adapt for this market? Which factors would be least 
important? Why?
Based on:
Anonymous. (2015, October 12). Can cloning businesses work? Ask 
Rocket Internet. Knowledge @ Wharton. Retrieved June 27, 2016,  
from http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/can-cloning- 
businesses-work-ask-rocket-internet
Onalaja, G. (2015, June 4). Why does everybody hate Rocket Internet? 
Techcabal. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://techcabal.com/2015/06/04/
why-does-everybody-hate-rocket-internet
Parr, S. (2016, January 25). Rocket Internet: What it’s like to work at a startup 
clone factory. The Hustle. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://thehustle.co/
rocket-internet-oliver-samwer
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 4-46. 	 Describe mass customization and explain how companies can reap higher profits despite higher production costs for manufacturing cus-
tomized products.
	 4-47. 	 How can online retailers minimize the risk associated with credit card transactions?


CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce    207
References
Absolunet. (2016). E-commerce trends for 2016. Retrieved April 26, 
2016, from http://10ecommercetrends.com
Adobe.com. (2012). The impact of tablet visitors on retail websites. 
Adobe.com. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://success.adobe 
.com/en/na/programs/digital-index/1205_18011_tablet_ 
report.html
Alipay. (2015). About Alipay. Retrieved June 27 2017, from https://
www.alipay.com/static/aboutalipay/englishabout.htm
Allen, F., McAndrews, J., & Strahan, P. (2002). E-finance: An intro-
duction. Journal of Financial Services Research, 22(1-2), 5–27.
Anderson, C. (2004). The long tail. Wired. Retrieved June 27, 2016, 
from http://www.wired.com/2004/10/tail
Anderson, C. (2006). The long tail: Why the future of business is sell-
ing less of more. New York: Hyperion.
Buntinx, J.-P. (2016, May 16). 45% of US households avoid 
online shopping due to cybercrime risk. Bitcoin.com. 
Retrieved June 27, 2016, from https://news.bitcoin.com/
avoid-online-shopping-cybercrime
CNet Australia. (2012, June 13). Do we really need DRM? CNet 
.com.au. June 27, 2016, from http://www.cnet.com/au/news/
do-we-really-need-drm
eMarketer. (2015a, July 20). Mobile accounts for almost half of 
China’s retail ecommerce. eMarketer.com. Retrieved April 24, 
2016, from http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Accounts-
Almost-Half-of-Chinas-Retail-Ecommerce-Sales/1012793
eMarketer. (2015b). Worldwide retail ecommerce sales: eMarketer’s 
updated estimates and forecast through 2019. eMarketer.com. 
Retrieved April 24, 2016, from http://www.emarketer.com/
public_media/docs/eMarketer_eTailWest2016_Worldwide_
ECommerce_Report.pdf
eMarketer. (2016, January). Mobile commerce roundup. eMarketer 
.com. Retrieved April 26, 2016, from https://www.emarketer 
.com/public_media/docs/eMarketer_Mobile_Commerce_
Roundup_2016.pdf
Evan, P., & Wurster, T. (1999). Blown to bits: How the new econom-
ics of information transforms strategy. Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press.
Google. (2007). Marketing and advertising using Google. Retrieved 
June 27, 2016, from books.google.com/intl/en/googlebooks/pdf/
MarketingAndAdvertisingUsingGoogle.pdf
Harrell, E. (2015, September). Victims of identity theft, 2014. U.S. 
Department of Justice. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://www 
.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/vit14.pdf
Herrman, J. (2016, April 17). Media websites battle faltering ad 
revenue and traffic. The New York Times. Retrieved August 10, 
2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/18/business/media-
websites-battle-falteringad-revenue-and-traffic.html
Internet Crime Complaint Center. (2016). 2015 IC3 annual report. 
IC3.gov. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from https://www.ic3.gov/
media/annualreport/2015_IC3Report.pdf
Jones, C. (2013, October 2). Ecommerce is growing nicely while 
mcommerce is on a tear. Forbes. Retrieved June 27, 2016, 
from http://www.forbes.com/sites/chuckjones/2013/10/02/
ecommerce-is-growing-nicely-while-mcommerce-is-on-a-tear
Kalakota, R., Oliva, R. A., & Donath, E. (1999). Move over, 
e-commerce. Marketing Management, 8(3), 23–32.
Laudon, K., & Guercio Traver, C. (2017). E-commerce 2016 
(12th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Lindner, M. (2016, January 29). Online sales will reach $523 bil-
lion by 2020 in the U.S. Internetretailer.com. Retrieved April 
25, 2016, from https://www.internetretailer.com/2016/01/29/
online-sales-will-reach-523-billion-2020-us
MobileInfo. (2016). M-commerce. MobileInfo.com. Retrieved June 
27, 2016, from http://www.mobileinfo.com/Mcommerce/ 
index.htm
Mulpuru, S., Gill, M., Wu, S., & Naparstek, L. (2015, October 1). 
US mobile phone and tablet commerce forecast, 2015 to 2020. 
Forrester Research. Retrieved April 24, 2016, from https://www 
.forrester.com/report/US+Mobile+Phone+And+Tablet+Commerc
e+Forecast+2015+To+2020/-/E-RES116714
Parrish, M., Elliott, N., Mullen, A., Nail, J., O’Connell, J., VanBos-
kirk, S., & Wise, J. (2013, February 11). 2013 interactive mar-
keting predictions. Forrester. Retrieved June 27, 2016, https://
www.forrester.com/report/2013+Interactive+Marketing+Predicti
ons/-/E-RES90761
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. (2016). Online shopping tips: 
e-commerce and you. Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Retrieved 
August 10, 2016, from https://www.privacyrights.org/cc/
online-shopping-tips-e-commerce-and-you
Quelch, J. A., & Klein, L. R. (1996, Spring). The Internet and inter-
national marketing. Sloan Management Review, 63, 60–75.
Seideman, T. (1996) What Sam Walton learned from the Berlin 
airlift. Audacity: The Magazine of Business Experience, Spring, 
52–61.
Siwicki, B. (2014, March 10). Mobile commerce 
will be nearly half of e-commerce by 2018. 
Internetretailer.com. Retrieved June 27, 2016, 
from http://www.internetretailer.com/2014/03/10/
mobile-commerce-will-be-nearly-half-e-commerce-2018
Tode, C. (2015, October 8). Mcommerce sales to reach $142B 
in 2016: Forrester. Mobilecommercedaily.com. Retrieved 
April 24, 2016, from http://www.mobilecommercedaily.com/
mcommerce-sales-to-reach-142b-in-2016-forrester
Turban, E., King, D., Lee, J., Liang, T.-P., & Turban, D. (2012). 
Electronic commerce 2012: Managerial and social networks 
perspectives (7th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2016, June). 2014 e-stats. Measuring the 
electronic economy. Retrieved June 27, 2016, from http://www 
.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/econ/
e14-estats.pdf
U.S. Census Bureau News. (2016, May 17). Quarterly retail e-com-
merce sales 1st quarter 2016. Retrieved June 7, 2016, from http://
www2.census.gov/retail/releases/historical/ecomm/16q1.pdf
Valacich, J. S., Parboteeah, D. V., & Wells, J. D. (2007). The online 
consumer’s hierarchy of needs. Communications of the ACM, 
50(9), 84–90.
VanBoskirk, S. (2014, November 18). US digital marketing forecast, 
2014 to 2019. Cambridge, MA: Forrester Research.
Venable. (2014, April). Legal considerations for e-commerce  
businesses. Venable.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016,  
from https://www.venable.com/
legal-considerations-for-e-commerce-businesses-04-04-2014
Visa. (2008). Visa e-commerce merchants’ guide to risk manage-
ment. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://usa.visa.com/content/
dam/VCOM/download/merchants/visa-risk-management-guide-
ecommerce.pdf

208    CHAPTER 4  •  Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce 
Yang, A., & Birge, J. (2016). Trade credit and inventory financing 
portfolios. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2746645
Zottola, A. J., & Parr, R. F. (2014, April 14). Legal considerations 
for e-commerce businesses. Lexology. Retrieved June 27, 2016, 
from http://www.lexology.com/library/detail 
.aspx?g=0de245fb-3ae2-4291-84aa-3872904edb58
Zwass, V. (1996). Electronic commerce: Structures and issues.  
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 1(1), 3–23.
Wells, J., & Gobeli, D. (2003). The three R framework: Improving 
e-strategy across reach, richness and range. Business Horizons, 
46(2), 5–14.
Wells, J. D., Valacich, J. S., & Hess, T. J. (2011). What signals are 
you sending? How website quality influences perceptions of 
product quality and purchase intentions. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 
373–396.
Worstall, T. (2013, December 13). Over 60% of all web-
site visits are bot traffic. Forbes. Retrieved June 27, 2016, 
from http://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2013/12/13/
over-60-of-all-website-visits-are-bot-traffic

This page intentionally left blank

210
210
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Facebook
M
anaging our lives in the modern, digital 
world seems to be far more complex than it 
was in the past. The same is true for compa-
nies. Interactions with customers were limited to one-
way communication using TV ads, billboards, posters, or 
radio broadcasts. In return, people showed affinity to a 
particular brand by displaying bumper stickers, wearing 
T-shirts, or refusing to even try alternative brands. All in 
all, no real interaction could be recorded between cus-
tomers and brands.
Things have changed since then. In mid-2016, 
Facebook reported impressive usage statistics (Figure 5.1). 
Each month, more than 1.65 billion users access the site, 
and more than 1.5 billion of those users access the service 
via a mobile device. On average, Facebook users upload 
more than 300 million photos per day, and five new pro-
files are created every second.
Many companies have also joined Facebook, creating 
pages to extend their reach and promote new products. 
In addition, celebrities, musicians, public figures, movies, 
and almost any other product or service you can think of 
now appears to have a Facebook page. Facebook has 
become another get-together space for people who 
have acquaintances, friends, or beliefs in common. Busi-
nesses use it to build and track customer loyalty, and 
connections are made even tighter with the help of 
“like” buttons that seem to be on almost every site on 
Enhancing Organizational 
Communication and 
Collaboration Using 
Social Media
5
This chapter focuses on social media and how social media 
can enhance organizational communication and collabo-
ration. Most likely, you are actively using various social 
media applications such as Facebook, Instagram, or Wiki-
pedia, and you may ask, “Why do we need to have a 
chapter on this?” Social media introduce unprecedented 
ways to connect to friends, share knowledge with your 
colleagues, or collaborate with a team of engineers 5,000 
miles away, and many of today’s companies cannot afford 
to miss this trend. Most young people entering the work-
force have grown accustomed to using Facebook or Twit-
ter for their communication needs (and some even regard 
e-mail as an outmoded communication medium); if a 
company doesn’t allow the use of these tools, some 
employees may leave and work for another company. 
Additionally, you may have noticed your parents’ genera-
tion joining sites such as Facebook, as the masses are more 
and more taking those tools for granted.
With social media providing a vastly expanded set of 
capabilities for individuals and businesses, an understand-
ing of how they can be applied can be very helpful. Being 
able to understand and apply these emerging capabilities 
and strategies that are associated with social media is a 
highly valued skill.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

211
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
In early 2016, Facebook’s market value was greater than 
US$350 billion, making it the sixth most valuable com-
pany in America. Analysts predict that Facebook could 
grow more than 30 percent annually for the next few 
years. That growth rate is twice the rate that is fore-
casted for Google and nearly triple of what Apple is 
expected to grow. If this growth occurs, analysts believe 
that Facebook could be the first US$1 trillion-dollar 
company.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How can Facebook be used to address organizations’ 
needs for communication and collaboration?
2.	What are the social media and evolving web capabili-
ties used by Facebook?
3.	Facebook started as a “pure” social networking 
site. What other social media applications are now 
integrated into Facebook, and how do they help 
enhance communication, collaboration, cooperation, 
and connection?
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016, April 27). Facebook reports first quarter 2016 
results. Retrieved June 22, 2016, from https://investor.fb.com/investor-
news/press-release-details/2016/Facebook-Reports-First-Quarter-
2016-Results-and-Announces-Proposal-for-New-Class-of-Stock
Anonymous. (2016, May). The top 20 valuable Facebook statistics—
Updated May 2016. Retrieved June 22, 2016, from https://zephoria.com/
top-15-valuable-facebook-statistics
Facebook. (2016, June 21). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved June 23, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?ti
tle=Facebook&oldid=726328665
LaMonica, P. R. (2016, April 28). Why Facebook could one day be worth 
$1 trillion. CNN Money. Retrieved June 22, 2016, from http://money 
.cnn.com/2016/04/28/investing/facebook-trillion-dollar-market-value
the web. Facebook has changed the scope of social inter-
actions, as consumer preferences, collective tastes, and 
future demands are now more easily analyzed and pre-
dicted through the number of “likes” or the comments 
left by consumers responding to photos regarding the 
latest smartphone or that new movie premiering next 
Thursday. Through this social media platform, companies 
can interact with customers like never before.
In early 2016, most objective measures of Facebook’s 
tremendous success appear to continue. Over the past 
year, daily active users were more than 1 billion, up 
16 percent, with quarterly revenue up 52 percent, 
exceeding US$5.3 billion. Of the more than US$5 billion 
in quarterly advertising revenue, about 82 percent was 
generated through ads delivered on mobile devices. 
1.	 Explain organizations’ needs for communication and collaboration.
2.	 Explain social media and evolving web capabilities.
3.	 Describe various social media applications, and explain their role in enhancing 
communication, collaboration, cooperation, and connection.
4.	 Describe how companies can manage enterprise-oriented social media applications 
and deal with potential pitfalls associated with social media.
FIGURE 5.1
Facebook is the most popular social network, with more than 
1.65 billion monthly active users.
Source: Thomas Pajot/Fotolia.

212    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
The Need for Communication and Collaboration
Just as you communicate with your friends when planning a vacation or organizing a party, or 
collaborate with your teammates on a class project, organizations rely on effective communica-
tion and collaboration (i.e., two or more people working together to achieve a common goal), 
both within and outside organizational boundaries. Most organizational business processes 
require communication and collaboration between employees of different departments as well as 
with outside business partners (such as suppliers), customers, and other external stakeholders. 
Many organizations operate on a national or global scale and rely on effective and efficient com-
munication between various locations or subsidiaries, and even small, local companies need to 
communicate with suppliers or promote their products or services to customers. Further, global-
ization has enabled companies to source raw materials, parts, or components on a global scale or 
manufacture products wherever they can find the lowest cost, best quality, or most qualified 
workforce. In all of these scenarios, effective and efficient communication is essential to convey 
specifications, coordinate production or delivery schedules, and so on. Similarly, salespeople 
rely on efficient communication with the customers and with other departments within the orga-
nization. With the increased global reach of organizations, the needs for internal communication 
have also changed tremendously.
Virtual Teams
To be competitive, organizations constantly need to bring together the right combinations of 
people who have the appropriate set of knowledge, skills, information, and authority to solve 
problems quickly and easily. Traditionally, organizations have used task forces, which are tem-
porary work groups with a finite task and life cycle, to solve problems that cannot be solved well 
by existing work groups. Unfortunately, traditional task forces, like traditional organizational 
structures, cannot always solve problems quickly, as structure and logistical problems often get 
in the way of people trying to get things done. Thus, organizations are increasingly trying to har-
ness the expertise of highly specialized team members, regardless of their location. With various 
collaboration and communication tools enabled by the Internet, collaborators on projects or 
teams do not have to be colocated; rather, businesses increasingly form virtual teams, com-
posed of members from different geographic areas and assembled as needed to collaborate on a 
certain project (Figure 5.2). Membership on these virtual teams is fluid, with teams forming and 
disbanding as needed, with team size fluctuating as necessary, and with team members coming 
and going as they are needed.
Employees may, at times, find themselves on multiple teams, and the life of a team may be 
very short. In addition, team members must have easy, flexible access to other team members, 
meeting contexts, and information. Resembling highly dynamic task forces, virtual teams are 
commonly used for tasks such as developing systems and software; for example, the program-
mers are located in India, the project managers are in the United States, and the testers are in 
Europe. However, systems development is not the only place you will find virtual teams. For 
instance, the healthcare industry has embraced the idea of using technology to create superior 
care for patients by creating virtual teams that may include dieticians, physicians, surgeons, 
pharmacists, and social workers from different cities, all of whom can coordinate care of a 
patient using various web technologies so as to provide the best healthcare professionals regard-
less of where the patient resides.
If you have ever worked on a team project for your class (and you probably have), you have 
noticed that there are many different communication needs, such as discussing issues, sharing 
documents, and making decisions. Just as there are many things to discuss within your team 
project, there are also many ways that you can communicate and collaborate, and different time 
horizons. One key distinction is between the need for synchronous (i.e., at the same time) and 
asynchronous (i.e., not coordinated in time) communication. For example, chatting online or 
making a telephone call are examples of synchronous communication, whereas texting or send-
ing e-mails are examples of asynchronous communication. Likewise, meetings of virtual teams 
typically take the form of virtual meetings using online environments; such meetings can be 
held synchronously, like a teleconference, or asynchronously, using technologies such as online 
discussion boards. If time is of the essence, such as when attempting to meet deadlines or resolve 
urgent customer problems, synchronous media may be best suited, as delays can create process 


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    213
inefficiencies or dissatisfied customers and can thus be costly for the organization. Thus, over 
the years, different tools have emerged to support various communication and collaboration 
needs (Table 5.1).
Groupware
Enabled by computer networking (and later the Internet), groupware—a class of software that 
enables people to work together more effectively—became a widely used way for collaboration 
within teams or organizations. Since the appearance of the first mainstream groupware product—
Lotus Notes—in 1989, groupware has become ubiquitous in all types of organizations, with many 
(often free) tools allowing anyone with a connected device to utilize the benefits of groupware. 
Groupware and other collaboration technologies are often distinguished along two dimensions:
1.	Whether the system supports synchronous or asynchronous collaboration and 
communication
2.	Whether the system supports groups working together face-to-face or distributed
FIGURE 5.2
Members of highly specialized 
virtual teams are often not 
colocated.
Source: Toria/Shutterstock.
TABLE 5.1  Categories of Collaboration Tools
Category
Description
Instances
Examples
Electronic communi-
cation tools
Tools allowing users 
to convey verbal and 
written informa-
tion and send files, 
documents, or other 
content
Fax, e-mail, voice 
mail, blogs, wikis, 
static websites
MS Outlook, Blogger, 
Wikipedia
Electronic conferenc-
ing tools
Tools allowing 
information sharing 
and rich interactions 
between users
Internet forums, 
instant messaging, 
application sharing, 
videoconferencing
Apple FaceTime, 
Skype, Google 
Hangouts, WebEx
Collaboration man-
agement tools
Tools used to facilitate 
virtual or collocated 
meetings and manage 
group activities
Electronic calendars, 
knowledge man-
agement systems, 
intranets, online docu-
ment systems
Google Docs, MS 
Office Online, MS 
SharePoint

214    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Same Time 
Same
Place
Diﬀerent
Place
Live Meetings
 in Electronic
Meeting Facility
Synchronous
 Distributed
Meetings
Virtual Teams
Electronic Meeting
Facility as
Home Base
Diﬀerent Time 
FIGURE 5.3
Groupware supports various modes of group interaction.
Using these two dimensions, groupware systems can be categorized as being able to support 
four modes of group interaction, as shown in Figure 5.3.
Depending on the purpose, organizations draw on different types of asynchronous groupware 
tools, such as e-mail, mailing lists, workflow automation systems, intranets (see upcoming discus-
sion), group calendars, or collaborative writing tools. One widely used tool for group communica-
tion is discussion forums (also known as discussion boards or online forums), which emulate 
traditional bulletin boards and allow for threaded discussions between participants. Typically, dis-
cussion forums are dedicated to specific topics, and users can start new threads (Figure 5.4). 
Depending on the owner or host of the forum, the discussion forum may be moderated so that new 
postings appear only after they have been vetted by a moderator; further, some discussion forums 
may only allow posts from registered users, whereas others allow anyone to contribute. As the pur-
pose of such forums is to enable discussion and/or solve problems, many discussion forums now 
incorporate collaboration features such as the ability to mark answers as helpful or correct.
Like asynchronous groupware, there are also many forms of synchronous groupware available 
to support a wide variety of activities, including shared whiteboards, online chat, electronic meet-
ing systems, and, of course, video communication systems (discussed in the following section). An 
electronic meeting system is a sophisticated software tool used to help group members solve 
problems and make decisions through interactive structured processes such as electronic idea gen-
eration, idea evaluation, and voting (Figure 5.5). These structured processes help groups stay on 
track and avoid costly diversions that regularly occur in meetings. EMSs have traditionally been 
housed within a dedicated meeting facility; increasingly, web-based implementations support team 
members around the globe. Many groupware systems used by organizations combine a variety of 
tools supporting both synchronous and asynchronous communication and collaboration.
Videoconferencing
In the 1960s, at Disneyland and other theme parks and special events, the picturephone was first 
being demonstrated to large audiences. It took another 30 years to take off, but today, organiza-
tions are routinely conducting videoconferences to replace traditional meetings, using either 
desktop videoconferencing or dedicated videoconferencing systems.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    215
Desktop videoconferencing has been enabled by the growing power of processors power-
ing personal computers and faster Internet connections. For desktop videoconferencing, all that 
is needed is a webcam (i.e., a small video camera that is connected directly to a PC or inte-
grated in a laptop PC’s monitor), a speaker telephone or a separate microphone and speakers/
headphones, videoconferencing software (e.g., Skype, Google+, or Apple FaceTime), and a 
high-speed Internet connection. Similarly, people can now use various apps on their mobile 
devices, enabling them to make video calls on the go.
Dedicated videoconferencing systems are typically located within organizational confer-
ence rooms, facilitating meetings with customers or project team members across town or 
around the world. These systems can be highly realistic—as if you are almost colocated with 
your colleagues—but high-end systems can be extremely expensive, ranging from a few 
thousand dollars up to US$500,000. No matter what type of videoconferencing system is 
utilized by an organization, this collaboration technology has come a long way from the 
demonstration at Disneyland in the 1960s and has become mainstream in most modern 
organizations.
FIGURE 5.4
Microsoft offers discussion 
forums for questions and feedback 
related to its various products and 
services.
Source: TechNet 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
FIGURE 5.5
An electronic meeting system 
utilizes networked computers and 
sophisticated software to support 
various group tasks.
Source: Konstantinos Kokkinis/
Shutterstock.

216    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
GREEN IT
Green IT Fueling Renewable Energy
Everyone is excited about the potential for renewable energy 
to replace non-renewable sources such as coal, petroleum, and 
nuclear. Renewable energy is generated from natural processes 
that are continuously replenished, such as sunlight, rain, tides, 
and geothermal heat. For individuals and organizations, key 
considerations are reducing energy bills and reducing carbon 
footprint; reducing the carbon footprint is especially important 
for organizations attempting to portray a positive image by 
engaging in socially responsible behavior. Continuous improve-
ments in various energy technologies are rapidly improving the 
efficiency and reducing the costs of renewable sources. Like-
wise, IoT sensors allow for analyzing energy needs and perfor-
mance to optimize the balance between energy consumption 
and performance needs for a variety of devices. With such 
progress, many individuals and companies are going green by 
buying electric cars, installing solar panels and wind turbines, 
and so on.
Recently, the U.S. military has also started to embrace 
renewable energy sources. As the Department of Defense, 
which includes all branches of the military, is the largest con-
sumer of energy in the United States, contributing to about 
2 percent of the nation’s total energy consumption, this can 
have significant impacts on reducing CO2 emissions. While 
increasing its use of cleaner fuels is a good environmental 
outcome, this is not a motivating factor for the U.S. military. 
According to one source, “We’re concerned about climate 
change… but the first mission is bombs on target.” Thus, its 
primary motivation centers around energy security, both on 
bases and when deployed throughout the world. For instance, 
by using solar technology when deployed in the Middle East, it 
reduced the diesel generator loads by 60 percent. However, 
using alternative energy sources and still being able to provide 
energy where needed, when needed, requires continuously 
monitoring and analyzing energy consumption. Senior leaders 
believe that solar and other renewable sources, coupled with 
analytic capabilities provided by information systems, will pro-
vide the military with greater energy options and improve the 
resilience of the operations both domestically and when 
deployed. And there will also be the added benefit of a greener 
and cleaner military.
Based on:
Hepler, L. (2016, June 22). Energy meets security: Can the military scale 
clean power? GreenBiz. Retrieved July 1, 2016 from https://www.greenbiz 
.com/article/energy-meets-security-can-military-scale-clean-power
Kaenel, C. (2016, March 16). Energy security drives U.S. military to renewables. 
Scientific American. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.scientificamerican 
.com/article/energy-security-drives-u-s-military-to-renewables
Intranets and Employee Portals
Internet technologies have given rise to another widely used tool for communicating and collab-
orating within organizational boundaries. Specifically, many large organizations have intranet-
based employee portals. As discussed in Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems 
Infrastructure and Services,” an intranet is a private network using web technologies, used to 
facilitate the secured transmission of proprietary information within an organization. An intranet 
looks and acts just like a publicly accessible website, but the intranet pages are behind the com-
pany’s firewall, so only authorized users can access the content using their web browser. Modern 
intranets allow for dynamically creating customized intranet pages for each employee depending 
on job functions or even geographical location. Whereas all pages have the same look and feel 
and draw on the same underlying data, each employee can access only the data needed to per-
form his or her job function (following the principles of least permissions and least privileges; 
see Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”). For example, if an employee from human 
resources logs on to the employee portal, he or she would see only content that pertains to his or 
her job, such as payroll information or hiring statistics.
All intranet pages are behind the company’s firewall, and in the simplest form of an 
intranet, communications take place only within the confines of organizational boundaries and 
do not travel across the Internet. However, increases in employees’ mobility necessitate that an 
intranet be accessible from anywhere. Thus, most companies allow their employees to use 
virtual private networks (VPNs) to connect to the company’s intranet while on the road or 
working from home (i.e., telecommuting). Once connected via a VPN, users can access 
resources as if they were located within the organization and connected to the organization’s 
network. Figure 5.6 depicts a typical intranet system architecture (see Chapter 10 for more on 
firewalls and VPNs).


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    217
REAL-TIME ACCESS TO INFORMATION.  A major benefit of corporate intranets is the ability 
to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of collaboration by providing real-time access 
to information. Unlike paper-based documents, which need to be continually updated and 
distributed to employees when changes occur, intranets make it less complicated to manage, 
update, distribute, and access corporate information. For instance, Boeing disseminates corporate 
news by distributing multimedia content over the company’s intranet, allowing employees to 
view digital copies of company news releases as they occur, from the convenience of their 
desktops.
With intranet-based solutions such as those deployed at Boeing, up-to-date, accurate infor-
mation can be easily accessed on a company-wide basis from a single source that is both effi-
cient and user friendly. Companies can become more flexible with resources required to create, 
maintain, and distribute corporate documents, while in the process employees become more 
knowledgeable and current about the information that is important to them.
ENTERPRISE SEARCH.  Another component supporting employee productivity by providing real-
time access to information is the integration of enterprise search functionality. As more and 
more content is accessible via a company’s intranet, relevant information becomes increasingly 
difficult to locate, especially if the information is in different languages and located on different 
servers or databases, as is the case in many large global organizations such as Nestlé. Hence, 
the requirements for enterprise search engines are very different from those of Internet search 
engines such as Google or Bing. Enterprise search engines such as Microsoft’s Enterprise 
Search or the Google Search Appliance are designed to retrieve content from various internal 
data sources, including documents, databases, or applications linked to the company’s intranet. 
Such capabilities allow organizations to easily share millions of documents located throughout 
the organization. Thus, providing enterprise search functionality can enhance productivity and 
be an important factor contributing to users’ satisfaction with the company’s intranet.
COLLABORATION.  One of the most common problems occurring in large corporations relates 
to the coordination of and collaboration on business activities in a timely fashion across 
divisions or functional areas. For instance, Boeing uses its intranet to facilitate collaborative 
efforts, such as in the process of designing new aircraft components. In this process, three-
dimensional digital models of aircraft designs frequently need to be shared between aerospace 
engineers. Using Boeing’s intranet, an engineer can share a drawing with another engineer at a 
remote location; the second engineer revises the drawing as necessary and uploads the updated 
drawing to a shared folder on the intranet. The Boeing intranet provides the company with the 
capability of reducing product development cycle times as well as the ability to stay abreast 
of current project, corporate, and market conditions. Likewise, intranets are being used to poll 
staff about current issues or by employees to communicate with each other and executives in 
secure nonpublic forums.
Client Inside Local Network
Firewall
Internet
Server/Data
Corporate Network
Corporate Client Outside Local Network
Virtual Private Network (VPN) Connection
FIGURE 5.6
Typical intranet system 
architecture.

218    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
To further enable collaboration and communication, many intranet solutions now incorpo-
rate social components. In contrast to traditional intranets, where typically only select users with 
editorial privileges can create and update content, these intranets—sometimes referred to as 
social intranets—allow every user to create and update content and to easily connect with other 
content creators (see our discussion of social software below). Further, intranet solutions such as 
Jive are integrated with various other collaboration tools, ranging from Gmail to Dropbox, 
Skype, or customer relationship management software such as Salesforce.com (see Chapter 8, 
“Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relation-
ship Management”).
EMPLOYEE PORTALS.  In addition to being used for communication and collaboration, 
organizational intranets are widely used to provide employee portals that enable employee self-
service for administering benefits, managing retirement plans, or other human resources–based 
applications. For example, for large companies, processing human resources–related forms can 
be a large cost factor. Depending on the complexity of the form, processing a paper-based form 
can cost US$20 to US$30, according to benefits administration solutions provider Workscape, 
Inc. Whereas interactive voice response–based telephone applications can cut these costs to 
US$2 to US$4, using intranet-based employee self-service applications can reduce this further, to 
a few cents per form. Considering that an employee, on average, conducts 15 human resources–
related transactions per year, the savings can be significant. Using the intranet, form templates 
can be centrally managed, and modifications can be made instantaneously as conditions change; 
thus, employees can submit the appropriate form electronically with the assurance that they have 
used the correct version. Further, using online forms can help to significantly reduce error rates, 
as the entries can be checked for accuracy at the time of data entry, thus preventing the user from 
inputting incorrect or illogical entries. Using employee portals, employees become self-reliant, 
reducing time spent dealing with employment-related issues and allowing them to focus on their 
work responsibilities.
The Evolving Web
The traditional collaboration tools previously introduced are based on Internet technologies. 
However, up until a few years ago, the web was regarded as a one-way medium (sometimes 
referred to as “web 1.0”), with a relatively strict distinction between content creators and con-
tent consumers. Some entities would create content (say, a website), and others would con-
sume this content. However, changes in technology have enabled new uses of the web; 
dynamic web applications, often referred to as web 2.0 applications, allow people to collabo-
rate and share content online, shifting the users’ role from passive consumers of content to 
content creators (Figure 5.7). In contrast to the TV network ABC’s site, where content is pro-
vided by ABC, the web 2.0 application YouTube depends on user-generated content, content 
that is created and uploaded by other users; similarly, whereas Encyclopaedia Britannica 
invests large sums in professionally researched articles, the articles in the online encyclopedia 
Web 1.0
Web 2.0
FIGURE 5.7
Web 2.0 applications shift a 
web user’s role from a passive 
consumer of content to its creator.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    219
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Dissolvable Electronics
The pharmaceutical industry is fighting a constant battle 
against various bacteria that can quickly evolve to become 
resistant to antibiotic treatments. Drug researchers can spend 
months or years developing a new treatment, only to have that 
treatment lose effectiveness when the bacteria it was designed 
to kill become resistant. New antibiotics must then be devel-
oped, and these cunning bacteria keep pharmaceutical com-
panies on their toes. It is not known whether researchers will 
be able to stay ahead of the bacteria indefinitely and keep the 
population healthy. But some researchers are developing alter-
native ways of killing bacteria using methods that are not sus-
ceptible to the mutations of bacteria.
Researchers at the University of Illinois are developing spe-
cialized electronic devices capable of performing short-term 
therapeutic tasks without active treatment from a medical pro-
fessional. The key characteristic of these devices is their ability 
to disappear—to dissolve after a time and be absorbed by the 
person they were helping to heal. For example, after a surgery 
in which a large incision is made, a key risk for recovering 
patients is that of bacterial infection. A dissolvable electronic 
device could be embedded in the incision and emit just enough 
heat to kill bacteria. After the risk of infection has passed, the 
device, which is made of “biocompatible” materials, would 
then dissolve and be absorbed or excreted through the normal 
biological processes of the body.
Researchers have been working with an array of natural 
materials to test how well they perform in electronic devices 
and whether they might cause side effects or other damage 
when implanted. A variety of biodegradable materials, includ-
ing DNA, proteins, and metals, have been tested. One test uti-
lized egg proteins and found that the device’s performance 
matched that of a non-degradable device, worked for more 
than 3 months in dry conditions, and lasted from 2 to 10 hours 
when operating in wet conditions. In this experiment, the rest 
of the chip took about 3 days to dissolve.
So, while this technology is not yet ready for deployment, 
the researchers have successfully demonstrated that it is possi-
ble to create dissolvable electronic circuits. Perhaps the tech-
nology will soon develop into something that will help the 
human race further reduce disease and sickness that still 
afflicts many around the world.
Based on:
ACS. (2016, April 27). Toward dissolvable electronics for implants and 
sensors. American Chemical Society. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from 
https://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/pressroom/presspacs/2016/acs-
presspac-april-27-2016/toward-dissolvable-electronics-for-implants-
and-sensors.html
Drake, N. (2013, May 24). New wireless electronics could heal wounds 
and then dissolve. Wired. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://www 
.wired.com/2013/05/remote-controlled-dissolvable-electronics
Zyga, L. (2015, January 15). Water-soluble silicon leads to dissolvable 
electronics. Phys.org. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://phys.org/
news/2015-01-water-soluble-silicon-dissolvable-electronics.html
Wikipedia are jointly written and edited by the online community (owing to societal changes 
and competition from Wikipedia, Encyclopaedia Britannica decided to stop producing printed 
encyclopedias in 2012, instead focusing on its online offerings). In addition to these applica-
tions, many organizations have successfully incorporated web 2.0 concepts into their business 
models. For example, Amazon.com adds value to its site by incorporating product reviews from 
its customers. This way, it gives customers a channel to voice their thoughts; at the same time, 
a larger number of reviews can help other customers make better decisions, thus attracting 
more visitors to Amazon.com’s site. Likewise, platform-based business models (such as pur-
sued by Airbnb, Uber, or YouTube; see Chapter 2, “Gaining Competitive Advantage Through 
Information Systems”) are based on web 2.0 concepts. In the following sections, we will dis-
cuss technological and societal changes that both enable and necessitate changes in the way 
many organizations do business.
Evolving Web Capabilities
Many successful web 2.0 applications rely on the network effect. The network effect (as defined 
in Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World”) refers to the notion that the value of a network 
(or tool or application based on a network) increases with the number of other users. In other 
words, if a network has few users, it has little or no value. Many successful websites or service 
providers (such as Google) try to provide value to users by making parts of their functionality or 
data (such as map data) available for other websites to use and thus enable creating unique and 
dynamic applications, or mashups, quickly and easily.

220    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
The idea of mashups came from popular music where many songs are produced by mix-
ing two or more existing songs together; in web 2.0 terminology, a mashup is a new applica-
tion (or website) that uses data from one or more service providers. For example, a mashup 
could combine map data, photos, reference information, hotel prices, and weather informa-
tion to provide a comprehensive overview of travel destinations. Rather than having to col-
lect or generate all of this information single-handedly, the creator of the mashup could 
simply draw on services provided by Google Maps, Flickr, Wikipedia, Expedia, and Accu-
Weather (Figure 5.8). The online itinerary planner Sygic integrates data from OpenStreet-
Map, hotel booking services, and other services to let users plan their next holiday. Likewise, 
users and companies can create mobile apps by combining various services and data sources. 
The local search app AroundMe uses data from services such as Booking.com, Opentable 
.com, or Foursquare to display information, reviews, or driving directions about businesses, 
restaurants, or medical facilities near a given location. Other websites and mobile apps use 
data from airlines, radio stations, recommendation services, or any other sources of useful 
information.
Many organizations have recognized the power and benefits of allowing other sites and apps 
to incorporate their services and data into mashups. Why are companies doing this? By provid-
ing access to useful services and data, organizations extend their reach and build and strengthen 
customer relationships, providing a base for revenue-generating services (e.g., Google offers 
mapping services for free for low-volume usage but offers the services as a paid version for 
high-volume commercial usage, such as integration in a hotel booking site).
Evolving Social Interaction
Many successful web 2.0 applications embody core web 2.0 values such as collaboration and 
social sharing; these can be classified as social media (or social software), allowing people to 
communicate, interact, and collaborate in various ways. With web 2.0 coming of age, people’s 
behaviors as well as societies have undergone rapid changes. For example, many people have 
changed the ways they search for information. Whereas in the past people turned to paper ency-
clopedias as sources of unbiased information, people now turn to websites such as Wikipedia or 
ask their friends and acquaintances on social networks such as Facebook for personalized infor-
mation. Similarly, there has been a marked shift in the way people view privacy and share 
information; although criticized by privacy advocates, people are sharing more personal infor-
mation online than ever before. Repeatedly, you can read about people posting the most private 
information without thinking about the consequences; as Facebook and other social websites 
have become pervasive in many people’s lives, you have information about your friend’s recent 
drinking escapades leading to a driving under the influence (DUI) arrest, your coworker’s 
breaking up with his girlfriend, and other things you may or may not want to know, all at your 
fingertips. Clearly, social software has strongly influenced the lives of many people, and social 
media have now reached a point where almost everything is interconnected. Further, ongoing 
conversations on social media generate vast amounts of Big Data, which can used not only by 
the social media companies themselves but also by organizations using social media to connect 
with their stakeholders. Table 5.2 highlights the shift in perspectives from the web 1.0 to the 
web 2.0 era.
Expedia
Wikipedia
Flickr
Google Maps
AccuWeather
FLIGHTS
HOTELS
CARS
FIGURE 5.8
A mashup is a new application 
(or website) that uses data from 
one or more service providers.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    221
The Evolving Workspace
The “millennials,” or “Generation Y,” who grew up being tied to social software such as Myspace 
(once the world’s largest social network site, which now primarily focuses on music), YouTube, 
or Facebook, are joining the workforce and have much different expectations for their workplace 
than prior generations, and some fundamental shifts are taking place in employer–employee 
relationships (see Accenture, 2016). For example, employees are now looking for a portfolio 
career rather than a cradle-to-grave job, tend to view themselves as citizens rather than employ-
ees, and “loan their talent” to the employer rather than being a “human resource.” Accenture 
feels that this new generation of “born digital” workers have new expectations about how work 
should be organized and performed. For instance, companies no longer just serve customers, 
compete with rivals, or are limited to industry boundaries. Today, successful companies collabo-
rate with customers, partner with rivals, and evolve their business as needed. Thus, to be suc-
cessful, companies must create a corporate culture that is embracing the trends of the digital 
world. For instance, millennials bring with them many new and valuable skills but also attitudes 
that may be difficult to integrate with more traditional business environments. A great example 
of this relates to the use of social networking in the office. If a business bans the use of social 
networking sites at work, many millennials will easily find creative workarounds to circumvent 
such policies or simply find a job that is embracing the trends of the digital world. Many believe 
that embracing social media and other changes is not only necessary to attract and retain top tal-
ent, it is also good for business (CIPHR, 2016). Viewing social media as a way to enhance com-
pany culture, improve customer relationships, and recruit future customers and employees 
provides many benefits. It also provides companies with deeper insight into what their competi-
tion is doing and what matters to their customers, all of which can aid in planning for the future.
Future Web Capabilities
Web technologies and collaboration are ever-evolving topics, and many developments have yet 
to be fully realized. This section briefly forecasts future capabilities of the web, in particular, 
focusing on efforts to create the semantic web and characteristics of web 3.0.
THE SEMANTIC WEB.  Since the web opened up for public use, the number of web pages and 
sites has grown exponentially. Although this increase in web pages should mean that we have 
ever more information at our fingertips, it also means that the information is increasingly harder 
to find. What if the information on the web was organized in a way that users could more easily 
find information or relevant content? Traditionally, web pages were designed to be understood 
by people but not by computers, and search engines were examining pages for the existence of 
key terms; for example, when searching for “what eats penguins,” a search engine would return 
web pages that might have this information, but more likely various pages just having the words 
or key terms “what” and “eats” and “penguins,” as search engines were not sophisticated enough 
to be able to find, understand, and integrate content presented on web pages. The semantic web, 
TABLE 5.2  Shifting Perspectives from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0
Web 1.0
Web 2.0
Me
Me and you
Consume content
Consume and create content
Connect ideas
Connect ideas and people
Search
Receive and give recommendations to friends and others
Find
Share
Techies rule
Users rule
Organizations
Individuals
Source: Based on Sessums (2009).

222    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
originally envisioned by Tim Berners-Lee, one of the inventors of the World Wide Web, is a set 
of design principles that will allow computers to better index web pages, topics, and subjects. 
When web pages are designed using semantic principles, computers will be able to understand 
the meaning of the content, and search engines will be able to give richer and more accurate 
answers. The major search engines encourage webmasters to integrate so-called microdata into 
their pages’ HTML markup to help search engines understand the meaning of content on the 
pages; for example, the markup of a business’ address can be enhanced by using microdata to 
specify the meaning of the different parts of an address. In 2012, Google has started making 
strides toward implementing concepts related to the semantic web in its “knowledge graph.” 
When searching for terms in Google, the search engine now attempts to understand what the 
user may mean; for example, when searching for “kings,” the search engine not only provides a 
list of pages containing the keyword “kings” but also displays a box containing links to search 
results specific to the Los Angeles Kings, the Sacramento Kings, and the NBC TV series Kings. 
Similarly, when searching for “Los Angeles Kings,” Google returns not only a list of web pages 
but also a summary of relevant information about the hockey team, culled from various web 
sources. Although the semantic web is largely unrealized (and may never be fully realized due 
to issues surrounding complexity, feasibility, or privacy concerns), Google’s efforts show that 
computers are getting ever closer to understanding the meaning of content on the web.
WEB 3.0.  In many ways, web 2.0 has already replaced web 1.0, and the question is “What will 
replace web 2.0?” For some, web 2.0 is just a short transitional period before the next wave 
of Internet technologies, which is predicted to last until 2020. There are several ideas on what 
this next wave, sometimes termed web 3.0, will entail. Some, such as Forbes contributor Eric 
Jackson, envision the next wave of the web to be centered around mobility, almost announcing 
the demise of the web as we know it. Others see web 3.0 as the “contextual web,” where the 
immense amounts of content available to users will be filtered by contextual factors such as 
time, location, social activities, and so on. You may have already seen some of these emerging 
technologies in practice, especially regarding the context of a user’s location, and we may 
only know what web 3.0 really is when we see it; it may even forever remain a buzzword. 
Nevertheless, we can see exciting new developments on the horizon, and the coming trends will 
likely involve true integration of devices and connectivity to create powerful, socially aware 
Internet applications. Stay tuned to see what the future holds.
Social Media and the Enterprise
Having realized the opportunities brought about by web 2.0 applications, many business organi-
zations are continuously looking for ways to use social media to support their existing business 
processes; many organizations have built successful business models entirely based on core web 
2.0 values such as social sharing or collaboration (see Chapter 4, “Enabling Business-to-
Consumer Electronic Commerce,” for a discussion on social commerce). In addition, the use of 
social media within a company’s boundaries or between a company and its customers or stake-
holders can help in sharing organizational knowledge, making businesses more innovative and 
productive, and helping them to effectively connect with their customers and the wider public.
You were likely familiar with many of the social media applications mentioned throughout 
the previous chapters, but there may have been some that you were not aware of. You are proba-
bly more comfortable with or find more value using some tools over others. Similarly, organiza-
tions are increasingly trying to find the right tools for their different needs. In the following 
sections, we will discuss how different social media applications enable or support communica-
tion, cooperation, collaboration, or connection; needless to say, many of these applications can-
not be neatly categorized, fitting into more than one category.
Enhancing Communication Using Social Media
A prime application of social media in the enterprise is facilitating and enhancing the communi-
cation within an organization as well as between an organization and its stakeholders. For orga-
nizations, social media have opened up a vast array of opportunities for presenting themselves to 
their (potential) customers; at the same time, these applications have opened up literally thou-
sands of channels for people to voice their opinions about an organization. In this section, we 
introduce various social media tools used for communication.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    223
BLOGS.  Blogging originally started out as a way for novices to express themselves using very 
simple web pages. Blogging is the process of keeping an online text diary (i.e., a blog, or web log) 
made up of chronological entries that comment on everything from one’s everyday life to wine 
and food or even computer problems (Figure 5.9). Rather than trying to produce physical books 
to sell or use as gifts, bloggers (i.e., the people maintaining blogs) blog about their lives or voice 
their opinions (although feedback is often encouraged through associated threaded discussions). 
Many bloggers use their blogs to hone their writing skills, often producing elaborate, thoughtful 
pieces of writing. Others write blogs with the aim of attracting large audiences so as to monetize 
their efforts using online advertising or affiliate marketing programs.
However, blogs are not without controversy. Nicholas Carr, noted technology journalist (and 
active blogger himself), classifies blogging as the “amateurization” of journalism. Often the 
value of blogging is the ability to bring breaking news to the public in the fastest possible way. By 
doing so, some bloggers cut journalistic corners, rendering some of the posts on the blogs less 
than accurate, and blogs have been criticized for frequently providing the biased opinions of the 
writers, particularly because many of the authors’ sources cannot be or have not been verified.
Nevertheless, bloggers have massively influenced the way in which people gather and con-
sume information and have become important voices that can sway public opinion. In fact, turn-
ing to free information from blogs and other online sources, many readers have canceled 
newspaper subscriptions. In turn, diminishing readership in traditional newspapers has enticed 
advertisers to begin to withdraw from this traditional medium, leading to budget cuts and layoffs 
at reputable newspapers such as the San Francisco Chronicle, the New York Times, the Washing-
ton Times, and many others. Unfortunately—and ironically—this may erode the very sources 
that many bloggers base their information on.
In addition to blogs created by and/or for individual readers, blogs are being used by small, 
medium-sized, and large organizations for connecting with their employees or customers. For 
example, IBM’s business-oriented social software suite IBM Connections includes blogs, help-
ing people to voice ideas and obtain feedback from others. Similarly, companies such as Google 
maintain official company blogs (e.g., http://googleblog.blogspot.com) to inform their stake-
holders about news, rumors, or current thoughts. In contrast to press releases or other official 
public relations statements, blogs provide an avenue for companies to present themselves in a 
more approachable way.
MICROBLOGGING.  Microblogging, similar to blogging, enables people to voice their thoughts; 
however, in contrast to blogs, which often contain lengthy posts, microblogging services are designed 
for broadcasting relatively short “status updates,” which are distributed in (near) real time. In contrast 
to social networks, where users can choose who can or cannot receive their status updates, typically, 
anyone can follow another person’s microblog. A popular microblogging service is Twitter, which 
FIGURE 5.9
Blogging is the process of creating 
an online text diary (i.e., a blog, or 
web log) made up of chronological 
entries.
Source: 2016 Google Inc. All rights 
reserved. Google and the Google Logo 
are registered trademarks of Google Inc.

224    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
allows users to post short (up to 140 characters of text) “tweets” that are delivered to the author’s 
followers or subscribers (Figure 5.10). The recipient can “retweet” (i.e., re-broadcast) interesting 
tweets to his or her followers. With many people broadcasting everything they find interesting and 
the high speed of message transmission, Twitter has become a source for breaking news. In China, 
where Twitter is blocked, the most popular microblogging service is Sina Weibo, which is widely 
used not only by individuals and companies but also by various levels of government to portray a 
positive image or monitor public sentiments. Many social networking sites (discussed later) also 
have microblogging functionality built in; for example, users can update their status on Facebook, 
letting their friends know about their current thoughts and allowing them to post replies.
Many organizations have used this trend and created accounts on Twitter. For example, 
Coca-Cola has an official Twitter account it uses to post news or interact with its (as of mid-
2016) more than 3.2 million followers; Coca-Cola follows more than 66,000 Twitter accounts 
and actively replies to and retweets Twitter messages. This way, Coca-Cola signals that it cares 
about its followers, trying to increase its customers’ brand loyalty. When posting a tweet, users 
can tag words or phrases with a “# ”—called a hashtag (e.g., #NBAFinals, #ThursdayThoughts, 
or #WearOrange)—to indicate the topic and relate the tweet to other tweets about the same topic. 
A word phrase or topic that is tagged at a greater rate than others is said to be trending. A topic 
becomes trending because of a concerted effort by users or because of an event (e.g., a new win-
ner of the Super Bowl or a missing aircraft) that prompts people to tweet about the topic. Micro-
blogging, however, is not limited to text content. Apps such as Vine allow users to easily share 
short video clips, taken with the smartphone’s camera. Likewise, Tumblr allows users to go 
beyond the 140-character limit and share any kind of digital content, including text, music, and 
videos; by combining features of blogs, microblogs, and social networking sites, Tumblr allows 
companies to communicate and connect with their customers. For example, in May 2014, AMC 
premiered a full-episode sneak preview of its new TV series Halt and Catch Fire on Tumblr.
INSTANT MESSAGING.  In contrast to asynchronous discussion forums, blogs, and status updates, 
instant messaging (or online chat) enables real-time written conversations. Using instant 
messaging, multiple participants can have conversations and enjoy immediate feedback from 
their conversation partners. Some social networking sites such as Facebook have integrated 
instant messaging functionality. In addition, the increase in smartphone usage has merged instant 
messaging with cell phone–based text messaging; cloud-based messaging services such as 
WhatsApp allow for group chats, free text messages or voice calls (even internationally), and even 
the exchange of multimedia content, using the smartphone users’ data plan or Wi-Fi connection. 
Other popular instant message services include Viber, Line, or WeChat (hugely popular in China). 
Some instant messaging apps such as Snapchat or Telegram allow users to set a time limit 
specifying for how long the recipient can view the message before it is automatically deleted. 
Many organizations have adopted web-based instant messaging for internal communications and 
also use live chat for sales and customer support functions. In addition to offering live chat with 
human customer service agents, companies increasingly use automated chatbots (discussed in 
Chapter 6) to initiate conversations and gather preliminary information from the customer in order 
to route him or her to the relevant human customer service representative.
FIGURE 5.10
Twitter allows posting short 
“tweets” that are delivered to the 
author’s followers or subscribers 
via mobile phone or Twitter 
applications.
Source: Screenshot of Twitter. 
Copyright ©, by Twitter.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    225
Enhancing Cooperation with Social Media
In addition to communication, companies and individuals can benefit from social media applica-
tions that enable cooperation. Cooperation between individuals or organizations creates win-win 
situations such that one participant’s success improves the chances of success of other partici-
pants. As with other social media applications, social media applications facilitating such coop-
eration rely on the network effect to provide the greatest benefits for users.
MEDIA SHARING.  One example of cooperative social media applications making use of the 
network effect is the sharing of user-generated content such as pictures, videos, audio, or even 
presentations. Sharing media has become immensely popular on the web, using applications 
such as Flickr or Instagram (images), Vimeo or YouTube (videos), or SlideShare (presentations); 
using sites such as Pandora, users can even create their favorite music stream and share it 
with others who may have similar interests. Typically, the shared content is hosted on media-
sharing sites; however, the content can also be embedded into other sites, creating a win-win 
situation for the content creator and the site embedding the content. For example, embedding 
an interesting and relevant YouTube video into a blog post helps to increase the attractiveness 
of the blog while at the same time increasing the viewership of the video, thus creating positive 
returns for both parties.
Similarly, webcasting is increasingly used for media sharing. Webcasting (or podcasting) is the 
distribution of digital media content, such as audio or video files for on-demand playback on digital 
media players. The increase in mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets has contributed to 
the tremendous growth of webcasts (or podcasts), as the consumption can be time shifted and place 
shifted; in other words, webcasts allow media content to be consumed at one’s convenience, when-
ever or wherever. The term podcasting, derived from combining the terms broadcasting and iPod, is 
a misnomer, as podcasts can be played on a variety of devices in addition to Apple’s iPods. As with 
blogging, webcasting has grown substantially, with traditional media organizations now webcasting 
everything from shows on National Public Radio to Fox’s Family Guy to the Oprah Winfrey Show. 
In addition to media organizations and independent webcasters, the educational sector uses web-
casts for providing students access to lectures, lab demonstrations, or sports events; this allows stu-
dents to review lectures or prepare for class during their morning and evening commutes. In 2007, 
Apple launched iTunes U, which combines various course management tools; iTunes U is used by 
major U.S. universities, such as Stanford, Berkeley, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
with many universities offering free content ranging from lectures to faculty presentations 
(Figure 5.11). As webcasts can be enriched by allowing for interactive Q&A sessions or by 
embedding PowerPoint presentations, organizations increasingly use webcasts to provide access to 
shareholder meetings, online training, road shows, or other events.
To receive the most current content, users can subscribe to blogs, webcasts, videos, and 
news stories through Apple’s iTunes, or via RSS (Really Simple Syndication or Rich Site Sum-
mary) feeds. Content publishers provide RSS feeds to notify users of updates to the content. 
Rather than users actively having to check multiple sources for updated content, RSS readers 
automatically check the feeds for updates and provide a synopsis of a document or the full text.
FIGURE 5.11
A student listens to a podcast on 
iTunes U.
Source: Courtesy of Christoph Schneider.

226    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Recently, various apps, such as Periscope and Facebook, have enabled the possibility of sharing 
live video. Using Facebook Live, the White House broadcasts live videos from press conferences or 
president’s speeches, and companies use live video to broadcast everything from hot topics to inter-
views or public performances. Broadcasting live videos via social media can enable various forms of 
direct interactions with the audience, such as by enabling the content creator to directly engage with 
the audience by responding to questions or comments during the broadcast. Yet, for the social media 
apps, monitoring content broadcast via live video is highly problematic: How can the spread of 
objectionable or illegal content be avoided? A case in point is the live broadcast of a double murder 
in Paris, France, in June 2016; the killer, a self-proclaimed follower of ISIS, used Facebook Live to 
broadcast himself murdering a police commander and the commander’s wife. Given the rapid pace 
at which such content is generated, continuously monitoring and stopping (or deleting) such broad-
casts is virtually impossible for service providers.
TAGGING.  One problem with user-generated content is its variety; status updates, photos, videos, 
and other content are typically not easy to categorize or find. Metadata—which can be simply 
thought of as data about data—describe data in terms of who, where, when, why, and so on, 
and can be useful for categorizing content and making it easier to find. For example, metadata 
about a Word document include the author, the time the document was created, and when it was 
last saved; metadata about a digital photo include date and time, focal length, shutter speed, 
aperture value, and so on; metadata about a phone call include call time, duration, location of 
participants, phone numbers, or the phones’ unique identifiers (Figure 5.12).
Whereas certain metadata about documents or media files are captured automatically (e.g., 
when saving a document in a word processor or when taking a picture with a digital camera), 
there are various other useful pieces of information that are not automatically captured, such as 
keywords about a document or the names of people in a picture. Thus, manually adding tags, or 
metadata, to digital media or other content is an important aspect of many social media applica-
tions. Tags are commonly added to pictures and videos on websites such as Flickr, a picture- and 
video-hosting website that allows users to upload their content. Likewise, hashtags, popularized 
by social media applications such as Twitter, Tumblr, and Instagram, are used to add metadata to 
messages posted on these services, allowing users to search for content related to a certain topic. 
A way to visualize user-generated tags or content on a site is through tag clouds (Figure 5.13). 
The size of a word in a tag cloud represents its importance or frequency, making it easy to spot 
the most important or frequent words or tags.
GEOTAGGING.  Another type of metadata about media such as photos, videos, or even blogs or 
tweets is of geospatial nature; knowing where exactly a photo was taken and in what direction 
the camera was pointing, or knowing the location of a person sending out a breaking news update 
on Twitter can be extremely valuable. Such geospatial metadata (such as latitude, longitude, or 
altitude) added to digital media is referred to as geotags. Once the geographical coordinates of 
FIGURE 5.12
Metadata about a photo and a 
Word document.
Source: Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    227
an item are known, it can easily be visualized on a map. For example, Google Maps can display 
various types of geotagged content, such as photos, webcams, Twitter posts, or Wikipedia 
articles about places or landmarks. Thus, Google can offer a map experience containing pictures 
of attractions, reviews, and things to do without having to take a single picture or write a single 
review itself. Geotags are often automatically generated, for example, when taking images with 
a smartphone; yet this may lead to privacy or security concerns, for example, when sharing 
images online. A case in point is the arrest of John McAfee, the creator of the antivirus software, 
who was sought by authorities in Belize in connection with a murder. McAfee went into hiding 
and, in 2012, met with a team of journalists in Guatemala; one of the journalists posted a picture 
with him online but forgot to remove the location metadata, revealing McAfee’s hideout to the 
Guatemalan authorities, who arrested him for illegally entering the country. After a week in a 
Guatemalan prison, McAfee was deported to the United States.
SOCIAL BOOKMARKING.  As other social media applications, social bookmarking relies on the 
network effect. For many web surfers, key challenges are finding information and then finding 
it again at a later time; hence, people often keep long lists of bookmarks to sites they find 
interesting or visit frequently. Although this is useful for individuals, users may miss a plethora 
of other, related, and potentially interesting websites. Social bookmarking helps to address this 
by allowing users to share interesting content and to create categorization systems (referred to as 
folksonomies). As more people participate in social bookmarking, the value for each user grows 
as the bookmarks become more complete and more relevant to each user. Widely used public 
social bookmarking tools include reddit and StumbleUpon. Likewise, Pinterest allows users 
to “pin” content they find interesting, and media websites such as CNN.com provide sharing 
links so as to increase the reach of their content. For organizations, social bookmarking can 
be extremely valuable for knowledge management and harnessing the collective intelligence of 
employees. Using enterprise-oriented social bookmarking tools, it is easy to map “islands” of 
knowledge within an organization, thus helping to easily find experts on a given topic.
SOCIAL CATALOGING.  Similar to social bookmarking, social cataloging is the creation of a 
categorization system by users. Contributors build up catalogs regarding specific topics such as 
academic citations, wireless networks, books and music, and so on. For example, users can create 
virtual bookshelves with the social cataloging application goodreads, organize their collections, 
write reviews, and then share this bookshelf with others on the web. Similarly, students and 
researchers can use free tools such as Mendeley or Zotero (Figure 5.14) to manage their citations, 
thus facilitating the creation of reference lists for research papers. Organizations are typically 
dealing with tremendous amounts of information, ranging from supplier information to frequent 
customer complaints, and can use social cataloging for structuring this information and making 
it more accessible and useful.
FIGURE 5.13
A tag cloud representing words 
and concepts that are key to social 
media.
Source: Vlue/Shutterstock.

228    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
FIGURE 5.14
Zotero helps in organizing 
citations and research resources.
Source: Courtesy of Center for History 
and New Media, George Mason 
University. Copyright ©, by Zotero.
v
SECURITY MATTERS 
Terrorism Is Winning the Social Media Battle
Terrorism is the use of violence or threat of violence in order to 
purport a political, religious, or ideological change. Terrorists 
aim to provoke irrational fear among large numbers of people 
in order to influence policymakers and thus advance their 
goals. To be successful, terrorists need to gain publicity about 
their cause. Historically, terrorists have learned to use media to 
their advantage and rely on media to spread their message and 
further their goals. For example, in the 1960s and 1970s, there 
was a rash of commercial airliners hijacked. Often, these 
hijackings would be broadcast live on TV, and many believed 
that this exposure actually increased the number of hijackings. 
At that time, there was very little security or passenger screen-
ing at airports. To stop the hijackings, the government man-
dated screening of passengers and luggage.
Over the past many decades, terrorists have continued to 
refine their ability to leverage the available media to reach as 
many people as possible. In order to garner publicity toward 
their cause, terrorist organizations resort to acts of violence 
and aggression that deliberately target civilians. While terror-
ism has not been effective at taking down governments and 
capturing political power, it has been very successful at gain-
ing increasing attention and spreading fear. Today, due to the 
convenience, affordability, and broad reach of social media 
platforms such as YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter, terrorist 
groups are increasingly using social media to further their 
goals and spread their message. New technologies have not 
only made it astonishingly easy to produce high-quality pro-
paganda images and videos, they have also made it far easier 
to disseminate this propaganda. Cheap portable cameras and 
easy-to-use editing software allow for the rapid production 
of content. Digital distribution on social media sites allows 
content to be distributed globally or broadcast in real time at 
little cost or effort. With smartphones connected to the Inter-
net, content can be viewed by millions around the world.
Terrorist organizations like the Islamic State, often referred 
to as ISIS, have created a variety of relatively well-edited videos 
to serve a dual purpose, inspiring one group of people to join 
their cause while disgusting and frightening the others. Numer-
ous videos of executions have been released, including those of 
Western aid workers, journalists, alleged spies, suspected homo-
sexuals, and anyone else the terrorists believe to be their enemy. 
Various types of dramatic murders have been displayed, includ-
ing decapitations, shootings, and even burning victims alive.
While attempts have been made by various governments 
and agencies to thwart the use of social media by terrorist 
organizations, these attempts have (mostly) not been success-
ful. As the future continues to unfold, we can be sure that 
violent extremists will continue to evolve their use of the latest 
media and platforms in an attempt to further their cause.
Based on:
Burke, J. (2016, February 25). How the changing media is changing terrorism. 
The Guardian. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from https://www.theguardian 
.com/world/2016/feb/25/how-changing-media-changing-terrorism
Gates, S. (2015). Social media, recruitment, allegiance and the Islamic 
State. Perspectives on Terrorism. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://
www.terrorismanalysts.com/pt/index.php/pot/article/view/446/html
Koerner, B. I. (2016, April). Why ICIS is winning the social media 
war. Wired. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from https://www.wired 
.com/2016/03/isis-winning-social-media-war-heres-beat.
Terrorism and social media. (2016, June 17). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia 
.org/w/index.php?title=Terrorism_and_social_media&oldid=725707095


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    229
Enhancing Collaboration with Social Media
Traditional office technologies, such as telephones or e-mail, are very useful to organizations; 
yet such technologies are not well suited to support rich, rapid, multi-person team collabora-
tion. For example, the telephone is best suited for person-to-person communication; e-mail is 
a useful technology for teams, but it does not provide the structure needed for effective multi-
person, interactive problem solving. Modern organizations need technologies that enable team 
members to interact through a set of media either at the same place and time or at different 
times and in different locations, with structure to aid in interactive problem solving and access 
to real-time information. The Internet, cloud computing, and the increase in the use of mobile 
devices have enabled various social media applications that provide many capabilities that 
have forever transformed the way individuals and teams can work together. These are 
described next.
CLOUD-BASED COLLABORATION TOOLS.  One key trend that has greatly facilitated collaboration 
is the rise of cloud computing. Traditionally, sharing and collaborating on documents were 
cumbersome; users typically had to e-mail documents back and forth or had to worry about 
having the latest version of the software installed. Cloud-based collaboration tools have greatly 
facilitated collaboration; for example, cloud-based collaboration tools allow for easy access and 
easy transfer of documents or other files from one person to another; using services such as 
Dropbox, documents are not only stored on a user’s computer but also synced to other computers 
or devices via a copy of the document stored in the cloud. This way, a user can access a file from 
multiple devices, always having the latest version at his or her fingertips, or collaborators can 
work on documents without needing to e-mail documents. Similarly, tools such as Evernote, 
Wunderlist, or Microsoft OneNote allow for synchronizing and sharing of notes, task lists, and 
the like. Cloud-based productivity suites take this concept a step further by not only storing the 
files in the cloud but also enabling the access of office productivity tools from any computer (or 
even mobile device) with a web browser and Internet connectivity. While this frees the user from 
having to locally install productivity software, using cloud-based collaboration tools requires 
a live Internet connection to work on shared documents, and thus users may not be able to 
work when traveling or when having Internet connectivity problems. Table 5.3 outlines various 
benefits and risks of cloud-based collaboration tools.
Organizations and individuals can choose from different options for using cloud-based col-
laboration tools. On one end of the spectrum, companies offer single-purpose tools for every-
thing from creating presentations to managing projects. On the other end of the spectrum, 
cloud-based collaboration tools such as Google Apps or Microsoft Office 365 integrate every-
thing from document sharing to videoconferencing, thereby mirroring (or even surpassing) the 
capabilities of traditional offline office suites (Table 5.4).
TABLE 5.3  Benefits and Risks of Cloud-Based Collaboration Tools
Domain
Benefit
Risk
Information technology
Reduced costs and risks when using preexisting, 
easily deployed, and low-cost web-based tools 
(versus in-house developed tools).
Loss of control regarding data and service quality (data 
and tools will likely reside on the provider’s server).
Organization
Tools are easy to use, facilitating widespread 
adoption throughout an organization.
Little or no documentation, training, or support for 
system complexities or problems.
Competition
More efficient and effective than e-mail, FTP, or 
legacy collaboration tools, potentially speeding 
up product development cycles and enabling 
quick responses to competitors’ actions.
Security and compliance policies are often difficult to 
enforce, which may increase the possibility of expos-
ing sensitive corporate data; increased threat of indus-
trial espionage.
Upgrade cycles
No need to purchase software upgrades.
Tools and features in the collaboration environment 
can change without notice, potentially causing prob-
lems with users and corporate IT strategy.

230    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
CONTENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS.  A content management system (CMS) allows users to 
publish, edit, version track, and retrieve digital content, such as documents, images, audio files, 
videos, or anything else that can be digitized. For example, organizations use open source content 
management systems such as WordPress, Joomla, or Drupal to create blogs or websites (see 
also upcoming discussion of open source software); Carnival Cruise Lines uses WordPress for 
publishing company news; the French automaker Peugeot uses Joomla for its company website; 
and the University of Minnesota uses Drupal. Whereas traditionally, webmasters would have 
the task of adding, modifying, or deleting content on a company’s website, content management 
systems provide easy-to-use interfaces that allow the creators of content to make necessary 
changes; thus, a member of the marketing team may edit a product’s description without having 
to ask the IS department to make the changes. Typically, such content management systems 
facilitate the creation and management of web content by allowing the assignment of different 
roles to different users; these roles are associated with different permissions, such that some 
users can create and edit content, others can edit but not create, and yet others can only view 
content contained in the system. Many open source content management systems can even be 
used for building e-commerce sites by incorporating functionality such as inventory management 
or shopping cart functionality. Yet content management systems, also known by several other 
names, including digital asset management systems, document management systems, and 
enterprise content systems, can be used for collaboration beyond the creation and management 
of websites. For example, Microsoft SharePoint is a document management platform that can 
be used to host intranet sites, extranet sites, or public websites that enable shared workspaces 
and integrate other collaborative applications such as document sharing, wikis (see upcoming 
discussion), and blogs. SharePoint also includes workflow functionality such as to-do lists, 
discussion boards, and messaging alerts (Figure 5.15). Because SharePoint has been designed to 
be easily customizable, it has been installed in a variety of businesses, which can personalize the 
collaborative SharePoint websites to meet their needs.
Learning Management Systems  Similar to content management systems used for 
communication and collaboration, learning management systems such as Blackboard, Sakai, and 
Moodle have facilitated business processes in educational settings. Typically, learning management 
systems enable uploading and viewing content, administering exams, and self-service functions 
such as registering for courses or viewing grades. Increasingly, learning management systems offer 
additional tools for enabling team collaboration, class discussions, and the like.
COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE.  One major benefit of social software is the ability to harness the 
“wisdom of crowds,” or collective intelligence (Surowiecki, 2004). The concept of collective 
intelligence is based on the notion that distributed groups of people with a divergent range of 
information and expertise can outperform the capabilities of individual experts. For organizations, 
making effective use of the collective intelligence of their employees, customers, and other 
stakeholders can prove extremely valuable. Based on the concept of collective intelligence, 
peer production is the creation of goods or services by self-organizing communities. In peer 
production, the creation of the goods or services is dependent on the incremental contributions 
of the participants such that anyone can help in producing or improving the final outcome. Prime 
examples of peer production are open source projects and wikis.
TABLE 5.4  Web-Based Collaboration Tools
Type
Names
Spreadsheets
Google Drive, Zoho Sheet, Microsoft Excel Online
Word processors
ThinkFree, Zoho Writer, Google Drive, Microsoft Word Online
Presentation
Google Drive, Zoho Show, Microsoft PowerPoint Online, Prezi
Office suites
Zoho, Google Apps, Microsoft Office Online
Project management
Trac, Redmine, eGroupWare, Collabtive
Notes/task management
Evernote, Wunderlist, Microsoft OneNote Online
Cloud storage/sharing
Dropbox, Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, SugarSync, iCloud


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    231
FIGURE 5.15
The Microsoft SharePoint content 
management system can assist in 
project collaboration.
Source: SharePoint 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Going SoLoMo: Yelp
If you’re looking for a good restaurant, tailor, or pest control 
service in town, it is difficult to know which of the many options 
will provide the best service. Luckily, there’s Yelp. You’ve proba-
bly heard of Yelp, the review and rating platform where you can 
find valuable information on local businesses provided by previ-
ous customers. The company began in 2004 as a way for friends 
to exchange local service recommendations via e-mail. The ser-
vice quickly evolved to include social networking services and 
has expanded its operations to many countries around the 
world. Yelp has also been a pioneer in developing mobile, loca-
tion-based services. Boasting 135 million monthly visitors and 95 
million reviews (as of 2016), Yelp tends to come up as an exam-
ple whenever people talk about the intersection of social, local, 
and mobile services (sometimes called SoLoMo for short).
Yelp has embraced the rising trends in mobile device usage. 
Shortly after the iOS app store launched the mobile app craze in 
2008, Yelp released its first app for the iPhone. Apps for other 
platforms followed. With Apple’s release of iOS 6 in September 
2012, Yelp’s rating and review content was integrated into the 
mapping and directions app of the iOS operating system. By 
November 2013, Yelp reported that 45 percent of its traffic 
came from mobile devices. Part of the reason for Yelp’s mobile 
success is the fact that a smartphone with a Yelp app installed is 
“location-aware,” meaning that users can use the phone’s 
global positioning system (GPS) capabilities to find Yelp reviews 
of locations in the area. This is very useful if you are in an unfa-
miliar area and would like to go eat somewhere with positive 
reviews. You can simply search for restaurants and choose from 
among the highest-rated restaurants within walking distance.
Yelp has leveraged its dominating mobile presence to its 
advantage. The company began allowing local businesses to 
advertise to local users, and the advertising technique has 
proven quite powerful. If you open the Yelp app and are search-
ing for restaurants, Yelp can be pretty confident that you’re hun-
gry and about to make a purchase. A cleverly placed ad offering 
a discount from a local pizza place may be just the thing that 
convinces you to buy a pizza instead of the Big Mac offered next 
door. Yelp is still seeing strong growth, with revenues of US$550 
million in 2015, representing a year-on-year growth of 46 per-
cent between 2014 and 2015. With about 35 percent of Yelp’s 
overall revenue coming from local advertising, Yelp has some 
critics, who feel that Yelp is manipulating reviews and blocking 
overly negative reviews in order to increase ad spending by busi-
nesses. Still, while smartphone users increasingly use their 
devices to find information about local business, Yelp is well 
positioned to continue its SoLoMo leadership.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016, February 8). Yelp announces fourth quarter and 
full year 2015 financial results. PR Newswire. Retrieved June 28, 2016, 
from http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/yelp-announces-
fourth-quarter-and-full-year-2015-financial-results-300216659.html
Holloway, D. (2015, November 19). Americans to spend $40 bil-
lion at local businesses this holiday season. YelpBlog. Retrieved 
June 28, 2016, from https://www.yelpblog.com/2015/11/
americans-to-spend-40-billion-at-local-businesses-this-holiday-season
Yelp. (2016, June 25). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
June 28, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yelp&
oldid=726935600

232    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Open Source Software  Traditionally, software—ranging from Adobe Acrobat to large ERP 
systems—has been developed by software companies. In contrast, open source software, such 
as the Firefox web browser, the Linux operating system, or the Apache OpenOffice productivity 
suite, is created, maintained, and updated by thousands of volunteers located all over the world 
(see Chapter 9, “Developing and Acquiring Information Systems”). Often, someone with an idea 
for a useful program develops an initial version; other developers looking for interesting projects 
to work on may then join the original creator and contribute to the continuing development of the 
software. Organizations now have access to various high-quality open source software, ranging 
from operating systems to databases, web servers, and e-commerce solutions; using open source 
software offers benefits such as security, flexibility, and auditability (of the program’s source 
code). For individuals, participating in open source software projects can help to improve their 
skill set or boost their CVs. For organizations, participating in open source projects can be a way 
to influence the direction the software’s development may take and to build goodwill by giving 
back to the community.
Wikis  Also based on the concept of collective intelligence, wikis are used for a variety of 
collaboration tasks. A wiki is a website allowing people to create, edit, or delete content as well 
as discuss about content or suggested changes with other members of the community. In contrast 
to a regular website, a wiki is linked to a database keeping a history of all prior versions and 
changes; thus, a wiki allows viewing prior versions of the pages as well as reverting any changes 
made to the content. The idea behind wikis is that by allowing anyone to contribute content or 
edit others’ contributions, the collaborative work performed by the community helps to minimize 
vandalism and ensure high-quality content (Figure 5.16). For example, Wikipedia articles are 
created by Wikipedia users, and almost any of these articles can be edited by either anonymous 
or registered users. By allowing easy access, Wikipedia has grown exponentially within just a 
few years. However, Wikipedia is not without critics. Some argue that by allowing anyone to 
create and edit articles, systematic biases in the content can occur. This includes the ability for 
users to add misinformation that is hard to verify. For example, recent news show that politicians, 
companies, and other entities of interest frequently edit their Wikipedia pages to portray a more 
positive image. Sometimes, so-called “wiki wars” arise, where contributors continuously edit 
or delete each others’ posts. Also, Wikipedia has been found to have a significant cultural bias 
on some topics, as most contributors are males from either North America or Europe, and the 
information is not always backed by verifiable sources. Given these issues, many universities 
discourage students from citing Wikipedia, and in some instances professors have been failing 
students for using Wikipedia as their primary (or only) source. Still, the contributors’ collective 
intelligence ensures that the quality of many articles matches (or surpasses) that of traditional 
encyclopedias, and a Wikipedia article may be a good starting point for researching about a 
topic; as always, it is good practice to evaluate the sources used within an article, and to consult 
other sources as well. Wikipedia openly acknowledges this situation and encourages users to 
check the facts against multiple sources.
Wikis have been used for many more things than just an online encyclopedia. The ability for 
users to contribute and edit content has a wide variety of applications, such as designing soft-
ware, helping people find media, and even helping people play video games. In fact, many orga-
nizations are using wiki technology to create internal knowledge repositories.
Wiki
View Revision
History
Revert
Changes
Discuss
Create, Edit,
Delete
FIGURE 5.16
The ability to create, edit, or delete 
content, view prior versions, revert 
any changes, and discuss about 
content and suggested changes are 
key to the creation of high-quality 
content by a community.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    233
HUMAN-BASED COMPUTING (CROWDSOURCING).  Another way companies are using the 
collective intelligence of individuals is through crowdsourcing. When companies look for cheap 
labor, many immediately think about outsourcing work to companies in different countries, such 
as India, China, or Russia (see Chapter 1). However, companies have now found a way to use 
everyday people as a cheap labor force, a phenomenon called crowdsourcing.
Amazon.com took crowdsourcing mainstream with its micro-task marketplace called 
Mechanical Turk. Using this marketplace, requesters can crowdsource so-called human intelli-
gence tasks (HITs), which are small, self-contained tasks that humans can solve easily but would 
be difficult for a computer to solve. Examples of HITs include tagging images, generating poten-
tial search key words for a product, fixing product titles on e-commerce sites, and so on 
(Figure 5.17; see also Chapter 4 for more on consumer-to-business business models). Users can 
find HITs that are of interest to them, solve the tasks, and earn money that is credited to their 
Amazon.com account. As you can see, for companies, crowdsourcing is an innovative way to 
reduce costs by using the expertise of the crowds. Similar to grid computing (see Chapter 3), a 
person’s “idle time” is used for a certain business task, and many people are willing to provide 
their resources in exchange for a relatively small amount of money. In order to harness the power 
of the crowds, some companies have even created their own, internal, micro-task marketplaces; 
for example, Microsoft’s “Universal Human Relevance System” is used by Microsoft to crowd-
source tasks related to improving Bing search results, conduct research, and so on. A related 
concept is that of open innovation. As discussed in Chapter 2, companies are increasingly 
attempting to create ad hoc research-and-development networks by integrating external stake-
holders into their innovation processes so as to harness the power of the crowds.
Enhancing Connection with Social Media
Social media applications also aid in connecting people with each other, companies with their 
customers or stakeholders, or people with content. Without a doubt, social networking has 
become the most popular type of application in this category; we explore social networking and 
other, lesser-known applications in the following sections.
SOCIAL NETWORKING.  In addition to direct collaboration, social networking has become one 
of the most popular uses of the Internet over the past few years. Social networking sites create 
social online communities where individuals with a broad and diverse set of interests meet, 
communicate, and collaborate. Facebook exemplifies this trend, being the third most popular 
site on the web (and being surpassed only by YouTube and Google), according to Alexa.com. 
Facebook took the spot as the most frequented social network from Myspace.com, which 
originally was designed to be a social network based on musical interests but then changed 
to a general interest social network used primarily by teens and young adults; over time, the 
importance of Myspace has declined tremendously, and in May 2014, Myspace was barely 
ranked in the top 1,000 sites on the web. Because of the network effect, as Facebook grew, it 
became ever more attractive for other people to join. In March 2016, Facebook announced that 
it had 1.65 billion monthly active users, and it is still growing. Other social networks are built 
on the tremendous increase in mobile devices. For example, the location-based social network 
Swarm is built around the idea of people using their mobile devices to “check in” at places.
Transcribe media to text
Requester: XY co.
Reward: $0.10
Extract items from a shopping receipt
Requester: TRE co.
Reward: $0.02
Fix transcription errors
Requester: ABC co.
Reward: $0.05
Categorize user reviews
Requester: XLS co.
Reward: $0.02
Translate from English to Chinese
Requester: VS, Inc.
Reward: $0.03
FIGURE 5.17
Anyone can earn money on micro-
task marketplaces by solving 
small, well-defined tasks.

234    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Social networks were initially primarily popular among preteens, teens, and young adults, 
but social networking demographics have slowly shifted, with 79 percent of American Internet 
users between 30 and 49 years and 64 percent of Internet users between 50 and 64 years using 
Facebook. In addition to general interest social networks, several social online communities are 
targeted at professional audiences, allowing users to meet business contacts, post career profiles, 
present themselves in a professional context, ask for expert advice, or be contacted regarding job 
opportunities. For example, LinkedIn has more than 414 million members, and Xing (popular in 
the German-speaking market) has almost 11 million members. Further, enterprise-oriented 
social software such as IBM Connections features social networking tools that allow people 
within organizations to connect to one another; similarly, Yammer, part of Microsoft, is designed 
as a private social network for communication and collaboration within organizations 
(Figure 5.18). Designed to mirror consumer-oriented social media apps people are used to, 
applications such as Yammer are but one example of increasing consumerization of IT, where 
technologies and applications are first designed for the consumer marketplace and then make 
inroads into organizational settings. Other players in the enterprise social networking market 
include Slack and Facebook’s business-oriented social network named Facebook at Work.
Organizations also increasingly use social networks to connect with their customers. 
Numerous companies have their own Facebook pages to interact with their customers, get feed-
back on new products or services, or in general portray a positive brand image.
However, social networks are not without critics. In particular, one area of criticism is the 
way users’ newsfeeds are assembled on social networks such as Facebook, where sophisticated 
algorithms analyze your (and others’) behavior and try to predict which of your friends’ posts 
may be of interest to you; for example, the algorithms analyze which posts you like, which 
friends you interact with most (e.g., as indicated by your activity in response to your friends’ 
posts), how many comments or likes a post receives, and so on. Facebook’s use of advanced ana-
lytics thus determines what type of items each user gets to see (or not). While this means that 
you might be more likely to see items you are actually interested in, this also results in people 
only being exposed to opinions of like-minded people, and some have accused Facebook of cre-
ating a “filter bubble” (see Case 1 at the end of the chapter). Further, many companies are trying 
to use social media to attract web traffic; often, these companies post incomplete or tantalizing 
headlines for stories in order to encourage users to click on them. Such types of headlines are 
often referred to as clickbait; as a user clicks on the link, the company earns revenue through ads 
posted on the page containing the article (which often turns out to be less than informative or 
useful; see also Case 2 at the end of the chapter).
Social Search  As the web has grown explosively since its early days (in the first 6 years, the 
growth rate was 850 percent, and after only 15 years, the number of websites was larger than 
100 million; Nielsen, 2006), finding relevant information has become increasingly difficult. Early 
search engines such as Altavista were based on key words embedded within pages and often 
FIGURE 5.18
Organizations use enterprise social 
networks for communication 
and collaboration within the 
organization.
Source: Yammer 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    235
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
Anonymity, Trolling, and Cyberharassment
Using pseudonyms, fictitious accounts, or proxy servers to hide 
one’s online tracks, it is easy to operate anonymously on the 
Internet; unfortunately, all too frequently, the anonymity 
offered by the Internet brings out the worst in people. When 
people are anonymous, they are more likely to enter into a 
state of deindividuation, a loss of self-awareness often causing 
antisocial behavior. Deindividuation has been used to explain a 
lot of humanity’s darkest behaviors, including violent crowds, 
lynch mobs, and even genocide.
While many people just want to lead civilized discussions in 
online forums, you are likely to have witnessed various vicious 
posts, nasty discussions, or outright fights in such forums. 
Many are waged by anonymous combatants who exhibit intol-
erance and anger toward others they view as being evil or 
wrong. These angry individuals are often referred to as trolls. 
More formally, an Internet troll is a person who creates dis-
cord on the Internet by starting arguments or upsetting people 
by posting inflammatory content on social media sites with the 
deliberate intent of provoking readers into an emotional 
response, often for the troll’s own amusement. Most of these 
trolls operate anonymously.
Much of the behavior of trolls can be classified as cyberha-
rassment, which refers to the use of the Internet to stalk or 
harass an individual, group, or organization. Cyberharassment 
can take many forms, from false accusations, defamation, slan-
der, and libel to threats, vandalism, identity theft, and doxing 
(researching and broadcasting personally identifiable information 
about an individual). Many feel that the Internet has provided a 
platform for trolls to join together to become cyber lynch mobs.
An example of such cyberharassment occurred during 
Gamergate, which began as an online backlash against per-
ceived breaches of journalistic integrity on video game news 
sites. Beginning in August 2014, Gamergate targeted several 
women in the video game industry. After a former boyfriend of 
one of the women wrote a lengthy disparaging blog post about 
her, others falsely accused her of entering a relationship with a 
journalist in exchange for positive game reviews and ultimately 
threatened her with assault, rape, and murder. Most Gamergate 
supporters were anonymous, making it difficult to identify or 
prosecute the harassers. Gamergate has led to calls for better 
methods of tackling and prosecuting online harassment. How-
ever, the design of the Internet makes it difficult to dramatically 
change a person’s ability to be anonymous if they want to be.
Questions
1.	 Reflecting on your past online behavior, do you think that 
the anonymity of the Internet played a role in you engag-
ing in antisocial behavior?
2.	 Given the difficulty in prosecuting online trolls and those 
who engage in cyberharassment, what can society do to 
reduce these antisocial behaviors?
Based on:
Cyberstalking. (2016, May 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title
=Cyberstalking&oldid=722514151
Deindividuation. (2015, November 4). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo-
pedia. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Deindividuation&oldid=688980515
Dewey, C. (2014, October 14). The only guide to Gamergate you will 
ever need to read. The Washington Post. Retrieved June 30, 2016, from 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2014/10/14/
the-only-guide-to-gamergate-you-will-ever-need-to-read
Doxing. (2016, June 21). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title
=Doxing&oldid=726385601
Gamergate controversy. (2016, June 15). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Gamergate_controversy&oldid=725428951
Internet troll. (2016, June 24). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Internet_troll&oldid=726762067
Martin, A. (2013, May 30). Online disinhibition and the psychology of 
trolling. Wired. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.wired.co.uk/
article/online-aggression
tried to assemble “directories” of the web. In 1996, Sergey Brin and Larry Page, the founders of 
Google, came up with a new algorithm for Internet search. Called BackRub, the algorithm used 
the number of other pages linking to a web page as a measure of interest, so as to return more 
relevant results to users. Yet returning the most relevant results to each individual user’s query 
remains the holy grail for search engines. Given that people tend to trust recommendations from 
their networks of friends, search engines and social networks are trying to capitalize on the 
fact that content posted by friends is typically more relevant than content posted by complete 
strangers. Social search attempts to increase the relevance of search results by including content 
from social networks, blogs, or microblogging services. For example, some approaches let users 
annotate or tag search results, making it easier for others to find relevant information; this is 
especially valuable for enterprise search applications, where other users within an organization 
can tag internal documents, making it easier to find information as well as to find people within 
the organization who have certain skills or knowledge.

236    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
VIRAL MARKETING.  In the offline world, marketing one’s products or services is one of the most 
important aspects of successfully running a business. In an online context, marketing websites, 
products, and services is equally important, and business organizations use techniques such as search 
marketing, paid inclusion, and banner advertisements to promote their websites (see Chapter 4). 
Building on the foundations of social networking, advertisers are now using viral marketing to 
promote their websites, products, or services. Viral marketing is using the network effect to increase 
brand awareness. The term viral marketing was coined by Harvard business professor Jeffrey 
Rayport to describe how good marketing techniques can be driven by word-of-mouth or person-to-
person communication, similar to how real viruses are transmitted through offline social networks. 
Rather than creating traditional banner ads or sending out millions of emails, businesses create 
advertisements in a way that entices the viewers to share the messages with their friends through 
e-mail or social networks so that the messages will spread like a virus. Viral marketing can take 
many forms, such as video clips, e-books, flash games, and even text messages.
The power of viral marketing can be a great tool, and there are several techniques that are criti-
cal to creating a successful viral marketing campaign. Writer and interaction designer Thomas 
Baekdal (2006) has outlined some critical factors in viral marketing, including the following:
■
■Do something unexpected
■
■Make people feel something
■
■Make sequels
■
■Allow sharing and easy distribution
■
■Never restrict access to the viral content
Following these principles entices users to view content, share it with their friends, and 
revisit the site to look for new content. For example, Turkish Airlines’s “Kobe vs. Messi Selfie 
Shootout” video quickly went viral. Likewise, Volvo Trucks’s “Epic Split” video featuring Jean-
Claude van Damme became one of the most successful viral videos (and triggered a large num-
ber of user-generated parodies).
One of the earliest viral marketing campaigns was used during the launch of the free Hot-
mail e-mail service. One of the techniques used was adding a footer to every outbound message. 
This footer gave a short message about Hotmail.com’s free e-mail service, and the message 
about the service was spread with every e-mail sent through the service. This campaign proved 
very effective (Hotmail spent only US$500,000 to get 12 million subscribers), and Microsoft 
later bought Hotmail.
With people increasingly posting pictures or videos of things they like or enjoy, such posts can 
go viral as well. Thus, another viral marketing strategy is to do good or innovative things that peo-
ple take pictures of and share and to rely on people’s social networks to spread the message.
Managing Social Media Applications in the Enterprise
As you have seen, mobile social, the cloud, and Big Data have enabled various tools that organi-
zations can use for communicating with external stakeholders as well as for enhancing collabo-
ration and connection of employees within the enterprise. In the following sections, we discuss 
factors organizations should take into account when considering the use of social media applica-
tions within the organization. Then we highlight potential pitfalls brought about by these tools 
when used by people within and outside an organization.
Organizational Issues
In previous discussions, you have learned that in many cases, technology can be an important enabler 
of strategic advantage if implemented and managed carefully. Similarly, with internal enterprise-ori-
ented social media applications, the technology is a critical success factor, but it is not the only com-
ponent, and change management can be critical for success or failure of such initiatives. Just 
providing the tools in the hope that employees will use them for the intended purpose is not enough; 
rather, management has to ensure that employees are aware of the tools, their purpose, and rules or 
policies surrounding the use of these tools. Given that social media applications are based on close 
social interaction, information sharing, and network effects, corporate culture is key to successful 
implementations of social media applications in the organization. Specifically, a corporate culture of 
knowledge sharing, trust, and honest feedback is conducive to such implementations. In addition to 
culture, various other caveats have to be taken into consideration (Khan, 2008) (Figure 5.19).


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    237
ENTERPRISE≠WEB.  While reading this chapter, you have learned about many web-based 
technologies you are familiar with from your daily life. Although many of those technologies are 
hugely successful in a consumer environment, this success does not always translate to success in a 
corporate environment. On the web, sites such as YouTube, Wikipedia, and Facebook have evolved 
over the years to become as successful as they are today, and examples such as Myspace show 
that success at one point in time is not guaranteed to continue. Further, what appears as seamless 
“magic” collaboration is sometimes based on intricate processes. For example, good articles in 
Wikipedia are based not only on the contributions of many editors but also on many behind-the-
scenes discussions over controversial issues or over how to improve an article. In contrast, many 
open source software projects closely guard changes to the software’s programming code such that 
only a limited number of “committers” can actually implement suggested changes.
CULTURE.  As highlighted earlier, organizational culture is a critical success factor for 
implementing social media applications in organizations, and many proposed projects 
face strong cultural resistance. Social media applications, based on the premise of open 
communication, do not always do well within traditional top-down organizational structures 
based on rigid hierarchies and control. Further, social media applications base their success 
on user-driven self-expression (if no one were willing to update his or her status on Facebook, 
people would eventually stop visiting the site); on the web, people participate by choice, but 
people in organizations cannot be forced to participate. Hence, organizations have to understand 
the multiple stakeholders, personalities, and perspectives of future users and ensure that any 
enterprise-oriented social media initiative will appeal to the organization’s members.
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT.  Any implementation of social media applications should be driven 
by a specific usage context. Just as users choose popular social media applications such as YouTube 
or Wikipedia to fulfill a particular need, the work-related context should drive the choice of tools. 
In other words, organizations should always ask what objective is to be accomplished with the tool 
and only then decide which type of tool to implement. Merely setting up a wiki site and hoping that 
the employees will use it for the “right” purpose most likely will not lead to the intended results.
ORGANIZATIONAL HIERARCHIES.  Often, enterprise-oriented social media initiatives are driven 
by user departments, and small-scale pilot implementations appear to work quite well. However, 
organization-wide implementations typically need changes in terms of organizational culture 
and processes and often the flattening of organizational hierarchies. Therefore, to be successful, 
enterprise-oriented social media implementations need the support and active involvement of 
senior management so as to cope with the large magnitude of changes.
Factors Shaping the
Deployment of an 
Enterprise 2.0 Strategy 
Technology
Integration
Technological
Inertia 
Culture
Critical
Mass 
Hierarchies 
Enterprise   Web
Organizational
Context 
Generation Gap 
Security 
FIGURE 5.19
Various factors have to be taken 
into account when using social 
media applications within an 
organization.
Source: Andy Dean Photography/
Shutterstock.

238    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
NETWORK EFFECTS AND CRITICAL MASS.  Successful social media applications such as Wikipedia 
base their success on network effects and the long tail (see Chapter 4) and have needed some 
time to achieve a critical mass. For example, although Wikipedia enjoys millions of page views 
per day, there is only a small number of people who choose to actively participate in the creation 
of content. Within organizations, achieving the critical mass needed for successful social media 
implementations is often difficult and takes considerable time and patience. Although for many 
smaller organizations collaborative social media applications can be beneficial, they will most 
likely not be able to harness the network effects that can be achieved with a larger user base.
GENERATION GAP.  The success of an enterprise-oriented social media initiative is also heavily 
dependent on the composition of the organization’s workforce. In organizations with large 
numbers of millennials, who have grown accustomed to highly interactive and communicative 
online social environments, such initiatives have a higher likelihood of success; in contrast, 
many baby boomers are used to rigid hierarchies and organizational structures and are less likely 
to fully embrace the capabilities of organizational social media applications. Further, senior 
organizational members may not fully grasp the potential and implications of social media 
applications in organizational settings.
TECHNOLOGICAL INERTIA.  One factor hindering the adoption of many new technologies is 
technological inertia. In many cases, people are not willing to switch to new applications unless 
they see real, tangible benefits. This can be especially a hindrance with social media applications, 
many of which incorporate a variety of other tools (such as chat or instant messaging interfaces 
within social networking sites).
TECHNOLOGICAL INTEGRATION.  Organizations will have to ensure that any enterprise-oriented 
social media applications are integrated well with the organization’s existing information systems 
infrastructure so as to reap the greatest benefits from connecting people with one another and 
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Crowdfunding Failures
Crowdfunding refers to the practice of funding a project or 
venture by raising small amounts of money from a large num-
ber of investors, typically via the Internet. Crowdfunding is a 
new and innovative way to get financing to support projects 
that might not otherwise be fundable using traditional meth-
ods. Another advantage of crowdfunding is that it connects 
investors with similar interests that might otherwise not have 
been able to have come together. Unfortunately, as with many 
other technological advances, crowdfunding can also be 
abused by unscrupulous individuals looking to take advantage 
of unsophisticated investors. There are several ways that crowd 
funded projects can fall short of expectations.
Some projects simply overpromise and under-deliver. The 
campaigners may simply not have the experience needed to 
execute the project or may have underestimated the resources 
and effort required. The Zano drone project, for example, col-
lected more than US$3.4 million on the popular crowdfunding 
site Kickstarter and pledged to build a miniature quadcopter 
drone. After months of delays, the drones were finally deliv-
ered. Unfortunately, however, their capabilities and perfor-
mance fell far short of expectations. Torquing Group, the 
company behind the project, filed for bankruptcy, and Kick-
starter launched an independent investigation.
Another case of setting high expectations and failing to 
deliver is the Laser Razor from a company called Skarp. The 
campaign promised to deliver a laser-powered shaving instru-
ment that seemed to push the limits of what is technologically 
possible. The company raised more than US$4 million in 
pledges on Kickstarter before Kickstarter pulled the plug. Skarp 
was unable to demonstrate that it had even a prototype of the 
product. Skarp relaunched the project on Indiegogo (another 
crowdfunding site) and collected an additional US$442,000. 
As of mid-2016, the campaign was delayed and unresponsive 
to investor inquiries.
Other projects like the Crystal Wash 2.0 are outright scams. 
This pseudo-scientific approach to clothes washing using 
“shrinking water molecule clusters” had been previously 
debunked yet still managed to collect more than US$268,000 
in pledges. Lastly, some projects are simply pranks or jokes. A 
user set up a Kickstarter campaign to fund his board game–
playing habit, and another asked for a million dollars to build a 
custom car.
The moral of the story is that crowdfunding sites are not 
stores. It’s important to understand that you are contributing 
to a promise and promises can be broken.
Based on:
Knibbs, K. (2015, December 23). The 9 most disgraceful crowdfunding  
failures of 2015.Gizmodo. Retrieved June 30, 2016, from http://
gizmodo.com/the-9-most-disgraceful-crowdfunding-failures-
of-2015-1747957776


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    239
connecting people with information. Typically, organizations choose systems provided by outside 
vendors such as Yammer, which allows the organization to create its own private social network. 
However, organizational users will use the tools they are used to as a benchmark, and many 
consumer-oriented tools such as Facebook create high expectations of usability for any internal tool.
SECURITY.  A final issue is related to security and intellectual property. For organizations, 
securing their information systems infrastructure is of paramount concern (see Chapter 10). Any 
application that allows closer collaboration by increasing data sharing will necessarily incur 
greater risks of security breaches. Companies thus have to balance their desire for enhancing 
collaboration with the need to protect intellectual property and compliance with rules and 
regulations such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act.
Downsides and Dangers of using Social Media Applications
Many organizations (and individuals) have learned painful lessons from public relations blun-
ders and from not considering the fundamental rule: The Internet never forgets. Another funda-
mental rule brought about by social media applications is to constantly monitor social media and 
quickly and appropriately react to emerging issues. In this section, we highlight potential pitfalls 
of social media and the enterprise.
ONLINE PRODUCT REVIEWS.  Online as well as offline consumers increasingly consult the web before 
making a purchase decision. Before making a purchase on Amazon.com, many potential buyers first 
consult the user reviews; relatedly, people read other travelers’ reviews of hotels or restaurants on 
Tripadvisor.com or consult websites dedicated to providing expert reviews. Unfortunately, such 
reviews are not always as unbiased as they seem, and sometimes companies hire people to deliberately 
spread positive (or negative) word of mouth across a variety of sites. The act of posting fake product 
reviews is unethical, to say the least. Fakespot.com, a website analyzing user reviews on Amazon.com 
using text mining (see Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics”), 
lists various products having more than 80 percent fake reviews. In 2015, Amazon started suing 
companies that offer good (read: fake) reviews for a fee. Having sued more than 1,000 people who 
posted fake reviews, in mid-2016 Amazon.com started suing sellers who offered items for sale on 
Amazon.com’s sites and who purchased fake reviews. While Amazon.com is expending much effort 
to combat the problem, fake reviews are likely to continue to spread, undermining trust in review 
systems and leading customers to make suboptimal purchasing decisions.
MICROBLOGGING.  Whereas microblogging can be very valuable for corporate communications, 
it has to be used carefully and is not without controversy. For example, in early 2014, New York 
City’s police department (NYPD), attempting to boost the department’s image, encouraged people 
to tweet images with police officers using the hashtag #myNYPD. Unfortunately, the response was 
not what the NYPD had hoped for. Rather than tweeting positive photos, the department’s critics 
soon used the hashtag for pictures depicting police brutality and racial discrimination.
For individuals, posting the wrong “tweets” can also have serious consequences, as they are 
more likely than not to reach the wrong readers—sooner or later. A Chicago woman was recently 
sued by her landlord for posting a tweet complaining about the management company’s reaction 
to mold in her apartment. The management company sued her for defamation, arguing that the 
tweet was published on a global scale. Whereas the lady had a mere 22 followers on Twitter, the 
landlord’s lawsuit was covered in major news outlets, online and offline, including the Chicago 
Tribune, the Associated Press, and the New York Times.
SOCIAL NETWORKS.  While free to host, having and maintaining a page on a social network is not 
free for organizations—the company should take great care to monitor what is happening on the 
page and take appropriate action. For example, Starbucks lets its customers upload their favorite 
Starbucks-related pictures to its Facebook page. However, people frequently post unrelated 
pictures, play pranks with the company logo, or post otherwise inappropriate content. A company 
then has to walk the fine line of removing inappropriate content to preserve the company’s image 
while not alienating its fans. Starbucks chooses to liberally allow unrelated content.
As with most social software, posting the “wrong” content can quickly get you in trouble. 
Companies routinely check social networking sites before making hiring decisions, and many 
applicants have lost a job offer they almost had secured. Similarly, your posts may make it far-
ther than you think; stories abound of people getting laid off after ranting about their jobs and 
their bosses in Facebook status updates—unfortunately, the boss was in the employee’s contacts 

240    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
list and could immediately see the post. Further, many people never bother to adjust their 
accounts’ privacy settings and inadvertently shout things out for the whole world to read.
BAD VIBES GOING VIRAL.  As with other social media, viral marketing can be a blessing or a 
nightmare. One of the most infamous examples happened back in 2008, when a musician on a 
tour witnessed from his airplane window how baggage handlers mishandled—and broke—his 
US$3,500 guitar. After not getting a satisfying response from the airline, the musician decided 
to write a song and post it on YouTube in 2009. The video quickly went viral, and the airline 
rushed to “make things right” for the musician. For the airline, however, the damage was done, 
and the video has since attracted more than 15 million views. Likewise, a Ryanair passenger’s 
complaint letter posted on Facebook was shared more than 68,000 times in less than 10 days. 
Whereas traditional phone complaints were a one-to-one conversation between the customer and 
a call center agent, the balance of power has shifted toward the customer, necessitating swift, 
effective responses by the companies. A case in point is the response of Domino’s Pizza, where 
two employees posted videos on YouTube displaying them playing not-so-harmless pranks and 
preparing sandwiches with disgusting ingredients; the videos quickly went viral and attracted 
more than a million viewers in just a few days. Domino’s was initially slow in responding and 
decided not to respond to the crisis, fearing that a reaction might draw even more interest. After 
48 hours, however, Domino’s changed its strategy, opened a Twitter account to interact with 
concerned customers, and posted a video response by the president of Domino’s on YouTube 
assuring that the culprits had been found, that the entire store had been closed and sanitized, and 
that everything would be done to avoid hiring the “wrong” people in the future. A nationwide 
survey by a media research company has found the response to be fairly successful, with more 
than 90 percent of the respondents indicating that the response video was effective in restoring 
trust in the brand.
LESSONS LEARNED.  As you probably know from your own experience and have seen from these 
stories, news travels fast in social media. For the companies in question, this is an enormous 
threat, as negative publicity can quickly reach millions of people. At the same time, the 
company’s reaction is equally critical, as it can reach people just as fast and thus has to be 
carefully crafted. Richard Levick, president of Levick Strategic Communications, has provided 
some tips on how to prepare for and deal with such crises:
1.	Identify a crisis team including members from within your organization (e.g., public rela-
tions or executive team) and from the outside (e.g., lawyers).
2.	Identify your worst social media nightmare (and make sure to know the signs to look for, 
such as search engine key terms your opposition could use).
3.	Monitor your social media environment (such as YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter) and be 
connected and responsive.
4.	Act fast. The first 24 hours count.
As in the offline world, companies should try to avoid such crises in the first place, but 
being prepared for a public relations disaster is crucial in today’s fast-paced world. Many organi-
zations have realized the need for social media monitoring; for example, Dell recently opened its 
“Social Media Listening Command Center” as a key part of its overall marketing efforts. Moni-
toring social media posts mentioning Dell in about a dozen languages not only enables Dell to 
respond to customers’ problems before they go viral but also serves as an effective means to 
gather business intelligence. We will discuss more about the role of social media monitoring and 
business intelligence in Chapter 8.
SOCIETAL IMPACTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA.  Clearly, social media have greatly changed the way we 
interact and will continue to do so. Over the past decade and a half (Myspace, the once widely 
popular social network, was launched in 2003), people’s attitudes toward sharing content as well 
as toward privacy have seen a tremendous shift. Likewise, social media have provided people with 
far wider access to information and have democratized content creation, which has tremendous 
effects on the way societies function. For example, whereas U.S. presidential campaigns used 
to be largely funded by big donors, Barack Obama’s 2008 campaign made wide use of social 
media and generated significant funding from small contributors. Similarly, Bernie Sanders’s 
2016 presidential nomination campaign relied on a large crowd of small donors for support. 
In addition, the Internet and social media has lowered barriers to entry by giving candidates 


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    241
free platforms to make their voices heard by removing the costs for printing and distributing 
campaign material. Together, this has lowered the influence of the wealthy on politics.
Yet people also point to downsides brought about by everyone’s ability to create content and 
by the way this content is being spread. In particular, traditional media outlets used editorial 
judgment to decide what would be covered. In social media, this judgment is increasingly 
replaced by automated algorithms that determine what content is being shown to social media 
users. For example, as algorithms on social networks analyze user behavior in order to provide 
the most relevant content, there is the risk of algorithms filtering out content that is in conflict 
with the users’ viewpoints. Whether these developments are potentially hurting democracy 
remains to be seen, but it is clear that social media and the accompanying societal changes will 
continue to have large impacts on individuals, organizations, and society as a whole.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Online Travel
Spring break is coming, and you’ve decided to go to Puerto Val-
larta this year. Chances are that your first step will be to check the 
websites of Expedia, Priceline, Travelocity, and Orbitz for flights to 
and hotels in your chosen destination. We all know the big four 
online travel agencies; in today’s digital world, they dominate the 
travel industry. They took the old brick-and-mortar travel industry 
and turned it into an online service where you can click to book 
flights and hotel reservations, change or cancel flights, reserve 
rental cars—even plan a vacation. In Internet terms, you can think 
of the big four as still being in Online Travel 1.0. But technology 
marches relentlessly on, and Online Travel 2.0 is in the works. Evi-
dence of this transition to Online Travel 2.0 is reflected in Expedia 
recently purchasing both Travelocity and Orbitz. When competi-
tion heats up, mergers and acquisitions often follow.
A new crop of travel sites has popped up, offering several 
benefits over the big online travel agencies. These travel sites 
are very different from typical online travel services, however. 
The first, and arguably the most prominent, example is Airbnb. 
Airbnb allows people to offer houses, condos, apartments, and 
rooms (private or shared) to anyone who happens to be travel-
ing through the area. If you’re planning a vacation, you could 
book a hotel through the hotel’s website or an online travel 
agency. Alternatively, you could use Airbnb to rent a house 
or apartment from someone, often for a fraction of the cost. 
Property owners benefit by generating income from unused 
living space, and Airbnb handles the processing of all rent 
payments. The site also offers an extensive rating and review 
platform that motivates property owners to provide excellent 
service to attract future renters. Airbnb has been fairly success-
ful so far and as of April 2016 was valued at approximately 
US$30 billion. If renting a house from a stranger worries you, 
there will always be hotels for you to use. But if you trust the 
ratings and experiences from “the crowd,” you can save a 
bundle in many popular locations to which you might travel.
Once you get to your location, however, you’ll need a way 
to get around. Again, you could book a rental car through a 
car rental company or an online travel agency. Or you could 
save some more cash and use a social taxi service like Uber. 
This service provides a platform through which individuals can 
request and pay for a “taxi” service from qualified drivers in 
449 cities in 66 countries (as of mid-2016). Using the Uber 
mobile app, riders can request a ride at the tap of a button 
and then monitor the location of the reserved car in real time. 
Upon completion of the trip, the Uber app allows the driver 
to collect payment. Uber requires that drivers submit to an 
insurance and background check and has typically targeted a 
higher-end market of users. The first Uber drivers had such cars 
as Cadillac Escalades, BMW 7 Series, and Mercedes-Benz S550 
sedans. The company has since expanded to a wider selection 
of cars to appeal to more riders and has recently implemented 
a ride-sharing system that allows riders to quickly request to 
“ride along” with someone to a specific destination. Similar to 
Airbnb, Uber encourages the use of a rating and review system 
to incentivize drivers to provide excellent service.
So next time you go on a trip, consider the benefits avail-
able through these social travel platforms. You might save a 
few bucks and maybe even make a friend in the process.
Questions
1.	 Do you use online travel agencies for assisting you with 
travel plans? If so, which service provider do you use, and 
why did you make this choice? If not, why not?
2.	 What features would you identify as crucial to the success 
of social travel services such as Airbnb and Uber?
Based on:
Airbnb. (2016, June 26). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Airbnb 
&oldid=727088256
Picker, L. & Isaac, M. (2016, June 28). Airbnb is said to be seeking 
funding valuing it at $30 billion. The New York Times. Retrieved June 29, 
2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/29/business/dealbook/
airbnb-is-said-to-be-seeking-funding-valuing-it-at-30-billion.html
Singh, M. & Sweeney, P.T. (2016, March 18). Online travel M&A in 
focus in OTA market. Bloomberg. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://
www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/consolidation-in-online-travel
Uber (company). (2016, June 29). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Uber_(company)&oldid=727469300

242    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Key Points Review
1.	 Explain organizations’ needs for communication and 
collaboration. In today’s increasingly competitive 
world, organizations need to communicate and 
collaborate effectively and efficiently within and 
outside organizational boundaries. For example, virtual 
teams, composed of team members located around the 
globe that are forming and disbanding as needed, have 
communication needs that often cannot be met by 
traditional communication media. Traditionally, 
organizations used tools such as groupware, 
videoconferencing, or intranets for their 
communication and collaboration needs.
2.	 Explain social media and evolving web capabilities. In 
contrast to traditional web 1.0 sites, web 2.0 applications 
allow people to collaborate and share information 
online, with a shift in the users’ role from passive 
consumer of content to creator of user-generated 
content. Owing to societal changes, using social media 
can be an important factor in being able to attract or 
retain employees as younger generations are joining the 
workforce. Future web capabilities extending web 2.0 
are the semantic web and the “contextual web,” which is 
characterized by devices providing the information and 
content needed depending on the user’s specific context. 
To harness the opportunities brought about by these 
changes, organizations are increasingly using social 
software to connect with customers and internal or 
external stakeholders in order to become more 
innovative or productive.
3.	 Describe various social media applications, and 
explain their role in enhancing communication, 
collaboration, cooperation, and connection. Social 
software can enhance communication within 
organizations as well as between an organization and its 
stakeholders. Blogs, microblogging, and instant 
messaging are widely used by individuals and 
organizations to communicate with internal and external 
stakeholders. Social media applications such as media 
sharing, social bookmarking, or social cataloging 
applications facilitate cooperation by using the network 
effect to provide the greatest benefit to users. Further, 
social media applications have enabled new forms of 
collaboration for organizations and individuals. These 
and other technologies have enabled cloud-based 
collaboration tools, content management systems, and 
wikis as well as the use of collective intelligence and 
crowdsourcing. Finally, social media applications aid in 
connecting people with each other. For individuals, 
social networking has become an important way to meet 
new friends, connect with family members, or meet new 
colleagues and business partners. The reach of social 
networks is also used by business organizations to 
market their products or services through viral 
marketing, which resembles offline word-of-mouth 
communication, in which advertising messages are 
spread like viruses through social networks.
4.	 Describe how companies can manage enterprise-
oriented social media applications and deal with 
potential pitfalls associated with social media. 
Organizations have to take into account that success in 
a consumer environment does not necessarily translate 
into success in a corporate environment. Further, 
organizations have to take into account issues 
associated with culture, organizational context, and 
organizational hierarchies; in addition, lack of critical 
mass, the generation gap, and technological inertia can 
hinder the success of enterprise-oriented social media 
initiatives. Finally, in organizational contexts, 
integration with existing technologies and security are 
of primary concern. Further, an organization’s 
opponents can use social media to spread damaging 
content or information to people all over the world 
within a very short time. Organizations should 
therefore carefully prepare for such incidents.
Key Terms
“amateurization” of journalism  223
asynchronous  212
blog  223
clickbait  234
cloud-based collaboration tools  229
collaboration  212
collective intelligence  230
content management system (CMS)  230
crowdsourcing  233
desktop videoconferencing  215
discussion forum  214
electronic meeting system  214
employee portal  218
employee self-service  218
folksonomy  227
geotag  226
groupware  213
hashtag  224
instant messaging  224
Internet troll  235
mashup  220
metadata  226
microblog  223
peer production  230
podcast  225
RSS  225
semantic web  221
social bookmarking  227
social cataloging  227
social intranet  218
social media  220
social networking  233
social online communities  233
social search  235
social software  220
SoLoMo  231
synchronous  212
tag cloud  226
tag  226
trending  224
user-generated content  218
viral marketing  236
virtual meeting  212
virtual team  212
web 2.0  218
webcam  215
webcast  225
wiki  232

 
CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    243
MyLab MIS
TM
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
Review Questions
	 5-1. 	What are virtual teams, and how do they help 
to improve an organization’s capabilities?
	 5-2. 	What are mashups? How do they enable social 
media applications?
	 5-3. 	What capabilities will define the web of the 
future?
	 5-4. 	How can social software help harness the wis-
dom of the crowd?
	 5-5. 	Why is using social media an important factor 
for attracting and retaining employees?
	 5-6. 	How can social software enhance 
communication?
	 5-7. 	How can social bookmarking and social cata-
loging help in an organization’s knowledge 
management efforts?
MyLab MIS
	 5-8. 	What is a wiki? Why would an organization 
want to implement a wiki?
	 5-9. 	Explain what is meant by crowdsourcing 
and how the web is enabling this form of 
collaboration.
	 5-10. 	How can organizations use social networking 
to connect with their customers?
	 5-11. 	Why is organizational culture an important 
factor in enterprise-oriented social media 
initiatives?
	 5-12. 	Why can social media be both a blessing and a 
threat for organizations?
	5-13. 	How can organizations plan for social media 
disasters?
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 5-14. 	Collective intelligence is based on the notion that 
distributed groups of people with a divergent range of 
information and expertise will be able to outperform 
the capabilities of ______________.
A.	crowds
B.	customers
C.	individual experts
D.	virtual teams
	 5-15. 	Microblogging is used primarily for ______________.
A.	creating an online text diary
B.	providing location information
C.	short status updates
D.	customer support functions
	 5-16. 	Tagging is adding ______________ to content such as 
maps, pictures, or web pages.
A.	metadata
B.	comments
C.	blogs
D.	knowledge
	 5-17. 	The process of adding metadata such as latitude and 
longitude to pictures, videos, or other content is called 
______________.
A.	adding geodata
B.	location tagging
C.	geotagging
D.	tagging
	 5-18. 	Successful enterprise-oriented social media initiatives 
consider ______________.
A.	organizational culture
B.	organizational hierarchies
C.	technological inertia
D.	all of the above
	 5-19. 	______________ is the process of creating an online 
diary made up of chronological entries.
A.	Wikiing
B.	Tagging
C.	Blogging
D.	None of the above
	 5-20. 	Webcasts are also known as ______________.
A.	podcasts
B.	blogcasts
C.	radiocasts
D.	weblogs
	 5-21. 	A wiki ______________.
A.	allows users to add content
B.	allows users to revert edits
C.	allows anyone to read content
D.	allows all of the above
	 5-22. 	______________ is using the network effect to 
increase brand awareness.
A.	Brand marketing
B.	Shared marketing
C.	Social marketing
D.	Viral marketing
	 5-23. 	______________ communication is when people are 
all meeting at the same time or in real time.
A.	Synchronous
B.	Asynchronous
C.	Instantaneous
D.	None of the above
Answers are on page 246.

244    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Problems and Exercises
	 5-24. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Microblog
ii.	 Asynchronous
iii.	 Metadata
iv.	 Social networking
v.	 Peer production
vi.	 Social software
vii.	 webcasts
viii.	 Folksonomy
ix.	 Network effect
x.	 Blog
a.	 Web-based applications embodying core web 2.0 
values such as collaboration and social sharing, 
allowing people to communicate, interact, and col-
laborate in various ways
b.	 Digital media streams that can be distributed to and 
played by digital media players
c.	 The creation of goods or services by self-organizing 
communities
d.	 The notion that the value of a network (or tool or 
application based on a network) is dependent on the 
number of other users
e.	 User-created categorization system
f.	 Chronological online text diary that can focus on 
anything the user desires
g.	 Data about data
h.	 Social networking service that allows to post 
­relatively short status updates
i.	 Using web-based services to link friends or 
­colleagues
j.	 Not coordinated in time
	 5-25. 	Visit a popular social networking site and search for 
public status updates by others. Do you come across 
any objectionable content? Is there any content you 
would not post publicly? How difficult would it be to 
restrict the audience of posts?
	 5-26. 	Go to www.programmableweb.com. List some inter-
esting mashups you find. What factors do you think 
make a good mashup website?
	 5-27. 	Go to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk website (www 
.mturk.com). Which of the HITs do you think could be 
completed using a computer, and which could not? Why?
	 5-28. 	Search the web for a popular social networking site 
(other than Facebook) in your home country. What 
is the target audience? Is this site more popular than 
Facebook? If so, why? If not, why?
	5-29. 	Build a presentation using different cloud-based pre-
sentation software such as emaze.com, prezi.com, or 
Google Slides. In how far does the experience differ 
from using presentation software installed on a com-
puter (such as PowerPoint)? Where is your presenta-
tion stored? Which software would you use and why?
	 5-30. 	Have you ever used a microblogging service? If so, are 
you still using the service, or have you stopped using it? 
Why? If not, what keeps you from trying out such service?
	 5-31. 	Have you ever discovered errors on a wiki page? What 
was the nature of the errors? Under which circumstances 
would you invest effort to correct the errors?
	 5-32. 	Envision features of the semantic web. What features 
would you like to see and how would it affect your 
personal or work life?
	 5-33. 	Describe a mobile app you would find useful but which 
is not available on the market. What data would you 
need to “mash up” to achieve the desired functionality?
	 5-34. 	Compare and contrast the social network pages of 
three different companies. What do the companies use 
their pages for? How frequently is new information 
posted? How much conversation takes place between 
the companies and other users?
	 5-35. 	Have you used music streaming services such as Spo-
tify or Pandora? If so, what are the benefits and draw-
backs of such services? If not, why not?
	 5-36. 	Compare and contrast face-to-face meetings and online 
collaboration for a team project. What are the benefits 
and challenges of each?
	 5-37. 	Describe an example (not discussed in the chapter) of 
bad vibes going viral. What was the trigger that made 
the event go viral? How did the company react? In how 
far was the reaction successful?
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application: Online  
Versus Traditional Spreadsheets
	 5-38. 	Campus Travel is currently evaluating the possibility 
of using online spreadsheet software as opposed to the 
traditional locally installed spreadsheet application. 
There are a variety of issues involved in this decision. 
The company wants you to investigate the possibilities 
that are currently available while also paying special 
attention to the company requirements. Campus Travel 
has the following requirements: (1) the ability to share 
spreadsheets easily, (2) the ability to secure this infor-
mation, (3) the ability to save the spreadsheets into 
other formats (i.e., CSV files), and (4) the ability to 
work from anywhere in the world. Prepare the follow-
ing information:
■
■On the Internet, find different options for online and 
traditional spreadsheets and list the available options.
■
■Using the company requirements, list the pros and 
cons for each spreadsheet option.


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    245
■
■Using an online spreadsheet, summarize the find-
ings and provide a recommendation to the com-
pany. Present your findings with tables and/or 
graphs, if available.
Database Application: Tracking  
Website Visits
	 5-39. 	As Campus Travel expands its web presence, the 
importance of tracking what the competitors are doing 
has become very important. This includes making 
sure Campus Travel tracks the prices of packages and 
services that its closest competitor offers. To do so, a 
database must be created to track this information. Fol-
low these steps to create the database:
■
■Create a database called “tracking.”
■
■Create a table called “company_info.” In this table, 
create fields for company_name and company_URL.
■
■Create a table called “products.” In this 
table, create fields for the company_name, 
product_name, product_description, product_price, 
and date_retrieved.
■
■Create a table called “services.” In this table, create 
fields for company_name, service_name, service 
description, service_price, and date_retrieved.
■
■Once these tables are created, go to the relationship 
view (select “Relationships” under the “Database 
Tools” tab) and connect the company_info (one 
side) and products (many side) tables and the 
company_info (one side) and service (many side) 
tables.
■
■Make sure that when you create the relationships, 
the referential integrity option is selected. (This 
will make sure that when you delete a company, 
the products associated with the company are also 
deleted.)
■
■Test the referential integrity by adding data to 
the tables and make sure that when a company is 
deleted in the company table, the products table is 
updated, too.
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats: Most Popular  
Facebook Fan Pages
More and more organizations have discovered Facebook as a way 
to connect with their customers and drive word-of-mouth adver-
tising. Any company can create a Facebook page containing basic 
information about the business, a “wall” to share content, a space 
for uploading photos or pictures (many organizations use this to 
show “behind-the-scenes” content), and so on. Further, busi-
nesses can add apps (such as an app that allows customers to 
make a reservation at a restaurant) to further engage with their 
customers.
Facebook users who “like” a page automatically receive 
the business’s status updates in their newsfeeds. As the liking 
of a page is announced to others in the user’s newsfeed and 
his or her profile, the liking of the page can spread throughout 
the user’s network of friends. Further, each business’s page has 
a listing of all Facebook users who like the page. What busi-
nesses are liked by most Facebook users? As of April 2016, the 
top 10 most-liked product pages were the following:
Rank
Page
Likes (millions)
  1
Facebook for Every Phone
506.96
  2
Facebook
170.72
  3
Cristiano Ronaldo
110.82
  4
Shakira
104.54
  5
Vin Diesel
  98.48
  6
Coca-Cola
  97.21
  7
Eminem
  91.97
  8
FC Barcelona
  91.96
  9
Real Madrid CF
  88.14
10
Lionel Messi (Leo Messi)
  84.34
Questions and Exercises
	 5-40. 	Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics. 
Try to find the number of “likes” for pages that interest 
you most.
	 5-41. 	As a team, interpret these numbers. What is striking/
important about these statistics?
	 5-42. 	How have the numbers changed since April 2016? 
Which categories seem to draw most attention in social 
networks? Why?
	 5-43. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, create a 
graph/figure that effectively visualizes the statistics/
changes you consider most important.
Based on:
Statista. (2016) Most popular Facebook fan pages as of April 2016, based on 
number of fans. Statista.com. Retrieved May 3, 2016, from http://www.statista 
.com/statistics/269304/international-brands-on-facebook-by-number-of-fans

246    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 5-14.	 C, p. 231
	 5-15.	 C, p. 223
	 5-16.	 A, p. 226
	 5-17.	 C, p. 226
	 5-18.	 D, p. 237
	 5-19.	 C, p. 223
	 5-20.	 A, p. 225
	 5-21.	 D, p. 232
	 5-22.	 D, p. 236
	 5-23.	 A, p. 213
Social media platforms like Facebook have 
become an integral part of how we interact 
with the world around us. From posting 
about what we had for lunch to our political 
views to our favorite movies, TV shows, and 
products, we express ourselves digitally in 
these online forums. With so many people 
posting so much information, it can be chal-
lenging to keep up with everything that is 
going on in our circle of friends and acquain-
tances. To make things easier and help us 
better manage the volume of posts, platforms 
like Facebook have introduced algorithmic 
prioritization of posts. These algorithms 
study what you are most interested in, whom 
you have close relationships with, even 
where you are located to determine which of 
the posts in your feed are most likely to 
interest you. In most cases, this is a good 
thing—the posts in your feed are the most 
relevant to your interests. A problem arises, 
however, when we consider the impact of 
social media on the shifting landscape of 
political thought and expression.
For many years, professional journalists 
have been challenged by the ease at which 
virtually “anyone” can publish information 
on social media. Historically, traditional 
newspaper companies controlled the physi-
cal distribution of sheets of paper. Content 
was generated by newspaper employees, 
edited, and then distributed. Print newspa-
pers during this period were the primary 
mechanism by which not just news but edito-
rial and political opinions were shared across 
society. The system certainly wasn’t per-
fect—political expression on a mass scale 
was concentrated in the hands of a few major 
publishers. Regulations were required, and 
social norms had to evolve to address the 
threats this concentration of control posed. 
Yellow journalism scares in the early 1900s 
led to improvements in editorial standards 
and laws restricting consolidation in the 
industry.
Fast-forward to today and digital media 
has drastically changed the publishing land-
scape. It is no longer necessary to invest 
heavily in a printing and distribution system 
to reach a mass audience, and many tradi-
tional print newspapers have disappeared. 
This shift has taken a great deal of power out 
of the hands of traditional publishers and left 
the market for news and content wide open. 
As a result, we are left with a new set of chal-
lenges on how political thought and opinions 
are disseminated throughout society. The old 
regulations and social norms may no longer 
be adequate to mitigate the threats posed by 
dysfunctional distribution systems. Stepping 
into this wide open market for news and con-
tent distribution are platform providers like 
Google, Apple, Facebook, and others. These 
platform providers have traditionally thought 
of themselves as technological enablers, 
agnostic to the political whims of the public 
they serve. The reality is that the content 
posted and consumed by the public on these 
new media platforms has become the de facto 
political discourse of our day.
Enter the algorithmic newsfeed. The 
algorithms are designed to show us things 
we will like and the things we want to read. 
It is possible that most of this content is 
benign, such as the latest gossip on celebri-
ties or a new fashion trend; however, a good 
deal has to do with news and political issues 
of the day. Indeed, many people now get 
their news primarily from social media. In an 
election year, our feeds are choked with 
news and opinions about this candidate or 
that. When the algorithms start to sift 
through this tidal wave of information, they 
do what they are designed to do—pick out 
things that we will like. Opposing views or 
dissenting opinions are suppressed—not 
through active censorship but simply by 
being less preferred by the viewer. We are 
then essentially living in an information bub-
ble—only seeing content we like, news pre-
sented from a perspective aligned with our 
own, and opinions that agree with our own. 
This filtering and silent censorship of our 
worldviews can have a profound effect. We 
may come to believe that everyone shares 
our views and opinions because that is what 
we see in our newsfeeds—a self-reinforcing 
collection of stories and content. We are sur-
prised to encounter others with views differ-
ent from our own and in some cases react 
angrily by removing (“unfriending”) the 
offending individual from our network. This 
can amplify divisions between groups and 
can ratchet up tensions in political discourse 
by making it far less likely that we are aware 
of and even understand opposing views, let 
alone empathize with those who hold them.
Technology is always evolving, and our 
society both reacts to and drives technologi-
cal change. When new content distribution 
platforms take over the mechanisms of social 
discourse, many of our assumptions about 
the nature of politics and the nature of politi-
cal debate can be undermined. How these 
new mechanisms and social interactions will 
shape up in the long run is an open question. 
The only certainty is that change is inevita-
ble and only diligence will allow us to main-
tain the free and open society we have 
enjoyed for so long. Conscious effort will 
be required to amplify the benefits and miti-
gate the risks of a changing technological 
and social landscape.
CASE 1
 Living in a Bubble: Facebook, Newsfeeds, and Journalism
Questions
	 5-44. 	 Have you personally experienced the information bubble 
effect? How would you know if you did? What was the topic?
	 5-45. 	 How might the information bubble effect be overcome? 
What technological and social changes might be needed to 
mitigate algorithmic self-reinforcement?
	 5-46. 	 What role should platform providers play in social dis-
course? Do these technology companies have an obligation 
to understand the impacts they are having on society? Do 
they have a responsibility to participate?
Based on:
Bell, E. (2016, March 7). Facebook is eating the world. Columbia Journalism 
Review. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_
and_media.php
Bradley, T. (2016, March 16). Leave me out of your Instagram algorithm 
bubble. Forbes. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/
tonybradley/2016/03/16/leave-me-out-of-your-instagram-algorithm-bubble


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    247
Saiidi, U. (2016, March 16). The social media bubble. CNBC. Retrieved June 
29, 2016, from http://www.cnbc.com/2016/03/16/social-media-creates-group-
think.html
Shah, R. (2015, July 2). Do privacy concerns really change with the Internet 
of Things? Forbes. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/
rawnshah/2015/07/02/do-privacy-concerns-really-change-with-the-internet-of-things
Facebook uses algorithms to select what 
content goes in your newsfeed. These algo-
rithms take a variety of things into account, 
such as your relationship to the poster, your 
interests, and even your location. However, 
one of the most important factors is the num-
ber of likes or shares that a post has received. 
If a post has been liked or shared by a large 
number of people, it will be more likely to 
show up in other people’s feeds. The 
assumption here is that because lots of peo-
ple are liking or sharing the post, it must con-
tain popular or desirable content. Usually, 
this is a good thing—it can help you quickly 
get to content that your friends and family 
have already vetted and that you are likely to 
enjoy and want to see. Unfortunately, scam-
mers have developed a variety of mecha-
nisms to take advantage of this functionality.
Scammers take advantage of their vic-
tims by getting them to view content related 
to their scams or to download viruses or other 
malware. Just like spam e-mail, it only 
requires a very small percentage of recipients 
to click on a malicious link or to run a mali-
cious attachment in order for the scammer to 
make money. As a result, scammers have an 
incentive to get as many people as possible to 
view their content or click their links. To 
accomplish this on a social media platform, 
scammers look for ways to get lots of people 
to view their content by having it show up in 
their newsfeed. Because a post’s popularity 
can drive how frequently it shows up in peo-
ple’s feeds, scammers look for ways to artifi-
cially inflate the popularity of their posts. 
One mechanism is so-called “like farming.”
Like farming begins when a scammer 
posts an article or story that is seemingly 
innocuous and designed to get people to like 
or share it. Often, these posts appeal to the 
emotions or political views of the readers. 
“This poor little girl with cancer lost her hair 
to chemotherapy—‘like’ this post to let her 
know she’s still beautiful!” or “This new 
government policy is outrageous—‘like’ this 
post if you’re outraged, too!” Another 
approach is to try to convince readers that 
they can win a valuable prize—such as the 
latest smartphone or even plain old cash—by 
liking the story. Any story offering to enter 
you in a contest or give you something for 
simply liking or sharing is highly suspicious 
and unlikely to be legitimate. Stories promis-
ing that “If I get X number of likes, then 
something amazing will happen for me” or “I 
was challenged to get X number of likes” are 
also highly likely to be like-farming schemes.
Once the scammer has convinced enough 
people to like or share the story, the scammer 
changes out the content. The post is edited 
such that it no longer contains the emotional 
story, puzzle, or contest but instead shows 
marketing material for the scam or other 
undesirable content. In some cases, the scam-
mer will sell the rights to edit the post to other 
scammers on a black market. A post with a 
high popularity rating that can be edited at 
will is a valuable commodity to those looking 
to do you harm. Either way, you and your 
friends are now seeing questionable and even 
dangerous content thanks to the farmed likes.
Other, less malicious forms of abuse 
take advantage of the algorithmic post selec-
tion as well. Many organizations will create 
headlines for their stories that are incomplete 
or tantalizing in order to encourage users to 
click on them, like “You won’t believe what 
happens next.” These “clickbait” headlines 
force users to actually click on the story in 
order to learn a key detail or to find out the 
answer to a question. When the story gets 
clicked on, the social media platform counts 
that as a vote toward the popularity of the 
story. The user has unwittingly bumped up 
the popularity of the post and made it more 
likely that it will be seen by members of the 
network. This increases the popularity rating 
of the post or the poster and makes it more 
likely that the content will be seen by more 
people. This type of abuse isn’t necessarily 
perpetrated by actual scammers, just organi-
zations looking to improve their online pop-
ularity ratings and the effectiveness of their 
advertising and marketing material. How-
ever, scammers often use these techniques as 
well. Falling for clickbait can lead you to 
malware and other scam sites.
How can one avoid falling victim to like 
farming and clickbait? It starts with being 
better informed. Look at the source of a post. 
Is it a reputable news organization or an 
unknown site? User behavior is also an 
important factor. Avoid liking or sharing sus-
picious posts and stories. If something sounds 
too good to be true, it probably is. Most social 
network platforms, including Facebook, pro-
vide tools that allow users to review their 
activity log and see what they have liked or 
shared. Users can take advantage of these 
tools to look back at their history and identify 
content that has changed or that they now 
recognize as like-farming or clickbait mate-
rial. By reporting or un-liking suspicious con-
tent, this type of abuse can be mitigated. In 
mid-2016, Facebook announced a new algo-
rithm to reduce the amount of clickbait in 
users’ newsfeeds. To assess the likelihood of 
a headline being clickbait, humans scored 
thousands of headlines on their likelihood of 
being clickbait; these scores were then used 
to train the new algorithm. Using this algo-
rithm, Facebook is now able to automatically 
classify headlines based on their likelihood of 
being clickbait, and filter (or punish) those 
with high clickbait likelihood scores.
CASE 2 
Like Farming and Clickbait
Questions
	 5-47. 	 Have you personally encountered like farming? Have you 
reviewed your activity log? Have you ever liked a post that 
has turned bad?
	 5-48. 	 You have now seen some techniques for identifying and 
avoiding scams. How can the social media–using general 
public be better educated to avoid online scams such as like 
farming and clickbait?
	 5-49. 	 Who is responsible for this type of malicious activity? Is it 
simply the fault of the scammers abusing the system? Do 
users and platform providers have a responsibility to reduce 
the risk of abuse? If so, how might this be accomplished?
Based on:
Abel, J. (2015, April 22). Like-farming Facebook scams: Look before you “like.” 
Consumer Affairs. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.consumeraffairs 
.com/news/like-farming-facebook-scams-look-before-you-like-042215.html

248    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 5-50. 	 What is blogging, and why are blogs sometimes controversial?
	 5-51. 	 What is viral marketing? What capabilities of the web help to spread the virus?
Binkowski, B. (2016, January 15). Death hoaxes, like-farming, and you. 
Snopes.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.snopes.com/2016/01/15/
death-hoaxes-like-farming
Constine, J. (2016, August 4). Facebook’s new anti-clickbait algorithm bur-
ies bogus headlines. TechCrunch. Retrieved August 5, 2016, from https://
techcrunch.com/2016/08/04/facebook-clickbait
Komando, K. (2015, June 20). One Facebook trick to prevent embarrass-
ment. Komando.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.komando.com/
columns/313113/one-facebook-trick-to-prevent-embarrassment
Komando, K. (2016, March 4). Don’t click ‘like’ on Facebook again 
until you read this. USA Today. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://
www.usatoday.com/story/tech/columnist/komando/2016/03/04/
dont-click-like-facebook-again-until-you-read/81264440


CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media    249
References
Accenture. (2016). Accenture Technology Vision 2016—
People first: The primacy of people in the Digital Age. 
Retrieved June 28, 2016, from https://www.accenture.com/
t20160314T114937__w__/us-en/_acnmedia/Accenture/Omobono/
TechnologyVision/pdf/Technology-Trends-Technology-
Vision-2016.PDF
Anonymous. (2016, June 28). Facebook.com site info. Alexa.com. 
Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/
facebook.com
Baekdal, T. (2006, November 23). 7 tricks to viral web marketing. 
Baekdal.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.baekdal 
.com/analysis/viral-marketing-tricks
Carr, N. (2005). The amorality of web 2.0. Retrieved July 1, 2016, 
from http://www.roughtype.com/?p=110
CIPHR. (2016, January 21). 7 reasons not to ban social media in the 
office. CIPHR.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://www 
.ciphr.com/blog/social-media-in-the-office
Clearswift. (2011, September 6). Worldwide clampdown on  
technology as businesses overreact to high profile data  
breaches. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.hirecentrix 
.com/worldwide-clampdown-on-technology-as-businesses-
overreact-to-high-profile-data-breaches
Conger, K. (2016, June 1). Amazon sues sellers for buying fake 
reviews. Techcrunch. Retrieved June 6, 2016, from http://techcrunch 
.com/2016/06/01/amazon-sues-sellers-for-buying-fake-reviews
Cook, N. (2008). Enterprise 2.0: How social software will change the 
future of work. Burlington, VT: Gower.
Duggan, M. (2015, August 19). The demographics of social 
media users. Pew Research Center. Retrieved June 6, 
2016, from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/
the-demographics-of-social-media-users
Flandez, R. (2009, April 20). Domino’s response offers lesson 
in crisis management. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 1, 
2016, from http://blogs.wsj.com/independentstreet/2009/04/20/
dominos-response-offers-lessons-in-crisis-management
Flaxman, S. Goel, S., & Rao, J.M. (2016). Filter bubbles, echo 
chambers, and online news consumption. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 80, 298–320.
Gaudin, S. (2009, October 6). Study: 54% of companies ban 
Facebook, Twitter at work. Computerworld. Retrieved July 1, 
2016, from http://www.computerworld.com/article/2528659/
web-apps/study–54–of-companies-ban-facebook–twitter-at-
work.html
Hinchcliffe, D. (2010, April 14). Enterprise 2.0 and improved business 
performance. ZDNet. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.zdnet 
.com/article/enterprise-2-0-and-improved-business-performance
Jackson, E. (2012, April 30). Here’s why Google and Facebook 
might completely disappear in the next 5 years. Forbes.com. 
Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/
ericjackson/2012/04/30/heres-why-google-and-facebook-
might-completely-disappear-in-the-next-5-years
Keen, W. (2007). The cult of the amateur: How today’s Internet is 
killing our culture. New York: Doubleday.
Khan, S. (2008, June 24). Enterprise 2.0—Giving the hype a 
second thought. CIOUpdate.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, 
from http://www.cioupdate.com/reports/article.php/3755056/
Enterprise-20—Giving-the-Hype-a-Second-Thought
MacManus, R. (2007, August 7). Eric Schmidt defines web 3.0. 
ReadWrite. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://readwrite 
.com/2007/08/07/eric_schmidt_defines_web_30
McAfee, A. (2006a, April 1). Enterprise 2.0: The dawn of emergent 
collaboration. MIT Sloan Management Review, 47(3), 21–28.
McAfee, A. (2006b, May 27). Enterprise 2.0, version 2.0. Andrew 
McAfee. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://andrewmcafee 
.org/2006/05/enterprise_20_version_20
McGrath, C. (2011, August 10). What is a social intranet? 
The definitive explanation. Thoughtfarmer. Retrieved 
June 1, 2016, from https://www.thoughtfarmer.com/blog/
what-is-social-intranet-definitive-explanation
Nielsen. (2012). State of the media: Social media report 2012. 
Nielsen.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www.nielsen 
.com/us/en/reports/2012/state-of-the-media-the-social-media-
report-2012.html
Nielsen, J. (2006, November 6). 100 million websites. Jacob 
Nielsen’s Alertbox. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://www 
.nngroup.com/articles/100-million-websites
Olmstead, K., Lampe, C., & Ellison, N.B. (2016, June 22). 
Social media and the workplace. Pew Internet. Retrieved 
July 1, 2016, from http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/06/22/
social-media-and-the-workplace
Prescott, L. (2010, February 10). 54% of US Internet users on 
Facebook, 27% on MySpace. SocialBeat. Retrieved July 1, 2016, 
from http://venturebeat.com/2010/02/10/54-of-us-internet-users-
on-facebook-27-on-myspace
Rayport, J. (1996, December 31). The virus of marketing. 
FastCompany.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://www 
.fastcompany.com/27701/virus-marketing
Reynolds, C. (2009, July 7). Smashed guitar, YouTube song—
United is listening now. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 
1, 2016, from http://articles.latimes.com/2009/jul/07/travel/
la-tr-smash-guitar-united-07072009
Rubin, B. F. (2016, April 25). Amazon continues crackdown on  
alleged fake reviews. CNet.com. Retrieved June 6, 2016,  
from http://www.cnet.com/news/amazon-continues-crack-down 
-on-alleged-fake-reviews-site
Salesforce.com. (2012). The little blue book of social enterprise trans-
formation. Salesforce.com. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://
www.salesforce.com/form/pdf/social-enterprise-bluebook.jsp
Sarker, S., & Sahay, S. (2002). Understanding virtual team develop-
ment: An interpretive study. Journal of the AIS, 3, 247–285.
Saul, D. J. (2014, January 15). 3 million teens leave Facebook in 
3 years: The 2014 Facebook demographic report. Istrategylabs. 
Retrieved July 1, 2016, from http://istrategylabs.com/2014/01/3-
million-teens-leave-facebook-in-3-years-the-2014-facebook-
demographic-report
Sessums, C. D. (2009, December 17). A simple definition:  
web 2.0. Retrieved July 20, 2012, from http://www.csessums 
.com/2009/12/a-simple-definition-web-2-0
Socialbakers. (2016, July 1). Facebook marketing statistics,  
demographics, reports, and news. Socialbakers.com. Retrieved  
2016, July 1, from http://www.socialbakers.com/facebook 
-overview-statistics
Sullivan, A. (2016, May 1). Democracies end when they are too 
democratic. New York Magazine. Retrieved June 6, 2016, from 
http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/04/america-tyranny-
donald-trump.htm
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds. New York: Doubleday.
Twentyman, J. (2014, February 26). The secret to viral video 
marketing. The Guardian. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/26/
secret-to-viral-video-marketing

250    CHAPTER 5  •  Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media 
Wagner, K. (2015, September 16). Facebook is about to take the 
training wheels off Facebook at Work. Recode. Retrieved June 
6, 2016, from http://recode.net/2015/09/16/facebook-is-about-to-
take-the-training-wheels-off-facebook-at-work
Wagner, M. (2002, May 23). Saving trees and serving 
up benefits. Internet Retailer. Retrieved July 1, 2016, 
from http://www.internetretailer.com/2002/05/23/
saving-trees-and-serving-up-benefits
Wikipedia: About. (2016, April, 23). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved July 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Wikipedia:About&oldid=716776032

This page intentionally left blank

252
252
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Intelligence Through 
Drones
O
ver the past years, commercially available 
drones have made great progress; they can rec-
ognize obstacles, maintain stable flying posi-
tions even under windy conditions, or safely return to 
their starting position in case of low battery levels. In 
the robotics lab at the University of Pennsylvania, 
researchers are hard at work creating flying robots that 
can sense each other and features of the environment, 
giving the impression that they have a mind of their 
own. In one demonstration, a group of eight flying 
devices—called quadcopters—rise from the ground in 
unison and fly around the room in a carefully orches-
trated formation. They then fly through a small win-
dow, one by one, and form up on the other side. What 
is particularly impressive about the devices is that they 
are autonomous, meaning that other than receiving 
instructions about going from point A to point B in the 
room, the devices are fully autonomous, get to decide 
where to move and how fast to get there, and 
are responsible for avoiding collisions. These devices are 
the precursor to drones that could be used in the real 
world for various purposes, ranging from package deliv-
ery to surveillance to search and rescue operations.
DARPA, the U.S. government research agency, is also 
actively working on improving the capabilities of such 
“micro-drones” and is developing a new class of small 
UAVs that will be able to navigate inside buildings without 
relying on GPS for navigation or having a remote pilot. 
Enhancing Business 
Intelligence Using 
Big Data and Analytics
6
Today, organizations operate in a global, highly competi-
tive, and rapidly changing environment. A key to effective 
management is high-quality and timely information to 
support decision making. Yet, to enhance decision-
making, this high-quality and timely information needs to 
be extracted from ever-increasing amounts of structured 
and unstructured data gathered from a variety of sources. 
Here, we first describe the need for enhanced decision 
making, followed by a description of databases and data 
warehouses, two fundamental components for gaining 
business intelligence. Then we describe the primary IS 
components utilized by organizations to extract meaning-
ful insights from data. In Chapter 2, “Gaining Competitive 
Advantage Through Information Systems,” you learned 
about general types of information systems supporting 
organizations’ different decision-making levels and busi-
ness functions that execute various business processes in 
order to realize the strategic goals of the organization. 
Here, we introduce business intelligence and advanced 
analytics tools utilized at various decision-making levels of 
modern organizations. Finally, we discuss how knowledge 
management systems help organizations effectively cap-
ture, store, and retrieve organizational knowledge, and 
how geographic information systems help analyze spa-
tially referenced data to make better business decisions.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

253
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How can databases support the operation of autono-
mous and semiautonomous drones?
2.	How can the creators of drones use advanced 
analytics to enable drone technology?
3.	How can drones support spatial decision making?
Based on:
Amazon Prime Air. (2016, June 14). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Amazon_Prime_Air&oldid=725315546
Amos, I. (2015, November 22). How drones are helping Scots scientists 
to grow better potatoes. The Scotsman. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from 
http://www.scotsman.com/news/environment/how-drones-are-helping-
scots-scientists-to-grow-better-potatoes-1-3955007
Bradley, J. (2013, May 1). Tiny flying robots! Meet the quadrotor. CNN. 
Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://edition.cnn.com/2013/05/01/tech/
innovation/flying-robots-quadrotors
Statt, N. (2016, February 12). Watch this DARPA drone speed around  
a warehouse at 45 mph. The Verge. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from  
http://www.theverge.com/2016/2/12/10981740/darpa-drone 
-autonomous-flight-fla-program
Unmanned aerial vehicle. (2016, June 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Unmanned_aerial_vehicle&oldid=727319653
These small autonomous UAVs will be able to fly through 
an open window and then navigate rooms, stairways, cor-
ridors, and other obstacle-filled environments—all at 
45 mph! Such UAVs will provide previously unattainable 
intelligence in battle and other high-security situations.
In a more mundane context, Amazon.com is aggres-
sively working on a drone delivery system, called Ama-
zon Prime Air, that would allow a package ordered 
online to be delivered within 30 minutes by a small fly-
ing drone. In Amazon.com’s ideal future, each city would 
have a local warehouse and a small task force of delivery 
drones, ready at a moment’s notice to deliver thousands 
of small packages to Amazon.com’s happy customers.
Another implementation of drone technology is in 
gathering geographic data to help farmers find plots of 
soil that are most suitable for crop growth (Figure 6.1). 
For example, researchers at the University of Aberdeen 
are developing drones with advanced imaging capabili-
ties. These drones can be sent out to survey vineyards to 
find soil that is most optimal for grape growth. This 
could be especially valuable for growers given that soil 
content and area humidity tends to vary from year to 
year. Likewise, drones can be used by scientists to map 
tree cover.
The technology described here is still under develop-
ment, but things are progressing rapidly. You are likely 
to have already seen drones at sports events, and drones 
have made inroads into the hobby sector, where indi-
viduals use drones to take travel pictures, hone their fly-
ing skills, or spy on their neighbors. With the capabilities 
of relatively inexpensive drones developing rapidly, var-
ied applications of these technologies can benefit soci-
ety in a number of different ways.
1.	 Describe the need for business intelligence and advanced analytics and how 
databases serve as a foundation for making better business decisions.
2.	 Explain core concepts of business intelligence and advanced analytics.
3.	 Describe how organizations can enhance decision making by using knowledge 
management and geographic information systems.
FIGURE 6.1
Drones are providing valuable data for countless purposes.
Source: Stockninja/Fotolia.

254    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
Enhancing Organizational Decision Making
In Chapter 2, you learned about the importance of strategic planning for gaining and sustaining 
competitive advantage. To stay ahead of the competition, organizations use information sys-
tems to gather and analyze data and information from internal and external sources in order to 
make better business decisions. To improve organizational performance, business executives 
are seeking answers to questions such as “How effective is this year’s promotion as compared 
with last year’s?” “Which customer segments should we focus on?” “Which customers are 
most likely to switch to a competitor if we raise prices by X percent?” or, even more important, 
“Do we care if those customers switch?” Answers to such questions require analyzing data of 
past and current transactions to understand what happened. Business intelligence (BI), refer-
ring to tools and techniques for analyzing and visualizing past data, can provide such answers. 
In contrast, advanced analytics refers to tools and techniques used to understand why some-
thing happened, predict future outcomes, or discover hidden patterns in large data sets (some-
times business analytics is used as an umbrella term for these concepts). Today, the need for 
business intelligence and advanced analytics goes beyond traditional “businesses”; rather, all 
types of organizations, ranging from political parties to hospitals, utilize business intelligence 
and analytics to improve their data-driven decision making (see Table 6.1). Next, we will dis-
cuss the need for business intelligence and advanced analytics for making better business 
decisions.
Why Organizations Need Business Intelligence and Advanced Analytics
Although an organization’s overall direction is decided on at the strategic level, business pro-
cesses span all organizational levels and are highly interconnected. As discussed in Chapter 2, 
business processes refer to the activities that organizations perform in order to reach their busi-
ness goals. Unfortunately, the business processes outlined within strategic plans are often not 
implemented as envisioned at the managerial and operational levels of the organization because 
the information needed to effectively monitor and control these processes is simply not avail-
able. This “missing” information, in fact, often exists but resides in disconnected spreadsheets, 
reports, or databases.
DATA-DRIVEN ORGANIZATIONS.  In today’s dynamic world, organizations must have up-to-
date, accurate, and integrated information to monitor and fine-tune a broad range of business 
processes and to realize the goals of their strategic plans. Consequently, many organizations 
are trying to create meaningful insights from a variety of data sources to make better business 
decisions. Organizations that make decisions that can be backed up with verifiable data are 
referred to as data-driven organizations; such organizations are measurably more productive 
and profitable (McAfee & Brynjolfsson, 2012), can better respond to ongoing threats and 
opportunities, and can better plan for the future. Also, by letting data drive decisions, decision 
making can be pushed lower into the organization, freeing up senior management time for 
more important decisions (Redman, 2013). Thus, information systems—such as business 
intelligence and advanced analytics tools—that enable collecting and analyzing large amounts 
of data from various sources and delivering needed information to the right decision maker at 
the right time facilitate the transition to a data-driven organization. As with any technologies, 
TABLE 6.1  Sample Uses of Business Intelligence and Analytics in Non-Business 
Contexts
Context
Example
Political parties
Model the influence of social media on election outcomes
Government
Analyze performance of public benefits programs
Defense
Manage maintenance and logistics during overseas deployments
Hospitals
Predict patient volume and resource utilization
Nonprofit organizations
Manage fundraising campaigns and target donors


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    255
however, having the right tools is not sufficient for business success. In data-driven 
organizations, familiarity with data analysis and analytics tools is not only the responsibility 
of data analysts but is a skill required of every business user. In addition, whereas business 
intelligence and advanced analytics can provide valuable insights, it is human judgment and 
creativity that are needed to translate these insights into action and make better business 
decisions.
RESPONDING TO THREATS AND OPPORTUNITIES.  External factors such as globalization, 
competitive pressures, consumer demands, societal changes, and governmental regulations can 
create opportunities as well as threats for modern organizations. For example, globalization 
provides opportunities to compete in new markets, but it also creates the challenge of gathering 
new types of data in order to effectively exploit these opportunities. Globalization can also 
lead to the threat of increased competition from developing countries, forcing organizations 
to rethink strategies or to further improve business processes. Thus, as the world becomes 
increasingly interconnected, market opportunities will expand, but at the same time, markets 
will become more competitive, forcing companies to develop new products at an ever-
increasing rate. Similarly, today’s consumers have increasing access to information via social 
media and mobile devices and can much more easily switch to a competitor’s products or 
services. Further, large corporate and banking failures have brought about more stringent 
rules and regulations (such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act; see Chapter 10, “Securing Information 
Systems”), and organizations have to comply with ever-increasing government reporting 
requirements. In sum, today’s business environment is characterized by factors such as unstable 
market conditions, fierce competition, shorter product life cycles, more stringent regulations, 
and wider choices for customers than ever before. Business intelligence and advanced analytics 
can help organizations make better decisions in this increasingly complex, fast-changing, and 
competitive environment by enabling them to more effectively collect and analyze both internal 
and external data (Figure 6.2).
With increasing pressure to reduce costs, organizations have to focus on investing in sys-
tems that provide the greatest returns. Business intelligence and advanced analytics solutions 
can provide quick returns, as they help to quickly react to problems by providing the right infor-
mation at the right time. Further, these tools help to leverage existing systems (such as enter-
prise-wide information systems; see Chapter 7, “Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise 
Information Systems”) by enabling decision makers to extract and analyze data provided by 
those systems. Finally, focusing on customer satisfaction can provide quick returns by helping to 
retain the most profitable customers.
BIG DATA.  One significant opportunity for organizations is the abundance of data available 
for decision making. As highlighted in Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World,” with 
External Factors
Threats
Opportunities
Business
Analytics
FIGURE 6.2
Business analytics helps 
organizations swiftly respond to 
external threats and opportunities.

256    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
decreasing costs for capturing and storing data, data are now not only ubiquitous but also 
cheap. With ever-increasing amounts of data increases the ability to detect meaningful 
relationships and regularities; thus, insights gained from analyzing Big Data can not only 
contribute to business success but can also help to address the tremendous challenges society 
faces. Research has demonstrated a strong linkage between effective data management and 
organizational performance, and organizations have long tried to collect, analyze, and use 
internal and external data to gain and sustain competitive advantage. The megatrends mobile 
and social, as well as the Internet of Things, have led to a tremendous increase in potentially 
useful data, gathered from mobile devices, social media, automated sensors, and other 
devices. Big Data is typically characterized as being of high volume, variety, and velocity (see 
Figure 6.3). One of the biggest opportunities is the sheer volume of data, which, for example, 
enables organizations to make business decisions based on more factors; yet at the same time, 
storing, analyzing, and managing increasing amounts of data pose tremendous challenges. The 
second characteristic is variety; useful data can come in the form of structured data (such 
as transaction data), which fit neatly into spreadsheets or databases; semistructured data, 
such as clickstreams and sensor data; or unstructured data, such as text, audio and video 
data, comments on social networks, and so on. Especially semistructured and unstructured 
data tend to be messy and are often incomplete, and the quality and origins of data such as 
user-generated content are typically unclear and at times questionable; further, analyzing 
unstructured data tends to be expensive in terms of effort, time, and expertise needed. 
Finally, Big Data is characterized based on its high velocity. On the one hand, data flow 
into organizations at increasingly higher rates; on the other hand, data-driven organizations 
have to process and use the data ever more quickly, such as when online retailer Amazon 
.com is providing recommendations for additional products. Thus, Big Data, ranging from 
geospatial data to customer sentiments, can prove invaluable for formulating and executing 
an organization’s strategy. Data are becoming increasingly abundant, yet many organizations 
find themselves unable to use these data to make sound business decisions; being able to ask 
the right questions and successfully utilize Big Data remains elusive for many organizations. 
Realizing the opportunities and challenges brought about by Big Data and its management, 
high-level company executives are increasingly focusing on designing an organization-wide 
data management strategy.
EFFECTIVE PLANNING IS CONTINUOUS.  In the past, organizations lacked the necessary data 
and tools to continuously plan for their future. Typically, organizations would first develop a 
strategic plan for some planning cycle (say, a year); then, once a strategic plan was agreed on, 
managers of various business units would prepare budgets for executing their portion of the plan. 
These budgets were often “backward looking” because they were typically based on historical 
data rather than being based on a clear understanding of current conditions and forecasts of 
future trends. Over time, managers would then execute their portions of the plan. For many 
organizations, this method of planning and managing was adequate given the relatively slow 
pace of change.
Today, however, given the need to swiftly respond to a highly competitive and rapidly 
changing environment, organizations must implement new ways of planning. In fact, successful 
Big Data
FIGURE 6.3
Big Data is characterized by 
volume, variety, and velocity.
Source: Alswart/Fotolia.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    257
organizations are utilizing a continuous planning process (Figure 6.4). In a continuous plan-
ning process, organizations continuously monitor and analyze data and business processes; the 
results lead to ongoing adjustments to how the organization is managed, but these results are 
also reflected in ongoing updates to the organizational plans. It is only through timely and accu-
rate insights gained from analyzing relevant data that continuous planning can be executed.
Responding to threats and opportunities and continuous planning are based on analyzing 
internal data (primarily from the operational level of the organization) as well as external data. 
In the next section, we describe how databases can be used to provide the necessary inputs to 
business intelligence and advanced analytics applications.
Databases: Providing Inputs into Business Intelligence and 
Advanced Analytics
Data and knowledge are probably among the most important assets an organization has, as both 
are essential for executing business processes, gaining business intelligence, and performing 
advanced analytics. Databases, which are collections of related data organized in a way that 
facilitates data searches, are vital to an organization’s success.
For instance, databases are essential for maintaining customer records and supporting busi-
ness processes such as sales transactions and tracking inventory but are also needed for market-
ing purposes, such as identifying target customers for personalized marketing communications. 
Additionally, database technology fuels electronic commerce, from tracking available products 
GREEN IT 
Big Data, Internet of Things, and Analytics Fuel Greener Facilities
Two megatrends, specifically Big Data and the Internet of 
Things (IoT), are transforming countless areas of business and 
society. One area that is being transformed through the use of 
Big Data and analytics is facilities management, an interdisci-
plinary business function that coordinates space, infrastruc-
ture, and people within an organization. Often associated with 
the administration of office blocks, arenas, schools, universi-
ties, sporting complexes, convention centers, shopping com-
plexes, hospitals, hotels, or manufacturing and shipping, 
facilities management is big business, currently representing 
about 5 percent of global GDP.
Within a large building or campus of buildings, there are a 
variety of systems and components working together to light, 
heat, or cool the environment. For example, Microsoft’s campus 
in the Puget Sound area consists of more than 100 separate 
buildings. In those buildings, there are more than 30,000 build-
ing systems components and more than 2 million points where 
building systems ranging from heating, ventilation, and air-con-
ditioning (HVAC) to lighting to power monitoring are con-
nected to sensors—i.e., each being a separate IoT device. In a 
24-hour period, those systems produce more than a billion data 
points. These data provide the Big Data to fuel many analytical 
systems for better facilities operations and management.
For example, in addition to better management of heating 
and cooling, motion sensors can be used to identify underutilized 
space or to better organize departments so that collaboration can 
be enhanced. With such data, a facilities manager could identify 
the amount of employee time being wasted moving between 
different parts of a workspace and then use these insights to plan 
more efficient workspace layouts. Likewise, if rooms are underuti-
lized, they could be repurposed for a more fitting use.
Ultimately, Big Data—generated through IoT and other sen-
sors—holds great promise for identifying cost savings, prevent-
ing equipment failures, and conserving energy when managing 
facilities. Today, we are just beginning to understand how to 
optimize facilities management using such Big Data insights. 
Also, older buildings with old systems are only slowly being ret-
rofitted with sensors to provide better business intelligence. 
However, in the future, when new buildings are designed and 
constructed, they will include a plethora of sensors, truly provid-
ing smart buildings for improved facilities management.
Based on:
Facility management. (2016, May 27). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo-
pedia. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Facility_management&oldid=722364047
Laughman, C. (2013, September). Microsoft uses Big Data to man-
age buildings. Facilitiesnet. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from http://www 
.facilitiesnet.com/energyefficiency/article/Microsoft-Uses-Big-Data-
To-Manage-Buildings-Facilities-Management-Energy-Efficiency-
Feature--14359
Patel, B. (2015, May/June). Technology and FM: The Internet of Things. 
Facility Executive. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from http://facilityexecutive 
.com/2015/05/the-internet-of-things
Spence, D. (2016, April 16). What FMs need to know about Big Data. 
Office Space Software. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from http://www 
.officespacesoftware.com/blog/what-fms-need-to-know-about-big-data

258    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
for sale to providing customer service. Databases are a foundation of the digital world. Data 
about all the products that are available for sale at Amazon.com are stored in databases, and data 
about all the courses available at your university are stored in a database. While you may expect 
organizations to use a variety of databases, databases are also powering many of the apps you 
are interacting with daily on your personal devices. For example, data (such as storage location, 
ratings, or comments) about all of the songs in your iTunes library, together with your playlists, 
are stored in a database. Databases not only store data about products, courses, songs, and playl-
ists, they also store the interrelationships between various things. For example, Amazon.com has 
databases that keep track of its millions of customers and other databases that keep track of the 
billions of sales transactions linking products to specific customers. Without databases, much of 
what we take for granted in the digital world would be impossible.
ENABLING INTERACTIVE WEBSITES USING DATABASES.  In today’s highly dynamic digital 
world, any organization engaged in e-commerce makes extensive use of databases to provide 
dynamic and customized content on their web pages. As described in Chapter 3, “Managing 
the Information Systems Infrastructure,” actions such as people using an organization’s website 
to view product catalogs, check inventory, and place orders all ultimately read from and write 
to the organization’s databases. Similarly, data about products (name, description, dimensions, 
shipping weight, and so on) are stored in databases and dynamically inserted into a web page 
template, freeing the company from having to develop a separate web page for each individual 
product. For example, companies such as Amazon.com need only a few page templates for 
different product categories. Depending on what the user is looking for, these templates are then 
populated dynamically with the relevant product data that are pulled from a database; similarly, 
whenever a registered user places an order, the customer’s billing and shipping information is 
retrieved from a database and displayed to the customer for confirmation.
Some electronic commerce applications can receive and process millions of transactions per 
day. To ensure adequate system performance for customers, as well as to gain the greatest under-
standing of customer behavior, organizations must manage online data effectively. For example, 
Amazon.com, the world’s largest bookstore, is open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, and its servers 
log millions of transactions per day, with dozens of database reads and writes for every single 
transaction. This is but one example that shows that the key to effectively designing an online elec-
tronic commerce business is the effective management of online data. Beyond websites and e-com-
merce, it is important to stress that databases are at the heart of your university’s student registration 
system, the inventory system at the local grocery store, Apple’s iTunes store, and virtually anything 
Continuous
Planning
Process
Manage
Analyze
Plan
Monitor
Real-Time
Management 
Compare
Actual
Performance
Against
Goals
Track &
Monitor
Business
Processes 
Update &
Adjust
Plans 
FIGURE 6.4
Effective business planning is 
continuous.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    259
else you can think of that requires recording and analyzing large amounts of data. Next we exam-
ine some basic concepts, advantages of the database approach, and database management.
DATABASES: FOUNDATION CONCEPTS.  The database approach dominates nearly all computer-
based information systems used today. To understand databases, we must familiarize ourselves 
with some terminology. In Figure 6.5, we compare database terminology (middle column) with 
equivalents in a library (left column) and a business office (right column). We use database 
management systems (DBMSs, such as Microsoft Access, a popular DBMS for personal 
computers) to interact with the data in databases (see Chapter 3, “Managing the Information 
Systems Infrastructure and Services”). A DBMS is a software application with which you create, 
store, organize, and retrieve data from a single database or several databases. In the DBMS, the 
individual database is a collection of related attributes about entities. An entity is something you 
collect data about, such as people or classes (Figure 6.6). We often think of entities as tables, 
where each row is a record and each column is an attribute (also referred to as field). A record 
is a collection of related attributes about a single instance of an entity. Each record typically 
consists of many attributes, which are individual pieces of data. For example, a name and a 
Social Security number are attributes of a particular person.
Customer No.
Customer name
Customer address
nasd zx kdv wsdms
nasd zx kdv wsdms
nasd zx kdv wsdms
nasd zx kdv wsdms
nasd zx kdv wsdms
nasd zx kdv wsdms
Library
DBMS Equivalent
Oﬃce
Card Catalog
DBMS
File Cabinet
Card Drawer
Database
File Drawer
Catalog Card
Record
File Folder
Card Data
Attributes
Report
FIGURE 6.5
Computers make the process of 
storing and managing data much 
easier.
FIGURE 6.6
This sample data table for the 
entity Student includes 10 records 
and 7 attributes.
Source: Access 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.

260    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
DATABASES: ADVANTAGES.  Before the advent of DBMS, organizations used the file processing 
approach to store and manipulate data electronically. As data were usually kept in long, 
sequential computer files that were often stored on tape, data about entities often appeared 
in several different places throughout the information system; further, the data were stored 
along with and sometimes embedded within the programming code that used the data. People 
had not yet envisioned the concept of separately storing data about entities in non-redundant 
databases, so different files frequently contained repetitive data about a customer, a supplier, 
or another entity. When someone’s address changed, it had to be changed in every file where 
it occurred, a tedious process. Similarly, if programmers changed the code, they had to change 
the corresponding data along with it. Further, the programmer would have had to know how the 
data were stored in order to make any changes. This was often no better than a pen-and-paper 
approach to storing data.
It is possible for a database to consist of only a single file or table. However, most data-
bases managed under a DBMS consist of multiple tables or entities, often organized in sev-
eral files. A DBMS can manage hundreds or even thousands of tables simultaneously by 
linking the tables as part of a single system. The DBMS helps us manage the tremendous 
volume and complexity of interrelated data so that we can be sure that the right data are 
accessed, changed, or deleted. For example, if a student or customer address is changed, that 
change is made through all the parts of the system where that data might occur. Using a data-
base approach prevents unnecessary and problematic redundancies of the data, and the data 
are kept separate from the applications’ programming code. This means that the database 
does not need to be changed if a change is made to an application. Consequently, there are 
numerous advantages to using a database approach to managing organizational data; these 
are summarized in Table 6.2.
DATABASES: TYPES.  Traditionally, organizations have used relational database management 
systems (RDBMSs) to support their business processes. An RDBMS attempts to balance 
efficiency of storage needs, ease of retrieval, and other factors by storing data in tables linked 
via relationships. However, RDBMSs are not easily scalable in response to peaks in demand, 
as is often the case in data-intensive applications such as e-commerce and social media, and 
traditional RDBMSs may simply not be able to handle massive volumes of often-unstructured 
TABLE 6.2  Advantages of the Database Approach
Advantages
Description
Minimal data redundancy
A single copy of data ensures that storage requirements are 
minimized.
Improved data consistency
Eliminating redundancy greatly reduces the possibilities of 
inconsistency.
Increased security
A centralized system makes it easier to enforce access restrictions.
Improved data quality
Centralized control, minimized redundancy, and improved data con-
sistency help to enhance the quality of data.
Improved data accessibility 
and sharing
A centralized system makes it easier to deploy and control access 
for personnel within or outside organizational boundaries.
Enforcement of standards
A centralized system makes it much easier to enforce standards and 
rules for data creation, modification, naming, and deletion.
Program–data independence
It is much easier to evolve and alter software to changing business 
needs when data and programs are independent.
Increased productivity of 
application development
Data standards make it easier to build and modify applications.
Reduced program 
maintenance
Data changed in the central database is replicated seamlessly 
throughout all applications.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    261
Big Data. For example, fueled by the megatrends Internet of Things (IoT), mobile, and social, 
various types of data are now generated by countless sensors and millions of users. Further, as 
RDBMSs tend to be highly complex, any changes need to be carefully planned and managed, 
potentially reducing the agility of a business. To overcome these limitations, a new breed of 
database management systems, called NoSQL, is increasingly becoming popular. NoSQL 
databases such as Amazon.com’s SimpleDB are highly scalable, as they can be distributed 
across multiple machines, which works especially well in a cloud computing infrastructure. 
The ability to use not only a single computer but also a distributed computing environment, 
dividing the processing tasks among hundreds or thousands of machines and using frameworks 
such as Apache Hadoop (see the Technology Briefing), is key for handling and processing 
Big Data. Further, NoSQL databases often offer much flexibility in the types of data they can 
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Twitter Fever—Look Before You Tweet
Over the past several years, Twitter has successfully trans-
formed both the ways of information transmission and the 
pulse of pop culture. Serving as a source of news for growing 
numbers of people, Twitter also works as a gathering place for 
expressing compassion, sharing grief, and supporting disaster 
relief efforts. When the rock star Prince died in 2016, for 
example, countless collaborators, friends, and well-known fans 
shared their sadness and memories over the tragic news. For 
example, actor Will Smith posted, “I am stunned and heartbro-
ken. I just spoke with him last night. Today, Jada & I mourn 
with all of you the loss of a beautiful poet, a true inspiration, 
and one of the most magnificent artists to ever grace this 
earth.” The speed at which the “Twitterverse”—the collective 
of members who use the social media platform—reacts to 
important events has transformed how people learn about and 
react to important events throughout the world.
Indeed, Twitter users’ ability to post thoughts in small snip-
pets (called tweets) allows quick and easy dissemination of 
content to a broad audience. A tweet cannot exceed 140 char-
acters and can thus easily be read out of context; the sheer 
number of tweets, appearing at a rapid pace and often with 
little context, can easily result in endless confusion. Thanks to 
the network effect, Twitter has become capable of gathering 
momentum so quickly that it is sometimes difficult to differen-
tiate between truth and fiction. And, because tweets can be 
sent so easily, often without a lot of thought by the sender, 
there are countless examples of so-called “dumb” tweets that 
instantly go viral. For example, Oprah Winfrey talked about her 
love of the Microsoft Surface tablet computer by tweeting: 
“Gotta say love that SURFACE! Have bought 12 already for 
Christmas gifts.” The Twitterverse was quick to identify that 
her adoring tweet was sent from her iPad!
In a more serious problem, Twitterbots are causing confu-
sion in the Twitterverse. A Twitterbot is a program used to pro-
duce automated posts or to automatically follow Twitter users. 
Twitterbots come in various forms. For example, many post 
clickbait, enticing clicks on promotional links. Others post 
replies or automatically “retweet” (i.e., forward) messages that 
include a certain word or phrase. Malicious Twitterbots follow 
the accounts of famous people who typically have millions of 
followers. In some macabre instances, the accounts of famous 
people who have passed away have been hijacked by bots, 
seemingly sending out messages from beyond the grave. In 
one instance, deceased journalist David Carr’s account was 
hijacked by a so-called “porn bot” in 2016, changing the 
account’s cover picture and sending out disturbing messages 
to Carr’s followers. Twitter currently doesn’t offer any access to 
the accounts of the deceased unless account credentials were 
given to friends or family members by the account owner prior 
to their death. However, family members can request to have 
an account deactivated. Otherwise, it continues to exist and 
can potentially be hacked. Many are discussing what is the 
most appropriate thing to do with the online accounts of the 
deceased. While there is no clear answer, it demonstrates some 
unintended consequences that occur in the digital world.
When properly used for good, Twitter is undoubtedly a 
meaningful platform for reaching out to people. Sometimes, 
however, people seem to retweet first and ask questions later; 
it may be better to do “due diligence” and try to Google a 
topic first to ensure that it indeed is true before retweeting. 
Also, if you follow some famous people on Twitter, if you get a 
crazy message from them, it may be from a bot.
Based on:
David Carr (journalist). (2016, April 11). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 26, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=David_Carr_(journalist)&oldid=714740240
Fee, R. (2015, August 18). 20 of the dumbest celebrity Tweets of all times, 
Vol. 2. Mandatory. Retrieved May 26, 2016, from http://www.mandatory 
.com/2015/08/18/20-of-the-dumbest-celebrity-tweets-of-all-time-vol-2
Golding, S. (2016, April 21). When doves cry: Celebrities react on Twit-
ter to Prince’s untimely death. Retrieved May 26, 2016, from http://
www.vibe.com/2016/04/twitter-reacts-prince-death
Twitter. (2016, May 25). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
May 26, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title
=Twitter&oldid=722022910
Twitterbot. (2016, May 25). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved May 25, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php 
?title=Twitterbot&oldid=721939432

262    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
handle (such as comments of various lengths made by Facebook users or audio or video data). 
However, implementing NoSQL databases comes at a cost, as they are still in their early stages 
of development; thus, some needed features may be lacking, and it may be difficult to find 
experienced NoSQL developers.
DATABASES: EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT.  Now that we have outlined why databases are important 
to organizations, we can talk about how organizational databases can be managed effectively. 
The best database in the world is no better than the data it holds. Conversely, all the data in 
the world will do you no good if they are not organized in a manner in which there are few or 
no redundancies and in which you can retrieve, analyze, and understand them. The two key 
elements of an organizational database are the data and the structure of those data. The structure 
of the data is typically captured in a data model, that is, a map or diagram that represents entities 
and their relationships. Further, the structure of the data is documented to facilitate management 
of the database.
Each attribute in the database needs to be of a certain type. For example, an attribute may 
contain text, numbers, or dates. This data type helps the DBMS organize and sort the data, com-
plete calculations, and allocate storage space. If tables are designed correctly, they will be easier 
to update, and it will be faster to extract vital information to improve an organization’s business 
intelligence capabilities.
Once the data model is created, the format of the data is documented in a data dictionary. 
The data dictionary (or metadata repository) is a document explaining several pieces of meta-
data for each attribute, such as its name, the type of data expected (dates, alphanumeric, num-
bers, and so on), and valid values. Data dictionaries can include information such as why the 
data item is needed, how often it should be updated, and on which forms and reports the data 
appear.
Data dictionaries often include business rules—that is, the policies by which a business 
runs—which help to prevent illegal or illogical entries from entering the database. For example, 
designers of a warehouse inventory database could capture a rule in the data dictionary to pre-
vent an invalid ship date for a future order from being entered into the database. Although 
NoSQL databases may not be as rigid as RDMBSs or may not enforce business rules at all (leav-
ing the enforcing to applications), it is wise to create data models and to consider what data will 
be captured, how the data will be related, and what rules should be enforced.
Master Data Management  To make sound operational, tactical, and strategic business 
decisions, it is imperative that decisions made in different departments are based on the same 
underlying data, definitions, and assumptions—that is, there is a “single version of the truth.” For 
example, do the marketing and accounting departments have the same definitions of a customer 
or a sale? Does a “customer” entail anyone who may be interested in the company’s product 
or service (marketing view) or only those who actually made a purchase (accounting view)? 
Part of creating a single version of the truth is master data management. Master data are the 
data deemed most important in the operation of a business. Typically shared among multiple 
organizational units, master data include data about customers, suppliers, inventory, employees, 
and the like. You can think of master data as the “actors” in an organization’s transactions; for 
example, a customer purchases something, an employee is paid, and so on. Given the importance 
of an organization’s master data, master data management is a management- rather than a 
technology-focused issue, as different business units and different corporate levels have to come 
to consensus on the meaning of master data items or on how to deal with duplicates. Especially 
for large organizations, arriving at a single version of the truth can be a challenge, as master 
data often have to be integrated from multiple systems. Likewise, after mergers or acquisitions, 
organizations have to try to consolidate the master data from two or more companies. Once the 
meaning and format of the master data have been agreed on, business intelligence applications 
can base their analyses on the single version of the truth.
ENTERING AND QUERYING DATA.  At some point, data must be entered into the database. 
Traditionally, a clerk or other data entry professional would create records in the database by 
entering data. These data may come from telephone conversations, preprinted forms that must 
be filled out, historical records, or electronic files. Today, much organizational data are captured 
electronically, as is the case with a user’s input in a web form; whenever you place an order on 
the web, sign up for a newsletter, or respond to an online survey, your input is directly stored 


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    263
in a database. A form (Figure 6.7) typically has blanks where the user can enter data or make 
choices, each of which represents an attribute within a database record (such as the user’s first 
name, last name, gender, and so on). A form should be organized in an intuitive way so that the 
user can easily see the required items and enter the data. Forms are often used to capture data to 
be added, modified, or deleted from the database (e.g., for modifying your password or removing 
your old shipping address on Amazon.com). Further, in today’s dynamic environment, data are 
increasingly generated and captured automatically. For example, capturing transactional data 
from a point-of-sale terminal or entering sensor data from smartphones or IoT devices requires 
no human intervention; likewise, autonomous agents (discussed later) can collect various data 
that are published on the web or posted in social media.
To retrieve data from a database, we use a query. In fact, whenever a web page is dynami-
cally populated with content, a query is executed to retrieve the data from a database. The most 
common language used to interface with RDBMSs is Structured Query Language (SQL). 
Figure 6.8 is an example of an SQL statement that an online bookstore would use to retrieve the 
information needed to populate a summary page containing all books written by the first author 
of this textbook, sorted by publication date. Writing SQL statements can be difficult, especially 
when you are dealing with complex databases with many entities or when you are writing com-
plex queries with multiple integrated criteria—such as adding numbers while sorting on two 
different attributes. Many desktop DBMS packages provide graphical user interfaces, where the 
user can pick the desired data from the database to create queries quickly and easily (Figure 6.9).
AD HOC QUERIES AND REPORTS.  Business users across an organization need the right 
information at the right time; thus, in order to support decision making, the results of queries are 
typically presented in the form of reports. A report is a compilation of data from the database 
that is organized and displayed to the user (either on screen or on paper). Sophisticated report 
generators and analysis tools such as Crystal Reports or Tableau can help users to quickly 
FIGURE 6.7
A computer-based form used for 
entering customer information.
SELECT AUTHOR, TITLE, PUBLICATION_DATE, PRICE
FROM BOOKS
WHERE AUTHOR=“VALACICH”
ORDER BY PUBLICATION_DATE;
FIGURE 6.8
This sample SQL statement would 
be used to retrieve the information 
needed to populate a summary web 
page containing all books written 
by the first author of this textbook, 
sorted by publication date.

264    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
build interactive reports and visualizations to present data in a useful format and help business 
users make sense of large amounts of data that are typically stored in organizational databases. 
Reports can take the form of scheduled reports, drill-down reports, exception reports, and 
key-indicator reports (Table 6.3) (as discussed in Chapter 2, key performance indicators are 
the metrics deemed most critical to assessing progress toward a certain goal). These reports 
are either produced at prespecified intervals or created whenever a prespecified event happens; 
often, this is combined with automated alerts if certain thresholds are reached. However, 
decision makers frequently have information needs that are unforeseen and may never arise 
again. In such instances, the users need to run ad hoc queries (i.e., queries created because 
of unplanned information needs that are typically not saved for later use). Ad hoc query tools 
provide an easy-to-use interface, allowing managers to run queries and reports themselves 
without having to know query languages or the structure of the underlying data. Installed on a 
person’s desktop, notebook computer, or mobile device, these tools can be used to run queries 
and reports whenever an unplanned information need arises without having to resort to calling 
the IS department for help in creating a complex query or a special report.
ONLINE TRANSACTION PROCESSING.  The systems that are used to interact with customers and 
run a business in real time are called operational systems. Examples of operational systems 
are sales order processing and reservation systems. As fast customer response is fundamental to 
having a successful Internet-based business, immediate automated responses to the requests of 
FIGURE 6.9
Microsoft Access provides a 
graphical user interface to let users 
select the required data.
Source: Access 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
TABLE 6.3   Common Reports and Queries
Report/Query
Description
Scheduled reports
Reports produced at predefined intervals—daily, weekly, or monthly—to 
support routine decisions
Key-indicator reports
Reports that provide a summary of critical metrics on a recurring schedule
Exception reports
Reports that highlight situations that are out of the normal range
Drill-down reports
Reports that provide greater detail, so as to help analyze why a key indicator 
is not at an appropriate level or why an exception occurred
Ad hoc queries
Queries answering unplanned information requests to support a nonroutine 
decision; typically not saved to be run again


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    265
users are required. Online transaction processing (OLTP) systems provide this and are designed 
to handle multiple concurrent transactions from customers. Typically, these transactions have a 
fixed number of inputs, such as order items, payment data, and customer name and address, 
and specified outputs, such as total order price or order tracking number. Common transactions 
include updating customer data, processing orders, and generating sales receipts. Consequently, 
OLTP is a big part of interactive electronic commerce applications. Because customers can be 
located virtually anywhere in the world, it is critical that transactions be processed efficiently. 
The speed with which OLTP systems can process transactions is, therefore, an important design 
decision. In addition to which technology is chosen to process the transactions, how the data are 
organized in the database is also a major factor in determining system performance.
Although the database operations behind most transactions are relatively simple, designers 
often spend considerable time making adjustments to the database design in order to “tune” pro-
cessing for optimal system performance. Once an organization has all these data, it must design 
ways to gain the greatest value from its collection; each individual OLTP system could be que-
ried individually, but the real power for an organization comes from analyzing the aggregation of 
data from different systems using methods such as online analytical processing (discussed later).
OPERATIONAL AND INFORMATIONAL SYSTEMS.  Operational systems can generate a wealth 
of data that can serve as useful inputs into business intelligence and advanced analytics 
applications. For example, a grocery checkout system processes a specific transaction (the 
purchase) that can be linked to an inventory system (for reordering purposes), but it can also 
capture valuable data such as time of the purchase, items purchased together, form of payment, 
or loyalty program details. Coupled with external data (such as store location, weather data, or 
competitor information), these data can be analyzed for spending patterns, effectiveness of sales 
promotions, or customer profiling.
Systems designed to support decision making based on stable point-in-time or historical data 
are called informational systems. The requirements for designing and supporting operational 
and informational systems are quite different (Table 6.4). In a distributed online environment, 
performing real-time analytical processing diminishes the performance of transaction processing. 
For example, complex analytical queries require the locking of data resources for extended peri-
ods of execution time, whereas transactional events—data insertions and simple queries from 
customers—are fast and can often occur simultaneously; further, the operational databases typi-
cally only contain current data. Thus, a well-tuned and responsive transaction processing system 
may have uneven performance for customers while analytical processing occurs. As a result, 
many organizations replicate all transactions on a second database server so that analytical pro-
cessing does not affect transaction processing performance. This replication typically occurs in 
batches during off-peak hours, when site traffic volumes are at a minimum. However, especially 
for situations where real-time analytics is needed (such as fraud detection), even a few hours’ 
delay is unacceptable. Therefore, modern database management systems provide real-time opera-
tional analytics—allowing OLTP and analytics to be performed simultaneously—for the analysis 
of data coming from a single data source (such as an organization’s ERP system).
TABLE 6.4   Comparison of Operational and Informational Systems
Characteristic
Operational System
Informational System
Primary purpose
Run the business on a current basis
Support managerial decision making
Type of data
Current representation of state of the 
business
Historical or point-in-time (snapshot)
Primary users
Online customers, clerks, salesper-
sons, administrators
Managers, business analysts, and 
customers (checking status and 
history)
Scope of usage
Narrow and simple updates and 
queries
Broad and complex queries and 
analyses
Design goal
Performance
Ease of access and use

266    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
DATA WAREHOUSES.  For many complex analyses, however, data from various sources are 
needed. Therefore, large organizations, such as Walmart, UPS, and Alaska Airlines, have built 
data warehouses that integrate multiple large databases and other data sources into a single 
repository. Such a repository, containing both historic and (almost) current data for analysis and 
reporting, is suitable for direct querying, analysis, or processing. Much like a physical warehouse 
for products and components, a data warehouse stores and distributes data on computer-based 
information systems. A data warehouse is a company’s virtual storehouse of valuable data from 
the organization’s disparate information systems and external sources. It supports the analysis 
of sales, inventory, and other vital business data that have been culled from operational systems. 
The purpose of a data warehouse is to put key business information into the hands of more 
decision makers, and an organization that successfully deploys a data warehouse has committed 
to pulling together, integrating, and sharing critical corporate data throughout the firm. Table 
6.5 lists sample industry uses of data warehouses. Data warehouses can take up hundreds of 
gigabytes (even terabytes) of data. They usually run on fairly powerful mainframe computers 
and can cost millions of dollars.
While no changes to the existing, historical data contained in the data warehouse are made, the 
data in a data warehouse are periodically appended with “new” data from operational systems. 
Consequently, a crucial process for consolidating data from operational systems with other organi-
zational data (to facilitate the use of data mining techniques to gain the greatest and broadest 
understanding from the data) is extraction, transformation, and loading. First, the data need to 
be extracted from various different source systems. In the transformation stage, data are being 
cleansed and manipulated to fit the needs of the analysis (such as by creating new calculated fields 
or summary values). Data cleansing refers to the process of detecting, correcting (e.g., standard-
izing the format), or removing corrupt or inaccurate data retrieved from different source systems 
(such as differences in the way dates or ZIP codes are stored). Finally, the transformed data are 
loaded into the data warehouse and are ready for being used for complex analyses (Figure 6.10).
TABLE 6.5   Sample Industry Uses of Data Warehousing
Uses of Data Warehousing
Representative Companies
Analysis of scanner checkout data
Safeway
Tracking, analysis, and tuning of sales promotions and coupons
Costco, CVS Corporation
Frequent customer program management
Target, United Airlines
Profitability analysis and market segmentation
Walgreens, Toyota
Product promotions for focused market segments
Walmart, Williams-Sonoma
Cross-segment marketing
Citigroup
Risk and credit analysis
HSBC
Customer profiling
Morgan Stanley
Extract
Load
Gender: 1
Gender: Male
Gender: M
Doe, John
First_Name: John
Last_Name: Doe
May 25, 2010
5/25/2010
Gender: M
Transform
Database 1
Database 2
Database 3
Data Warehouse
FIGURE 6.10
Extraction, transformation, and 
loading are used to consolidate 
data from operational systems into 
a data warehouse.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    267
DATA MARTS.  Rather than storing all enterprise data in one data warehouse, many 
organizations have created multiple data marts, each containing a subset of the data for a 
single aspect of a company’s business, such as finance, inventory, or personnel. A data mart 
is a data warehouse that is limited in scope. It contains selected data from the data warehouse 
such that each separate data mart is customized for the decision support needs of a particular 
end-user group. As a data mart only contains the data needed by a limited segment of users 
(as opposed to a company-wide data warehouse), it is typically easier to query and reduces 
the time needed to perform analytical queries. Data marts have been popular among small and 
medium-sized businesses and among departments within larger organizations, all of which 
were previously prohibited from developing their own data warehouses because of the high 
costs involved.
Data marts typically contain tens of gigabytes of data as opposed to the hundreds of 
gigabytes in data warehouses. Therefore, data marts can be deployed on less powerful hardware. 
The difference in costs between different types of data marts and data warehouses can be signifi-
cant. The cost to develop a data mart is typically less than US$1 million, while the cost for a data 
warehouse can exceed US$10 million. However, with the advent of cloud computing, several 
vendors are offering data warehousing as a service, which can help to significantly lower the 
company’s initial investment (see Chapter 3); similarly, companies such as SAP are offering 
on-demand business intelligence as a service.
Business Intelligence and Advanced Analytics
Various different vendors offer a wide variety of tools for decision support; such tools are often 
classified as business intelligence and advanced analytics applications. Typically, business intel-
ligence tools provide decision support by enabling business users to perform analyses to obtain 
an understanding what has happened. Advanced analytics tools, in contrast, provide decision 
support by enabling business users as well as business analysts and data scientist to gain a deeper 
understanding of why things happened and to build predictive models. Although each type of 
application by itself can be valuable to an organization, it is their convergence that enables 
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Emotion Aware Gaming
Imagine playing a video game that seems to be able to read 
your mind or at least know when you are confident or when 
you are scared. And, depending upon how you are feeling, it 
would adapt to either make things easier or tougher on you. 
Affectiva, a Boston area tech company, is using a webcam to 
capture a person’s facial expression and uses complex algo-
rithms to interpret how the person is feeling while playing a 
video game. With this information, game designers are able to 
adjust the level of play. In a recently released psychological 
thriller game called Nevermind, the technology makes the 
game harder when players are more frightened or more anx-
ious. For example, the game will unexpectedly introduce a 
stressful challenge, such as trapping a player in a threatening 
environment, forcing the player to maintain calm as he or she 
plays the way to safety.
To build their technology, Affectiva’s researchers have stud-
ied the faces of millions of people from throughout the world, 
asking them to watch videos and mapping how different peo-
ple’s faces change while different types of videos are watched. 
In addition, they are researching how changes in heart rates 
align with changes in facial expressions. Affectiva’s researchers 
have collected more than 40 billion data points for interpreting 
emotion from a person’s face—a true Big Data problem. While 
video games are designed to take players on an emotional 
journey, they have not been able to adapt to changes in a 
player’s emotional state. With its emotion-sensing technology, 
Affectiva hopes to design more immersive games. The applica-
tion of this technology can be used far beyond video games 
and can be extremely useful for understanding how people are 
feeling when watching movies, political candidates, and 
advertising.
Based on:
Affectiva. (2016). Retrieved May 25, 2016, from http://www.affectiva.com
Subbaraman, N. (2016, March 1). Affectiva teams up with devel-
opers to make video games that know your feelings. The Boston 
Globe. Retrieved May 25, 2016, from http://www.betaboston.com/
news/2016/03/01/affectiva-teams-up-with-developers-to-make-video-
games-that-know-your-feelings

268    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
organizations to gain and sustain competitive advantage through enhanced decision making. In 
the following sections, we discuss these categories as well as the various systems and technolo-
gies that each encompasses.
Business Intelligence
Business intelligence tools are used by business users to analyze both structured and unstruc-
tured data to obtain an understanding of current and past performance, helping to guide planning 
processes. Given vast amounts of data, business intelligence tools help users perform analyses 
and interpret data. In the following sections, we describe some of these applications.
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS.  Traditionally, organizations used decision support systems 
(DSSs) to analyze structured data and support their decision making. DSSs are often used by 
managerial-level employees to help them solve problems such as sales forecasting or resource 
optimization, yet DSSs can be used to support decisions at virtually all levels of the organization. 
A DSS is designed to be an “interactive” decision aid that uses models to manipulate data. For 
example, if you have some historic sales data, you can use many different types of models to 
create a forecast of future sales. One technique is to take an average of past sales and adjust it for 
seasonal changes. The formula you would use to calculate and adjust the average is the model. A 
more complicated forecasting model might use time-series analysis or linear regression.
Using such models, DSSs can augment human decision-making performance and prob-
lem solving by enabling managers to perform “what-if” analyses to examine alternative solu-
tions to a problem. A what-if analysis allows users to make hypothetical changes to the data 
associated with a problem (e.g., loan duration or interest rate) and observe how these changes 
influence the results. For example, a cash manager for a bank could examine what-if scenarios 
modelling the effects of various interest rates on cash availability. Some types of problems 
utilize a variety of input variables that each may have a different likelihood of occurring (e.g., 
there is a 25 percent likelihood that inflation will stay the same and a 75 percent likelihood 
that inflation will increase). Sensitivity analysis allows to understand how different input val-
ues and their probability of occurring (e.g., rate of inflation and its probability of occurring) 
will affect the results of a model. Similarly, goal-seeking analyses help in determining how 
input parameters need to be changed to achieve a desired end state. Finally, optimization mod-
els allow finding the best balance between certain parameters within given constraints. 
Together, DSSs provide managers with various decision analysis tools to either analyze data 
or create meaningful information to support the decision making related to a variety of organi-
zational problems. See Table 6.6 for a summary of the ways organizations can use DSS to 
support decision making in organizations. While DSSs are useful for supporting a variety of 
managerial decisions, they are typically limited to relatively simple analyses of structured 
data, typically from transaction processing systems.
TABLE 6.6  Common DSS Uses for Specific Organizational Areas
Area
Common DSS Uses
Corporate level
Corporate planning, venture analysis, mergers and acquisitions
Accounting
Cost analysis, breakeven analysis, auditing, tax computation and analysis, 
depreciation methods, budgeting
Finance
Discounted cash flow analysis, return on investment, buy or lease, capital 
budgeting, bond refinancing, stock portfolio management, compound interest, 
after-tax yield, foreign exchange values
Marketing
Product demand forecast, advertising strategy analysis, pricing strategies, 
market share analysis, sales growth evaluation, sales performance
Human resources
Employee business expenses, fringe benefit computations, payroll and deductions
Production
Production scheduling, transportation analysis, product mix, inventory lev-
els, quality control, plant location, material allocation, maintenance analysis, 
machine replacement, job assignment, material requirements planning


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    269
ONLINE ANALYTICAL PROCESSING.  Online analytical processing (OLAP) refers to the process 
of quickly conducting complex, multidimensional analyses of data stored in a database that is 
optimized for retrieval, typically using graphical software tools. OLAP tools enable users to 
perform ad hoc analyses of different dimensions of data beyond simple data summaries and 
data aggregations of normal database queries. A typical question asked would be “What were 
the profits for each week in 2018 by sales region and customer type?” In contrast to relatively 
simple queries on two-dimensional tables, running such multidimensional queries requires 
a deeper understanding of the underlying data. Given the high volume of transactions within 
Internet-based systems and the potential business value in the data, business intelligence tools 
must provide extensive OLAP capabilities to business users. The chief component of an OLAP 
system is the OLAP server, which understands how data are organized in the database and has 
special functions for analyzing the data. The use of dedicated databases allows for tremendous 
increases in retrieval speed. In the past, multidimensional queries against large transactional 
databases could take hours to run; in contrast, OLAP systems pre-aggregate data so that only the 
subset of the data necessary for the queries is extracted, greatly improving performance. Given 
the decrease in cost of random access memory (RAM, see the Technology Briefing), a recent 
trend is in-memory computing, where the data are stored in a computer’s main memory rather 
than on a comparatively slow hard drive, removing the bottlenecks associated with reading and 
writing data. Further, using in-memory computing for both transaction and analytical processing 
can help provide answers to questions as they arise and enable making business decisions based 
on real-time data.
Measures and Dimensions  Whenever a business transaction occurs, associated data can 
be stored and then analyzed from a variety of perspectives. To facilitate efficient processing of 
transactions, databases supporting online transaction processing systems treat all data in similar 
ways. In contrast, OLAP systems are designed for efficient retrieval of data and categorize data 
as measures and dimensions. Measures (or sometimes called facts) are the values or numbers 
the user wants to analyze, such as sales revenues or the number of orders placed. Dimensions 
provide a way to summarize the data, such as region, time, or product line. Thus, sales revenue 
(a measure) could be analyzed by product, time (year, quarter, or week), geographical region, or 
distributor (the dimensions). To enable the analysis of data at more or less detailed levels, the 
dimensions are organized as hierarchies (such as in year, quarter, month, or day). For example, 
when analyzing sales by geographical regions, a user can drill down from state, to county, to 
city, or to the individual store location or roll up from state to sales region (northwest, south, 
southeast, and so on), to country, or to continent.
Cubes, Slicing, and Dicing  To enable such multidimensional analyses, OLAP arranges the 
data in so-called cubes. An OLAP cube is a data structure allowing for multiple dimensions to 
be added to a traditional two-dimensional table (Figure 6.11). Although the figure only shows 
three dimensions, data can be analyzed in more than three dimensions. Analyzing the data on 
subsets of the dimensions is referred to as slicing and dicing. For example, a slice may show 
sales by product type and region only for the second quarter of 2018. Another slice may only 
show sales for desktops in the western region (Figure 6.12).
South
North
East
West
Desktops
Laptops
Tablets
Smartphones
2018Q1
2018Q4
2018Q3
2018Q2
FIGURE 6.11
An OLAP cube allows for 
analyzing data by multiple 
dimensions.

270    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
INFORMATION VISUALIZATION.  In addition to allowing business users to perform various 
queries and analyses, an important aspect of business intelligence applications is information 
visualization. Visualization refers to the display of complex data relationships using a variety of 
graphical methods, enabling managers to quickly grasp the results of the analyses.
Digital Dashboards  Digital dashboards are commonly used to visually present key 
performance indicators and other summary information used by managers and executives 
to make decisions. To provide the greatest benefits for decision makers, digital dashboards 
typically support three usage models: push reporting, exception reporting and alerts, and 
pull reporting. Digital dashboards not only provide the decision makers with a quick, visual 
overview of key performance indicators and other key operational statistics and trends (i.e., 
push reporting) but also alert the user of any items that require immediate attention (i.e., 
exception reporting and alerts); if the user wants to analyze the root causes of an exception 
or perform other analyses, he or she can drill down or perform self-service ad hoc queries 
(i.e., pull reporting).
Digital dashboards (sometimes called executive dashboards) provide top-level managers 
with the needed information to support business processes, such as cash and investment manage-
ment, resource allocation, and contract negotiation. Typically, executives require information 
presented in a highly aggregated form so that they can scan information quickly for trends and 
anomalies (Figure 6.13).
Although data are typically provided in a highly aggregated form, the executive also has the 
capability to drill down and see the details if necessary. For example, suppose a digital dash-
board summarizes profits by states. If the executive wants to get a deeper understanding about a 
particular state, a selection on the screen can provide the details behind the aggregate. By drill-
ing down into the data, the executive can see that the majority of the profits were made in a par-
ticular region or city or even store. Also, the information provided can be easily shared 
throughout the organization so that the executive can quickly send a message to the appropriate 
managers to discuss solutions to the problem discovered in the drill-down.
Dashboards make use of a variety of design elements to present the data in the most user-
friendly way. To highlight deviations that need to be addressed or to symbolize changes over 
time, dashboards use maps, charts, spark lines, or graphics symbolizing traffic lights, thermom-
eters, or speedometers (Figure 6.14); conditional formatting is often used to highlight exceptions 
and draw the user’s attention to deviations from the normal course of business.
One recent trend influencing the design of dashboards is mobile business intelligence. With 
the advances in mobile communication technology, today’s executives want to be in touch with 
their organizational performance anytime, anywhere. Further, most of today’s knowledge work-
ers are increasingly mobile in terms of the device they’re using—during a workday, one may use 
a desktop computer, a laptop, a smartphone, or an iPad. Hence, dashboard vendors are offering 
solutions for multiple devices and screen sizes so that each user can get the most current infor-
mation regardless of location and device used, facilitating business decisions based on real-time 
data (Figure 6.15).
One of the growing trends of mobile business intelligence (BI) is the use of location data 
that can easily be gained from GPS or Wi-Fi networks. This capability can be an important part 
Desktops
Laptops
Tablets
Smartphones
2018Q1
2018Q4
2018Q3
2018Q2
Desktops
Laptops
Tablets
Smartphones
2018Q1
2018Q4
2018Q3
2018Q2
South
North
East
West
South
North
East
West
FIGURE 6.12
Slicing and dicing allows 
for analyzing subsets of the 
dimensions.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    271
of an innovative BI solution because location-relevant information can be delivered to the device 
based on its location. For example, details about particular people, such as customers, col-
leagues, and staff, within a particular vicinity can be sent to the device in addition to location-
specific reports. With such capabilities, the mobile device uses its data generation capabilities to 
enhance the intelligence of the user.
Visual Analytics  As discussed in previous sections, business intelligence systems can 
provide business decision makers with a wide variety of analyses to support decision 
making. However, in the end, it is still the humans who have to interpret the output from 
these systems. With the growing complexity of the underlying data (such as multiple 
dimensions, including spatial dimensions), interpreting the outputs becomes extremely 
FIGURE 6.13
A digital dashboard presents 
information in a highly aggregated 
form, enabling executives to scan 
information quickly for trends and 
anomalies.
Source: Power BI 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
Sales This Month
10
20
30
0
36
QTD Gross Proﬁt %
QTD Gross Proﬁt/Total Income
Inventory Turnover
Inventory Turnover
Month
Jan
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
FebMar AprMayJun Jul AugSep Oct NovDec
160
Marketing
120
80
40
0
J
J
S
J
N
F
M
M
A
A
O
WA
(2,932)
Budgeted Amount
> 20% over budget
Over budget
Within budget
Incomplete month
D
FIGURE 6.14
Dashboards use various graphical 
elements to highlight important 
information.

272    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
challenging. Visual analytics (sometimes called visual data discovery) is the combination 
of various analysis techniques and interactive visualization to solve complex problems. By 
combining human intelligence and reasoning capabilities with technology’s retrieval and 
analysis capabilities, visual analytics can help in decision making, as the strengths of both 
the human and the machine are merged. With the humans’ ability to make sense of “noisy” 
data, unexpected patterns or relationships in the data can be discovered, and results of 
complex queries can be quickly interpreted. Visual analytics is used in a variety of settings, 
ranging from homeland security to disaster relief. For example, making sense of tabular 
data about the strength of a hurricane (including information about location of clouds, etc.) 
is nearly impossible. Figure 6.16 shows the visualization of a hurricane as it is gaining 
strength. The image shows towering thunderclouds (in red), called hot towers, that were 
spotted just before the hurricane intensified to a Category 5 hurricane. Once the hurricane is 
represented visually, analysts can view changes over time to better understand its behavior. 
In similar ways, organizations around the world are utilizing visualization technologies to 
enhance business intelligence.
FIGURE 6.15
Mobile business intelligence can 
provide executives with relevant 
information regardless of location 
and device.
Source: Power BI 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
FIGURE 6.16
Visual analytics can help 
making sense of complex data 
relationships using a variety of 
graphical methods.
Source: NASA.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    273
Advanced Analytics
In contrast to business intelligence tools, which primarily focus on analyzing structured or semi-
structured data to examine past and current performance, advanced analytics are designed to 
help users gain a deeper understanding of why things happened and build predictive models to 
support human and automated decision making (the term data science is used to describe the 
advanced analytics field of study and practice). As such, advanced analytics uses both struc-
tured and unstructured data to automatically gain meaningful insights by discovering patterns, 
trends, and relationships. Whereas business intelligence tools are primarily used by business 
users, advanced analytics are often used by business analysts or data scientists due to the com-
plexity of the models and the underlying data. Enabled by advanced analytics are intelligent 
systems, which are designed to take some of these decisions out of the hands of the human deci-
sion makers, thus freeing up valuable resources.
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Identifying Malaria Hotspots
A hotspot is a place of significance—whether it be a place for 
commerce or a place that is popular for dining and dancing. 
When we think about mobile technology and hotspots, we 
tend to think of busy places with free public access to Wi-Fi. 
Such Wi-Fi hotspots are often located where people gather 
together such as airports, train stations, libraries, convention 
centers, coffee shops, and hotels. Because hotspots are often 
surrounded by a large and dynamic number of individuals, 
researchers can use them to study a broad range of topics rang-
ing from crowd movements to fashion and entertainment 
trends. To aid in this work, researchers have also created algo-
rithms for estimating the number of people in a room that can-
not be seen or even the number of people in a large crowd by 
analyzing the number of smartphone devices with their Wi-Fi 
antenna turned on within a given area. In the United States and 
in much of the developed world, there are lots of restrictions 
related to cell phone tracking due to numerous privacy con-
cerns, but there are currently no laws restricting the tracking of 
devices connected to Wi-Fi. While using such techniques to 
estimate the number of people cannot lead to a perfect 
measure—as researchers have to make assumptions about the 
number people without devices, the number with Wi-Fi turned 
off, and even those with more than one device—it allows for a 
pretty good estimate. With a good estimate of the total num-
ber of people, forecasts of various things can be made based 
on random sampling and knowing the population size.
In rural Africa, however, such Wi-Fi hotspots are not preva-
lent, but cell towers are. In contrast to much of the developed 
world, many parts of the developing world allow cell phone 
tracking either through agreements with wireless providers or 
with local governments. While privacy concerns remain, 
researchers are using cell phone tracking data to study various 
health and infrastructure issues. Because many of these regions 
do not have complete wireless coverage, individuals intention-
ally travel near cell towers in order to be able to make calls or 
send and receive messages. Thus, in many ways, a cell tower is 
a bigger version of the popular Wi-Fi hotspots we have all 
become accustomed to utilizing through our daily routines. 
When a mobile phone is within range of a cell tower, it com-
municates with the tower to let it know it is there. And, if 
there are messages stored in the network, they can be deliv-
ered to the device. By knowing which phones are there, when, 
and for how long, researchers are able to identify who lives 
near a tower and who is traveling through the region. By 
studying the communication patterns, they can also gain 
insights on an individual’s social network of friends and family 
members.
Given lacking medical services in many areas of sub-Saha-
ran Africa, infectious diseases are a big problem, with out-
breaks often spreading within members of a social network. 
Thus, health researchers are studying cell phone traffic data to 
not only understand social networks but also gain insights 
related to the transmission of infectious diseases. For example, 
in studying the data from a single tower in Kenya, researchers 
found that people making calls or sending text messages from 
a particular tower were more likely to be carriers of malaria. As 
malaria is transmitted from person to person through mos-
quito bites, researchers could predict who was likely to become 
infected by studying whom these people communicated with. 
They were also able to identify the source of the outbreak, a 
busy tea plantation that had many migrant workers. While the 
tracking of cell phone traffic raises many privacy concerns, 
using data mining and advanced analytics on these data is 
allowing researchers to better combat the spread of disease. 
Typical in the digital world, many advances come with equally 
troubling concerns.
Based on:
Liszewski, A. (2015, June 9). Wifi networks can count people—no phones 
required. Gizmodo. Retrieved June 28, 2016, from http://gizmodo.com/
wi-fi-networks-can-count-people-no-phones-required-1710033051
Talbot, D. (2013). Big Data from cheap phones. Technology Review. 
Retrieved June 28, 2016, from https://www.technologyreview 
.com/s/513721/big-data-from-cheap-phones

274    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
DATA MINING.  Data mining complements OLAP in that it provides capabilities for discovering 
“hidden” predictive relationships in the data. Using complicated algorithms on powerful 
multiprocessor computers or cloud computing architectures, data mining applications can analyze 
massive amounts of data to identify characteristics of profitable customers, purchasing patterns, 
or even fraudulent credit card transactions. An algorithm refers to the step-by-step procedures 
used to make a calculation or perform some type of computer-based process. Typically, data 
mining algorithms search for patterns, trends, or rules that are hidden in the data so as to develop 
predictive models. Results from a data mining exercise (such as the characteristics of customers 
most likely to respond to a marketing campaign for a specific new product) can then be used in 
an ad hoc query (e.g., to identify customers sharing those characteristics so as to target them in 
the next campaign). It is important to note that any interesting predictive model derived from 
data mining should be tested against “fresh” data to determine if the model actually holds what 
it promises.
Sometimes, data mining is completely atheoretical, and companies search for hidden rela-
tionships between data, akin to panning for gold. In other cases, business users formulate 
hypotheses (such as “customers with a household income of US$150,000 are twice as likely to 
respond to our marketing campaigns as customers with an income of US$60,000 or less”), and 
these hypotheses are tested against existing data. However, as with other business intelligence 
tools, being able to ask the right questions is the most crucial skill and should come before jump-
ing into conclusions about the outcomes.
In order to increase predictive power, data mining algorithms are run against large data sets. 
Depending on the size of the data set (large data sets can contain many terabytes of data), data 
mining algorithms can take a long time to run; thus, an important preparatory step to running 
data mining algorithms is data reduction, which reduces the complexity of the data to be ana-
lyzed. This can be achieved by rolling up a data cube to the smallest level of aggregation needed, 
reducing the dimensionality, or dividing continuous measures into discrete intervals.
Association Discovery  One frequently used application of data mining is association 
discovery. Association discovery is a technique used to find associations or correlations 
among sets of items. For example, a supermarket chain wants to find out which items are 
typically purchased together in order to redesign the store’s layout and optimize the customers’ 
“navigational path” through the store or to launch a new promotion. Mining sales transactions 
over the past 5 years may reveal that 80 percent of the time, people who purchase coffee also 
purchase sugar (Figure 6.17). Association rules typically contain two numbers: a percentage 
indicating support (e.g., the combination of coffee and sugar occurs in 20 percent of all 
transactions analyzed) and a confidence level indicating the reliability (e.g., 80 percent of all 
transactions that contain coffee also contain sugar). These numbers help managers decide if 
the association rule is meaningful and if any changes (e.g., to store layout or pricing) based 
on the findings are worthwhile. Similar to association discovery, sequence discovery is used 
to discover associations over time. For example, it may be discovered that 55 percent of all 
customers who purchase a new high-definition TV set also purchase a Blu-ray disc player within 
the next 2 months.
Coﬀee S Sugar [Support 20%, Conﬁdence 80%]
?
FIGURE 6.17
Association rules symbolize 
associations among sets of items.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    275
Clustering and Classification  Another useful application of data mining is clustering 
and classification. Clustering is the process of grouping related records together on the 
basis of having similar values for attributes, thus finding structure in the data. For example, a 
manufacturer of consumer electronics may find clusters around model preferences, age groups, 
and income levels. These results can then be used for targeting certain groups of customers in 
marketing campaigns. In contrast, classification is used when the groups (“classes”) are known 
beforehand, and records are segmented into these classes. For example, a bank may have found 
that there are different classes of customers who differ in their likelihood of defaulting on a 
loan. As such, all customers can be classified into different (known) risk categories in order to 
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
Orwellian Internet of Things
In 1949, English author George Orwell wrote the novel 
“1984,” which described a futuristic tyrannical society with 
omnipresent government surveillance by an entity known as 
“Big Brother.” Big Brother was not a helpful and nurturing sib-
ling but an entity that seeks power for its own sake and not for 
the good of others. Since his writing, Orwellian is an adjective 
reflecting actions that could be destructive to the welfare of a 
free and open society. Privacy advocates are concerned that 
many types of gadgets and home automation devices, falling 
under the Internet of Things (IoT) megatrend, when paired 
with advanced analytics capabilities, have the potential to have 
Orwellian impacts on society.
There are a wide range of IoT devices that are designed to 
scoop up massive amounts of data to aid humans and other sys-
tems in our modern society. But as more and more data are col-
lected and analyzed, many privacy advocates fear we are losing 
more and more of our anonymity and individual freedom. For 
example, when considering IoT devices, privacy advocates are 
concerned with a variety of questions. What data are IoT devices 
collecting? Who has access to these data? How can these data 
be used? And, as news reports demonstrate, IoT data can be 
used in unexpected, interesting, and legally significant ways.
Imagine all of the things that could be equipped with a sen-
sor and have data collected about their use. For example, things 
like your toaster, refrigerator, thermostat, lighting, and even the 
front door lock on your apartment. All of those seem kind of 
cool, right? What about your toilet? That doesn’t sound too 
cool. If you have any concerns about a government reading 
your e-mail, how would you feel about a database collecting 
information on every time your toilet flushes? Imagine what a 
medical research group could do with such data. In sum, the 
data collected for every thing could end up in the hands of law 
enforcement, the government, marketing companies, and even 
malicious hackers. And this is not science fiction.
In 2016, the U.S. government admitted it was using IoT 
devices for spying and snooping on possible terrorists and crim-
inals. The U.S. director of national intelligence, James Clapper, 
made it clear that IoT sensors and devices are providing ample 
opportunities for intelligence agencies to spy on targets. “In the 
future, intelligence services might use the [Internet of Things] 
for identification, surveillance, monitoring, location tracking, 
and targeting for recruitment, or to gain access to networks or 
user credentials,” Clapper told a Senate panel as part of his 
annual “assessment of threats” against the United States.
In combination with advanced analytics, the IoT will allow 
companies to provide unprecedented services to customers. 
Reminders, automatic ordering, activity tracking, and a pleth-
ora of other conveniences will become a normal part of our 
lives. However, with all of these conveniences, we will also be 
providing an abundance of data about our daily lives that can 
at a minimum be a privacy invasion or be misused by malicious 
hackers or even our own government. While such Orwellian 
concerns were not possible in 1984, in today’s digital world, 
Big Brother has arrived.
Questions
1.	 If you use a fitness tracker or some other IoT device, should 
the company be able to sell your data? Would it be accept-
able to share the data with some but not others? Explain.
2.	 Typically, the company providing an IoT device owns its 
customers’ data. What laws or rules are needed to balance 
the needs of the company and the privacy of customers?
Based on:
Krieger, M. (2016, February 10). Top U.S. official admits—government 
will use “Internet of Things” to spy on the public. Liberty Blitz Krieg. 
Retrieved May 27, 2016, from http://libertyblitzkrieg.com/2016/02/10/
top-u-s-official-admits-government-will-use-internet-of-things-to-spy-
on-the-public
Sullivan, C.C. (2016, January 20). FTC chairwoman raises concerns 
over the Internet of Things. FindLaw. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from 
http://blogs.findlaw.com/technologist/2016/01/ftc-chairwoman-raises-
concerns-over-the-internet-of-things.html
Swanson, B. (2015, February 25). The FCC’s Orwellian Internet pol-
icy. ComputerWorld. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from http://www 
.computerworld.com/article/2888366/the-fcc-s-orwellian-internet-
policy.html
Timm, T. (2016, February 9). The government just admitted it will 
use smart home devices for spying. The Guardian. Retrieved May 27, 
2016, from http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/
internet-of-things-smart-devices-spying-surveillance-us-government
Ts, M. (2014, July 2). The Internet of Things is watching. Security Intel-
ligence. Retrieved May 27, 2016, from https://securityintelligence.com/
internet-of-things-all-well-or-orwell

276    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
ensure that the bank does not exceed a desired level of risk within its loan portfolio. Typically, 
classification would use a decision tree to classify the records.
UNSTRUCTURED DATA ANALYSIS.  Although the methods just described can help decision 
makers get a better view of their organization’s performance or their customers’ behavior, they 
only provide a partial picture. By focusing purely on structured data (such as transactions, 
credit lines, and so on), a wealth of unstructured data (such as customer sentiments voiced in 
online forums, letters, or service-related call center records) is left untapped; in fact, researchers 
estimate that 80 percent of all enterprise data consist of unstructured or semistructured data 
(Andriole, 2015), and with the tremendous increase of user-generated content on the web, 
this figure is likely to increase further. Therefore, making important business decisions purely 
based on structured data can be dangerous, as the massive amounts of unstructured data could 
either strengthen or contradict findings derived from analyzing only structured data. Hence, 
organizations are trying not only to reach a single version of the truth but also to get the whole 
truth by analyzing unstructured data using text mining, web content mining, or web usage mining.
Text Mining and Web Content Mining  Text mining refers to the use of analytical techniques 
for extracting information from textual documents. For organizations, the analysis of textual 
documents can provide extremely valuable insights into business performance, competitors’ 
activities, or regulatory compliance. Such textual documents can include internal data such as 
letters or e-mails from customers, customer calls, internal communications, or external data such 
as blog posts, wikis, Twitter messages, and Facebook posts as well as competitor’s web pages, 
marketing materials, patent filings, and so on. Text mining systems use text processing, statistical 
analyses, machine learning, and other techniques to analyze a document’s linguistic structures 
to extract data such as places, companies, concepts, or dates. Most systems can easily extract a 
wide range of content and can be customized to meet an organization’s needs by adding specific 
key words related to competitors, product names, persons of interest, and the like. Obviously, 
when analyzing and using user-generated content, companies have to be aware of issues related 
to ethics and privacy but also security.
Web content mining refers to extracting textual information from web documents. To 
extract information from the overall Internet (or from some subset of websites), a document col-
lection spider, or web crawler (discussed later), would gather web pages and documents that 
match some prespecified criteria and place their content in a massive document warehouse. 
Once collected, the text mining system would apply a variety of analytical techniques to produce 
reports that can be used to gain additional insights beyond what is typically gained when only 
mining structured data (Figure 6.18). The next challenge for organizations will be extracting 
useful information from audio or video streams on the web (so-called multimedia mining).
Analyzing textual documents can help organizations in various ways:
■
■The marketing department can use sentiment analysis to learn about customers’ thoughts, 
feelings, and emotions by analyzing not only customer e-mails or letters but also blogs, 
wikis, or discussion forums.
■
■The operations department can learn about product performance by analyzing service 
records, customer calls, or online product reviews and improve the product’s features or 
performance based on insights gained.
■
■Strategic decision makers can gather competitive intelligence by analyzing press releases, 
news articles, or customer-generated web content about competitors’ products.
■
■The sales department can learn about major accounts by analyzing news coverage.
■
■The human resources department can monitor employee satisfaction or compliance with 
company policies by analyzing internal communications (this is especially important in 
order to comply with regulations such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act; see Chapter 10).
■
■News reporters or intelligence agencies can find out what topics are trending when trying 
to understand public sentiments in unstable countries.
■
■Investigators can identify possible instances of noncompliance and fraud by analyzing 
e-mail communication within a company in a regulated industry.
Many major companies, including Capital One, Marriott International, United Airlines, and 
Walmart, use text mining solutions to assess customer sentiments and increase customer satis-
faction. Similarly, raveable.com provides hotel ratings by aggregating information from sources 


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    277
such as Tripadvisor, Expedia, and Travelocity as well as individual travel blogs; in addition to 
aggregating numerical ratings given for aspects such as cleanliness, value, or location, raveable 
.com uses text mining to analyze review comments based on key words such as earplugs, noise, 
or clean and the associated sentiments so as to categorize the reviews and classify them as posi-
tive or negative. We will further discuss social media monitoring and sentiment analysis and 
their role in customer relationship management in Chapter 8, “Strengthening Business-to-
Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management.”
Web Usage Mining  Web usage mining—also referred to as web analytics—is used by 
organizations such as Amazon.com to determine patterns in customers’ usage data, such as how 
users navigate through the site or how much time they spend on different pages. By analyzing 
users’ clickstream data (i.e., a recording of a user’s path through a website), a business such as 
Amazon.com can assess its pages’ stickiness (i.e., the ability to attract and keep visitors) and 
how customers navigate through different item categories, ultimately helping Amazon.com to 
optimize the structure of its website. In addition, organizations can monitor users’ mouse cursor 
movements to infer which areas of a web page get most attention by the visitors.
As with other business analytics systems, results from these analyses can be provided on 
digital dashboards, paper reports, web portals, e-mail alerts (using monitoring or data mining 
agents), and mobile devices as well as used by a variety of other information systems 
(Figure 6.19).
MACHINE LEARNING.  Whereas “conventional” computers are very adept at processing large 
amounts of data by rapidly executing a program’s instructions, they cannot easily adapt to 
different circumstances or deal with noisy data. If a conventional computer is presented with a 
novel problem that it is not programmed to solve, it cannot deal with this situation. Machine 
learning is a branch of artificial intelligence that allows systems to learn by identifying 
meaningful patterns when processing massive amounts of structured or unstructured data. 
Machine learning has enabled great advances in various fields; intelligent systems (discussed 
below) such as Google’s self-driving cars but also speech recognition, natural language 
processing, computer vision, web searching, image recognition, or predictive typing 
Internet
Networked Documents
Document
Warehouse
Document
Collection
Spider
Text
Mining
System
Doc B
Doc A
Doc C
Doc D
Doc E
Clustered Documents
Cluster
A
Cluster
B
Ranked Documents
1.
2.
3.
4.
Doc A
Doc B
Doc C
. . .
FIGURE 6.18
Text mining the Internet.

278    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
(e.g., using smartphone keyboards such as SwiftKey or Swype) are based on advances in 
machine learning algorithms. Recently, Netflix started applying machine learning algorithms 
to improve movie recommendations. One frequently used approach to machine learning is 
the use of artificial neural networks; neural networks, composed of a network of processing 
elements (i.e., artificial “neurons”) that work in parallel to complete a task, attempt to 
approximate the functioning of the human brain and can learn by example. Typically, a neural 
network is trained by having it categorize a large database of past information (e.g., a database 
of handwritten digits) for common patterns so as to infer rules (e.g., what features differentiate 
the digit 1 from a 7). These rules can then be applied to new data and conclusions drawn. For 
example, many financial institutions use neural network systems to analyze loan applications. 
These systems compare a person’s loan application data with the neural network containing 
the intelligence of the success and failure of countless prior loans, ultimately recommending 
loan acceptance (or rejection) (Figure 6.20). Newer neural-network based approaches—
called deep learning—are getting ever closer to mimicking the human brain and enable great 
advances in areas such as voice or speech recognition; in 2016, banks started using voice 
recognition to identify online banking customers. In recent years, machine learning algorithms 
have made great progress, especially in applications where inputs and tasks are imprecise, 
such as classifying images. In particular, using Bayesian statistics or fuzzy logic allows using 
approximations or subjective values in order to handle situations where information about a 
problem is incomplete or imprecise. For example, a loan officer, when assessing a customer’s 
loan application, may generally categorize some of the customer’s financial information, 
such as income and debt level, as high, moderate, or low rather than using precise amounts. 
In addition to numerous business applications, fuzzy logic is used to better control antilock 
braking systems and household appliances as well as when making medical diagnoses or 
filtering offensive language in chat rooms.
PREDICTIVE MODELING.  Traditional business intelligence applications are designed to focus 
on past and current performance, thus helping decision makers to get a detailed picture 
about the current state of a business. Advanced analytics augments business intelligence by 
using combinations of statistical analysis, data mining, and machine learning for predictive 
modeling to build explanatory models, which help understand the data, identify trends, 
or predict business outcomes; whereas business intelligence is good for knowing what is, 
advanced analytics helps in understanding why something is a certain way and foreseeing 
what will be. As such, predictive modeling tools extend traditional DSS and other BI tools 
by supporting forecasting, simulation, and optimization based on large volumes of structured, 
semistructured, and sometimes unstructured data. For example, predictive modeling can help 
Inventory
Data
Warehouse
Sales
Data
Warehouse
Other
Data
Sources
Business Intelligence
and Advanced
Analytics Systems
Paper
Reports
Digital
Dashboards
and Other
Systems
E-mail
Alerts
Mobile
Users and
Systems
FIGURE 6.19
Business intelligence can be 
delivered to users in a variety of 
ways.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    279
in developing predictive patterns based on not only historic purchase data (structured data) 
but also customer sentiments voiced in social media or call center records (unstructured data). 
Likewise, Uber is attempting to improve its pricing mechanism using predictive modeling. 
Under Uber’s current “surge pricing” mechanism, fares increase if there is increased demand 
(such as after concerts or during bad weather), which, in theory, should bring more drivers into 
an area where this increase in demand takes place. However, customers are often frustrated by 
being charged higher prices. Thus, Uber tries to build predictive models that are better able 
to forecast increased demand in certain areas at certain times, decreasing the effect of surges. 
However, predictive modeling is heavily dependent on statistical models and their underlying 
assumptions; likewise, as with all advanced analytics, analyzing unstructured data still remains 
relatively costly.
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS.  Artificial intelligence (AI) is the science of enabling information 
technologies—software, hardware, networks, and so on—to simulate human intelligence, such 
as reasoning and learning, as well as gaining sensing capabilities, such as seeing, hearing, or 
feeling. AI has had a strong connection to science fiction writers, who have written stories about 
AI-enabled technologies aiding humans (e.g., Mr. Data in Star Trek: The Next Generation), 
attempting world domination (e.g., The Matrix), or enabling humans to exist on an alien planet 
(e.g., Avatar). The current reality of AI is that it is lagging far behind the imagination of most 
science fiction writers; nevertheless, great strides have been made.
Based on complex machine learning algorithms, intelligent systems—composed of sen-
sors, software, and computers embedded in machines and devices—emulate and enhance 
Age
Income
Debt Level
Financial
   History
Job Status
Length of
   Employment
Home Ownership
Assets
Investments
Marital Status
Spouse Income
Dependents
Health
...
 Process
Neural Network System
Input
Output
Recommendation
Approve Loan
Reject Loan
Investments
Debt
Level
Home
Ownership
Spouse
Income
Financial
History
Length of
Employment
Age
Income
Assets
Job Status
Marital
Status
FIGURE 6.20
Neural networks approximate the functioning of the brain by creating common patterns in data and then comparing new data to learned 
patterns to make a recommendation.

280    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
human capabilities. Intelligent systems are having a tremendous impact in a variety of areas, 
including banking and financial management, medicine, engineering, and the military. Big 
Data has been both a challenge and an opportunity for artificial intelligence. On the one hand, 
vast amounts of different forms of data make machine algorithms increasingly complex; on the 
other hand, Big Data provides a treasure trove of potential insights and applications of intelli-
gent systems. For many applications, intelligent systems assist in or perform real-time decision 
making, often using vast amounts of data. For example, many see vast promises in the use of AI 
for trading, removing the influence of traders’ emotions, which often lead to suboptimal trad-
ing decisions. Likewise, advanced driver assistance systems (such as adaptive cruise control or 
lane-keeping systems offered in various new car models) or driverless cars of the future rely on 
intelligent systems to make real-time decisions based on up to 1GB of data per second, coming 
from various sensors, cameras, or radar. Over the past few years, the cost of sensors has been in 
free fall; for example, accelerometer sensors (built into many smartphones to measure motion) 
now cost only around US$0.50. The combination of machine learning and decreasing prices of 
sensors is fueling the development of sensor-driven computing. Sensors providing data about 
everything from motion to voltage to pressure or even chemistry can provide a tremendous 
amount of useful data, which can then be used to improve performance, a device’s life span, 
and so on. Artificial intelligence also fuels the rapid advances in drone technology and robotics 
that we see today, such as drones that can monitor product placement and stock levels in 
Walmart’s warehouses or robots built to replace human pickers in Amazon’s warehouses. Fur-
ther, the combination of AI and sensors has enabled the creation of collaborative robots, which 
can work alongside human workers (and react if there is possible danger) instead of having to 
be placed in segregated areas.
However, advances in artificial intelligence have fueled many ethical debates, such as 
how to ensure that AI (and robots) only learns in the way humans intend. For example, using 
unsupervised learning, a robot (or other intelligent system) can improve its own learning by 
making changes to learning rules and monitoring the results; as a consequence, such intelli-
gent systems must be programmed to stop the system without the system learning how to cir-
cumvent this.
Intelligent Agent Systems  An intelligent agent, or simply an agent (also called a bot—
short for “software robot”), is a program that works in the background to provide some service 
when a specific event occurs. There are several types of agents for use in a broad range of 
contexts, including the following:
■
■User Agents. Agents that automatically perform a task for a user, such as automatically 
sending a report at the first of the month, assembling customized news, or filling out a web 
form with routine information.
■
■Buyer Agents (Shopping Bots). Agents that search to find the best price for a particular 
product you wish to purchase.
■
■Monitoring and Sensing Agents. Agents that keep track of key data, such as data pro-
vided by various sensors, meters, cameras, and the like, notifying the user when conditions 
change.
■
■Data Mining Agents. Agents that continuously analyze large data warehouses to detect 
changes deemed important by a user, sending a notification when such changes occur.
■
■Web Crawlers. Agents that continuously browse the web for specific information (e.g., 
used by search engines)—also known as web spiders.
■
■Chatbots. Agents that simulate human conversations, such as in online help systems.
■
■Destructive Agents. Malicious agents designed by spammers and other Internet attackers 
to farm e-mail addresses off websites or deposit spyware on machines.
One example of an intelligent agent is Apple’s Siri personal assistant, built into its iPhones. 
Similarly, Cortana is a personal assistant built into various Microsoft platforms. Over time, Cor-
tana learns about a user’s habits and performs certain actions based on certain triggers such as 
time of the day, location, incoming or outgoing phone calls, searches, and so on. For example, in 
the morning, the user automatically receives an alert about the weather in his or her current loca-
tion; when passing by a subway station, public transport information is presented; when on a 
trip, the time to travel back home is automatically calculated (taking into consideration factors 
such as traffic situation); and so on (Figure 6.21).


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    281
SECURITY MATTERS 
Hacktivists Versus Fembots: The Ashley Madison Case
On July 15, 2015, the Impact Team, a group of hacktivists, 
broke into the systems of the extramarital dating website 
Ashley Madison, which it accused of deceptive business prac-
tices, such as requiring users to pay for having their account 
(and the associated data) deleted. Having gained access to sev-
eral gigabytes of data, including login names, identifying infor-
mation, and even expressed sexual desires of the site’s users, 
the hacktivists demanded the site to shut down, threatening to 
publish user data. To reinforce the demand, the Impact Team 
released a small amount of its data several days later, after the 
site was not shut down as requested by the hackers. Later in 
August 2015, the hackers posted data about 32 million users, 
resulting in a chain reaction of events in the lives of many of 
those named in the posted data. Some denied involvement, 
some committed suicide, and many others began a long ordeal 
of explaining to loved ones how their names, credit card data, 
and other personal data became part of the released data.
Later analysis of the hacked data revealed that a large pro-
portion of the female accounts were chatbots—so-called fem-
bots, (more or less) intelligent agents designed to start a chat 
with unsuspecting men, enticing them to purchase credits to 
contact the make-believe female members. As most people, 
Ashley Madison’s users probably had not read Ashley Madison’s 
terms and conditions before agreeing to them: In the terms and 
conditions, Ashley Madison stated that conversations may not 
be authentic, may be exaggerated, or may even be fictitious. 
Whether or not running a dating portal for extramarital affairs 
in the pursuit of earning money is ethical is debatable. Whether 
asking users to pay for deleting account data or using chatbots 
to lure unsuspecting customers would be considered deceptive 
business practices is debatable. Likewise, whether or not the 
Impact Team’s actions in response to Ashley Madison using 
deceptive business practices were warranted is debatable. 
What is clear is that Ashley Madison did not sufficiently protect 
user data, allowing the hacktivists to gain access to the data, 
resulting in an avalanche of negative consequences for many.
Based on:
Ashley Madison data breach. (2016, May 19). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved May 28, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Ashley_Madison_data_breach&oldid=721001290
Calpito, D. (2015, September 16). Ashley Madison’s terms of service 
says so: Users are cheating on their spouses with fembots. Tech-
Times. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.techtimes.com/
articles/85172/20150916/ashley-madison-s-terms-of-service-says-so-
users-are-cheating-on-their-spouses-with-fembots.htm
Dreyfuss, E. (2015, August 19). How to check if you or a 
loved one were exposed in the Ashley Madison hack. Wired. 
Retrieved June 15, 2016, from https://www.wired.com/2015/08/
check-loved-one-exposed-ashley-madison-hack
McHugh, M. (2015, September 4.). The dangers of look-
ing at Ashley Madison hack infographics. Wired. Retrieved 
June 15, 2016, from http://www.wired.com/2015/09/
dangers-looking-ashley-madison-hack-infographics
FIGURE 6.21
Cortana, an intelligent agent built 
into various Microsoft platforms, 
presents pertinent information 
based on factors such as the user’s 
habits, location, and time of day.
Source: Cortana, Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation.

282    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
In sum, there are ongoing developments to make information systems smarter so that orga-
nizational decision makers gain business intelligence. Although intelligent systems have yet to 
realize the imagination of science fiction writers, they have taken great strides in helping organi-
zations enhance decision making.
Knowledge Management and Geographic 
Information Systems
As you have seen, there are various tools organizations can use to enhance their decision mak-
ing. In addition to analyses and predictions using various types of structured and unstructured 
data, organizations draw on other sources of data and knowledge. In particular, organizations use 
knowledge management systems to manage organizational knowledge assets and use geographic 
information systems to manage and analyze spatially referenced data to provide spatial decision 
support. These are discussed next.
Knowledge Management Systems
There is no universal agreement on what exactly is meant by the term knowledge management. 
In general, however, knowledge management refers to the processes an organization uses to 
gain the greatest value from its knowledge assets. In Chapter 1, we contrasted data, informa-
tion, and knowledge. Recall that data are raw, unformatted symbols such as characters or num-
bers. Information is data that have been formatted, organized, or processed in some way so that 
the result is useful to people. We need knowledge to understand relationships between different 
pieces of information. Consequently, what constitutes knowledge assets are all the underlying 
skills, routines, practices, principles, formulas, methods, heuristics, and intuitions. All data-
bases, manuals, reference works, textbooks, diagrams, displays, computer files, proposals, 
plans, and any other artifacts in which both facts and procedures are recorded and stored are 
considered knowledge assets. From an organizational point of view, properly used knowledge 
assets enable an organization to improve its efficiency, effectiveness, and, of course, profitabil-
ity. Additionally, as many companies are beginning to lose a large number of baby boomers to 
retirement, companies are using knowledge management systems to capture these crucial 
knowledge assets. Clearly, effectively managing knowledge assets will enhance business 
intelligence.
Knowledge assets can be categorized as being either explicit or tacit. Explicit knowledge 
assets reflect knowledge that can be documented, archived, and codified, often with the help of 
information systems. Explicit knowledge assets reflect much of what is typically stored in a 
DBMS. In contrast, tacit knowledge assets reflect the processes and procedures that are located 
in a person’s mind on how to effectively perform a particular task (Figure 6.22). Identifying key 
Explicit Knowledge Assets
Tacit Knowledge Assets
FIGURE 6.22
Explicit knowledge assets can 
easily be documented, archived, 
and codified, whereas tacit 
knowledge assets are located in 
a person’s mind.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    283
tacit knowledge assets and managing these assets so that they are accurate and available to peo-
ple throughout the organization remains a significant challenge.
Tacit knowledge assets often reflect an organization’s best practices—procedures and pro-
cesses that are widely accepted as being among the most effective and/or efficient. Identifying how 
to recognize, generate, store, share, and manage this tacit knowledge is the primary objective for 
deploying a knowledge management system. Consequently, a knowledge management system is 
typically not a single technology but rather a collection of technology-based tools that include 
communication technologies—such as e-mail, groupware, instant messaging, and the like—as 
well as information storage and retrieval systems, such as wikis or DBMSs, to enable the genera-
tion, storage, sharing, and management of tacit and explicit knowledge assets (Malhotra, 2005).
Benefits and Challenges of Knowledge Management Systems  Many potential benefits 
can come from organizations’ effectively capturing and utilizing their tacit knowledge assets 
(Levinson, 2010) (Table 6.7). Although there are many potential benefits for organizations that 
effectively deploy knowledge management systems, to do so requires that several substantial 
challenges be overcome.
First, effective deployment requires employees to agree to share their personal tacit 
knowledge assets and to take extra steps to utilize the system for identifying best practices. 
Therefore, organizations must create a culture that values and rewards widespread 
participation.
Second, experience has shown that a successful deployment must first identify what knowl-
edge is needed, why it is needed, and who is likely to have this knowledge. Once an organization 
understands “why, what, and who,” identifying the best technologies for facilitating knowledge 
exchange is a much easier task.
Third, the successful deployment of a knowledge management system must be linked to a 
specific business objective (e.g., increase innovativeness); and fourth, the knowledge manage-
ment system must be easy to use, not only for entering but also for retrieving knowledge. Simi-
larly, the system cannot overload users with too much information or with information that is 
obsolete. Just as physical assets can erode over time, knowledge can also become stale and irrel-
evant. Therefore, an ongoing process of updating, amending, and removing obsolete or irrele-
vant knowledge must occur, or the system will fall into disarray and will not be used.
How Organizations Utilize Knowledge Management Systems  The people using 
a knowledge management system will be working in different departments within the 
organization, performing different functions, and will likely be located in different locations 
around the building, the city, or even the world. Each person—or group of people—can be 
thought of as a separate island that is set apart from others by geography, job focus, expertise, 
age, and gender. Often, a person on one island is trying to solve a problem that has already been 
solved by another person located on some other island. Finding this “other” person is often a 
significant challenge. The goal of a successful knowledge management system is to facilitate 
the exchange of needed knowledge between these separate islands. To find and connect such 
separate islands, organizations use social network analysis, a technique that maps people’s 
contacts to discover connections or missing links (sometimes called structural holes) within the 
organization (Figure 6.23); thus, social network analysis can be used to attempt to find groups 
of people who work together, to find people who don’t collaborate but should, or to find experts 
in particular subject areas. In addition to social network analysis, organizations use social 
bookmarking and social cataloging to capture and structure employees’ knowledge and harness 
TABLE 6.7  Benefits and Challenges of Knowledge Management Systems
Benefits
Challenges
Enhanced innovation and creativity
Improved customer service, shorter product 
development, and streamlined operations
Enhanced employee retention
Improved organizational performance
Getting employee buy-in
Focusing too much on technology
Forgetting the goal
Dealing with knowledge overload and 
obsolescence

284    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
their collective intelligence (see Chapter 5, “Enhancing Organizational Communication and 
Collaboration Using Social Media”).
Once organizations have collected their knowledge into a repository, they must find an 
easy way to share it with employees (often using an intranet), customers, suppliers (often using 
an extranet), or the general public (often using the Internet). These knowledge portals can be 
customized to meet the unique needs of their intended users. For example, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) uses a web-based knowledge portal for keeping the public (e.g., 
citizens, researchers, and industry) informed on the most up-to-date information related to food 
(e.g., information on mad cow disease or product recalls) and drugs (e.g., the status of a drug 
trial) (Figure 6.24).
Campbell_D
Parboteeah_V
Jenkins_J
Lowry_P
Valacich_J
Hardin_A
Schneider_C
Chakraborty_S
Fuller_M
Scott_K
FIGURE 6.23
Social network analysis can help 
to analyze collaboration patterns.
FIGURE 6.24
Countless organizations are using web-based knowledge portals to provide information to employees, customers, and partners.
Source: United States Food and Drug Administration.


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    285
In addition to the FDA, countless other organizations, such as Ford Motor Company, Eli 
Lilly, Walmart, and Dell Computers, are also using knowledge management systems. We are 
learning from these deployments that all organizations, whether for-profit or nonprofit, struggle 
to get the right information to the right person at the right time. Through the use of a comprehen-
sive strategy for managing knowledge assets, organizations are much more likely to gain a com-
petitive advantage and a positive return on their IS investments.
Geographic Information Systems
One type of information system used to enhance decision making is called a geographic 
information system (GIS). A GIS is a system for creating, storing, analyzing, and managing 
geographically referenced data. In other words, GISs augment and extend other business ana-
lytics tools by adding a spatial dimension to data; a GIS captures various characteristics 
about geographic locations, allowing these characteristics to be coupled with other data to 
support querying, analysis, and decision making (sometimes referred to as location 
analytics). For example, a GIS could link the square footage of commercial real estate to its 
exact location in terms of latitude and longitude. These data could be paired with population 
density, average incomes of people living within an area, travel accessibility (e.g., interstate 
highways and major thoroughfares), proximity to services (e.g., fire, police, restaurants, pub-
lic transportation stops), or virtually any other characteristic. A business such as a restaurant 
chain could use this information to identify optimal locations for the placement of new out-
lets. On a personal level, you probably frequently interact with GISs. For example, when 
you’re accessing Google Maps to search for a restaurant in your town, you can view geo-
graphic data (such as the map or the satellite image) as well as attribute data about restau-
rants, including name, address, opening hours, and customer reviews. With the increase in 
mobile devices, geospatial data is increasingly becoming part of many applications and often 
serves as the foundation for many business models. For example, companies such as the car-
hailing app Uber could not provide services without being able to match the locations of rid-
ers and drivers.
Businesses typically face many decisions with a spatial dimension: Where are my cus-
tomers located? Where is the best location to open a new store? Which areas should be 
included in the next mailing? How far are my customers willing to drive? One application of 
GISs is their use as spatial decision support system, helping to create models used to answer 
questions such as where a company such as Levi Strauss should add authorized resellers or 
how, where, and what kinds of fertilizers farmers should apply, enabling precision farming 
(see Table 6.8 for various industry uses of GISs). Depending on the problem to be solved, spa-
tial decision support systems can use factors such as climate, water, transportation, resource 
management, agriculture, and so on, to build models that help forecast potential outcomes of 
land use decisions.
In organizational settings, analysts can use GISs to combine geographic, demographic, and 
other data for locating target customers, finding optimal site locations, or determining the right 
product mix at different locations; additionally, GISs can be used to perform a variety of analy-
ses, such as market share analysis and competitor analysis. Cities, counties, and states also use 
GISs for aiding in infrastructure design and zoning issues (e.g., where should the new elemen-
tary school be located?). For the various geospatial aspects you can map with GISs, refer to 
Table 6.9. How does a GIS help in visually analyzing geospatial and related data? Typically, a 
GIS provides a user with a blank map of an area. The user can then add data stored in different 
layers, each resembling a transparency containing different information about the area; for 
example, one layer may contain all roads, another layer may contain ZIP code boundaries, and 
yet other layers may contain floodplains, average household sizes, locations of coffee shops, or 
other information of interest (in Google Earth, you can view various layers, such as roads, traffic 
patterns, weather, earthquakes, golf courses, and so on; see Figure 6.25). Adding or removing 
those layers helps to view the relevant information needed to answer questions that have a spa-
tial dimension.
One question that organizations often face is where the customers come from. In order to 
answer this question, organizations typically use data from survey respondents (or the cashier 
asks for customers’ ZIP codes); these data are then geocoded (i.e., transformed into coordinates) 
to create a layer containing customer data that can then be added to a map. Comparing custom-
ers’ locations with the location of one’s business can help in deciding whether the store has the 

286    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
TABLE 6.8  Various Industry Uses of GISs
Industry
Sample Uses
Agriculture
Analyze crop yield by location, soil erosion, or differences in 
fertilizer needs (precision farming)
Banking
Identify lucrative areas for marketing campaigns
Disaster response
Analyze historical events, set up evacuation plans, and identify 
areas most likely to be affected by disasters
Environment and conservation
Analyze wildlife behaviors or influences of climate change
Insurance
Risk analysis (e.g., earthquake insurance)
Government
Urban planning, zoning, and census planning
Law enforcement
Analyze high-crime areas
Marine biology
Track movements of fish swarms
Media
Create maps to visualize locations of events and analyze circulation
Mining and drilling
Locate potential areas for extraction of natural resources
Real estate
Create maps to visualize locations of properties
Retail
Analyze sales, inventory, customers, and so on, by location; identify 
new retail locations; and visualize and present business data
Transportation and logistics
Route planning
Source: Based on ESRI, http://www.esri.com/what-is-gis/who-uses-gis.
TABLE 6.9  Various Ways of Representing Geospatial Data
Mapping
Example
Features and patterns (i.e., 
distribution of features)
Earthquake epicenters (features) and areas where the hazard may be 
highest (patterns)
Quantities
The number of young families with a high income in a census district
Densities
Number of high-income families per square mile in a census district
What’s inside
Does a luxury real estate development fall within a 15-minute driving 
radius of a store?
What’s nearby
How many Starbucks stores are within 5 miles of my new coffee 
shop?
Change
How have store sales changed after a large ad campaign?
Source: Based on ESRI, http://www.esri.com/what-is-gis/overview.
optimal location or whether opening a new store would be warranted. Relatedly, trade area anal-
ysis helps to assess where customers are coming from by combining location information with, 
for example, drive time information to determine if certain areas are underserved or if two stores’ 
trade areas overlap. Another way to visualize geospatial data is by using thematic maps. The-
matic maps color-code data that are aggregated for specific geographic regions. For example, a 
thematic map could display the median household income in different blocks, or it could display 
average household sizes, helping a business to identify areas with the most promising target 
population; similarly, an insurance company could use GISs to determine where certain crimes 


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    287
(such as car theft) most frequently occur. Another use of GIS is analyzing paths shoppers take in 
a retail store, allowing retailers to assess whether the placement of products or promotional dis-
plays is effective.
GIS benefit greatly from advances in machine learning, especially for recognizing and clas-
sifying geographical features, such as land or soil. In particularly, many situations (such as in 
agriculture, resource extraction, or nature conservation) require the analysis of aerial imagery 
(acquired using satellites or drones). Typically, such classification tasks are inherently imprecise 
and do not lend themselves easily to binary classifications. Machine learning algorithms, how-
ever, enable such analyses, offering much potential for applications ranging from agriculture to 
disaster recovery.
Further, the Internet of Things and mobile technologies have enabled far more mean-
ingful analyses than ever. For example, Google Maps performs real-time analyses of loca-
tion data from literally hundreds of millions of mobile phone users (such as Android users 
who have location services enabled or iPhone users running Google Maps) to estimate the 
number of cars and traffic conditions on any given road; such analyses enable Google to 
provide information about traffic conditions and suggest alternative routes in case there are 
traffic jams on a given route. In addition, Google has used these data to build a tremendous 
repository of historical traffic data, allowing Google to predict how traffic conditions are 
likely to be once a user reaches a certain area. Likewise, the data collected by countless IoT 
devices can be augmented with geospatial data, allowing users to harness the benefits of IoT 
technologies in mobile settings, where precise information about a sensor’s location is 
needed.
In addition to helping in analysis, GISs are also increasingly used by governments and 
organizations to effectively communicate with stakeholders. For example, many retail 
chains such as Best Buy and Walmart incorporate map-based store locators into their web-
sites. When users search for a store by city, state, or ZIP code, the website returns a map 
showing the store’s location (geographic data) along with attribute data such as distance, 
street address, phone number, and opening hours. Similarly, organizations use output from 
GISs to communicate to their stockholders about expansion plans, retail store density, and 
the like.
Clearly, GISs, like all the systems described here, are providing organizations with business 
intelligence to better compete in the digital world.
FIGURE 6.25
Google Earth uses layers to 
display information related to a 
specific geographical area.
Source: 2016 Google Inc. All rights 
reserved. Google and the Google Logo 
are registered trademarks of Google Inc.

288    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Healthcare
Do you remember the times when your doctor wrote a pre-
scription and the handwriting was worse than your professor’s, 
making you wonder how the pharmacist could ever decipher it 
and dispense the correct drugs? If you recently went to a doc-
tor, you may have noticed that information systems have had a 
huge impact on the healthcare field; indeed, health informatics 
(or healthcare IS) has become a key focus of healthcare provid-
ers, insurance companies, and governments. Now, many doc-
tors carry laptops or tablets, allowing them to digitally store 
any diagnosis, facilitating the sharing of information between 
the physician, nurses, and even your medical insurance pro-
vider. In addition to providing access to electronic patient 
records, the laptop or tablet provides your physician access to 
medical and drug information, as offered by the Physician’s 
Desk Reference website (www.pdr.net), where your physician 
can obtain the latest information about drugs and clinical 
guidelines or check interactions between different drugs.
Information systems have also tremendously changed the 
diagnosis and monitoring of patients. For example, modern 
electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocardiogram (EKG) 
devices heavily depend on computer technology, and, as the 
name implies, computed tomography (used to produce images 
of internal organs) could not be performed without computer 
technology. Even diagnostic tests such as X-rays now use digi-
tal technology, allowing the doctor to digitally enhance the 
image for improved diagnosis or to electronically transmit 
the image to a remote specialist. Following the diagnosis of a 
serious condition, technology can even help in the operating 
room. For example, many modern clinics use surgical robots 
and endoscopes for delicate procedures such as neurosurgery 
or gastrointestinal surgery. Taken a step further, such systems 
can be used for what is referred to as telemedicine, including 
remote diagnosis and remote surgery. Whereas traditionally 
a patient had to travel thousands of miles to visit a special-
ized surgeon, many surgeries can now be performed remotely, 
reducing the strain on the patient and potentially saving pre-
cious time. Further, telemedicine applications can be used for 
remote locations, battlefields, or even prisons, reducing costs 
for transporting patients and improving care.
Just as physicians, insurance companies, and healthcare 
providers are turning to information systems to improve busi-
ness processes and better serve patients’ needs, consumers 
are increasingly using the Internet for health information. 
For example, WebMD is one of the most popular websites 
providing health-related information, priding itself on hav-
ing high-quality, timely, and unbiased information. In addi-
tion to objective information, people use social media to 
obtain information beyond what’s published by the experts. 
Specifically, people seeking physician and hospital rankings 
or recommendations frequent blogs, health-related discus-
sion forums, or review sites such as RateMDs (ratemds.com) 
or Angie’s List (angieslist.com). Further, major search engines 
such as Microsoft’s Bing are constantly refining their search 
algorithms to provide the most relevant information to 
health-related queries. Another important trend is the use 
of personal sensors, devices, and services to keep track of a 
variety of things about your health and well-being. For exam-
ple, there are numerous products to help you quantify vari-
ous aspects of your life, from Wi-Fi–connected body scales 
and fitness trackers to mood monitoring, blood testing, 
sleep monitoring, and even DNA sequencing. The Internet of 
Things is playing a huge role in fueling various aspects of the 
quantified self, a movement to incorporate data acquisition 
on various aspects of a person’s daily life in order to chart 
self-improvement and other objectives. These and other data 
sources throughout the digital world are creating massive 
amounts of data that can be used by researchers to better 
understand various health-related issues. Likewise, doctors 
and hospitals are increasingly using IoT-enabled healthcare 
devices, and healthcare providers are using data analytics for 
everything from researching drug interactions to monitoring 
healthcare costs, quality of service, and effectiveness of treat-
ments. Needless to say, Big Data and analytics are transform-
ing the healthcare industry.
Regardless of whether you’re visiting your doctor about a 
condition or for a routine checkup or if you need more infor-
mation about what your doctor is telling you, various informa-
tion systems are likely to play a major role.
Questions
1.	 Discuss the benefits and drawbacks of online medical 
records.
2.	 Computer-aided diagnosis can replace years of experience, 
providing opportunities for young, inexperienced physi-
cians. Contrast the benefits and drawbacks for the patients 
and the physicians.
3.	 Will there be a place for physicians without computer skills 
in the future? Why or why not?
Based on:
Anonymous. (n.d.). What is telemedicine? American Telemedi-
cine Association. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://www 
.americantelemed.org/about-telemedicine/what-is-telemedicine
Massey, P. M. (2016). Where do U.S. adults who do not use the Inter-
net get health information? Examining digital health information dis-
parities from 2008 to 2013. Journal of Health Communication, 21(1), 
118–24.
Quantified self. (2016, June 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Quantified_Self&oldid=727407441
Telemedicine. (2016, June 22). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?ti
tle=Telemedicine&oldid=726471226


CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    289
Key Points Review
1.	 Describe the need for business intelligence and 
advanced analytics and how databases serve as a 
foundation for making better business decisions. 
Businesses need to quickly respond to external threats 
and opportunities arising from unstable market 
conditions, fierce competition, short product life cycles, 
government regulation, or fickle customers; business 
intelligence and advanced analytics tools can help 
organizations gain meaningful insights from ever-
increasing amounts of structured and unstructured data. 
Organizations use databases to capture and manage the 
data that can later be used as input to business 
intelligence applications. A database is a collection of 
related data organized in a way that facilitates data 
searches and contains entities, attributes, records, and 
tables. A DBMS is a software application with which 
you create, store, organize, and retrieve data from a 
single database or several databases. The data within a 
database must be adequately organized so that it is 
possible to store and retrieve data effectively. To 
support more effective business processes, businesses 
use online transaction processing. Data from 
operational systems serve as an input to informational 
systems. Master data management helps organizations 
to arrive at a “single version of the truth” to gather 
business intelligence; data warehouses and data marts 
support the integration and analysis of large data sets.
2.	 Explain core concepts of business intelligence and 
advanced analytics. Business intelligence tools enable 
business users to analyze past and current data to obtain 
an understanding what has happened. Traditionally, 
decision support systems were used to support human 
and automated decision making. OLAP tools offer the 
ability to perform complex multidimensional queries. 
Visualization refers to the display of complex data 
relationships using a variety of graphical methods. 
Results of complex analyses as well as key performance 
indicators are displayed on digital dashboards, which 
are often used to provide decision makers with the right 
information in an easy-to-understand way. Visual 
analytics combines the human visual system and 
analysis techniques to aid in the analysis of complex 
relationships and make sense of “noisy” data. Advanced 
analytics tools, in contrast, are used by business users 
as well as business analysts and data scientists to gain a 
deeper understanding of why things happened and to 
build predictive models. Advanced analytics models are 
often used to discover “hidden” relationships in data. 
Data mining is used for association discovery and 
clustering and classification. Unstructured data analysis 
is used to extract information from textual documents. 
Intelligent systems, based on machine learning and 
artificial neural networks, work to emulate and enhance 
human capabilities.
3.	 Describe how organizations can enhance decision 
making by using knowledge management and 
geographic information systems. Knowledge 
management systems are a collection of technology-
based tools that enable the generation, storage, sharing, 
and management of tacit and explicit knowledge assets. 
GISs aid in storing, analyzing, and managing 
geographically referenced data and provide spatial 
decision support for a variety of applications.
Key Terms
ad hoc query  264
advanced analytics  254
algorithm  274
artificial intelligence (AI)  279
association discovery  274
attribute  259
bot  280
business analytics  254
business intelligence (BI)  254
business rules  262
buyer agent  280
chatbot  280
classification  275
clickstream data  277
clustering  275
competitive intelligence  276
continuous planning process  257
data cleansing  266
data dictionary  262
data-driven organization  254
data mart  267
data mining  274
data mining agent  280
data model  262
data reduction  274
data science  273
data type  262
data warehouse  266
decision support system (DSS)  268
destructive agent  280
digital dashboard  270
dimension  269
drill down  269
drill-down report  264
entity  259
exception report  264
explicit knowledge asset  282
extraction, transformation,  
and loading  266
fact  269
form  263
fuzzy logic  278
geographic information  
system (GIS)  285
in-memory computing  269
informational system  265
intelligent agent  280
intelligent system  279
key-indicator report  264
knowledge assets  282
knowledge management  282
knowledge management system  283
knowledge portal  284
layer  285

290    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
location analytics  285
machine learning  277
master data  262
master data management  262
measure  269
model  268
monitoring and sensing agent  280
neural network  278
NoSQL  261
OLAP cube  269
OLAP server  269
online analytical processing 
(OLAP)  269
online transaction processing 
(OLTP)  265
operational system  264
predictive modeling  278
query  263
record  259
relational database management system 
(RDBMS)  260
report  263
report generator  263
roll up  269
scheduled report  264
semistructured data  256
sentiment analysis  276
sequence discovery  274
shopping bot  280
slicing and dicing  269
social network analysis  283
stickiness  277
structured data  256
Structured Query Language 
(SQL)  263
table  259
tacit knowledge asset  282
text mining  276
unstructured data  256
user agent  280
visual analytics  272
visual data discovery  272
visualization  270
web content mining  276
web crawler  280
web spider  280
web usage mining  277
what-if analysis  268
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM
Review Questions
	 6-1.	 How can a continuous planning process help 
businesses respond to external threats and 
opportunities?
	 6-2.	 Describe the differences between entities, 
tables, rows, and attributes in a database.
	 6-3.	 What is the importance of master data 
management?
	 6-4.	 What are the advantages of a DBMS?
	 6-5.	 Explain the differences between OLAP and 
OLTP.
	 6-6.	 How can visual analytics be used to improve 
decision making?
	 6-7.	 Describe how OLAP enables a user to 
conduct multidimensional queries.
	 6-8.	 Explain the difference between clustering and 
classification.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
	 6-9.	 What is the relationship between measures 
and dimensions?
	 6-10.	 Describe and give examples of two types of 
web mining.
	 6-11.	 What is a website’s stickiness, and why is it 
important?
	 6-12.	 Explain the purpose of a model within a DSS.
	 6-13.	 Describe four types of intelligent agents. How 
can they be used to benefit organizations?
	 6-14.	 What is a knowledge management system, 
and what types of technologies make up a 
comprehensive system?
	 6-15.	 What is the purpose of using layers in GIS 
applications?
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 6-16.	 In an RDBMS, an entity is represented as a(n) 
______________.
A.	attribute
B.	table
C.	row
D.	association
	 6-17.	 A(n) ______________ report provides a summary of 
critical metrics on a recurring schedule.
A.	scheduled
B.	exception
C.	key indicator
D.	drill-down
	 6-18.	 In order to swiftly respond to a highly competitive and 
rapidly changing environment, organizations utilize a 
______________.
A.	continuous planning process
B.	structured decision-making process
C.	structured decision support process
D.	continuous decision-making process
	 6-19.	 To determine the likelihood of new customers to 
default on a loan, a manager in a bank would typically 
use ______________.
A.	association discovery
B.	sequence discovery
C.	classification
D.	clustering

 
CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    291
	 6-24.	 What is true about knowledge management?
A.	As baby boomers retire at an increasing rate, 
knowledge management is helping organizations 
capture their knowledge.
B.	A knowledge management system is not a single 
technology but a collection of technology-based 
tools.
C.	Finding the right technology to manage knowledge 
assets is much easier than identifying what knowl-
edge is needed, why it is needed, and who has this 
knowledge.
D.	All of the above are true.
	 6-25.	 Which of the following is an example of attribute data 
commonly used in GIS applications?
A.	structured data
B.	longitude
C.	trade area
D.	annual sales
Answers are on page 293.
	 6-20.	 Web usage mining entails analyzing ______________.
A.	clickstream data
B.	page content
C.	associations among sets of items
D.	unstructured data
	 6-21.	 Market share analysis is typically used by the 
______________ function of an organization.
A.	marketing
B.	accounting
C.	production
D.	management science
	 6-22.	 Big Data is characterized by all of the following except 
______________.
A.	verifiability
B.	velocity
C.	variety
D.	volume
	 6-23.	 ______________ agents keep track of key information 
such as inventory levels, notifying the users when con-
ditions change.
A.	User
B.	Buyer
C.	Monitoring and sensing
D.	Data mining
Problems and Exercises
	 6-26. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Social network analysis
ii.	 Measures
iii.	 Master data
iv.	 Web content mining
v.	 Continuous planning process
vi.	 Data mining
vii.	 Business intelligence
viii.	 Digital dashboard
ix.	 Geographic information system
x.	 DSS
a.	 An information system designed to store and 
analyze spatially referenced data
b.	 Tools and techniques for analyzing and visualizing 
both structured and unstructured data to obtain an 
understanding of current and past performance
c.	 A technique that attempts to find groups of people 
who work together, to find people who don’t col-
laborate but should, or to find experts in particular 
subject areas
d.	 A set of methods used to find hidden predictive re-
lationships in a data set
e.	 A strategic business planning process involving 
continuous monitoring and adjusting of business 
processes to enable rapid reaction to changing busi-
ness conditions
f.	 The values or numbers a user wants to analyze
g.	 A special-purpose information system designed to 
support organizational decision making
h.	 Extracting textual information from web documents
i.	 A user interface visually representing summary 
information about a business’s health, often from 
multiple sources
j.	 The data that are deemed most important in the 
operation of a business
	 6-27.	 Interview a top-level executive within an organization 
with which you are familiar and find out the organiza-
tion’s most important external opportunities. Can busi-
ness intelligence help to harness these opportunities?  
If so, how; if not, why not?
	 6-28.	 Search for a product at the website of an online 
retailer. Do you think the page containing product 
descriptions is a static page or is created dynamically? 
What pieces of information would be stored in a data-
base to create the page dynamically?
	 6-29.	 On the web, search for the use of data warehouses in a 
particular industry you are interested in. What are the 
primary uses for a data warehouse in the industry? If data 
warehouses are not used within the industry, why not?
	 6-30.	 Visit CNN Money (http://money.cnn.com/calculator/
retirement/retirement-need) on the web to plan your 
retirement using a DSS. What did you learn? To what 
extent is the DSS useful in planning your retirement? 
If you browse through CNN Money, what other inter-
esting stuff do you find?
	 6-31.	 Search the web for information about design elements 
used in dashboards (such as charts, spark lines, traffic 
lights, thermometers, and speedometers). What is the 
purpose of each design element? Which ones are con-
sidered most effective in presenting information? Why?

292    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
	 6-32.	 Think about the online ads you see when surfing the 
web. Which ads do you believe to be a result of web 
usage mining? How do you that think vastly different 
websites are able to target you with similar ads?
	 6-33.	 Think about the junk mail in your e-mail program’s 
spam folder. What types of advanced analytics meth-
ods does your e-mail program’s spam filter use to 
identify spam e-mails?
	 6-34.	 Describe your experiences with GIS. What tasks or 
problems have you used GIS for? For which personal 
decisions would a GIS be especially relevant? Provide 
specific examples.
	 6-35.	 Go out onto the web and compare three shopping bots 
(e.g., www.mysimon.com, www.shopzilla.com, www 
.shopping.com, or www.pricegrabber.com) for a prod-
uct you are interested in. Did the different agents find 
the same information, or were there any differences? 
Did you prefer one over the others? If so, why?
	 6-36.	 Interview a manager within an organization. What 
types of reports does the individual use? Who produces 
the reports? What types of reports are deemed most 
important for decision making?
	 6-37.	 Interview an IS manager within an organization. What 
types of information and knowledge discovery tools 
does the organization use? What are the most impor-
tant business questions to be answered? What types of 
tools are most useful for answering these questions?
	 6-38.	 Identify different types of tacit and explicit knowledge 
needed for one of your hobbies. Do you consider tacit 
or explicit knowledge more important for pursuing 
your hobby? Why?
	 6-39.	 Imagine that your friends are launching a knowledge 
management system for sharing class notes and study 
tips. Would you share your knowledge with your fel-
low students? Why or why not? What knowledge 
would you not share with others? Why?
	 6-40.	 Search the web for graphs representing demographics 
and population statistics about your country. Which 
graphs are best at representing the information? Why?
	 6-41.	 Find a publicly available mashup that combines maps 
with geospatial data. What makes this mashup useful? 
How could you represent the data without using map 
layers?
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application:  
Travel Loan Facility
	 6-42.	 A new aspect of the business has been added to Campus 
Travel. Students can apply for a loan to help pay for 
their travels. However, loans for travel are available only 
to students who are traveling outside the country for at 
least 2 weeks. Because the costs for this type of interna-
tional travel differ depending on how you travel, where 
you stay, and what you do at the destination, different 
loan packages are available. For a month in Europe, you 
have decided to take out a loan. You have already taken 
a look at several offers but are unsure whether you can 
afford it. Set up a spreadsheet to calculate the payments 
per month for the following situations:
■
■2 weeks in Eastern Europe; price: US$2,000; 
interest rate: 5.5%; Time: 1 year
■
■2 weeks in Western Europe; price: US$3,000; 
interest rate: 6.0%; time: 1 year
■
■3 weeks in Eastern Europe; price: US$3,000; 
interest rate: 6.5%; time: 2 years
■
■3 weeks in Western Europe; price: US$3,500; 
interest rate: 5.5%; time: 2 years
■
■4 weeks in Eastern Europe; price: US$4,000; 
interest rate: 6.0%; time: 2 years
■
■4 weeks in Western Europe; price: US$5,000; 
interest rate: 6.5%; time: 2 years
	
	 Once you have calculated the payments, calculate the 
total amount to be paid for each option as well as the 
total interest you would pay over the course of the 
loan. Make sure to use formulas for all calculations 
and submit a professionally formatted page displaying 
the results and a page displaying the formulas. (Hint: 
In Microsoft Excel, use the “PMT” function in the 
category “Financial” to calculate the payments. Use 
Ctrl+` [grave accent] to switch between formula and 
data views; calculate the number of payments before 
using the formula.)
Database Application: Tracking Regional Office 
Performance at Campus Travel
	 6-43.	 The general manager wants to know which offices 
were most profitable during the previous year and asks 
you to prepare several reports. In the file FY2012.mdb, 
you find information about the offices, sales agents, 
and destinations. Use the report wizard to generate the 
following reports:
■
■List of all sales agents grouped by office (including 
total number of agents per office)
■
■List of all sales agents for each destination (grouped 
by destination, including total number of agents)
■
■Destinations sold by each sales agent (including 
total number of destinations)
	
	 Hint: You will need to generate the necessary queries 
before creating the reports.

 
CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    293
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats:  
Internet User Demographics around the World
While over the past years, Internet user demographics have 
shifted towards a broader user base, there are still differences 
among segments of society. In the United States, according to 
research conducted by Pew Research in January 2014, 97 per-
cent of adults with a college degree used the Internet, but only 
76 percent of those with a high school degree or less did. Like-
wise, 99 percent of those with a household income of $75,000 
or higher used the Internet, whereas only 77 percent of those 
with a household income of $33,000 or less used the Internet. 
These differences are also apparent among age groups: whereas 
97 percent of 18- to 29-year-olds used the Internet, only 57 per-
cent of the people aged 65 or above did. This implies that some 
segments of society do not have easy access to much of the 
information provided online by the government and private 
institutions.
Questions and Exercises
	 6-44.	 Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics for 
the United States and your own country.
	 6-45.	 As a team, interpret these numbers. What is striking 
or interesting about these statistics? What may be the 
reason for differences between countries?
	 6-46.	 How have the numbers changed since 2014?
	 6-47.	 Using a spreadsheet software of your choice, create 
a graph or figure most effectively visualizing the 
­statistics/changes you consider most important.
Based on:
Pew Research (2014). Internet user demographics. Pew Research. Retrieved 
November 25, 2014, from http://www.pewinternet.org/data-trend/internet-use/
latest-stats.
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 6-16.	 B, p. 259
	 6-17.	 C, p. 264
	 6-18.	 A, p. 257
	 6-19.	 C, p. 275
	 6-20.	 A, p. 277
	 6-21.	 A, p. 268
	 6-22.	 A, p. 256
	 6-23.	 C, p. 277
	 6-24.	 D, p. 282
	 6-25.	 D, p. 285
Total healthcare spending in Asia—approxi-
mately US$1.34 trillion in 2013—is growing 
at an annual rate of 10.5 percent and is 
expected to reach US$2.21 trillion in 2018. 
This is the result of a rapidly aging popula-
tion and a growing middle class demanding 
access to an already-strained healthcare 
­system. To cope with these increased 
demands, hospitals are increasingly turning 
to big data and analytics for more optimal 
use of resources as well as operational 
efficiencies.
When Khoo Teck Puat Hospital (KTPH) 
first opened in Singapore in June 2010, it 
was overwhelmed by demand for the subsi-
dized in-patient beds. Its Health Analytics 
Unit dived into the data and found that  
20 percent of the patients were responsible 
for the overwhelming demand, because they 
accounted for 80 percent of the repeat visits. 
Moreover, only 10 percent of the cases were 
health-related; the majority were related to 
social problems. Based on this insight, 
KTPH started an Ageing-in-Place Programme 
(AIP) involving nurses and part-time social 
workers to manage the health of repeat 
patients at home. The Programme was so 
successful that the average admission  
rate fell from 3.5 to 1.3 times in just six 
months.
Following the success of AIP, KTPH 
embarked on another project to predict 
which patients were likely to be readmitted. 
A predictive analytics model analyzed past 
discharge data as well as the bio-socio data 
of the patients who had been admitted more 
than twice in a six-month period. Based on 
statistical models, patients who were likely 
to be admitted in the following month were 
forecast, and this list became a planning tool 
for the hospital. It allowed the hospital staff 
to be more discerning in their home-visit 
program by concentrating more on the poten-
tially at-risk patients. In addition, it allowed 
the hospital to plan and to allocate its staff 
more efficiently based on the anticipated 
demand.
In another instance, to find out how 
healthy people in north Singapore were, 
KTPH examined 4,000 people aged 40 and 
above for conditions such as diabetes and 
cholesterol. The analytics team then com-
bined this patient data with geospatial coor-
dinates to map patients on an area map. All 
of a sudden, the problem hotspots became 
visually clear, and it was easy to identify 
where more unhealthy members of the 
community lived. This enabled the team to 
plan proactive strategies and deploy appro-
priate resources such as community pop-up 
clinics and health and well-being talks at 
strategic locations to reach those deemed to 
be at risk.
In another study, KTPH realized that the 
data it had collected about obstructive sleep 
apnea, a sleep disorder in which breathing 
suddenly stops and then restarts during sleep, 
could be used to plan for critical care admis-
sion after surgery. That was because the data 
showed that people with a history of the dis-
order faced much greater risk during surgery, 
especially under anaesthesia. This predictive 
model thus became a planning tool that has 
since been used by KTPH to screen patients 
who undergo surgery and forecast the 
CASE 1 
Data Analytics in HealthCare

294    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
probability of possible complications and the 
resulting intensive care admissions.
Similarly, at another Singapore hospital, 
Changi General Hospital (CGH), the analyt-
ics team analyzed the patient records of those 
with diabetes in its Health Management 
Unit’s tele-health program and found that it 
was patients with poorly controlled diabetes 
who benefitted the most from phone calls 
and follow-up by its nurses. This allowed the 
hospital to refine its enrolment criteria for 
the program and to deploy its staff and other 
medical resources more efficiently. 
In another instance, to reduce the wait-
ing time for patients at the emergency 
department, the analytics team at CGH dived 
into three years’ worth of data to address the 
following questions: How many patients 
were coming for treatment? On which days 
of the week and at what times of the day 
were they coming? How severe were their 
illnesses? After analyzing usage patterns, for 
example, they found that patient volume was 
the highest at around 10 a.m. and 7 p.m. to 
8 p.m. Thus, CGH’s emergency department 
rescheduled doctors’ shifts to these periods 
leading to a reduction in the waiting time for 
high-priority patients by 24 percent (from 
33 minutes to 25 minutes). 
Hospitals are not just becoming medi-
cally savvy through big data but also more 
business savvy. One example comes from 
Indonesia, home to 255 million people and 
by far the most populated country in 
Southeast Asia. Indonesian healthcare opera-
tor Bundamedik Healthcare System started 
using big data and analytics at one of its hos-
pitals, RSIA Bunda Jakarta. The insights 
gained from analytics have helped the hospi-
tal in its decision-making for critical finan-
cial business processes such as budgeting, 
reporting, creating a score card, analysis, and 
forecasting. As a result, Bundamedik is able 
to get a more holistic picture on the overall 
spending and budget status at RSIA Bunda 
Jakarta. 
All across Asia and the world, big data 
and analytics are playing a critical role in 
transforming healthcare by improving its 
quality and, at the same time, making it more 
affordable.
Questions
	 6-48.	 What is predictive analytics? How did the insights gained 
from predictive analytics benefit KTPH? 
	 6-49.	 How is data analytics transforming the healthcare industry?
	 6-50.	 Search the web for data analytics usage in industries other 
than healthcare. Give one example where insights gained 
from data analytics have helped the organization in its 
­decision-making or improved its operations.
Based on:
Anonymous (2013, November 12). Singapore’s Khoo Teck Puat Hos-
pital deploys predictive analytics. EnterpriseInnovation.net. Retrieved 
January 25, 2017, from http://www.enterpriseinnovation.net/article/
singapores-khoo-teck-puat-hospital-deploys-predictive-analytics-559521559
Anonymous (n.d). Big Data Analytics: How is it changing lives? Himss Asia 
Pacific. Retrieved January 25, 2017, from https://www.himssasiapac.org/sites/
default/files/HIMSSAP_ExclusiveArticles_BigDataAnalytics.pdf
Anonymous (2014, January 21). Singapore hospital uses analytics to cut hos-
pital readmissions. Business Intelligence Singapore website. Retrieved Janu-
ary 25, 2017, from http://singaporebusinessintelligence.blogspot.sg/2014/01/
singapore-hospital-uses-analytics-to.html
Anonymous (2016, November 14). Healthcare analytics in action. Infocomm 
Media Development Authority Singapore. Retrieved January 25, 2017, from 
https://www.imda.gov.sg/infocomm-and-media-news/buzz-central/2014/7/
healthcare-analytics-in-action
Avery, L. (2015, February 3). How big data can drive patient behavior change. 
FuturereadySingapore.com. Retrieved January 25, 2017, from https://www 
.futurereadysingapore.com/2015/how-big-data-can-drive-patient-behaviour-
change.html
Neo, C. (2015, February 28). Big data making a great difference in healthcare. 
Todayonline.com. Retrieved January 25, 2017, from http://www.todayonline 
.com/singapore/big-data-making-great-difference-healthcare
In recent years, social media have become 
pervasive throughout society. No one can 
deny that social media have completely 
changed the context of privacy, shaping and 
reshaping relationships, exaggerating ideals 
of sharing, and reconstructing daily routines 
in order to visit one’s online friends at least 
once a day. Thanks to social media, people 
can now share every detail about the most 
mundane things in life. Updating where you 
are at any given moment alerts your friends 
to what you are up to but also allows enter-
prises to learn how to better market products 
and promote celebrities.
Responding to the growing influence of 
social media and, in turn, demonstrating 
another crucial function of the phenomenon, 
all types of organizations are finding value in 
monitoring and digesting the nonstop flow of 
posts in the social media world. For example, 
traditional business intelligence (BI) will 
inform you where your products are selling 
well and where they are not. But it will not tell 
you why your product is selling well in one 
location but not another. By integrating social 
media with traditional BI tools, you can moni-
tor everything that is being said about your 
products on various platforms. With such 
social intelligence, you can gain deeper and 
more timely insights about customers, learning 
why a product is not selling. As we all know, 
information can travel fast on social media 
sites, as information goes viral when people 
like, share, and retweet information. By care-
fully monitoring trends, companies can stay 
ahead of the competition as new information is 
starting to trend. Countless successful organi-
zations are actively monitoring social media to 
gain social intelligence regarding the senti-
ments of current and future customers.
Social media has not only become an 
important source of up-to-date information 
for businesses, but it is also emerging as a 
valuable resource for police and other first 
responders. Social media users have demon-
strated that information about crises can 
travel at a rate that rivals 911 services. 
Indeed, analyzing public information is not 
unusual in the world of intelligence gathering 
either. Today, social media have people rac-
ing to express who they are and what they 
think, information that has never been this 
vast and openly accessible. Using such infor-
mation, the U.S. government is developing 
tools to forecast everything from revolutions 
to upheavals to economic changes. Recently 
released documents also reveal that the U.S. 
National Security Agency (NSA) uses Face-
book and other social media profiles to create 
maps of social connections. From business 
CASE 2 
Gathering Social Intelligence

 
CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics    295
corporations to government agencies, insights 
about what is happening, or about to happen, 
can be gleaned from social media where peo-
ple are compelled to share what they know or 
think with just about anyone.
Have you checked your Facebook news-
feed today? Or, more accurately, how many 
times have you been on Facebook since you 
woke up this morning? It is astonishing to see 
what a large part of our lives social media 
have become. By just keeping an eye on the 
number of posts your feed gets in an hour, 
you can easily imagine how analyzing these 
massive numbers of posts can quickly 
become a Big Data problem. On the other 
hand, gaining social intelligence has become 
a Big Data opportunity for countless 
organizations.
Questions
	 6-51.	 How will organizations know what to look for when using 
social media for business intelligence?
	 6-52.	 How can government organizations analyze social media 
activities to predict social upheavals?
	 6-53.	 Given the speed and volume of activity on social media, 
what business analytics and visualization tools could be used 
to make sense of the information?
Based on:
Burbank, J. (2016, March 25). Why your business intelligence efforts need to involve 
social media. TweetFavy. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://www.tweetfavy.com/
blog/2016/03/why-your-business-intelligence-efforts-need-to-involve-social-media
Martin, A. J. (2016, June 13). US plans intervention in EU vs Facebook case 
caused by NSA snooping. The Register. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://
www.theregister.co.uk/2016/06/13/us_to_intervene_eu_vs_facebook_case
PRISM (surveillance program). (2016, June 10). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=PRISM_(surveillance_program)&oldid=724687804
Trujillo, M. (2016, May 13). Feds to start mining social media in secu-
rity clearance reviews. The Hill. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from http://thehill 
.com/policy/technology/279805-fed-to-start-mining-social-media-in-security-
clearance-reviews
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 6-54.	 What is the meaning of support and confidence in the context of data mining?
	 6-55.	 Explain the difference between explicit and tacit knowledge.

296    CHAPTER 6  •  Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics 
References
Alavi, M., & Leidner, D. (1999). Knowledge management systems: 
Issues, challenges, and benefits. Communications of the AIS, 
1(Article 7).
Andriole, S. (2015, March 15). Unstructured data: The other side of 
analytics. Forbes. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.forbes 
.com/sites/steveandriole/2015/03/05/the-other-side-of-analytics
Awad, E. M., & Ghaziri, H. M. (2004). Knowledge management. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Checkland, P. B. (1981). Systems thinking, systems practice. 
Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Clarke, K. C. (2015). Maps and Web mapping. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Costa, T. (2014, March 12). How location analytics will transform 
retail. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from 
https://hbr.org/2014/03/how-location-analytics-will-transform-retail
Daugherty, P. Banerjee, P., Negm, W., & Alter, A. E. (2015). Driving 
unconventional growth through the Industrial Internet of Things. 
Accenture. Retrieved June 29, 2016, from https://www.accenture 
.com/us-en/_acnmedia/Accenture/next-gen/reassembling-industry/
pdf/Accenture-Driving-Unconventional-Growth-through-IIoT.pdf
Dumbill, E. (2012, January 19). Volume, velocity, variety: What 
you need to know about Big Data. Forbes. Retrieved June 17, 
2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/oreillymedia/2012/01/19/
volume-velocity-variety-what-you-need-to-know-about-big-data
Economist Intelligence Unit. (2007). In search of clarity: Unravelling 
the complexities of executive decision-making. Retrieved June 
17, 2016, from http://graphics.eiu.com/upload/EIU_In_search_of_
clarity.pdf
Economist Intelligence Unit. (2011). Big Data: Harnessing a game-
changing asset. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.sas 
.com/resources/asset/SAS_BigData_final.pdf.
EY. (2016). Don’t forget the human element of analytics. EY.com. 
Retrieved June 17, 2016, from https://betterworkingworld.ey.com/
better-questions/human-element-analytics
Harrison, G. (2010, August 26). 10 things you should know about 
NoSQL databases. Techrepublic. Retrieved June 17, 2016,  
from http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/10things/10-things- 
you-should-know-about-nosql-databases
Hof, R. D. (2013). Deep learning. MIT Technology Review.  
Retrieved June 17, 2016, from https://www.technologyreview 
.com/s/513696/deep-learning
Jensen, J. R., & Jensen, R. R. (2013). Introductory Geographic Infor-
mation Systems. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Kleinman, Z. (2016, June 13). “Harmful” robot aims to spark AI 
debate. BBC.com. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.bbc 
.com/news/technology-36517340.
Knight, W. (2015, December 29). What robots and AI learned 
in 2015. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved June 17, 
2016, from https://www.technologyreview.com/s/544901/
what-robots-and-ai-learned-in-2015
Larose, D. T. (2015). Data mining and predictive analysis (2nd ed.). 
New York: Wiley.
Levinson, M. (2010). Knowledge management definition and solu-
tions. CIO.com. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.cio.com/
article/40343/Knowledge_Management_Definition_and_Solutions
Malhotra, Y. (2005). Integrating knowledge management technolo-
gies in organizational business processes: Getting real time enter-
prises to deliver real business performance. Journal of Knowledge 
Management, 9(1), 7–28.
McAfee, A., & Brynjolfsson, E. (2012, October). Big Data: The 
management revolution. HBR.org. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from 
http://hbr.org/2012/10/big-data-the-management-revolution
Microsoft, (2016, March 8). Get started with Columnstore for 
real time operational analytics. Microsoft Developer Network. 
Retrieved June 17, 2016, from https://msdn.microsoft.com/library/
dn817827.aspx
Mierswa, I. (2014, October 1). Summarizing the differences 
between business intelligence and advanced analytics. Rapid-
miner. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from https://rapidminer.com/
summarizing-differences-business-intelligence-advanced-analytics
Myatt, G. J., & Johnson, W. P. (2009). Making sense of data: A prac-
tical guide to data visualization, advanced data mining methods, 
and applications. New York: Wiley.
Nichols, G. (2016, June 6). Walmart’s drone ambitions are real,  
and smarter than Amazon’s. ZDNet. Retrieved June 17, 2016,  
from http://www.zdnet.com/article/walmarts-drone-ambitions- 
are-real-and-smarter-than-amazons
Nielsen, M (2014, April). Neural networks and deep 
learning. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/index.html
Redman, T. C. (2013, July 11). Are you data driven? Take a hard 
look in the mirror. HBR.org. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://
blogs.hbr.org/2013/07/are-you-data-driven-take-a-har
Saarenvirta, G. (2004). The untapped value of geographic informa-
tion. Business Intelligence Journal, 9(1), 58–63.
Savitz, E. (2013, February 4), Big Data: Big hype? Forbes. 
Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/
ciocentral/2013/02/04/big-data-big-hype
Sharda, R., Delen, D., & Turban, E. (2014). Business intelligence: 
A managerial perspective on analytics (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: 
Pearson.
Sharda, R., Delen, D., & Turban, E. (2015). Business intelligence and 
analytics: Systems for decision support (10th ed.). Boston, MA: 
Pearson.
Stenovec, T. (2015, November 18). Google has gotten incred-
ibly good at predicting traffic—here’s how. TechInsider. 
Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.techinsider.io/
how-google-maps-knows-about-traffic-2015-11
Stewart, D. (2013, May 1). Big content: The unstructured 
side of big data. Gartner. Retrieved June 17, 2016, 
from http://blogs.gartner.com/darin-stewart/2013/05/01/
big-content-the-unstructured-side-of-big-data
Stubbs, E. (2011). The value of business analytics. New York: Wiley.
Tapscott, D. (2008). Actionable insights for business decision mak-
ers. Business Objects. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://
www.businessobjects.com/campaigns/forms/q109/apj/everyone/
tapscott/BI_for_Decision_Makers.pdf
Templeton, G. (2016, June 10). Google’s developing its own ver-
sion of the Laws of Robotics. ExtremeTech. Retrieved July 
11, 2016, from http://www.extremetech.com/extreme/229806-
google-is-starting-to-design-its-own-version-of-asimovs-laws-
of-robotics
Vijayan, J. (2015, June 25). Solving the unstructured data challenge. 
CIO.com. Retrieved June 17, 2016, from http://www.cio.com/ 
article/2941015/big-data/solving-the-unstructured-data-challenge 
.html

This page intentionally left blank

298
298
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Amazon.com
A
mazon.com has transformed how we shop. 
Having started as an online bookseller, 
Amazon.com now retails nearly everything, 
from kitchen appliances to garden furniture and even 
groceries. Amazon.com strives to provide a superior 
product selection well beyond the biggest malls and 
big-box stores paired with the convenience of allowing 
customers to purchase the products with one click from 
their computers or mobile devices.
Founded and headed by Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com 
started in 1994 with a commitment to be “customer-
centric.” Amazon.com custom-tailors its home page 
with recommendations for books, music, and other 
products that may entice you; these recommendations 
are provided by analyzing your prior purchases and 
comparing them to those of millions of other customers 
with similar tastes. Amazon.com offers free shipping 
when you place orders over US$25 for books or US$49 
for other types of products. In certain cities, Amazon 
.com offers same-day delivery on items placed before a 
cutoff time. Amazon.com is working on a package deliv-
ery system that uses small, unmanned drones to deliver 
small packages within 30 minutes of placing the order.
In order to keep its competitive advantages, Amazon 
.com uses enterprise-wide information systems to 
optimize its business processes, ranging from acquiring 
and receiving the right goods at the right time from its 
suppliers to efficiently shipping physical goods to its 
Enhancing Business Processes 
Using Enterprise Information 
Systems
7
This chapter describes how companies are deploying 
enterprise-wide information systems to support and enable 
core business processes. Enterprise systems help to integrate 
various business activities, to increase coordination among 
various business departments and partners, to streamline 
and better manage interactions with customers, and to 
coordinate better with suppliers in order to more efficiently 
and effectively meet rapidly changing customer demands.
Companies continue to find that they need systems 
that span their entire organization to tie everything 
together. As a result, an understanding of enterprise 
systems is needed to succeed in today’s competitive and 
ever-changing digital world. This chapter focuses on how 
organizations are utilizing enterprise-wide information 
systems to best support internal business processes. In 
Chapter 8, “Strengthening Business-to-Business Relation-
ships Via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Man-
agement,” we focus on systems that support business 
processes spanning multiple organizations, critical in 
today’s competitive global environment.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

299
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
2.	How do enterprise-wide information systems enable 
Amazon.com’s strategy?
3.	What benefits would an organization realize by 
running its enterprise resource planning system on 
Amazon.com’s Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud 
computing infrastructure?
Based on:
Amazon.com. (2016, April 26). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved April 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Amazon.com&oldid=717233888
Anonymous. (2016). Statistics and facts about Amazon. Statista.com. 
Retrieved April 29, 2016, from http://www.statista.com/topics/846/
amazon
Bensinger, G. (2016, April 28). Cloud unit pushes Amazon to record 
profit. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 29, 2016, from http://www 
.wsj.com/articles/amazon-reports-surge-in-profit-1461874333
customers. Amazon.com has built not only a network of 
dozens of North American and international fulfillment 
centers for its physical products but also a number of 
sophisticated data centers to support its operations and 
offer various digital products and services. Now, Amazon 
.com even manages online stores and sales fulfillment 
for many small and large companies, creating a win–win 
situation: For small, independent retailers, warehousing 
becomes a variable cost, and for Amazon.com, this cre-
ates additional revenue streams and helps to utilize 
excess capacity (Figure 7.1). Using its information systems 
(IS) infrastructure, Amazon.com offers Amazon Web Ser-
vices (AWS), a solid and reliable IS infrastructure that 
allows companies to rent computing resources or storage 
space on an as-needed basis or even deploy enterprise 
resource planning systems in the cloud.
Clearly, Amazon.com is more than a vibrant online 
store. Having designed an impressive IS infrastructure, 
Amazon.com is constantly developing new and innova-
tive products and services that utilize this infrastructure. 
In 2015, with more than 304 million active customer 
accounts worldwide, Amazon.com posted net sales of 
US$107 billion (an increase of nearly US$20 billion over 
2014), making it the leading online retailer in the United 
States. What the future holds for Amazon.com is incon-
ceivable, given its current rate of innovation and growth.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How do the core business processes differ for 
Amazon.com’s various product and service offerings?
1.	 Explain core business processes that are common in organizations.
2.	 Describe what enterprise systems are and how they have evolved.
3.	 Describe enterprise resource planning systems and how they help to improve 
internal business processes.
4.	 Understand and utilize the keys to successfully implementing enterprise systems.
FIGURE 7.1
Companies can rent Amazon.com’s warehouse infrastructure on an 
as-needed basis.
Source: Bombaert Patrick/Fotolia.

300    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
Core Business Processes and Organizational 
Value Chains
Traditionally, companies are organized around five distinct functional areas: marketing and 
sales, supply chain management, manufacturing and operations, accounting and finance, and 
human resources. Each of these functional areas is responsible for various well-defined business 
functions, such as marketing a product; sales forecasting; procuring raw materials and compo-
nents; manufacturing goods; planning and budgeting; or recruiting, hiring, and training. 
Although this model suggests that a company can be regarded as being composed of distinct 
independent silos, the different functional areas are highly interrelated to perform value-added 
activities (Figure 7.2). In fact, most business processes cross the boundaries of business func-
tions, so it is helpful for managers to think in terms of business processes from a customer’s 
(both internal and external) point of view.
Core Business Processes
In most cases, customers do not care about how things are being done; they care only that things 
are being done to their satisfaction. When you buy a book at Amazon.com, you typically do not 
care which functional areas are involved in the transaction; you care only about quickly getting 
the right book for the right price. Buying a book at Amazon.com can help to illustrate one of the 
core business processes, namely, order-to-cash. Similarly, procure-to-pay and make-to-stock are 
core business processes also common to most business organizations. Other important business 
processes are related to tracking a firm’s revenues and expenses, managing employees, and so 
on. Next, we discuss the core business processes involved in generating revenue.
ORDER-TO-CASH.  For business organizations, selling products or services is the main way of 
generating revenue. In the example of Amazon.com, you need to create an account and add 
items to your shopping cart. You then need to complete your order by entering shipping and 
billing information and submitting the order. Amazon.com will then confirm that your address 
is valid and will check your credit card information. Your order will then be put together and 
Marketing 
and Sales
Human
Resources
Accounting 
and
Finance
Supply
Chain
Management
Manufacturing
and
Operations
Marketing 
and Sales
Human
Resources
Accounting 
and
Finance
Supply
Chain
Management
Manufacturing
and Operations
FIGURE 7.2
A company’s functional areas 
should be interrelated.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    301
shipped, and your credit card will be charged. Together, the processes associated with selling a 
product or service are referred to as the order-to-cash process (Figure 7.3). As with all business 
processes, the order-to-cash process can be broken down into multiple subprocesses (most of 
which are common across organizations). For most businesses, the order-to-cash process entails 
subprocesses such as creating a customer record; checking the customer’s creditworthiness; 
creating an order; checking and allocating stock; picking, packing, and shipping; invoicing; and 
collecting the payment. Depending on the nature of the transaction, the individual subprocesses 
and the time in which these are completed can differ considerably. For example, a sale in a 
convenience store may take only several seconds, and many of the subprocesses mentioned 
(such as creating a customer record) are not needed (although many stores now try to gather 
information such as customers’ ZIP codes for business intelligence). In contrast, large volume 
orders in business-to-business contexts may take months or years to fulfill and may involve 
many more steps. The subprocesses can be further broken down to a more granular level.
Obviously, an ineffective order-to-cash process can have various negative effects for organi-
zations; for example, the manual input of order information often causes errors, as do subopti-
mal picking and shipping processes. Together, such errors can lead to a high rate of disputes that 
have to be resolved, ineffective collection processes, and, ultimately, defecting customers. In 
contrast, an effective order-to-cash process can create customer satisfaction, speed up the collec-
tion process, and serve to provide valuable inputs into business intelligence and customer rela-
tionship management applications (see Chapter 8).
PROCURE-TO-PAY.  In order to be able to sell books and other products, Amazon.com needs to 
acquire these from its suppliers. Amazon.com needs to manage literally thousands of suppliers, 
place purchase orders, receive the products, allocate warehouse space, receive and pay invoices, 
and handle potential disputes. These processes associated with procuring goods from external 
vendors are together referred to as the procure-to-pay process (Figure 7.4). Subprocesses of 
the procure-to-pay process include price and terms negotiations, issuing of the purchase order, 
receiving the goods, and receiving and paying the invoice.
An ineffective procure-to-pay process can increase error rates in purchase order and invoice 
processing; further, it inhibits a company from developing close relationships with preferred 
vendors. Together, this can increase the cost per transaction, lead to an increase in disputes to be 
resolved, and prevent the company from obtaining the most favorable conditions from its ven-
dors. In contrast, an effective procure-to-pay process can help to obtain favorable conditions, 
reduce transaction costs, and, ultimately, create customer goodwill as it helps to efficiently fulfill 
customer orders.
Create
Customer
Record
Check
Credit
Create
Order
Allocate
Stock
Pick,
Pack, and
Ship
Prepare
and Send
Invoice
Collect
Payment
FIGURE 7.3
The order-to-cash process.
Negotiate
Price and
Terms
Issue Purchase
Order
Receive Goods
Receive
Invoice
Settle Payment
FIGURE 7.4
The procure-to-pay process.

302    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
MAKE-TO-STOCK/MAKE-TO-ORDER.  A third set of core business processes is associated 
with producing goods (such as Amazon.com’s Kindle e-book reader) and entails make-
to-stock and make-to-order. In the make-to-stock process, goods are produced based on 
forecasts and are stocked in a warehouse (i.e., a push-based approach); customers’ orders 
are then fulfilled from inventory. In contrast, in the make-to-order process, raw materials, 
subcomponents, and accessories are procured based on forecasts, but actual manufacturing 
does not start until an order is received (a pull-based approach); in extreme cases, even 
design and engineering start only when an order is received. For example, mass-produced 
goods, such as television sets or home appliances, are typically produced under a make-to-
stock approach. Here, the organization stocks the produced goods, pushing the products out 
to customers after orders are received. In contrast, highly customizable or very expensive 
low-volume goods are often produced under a make-to-order approach, as is the case with 
Dell computers or with commercial aircraft, where the assembly starts only after a customer 
has placed an order. Here, the organization waits for an order, allowing it to initiate a pulling 
sequence to move the order through the production process. The processes associated with 
making products are composed of processing customers’ orders, procuring the inputs to the 
manufacturing process, scheduling production, production, quality control, packaging, and 
stocking or shipping the product. Figure 7.5 illustrates the make-to-stock and make-to-order 
processes.
Together, these core business processes enable the creation of supply chains that are 
involved in transforming raw materials into products sold to the end customer. A typical supply 
chain resembles a river, where the raw materials start out at the source and move downstream 
toward the end customer; at each step, the goods are transformed to make the end product. To 
meet the needs for various different inputs, each organization typically has multiple upstream 
suppliers; similarly, each organization typically sells to multiple downstream customers. 
Figure 7.6 shows the supply chain of a book. Within this supply chain, one company’s sales-
related processes overlap with the downstream company’s procurement-related processes (sup-
ply chains are discussed in detail in Chapter 8).
Organizational Activities Along the Value Chain
To gain competitive advantage over their rivals, companies are trying to optimize the core 
business processes in different ways so as to increase effectiveness and/or efficiency. One of the 
first challenges an organization must face is to understand how it can use information systems to 
support core and other business processes. For example, Amazon.com excels at using informa-
tion systems to optimize both the procure-to-pay and the order-to-cash process. Generally, the 
set of business activities that add value to the end product is referred to as a value chain (Porter 
& Millar, 1985), in which information flows through functional areas that facilitate an 
Process
Sales
Order
(Design/
Engineer
Product)
Procure
Inputs
Schedule
Production
Production
Quality
Control
Ship
Product
Make-to-Stock
Make-to-Order
Procure
Inputs
Schedule
Production
Production
Quality
Control
Stock
Product
FIGURE 7.5
The make-to-stock versus the 
make-to-order process.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    303
organization’s business processes. Figure 7.7 depicts the value chain framework. In Chapter 2, 
“Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems,” we spoke of the strategic 
value of analyzing a value chain. Here, we show you how the activities along the value chain 
support business processes.
Many business processes depend on activities performed by various functional areas within 
an organization; for example, Amazon.com’s order-to-cash process involves activities performed 
by sales, shipping, accounting, and other functional areas. The functional areas directly involved 
in the process are responsible for the core activities, whereas other functional areas are perform-
ing support activities. In other words, core activities are performed by the functional areas that 
process inputs and produce outputs, and support activities are those activities that enable core 
activities to take place. In the following sections, we focus on core activities and then turn our 
attention to the support activities that make them possible.
CORE ACTIVITIES.  Core activities include inbound logistics (receiving), operations and 
manufacturing, outbound logistics (shipping), marketing and sales, and customer service. These 
Make-to-
Stock: The
Tree Farmer
Is Growing
Trees to
Harvest
Someday
Tree
Farmer
Paper
Mill
Book
Printer
Bookseller
Customer
Procure-to-
Pay: The Book
Printer
Acquires Paper
(the Raw
Material) from
the Paper Mill
Make-to-
Order: The
Book Printer
Receives
Book Orders
and Produces
Books to Sell
to Booksellers
Order-to-Cash:
The Book
Printer
Receives an
Order and
Eventual
Payment from
the Bookseller
Order-to-Cash:
The Tree
Farmer
Receives an
Order and
Eventual
Payment from
the Paper Mill
Procure-to-
Pay: The Paper
Mill Acquires
Logs (the Raw
Material) from
the Tree
Farmer
Make-to-
Stock: The
Paper Mill
Produces
Paper to Sell
to Book
Printers or
Newspapers
Order-to-Cash:
The Paper Mill
Receives an
Order and 
Eventual
Payment from
the Book
Printer
Procure-to-
Pay: The
Bookseller
Acquires Books
from the Book
Printer
Order-to-Cash:
The Bookseller
Receives an
Order and
Eventual
Payment from
the Customer
FIGURE 7.6
Supply chain of a book.
Procurement
Inbound
Logistics
Operations and
Manufacturing
Outbound
Logistics
Marketing and
Sales
Customer
Service
Technology Development
Human Resources
Firm Infrastructure
Administration
Core
Support
FIGURE 7.7
Value chain framework.
Source: Based on How Information Gives 
You Competitive Advantage. Published by  
Harvard Business Review, 1985.

304    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
activities may differ widely depending on the unique requirements of the industry in which a 
company operates, although the basic concepts hold in most organizations.
Inbound Logistics Activities  Inbound logistics involves the business activities associated 
with receiving and stocking raw materials, parts, and products. For example, inbound logistics at 
Amazon.com involves not only the receipt of books, e-book readers, and various other products 
for sale but also the receipt of packaging materials and shipping labels. Shippers deliver these 
products to Amazon.com, where employees unwrap the packages and stock the products in the 
company’s warehouse or directly route the products to operations in order to fill open orders. 
Amazon.com can automatically update inventory levels at the point of delivery, providing 
purchasing managers access to up-to-date information related to inventory levels and reorder 
points. Inbound logistics activities (also referred to as supply chain management) are a crucial 
part of the procure-to-pay business process, as these activities enable the company to efficiently 
and effectively fill customer orders.
Operations and Manufacturing Activities  Once the components have been stocked in 
inventory, operations and manufacturing activities transform the inputs into outputs. Operations 
and manufacturing can involve such activities as order processing (e.g., at Amazon.com) 
and/or manufacturing or assembly processes (e.g., at Dell) that transform raw materials and/
or component parts into end products (i.e., the make-to-stock and make-to-order business 
processes). Companies such as Dell utilize web-based information systems to allow customers 
to enter orders online. This information is used to coordinate the manufacturing of a customized 
personal computer in which the component parts are gathered and assembled to create the 
end product. During this process, inventory levels from inbound logistics are verified; if the  
appropriate inventory exists, workers pick the components from existing supplies and build  
the product to the customer’s specifications. When components are picked, items are deducted 
from inventory; once the product is assembled, inventory levels for the final product are updated.
Outbound Logistics Activities  The activities associated with outbound logistics mirror 
those of inbound logistics. Instead of involving the receipt of raw materials, parts, and products, 
outbound logistics focuses on the distribution of end products within the order-to-cash business 
process. For example, outbound logistics at Amazon.com involves the shipping of books that 
customers have ordered. Orders that have been processed by operations are forwarded to 
outbound logistics, which picks the products from inventory and coordinates shipment to the 
customer. At that point, items are packaged and deducted from the company’s inventory, and an 
invoice is created that will be sent to the customer. Amazon.com can automatically update sales 
data at the point of distribution, allowing managers to view inventory and revenue information 
in real time.
Marketing and Sales Activities  Marketing and sales activities are associated primarily with 
the presales (i.e., before the sale) activities of the company. These activities include the creation 
of marketing literature, communication with potential and existing customers, and pricing of 
goods and services. Most companies support the business activity of marketing and sales by 
creating websites, building pages on Facebook, or communicating on other social media such 
as Twitter (for further discussion, see Chapter 4, “Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic 
Commerce”). Many companies, especially those focused on selling products or services to the 
end consumer (e.g., passenger airlines such as United or online retailers such as Amazon.com), 
use information systems to update pricing information and/or schedules. This information is 
entered directly into the pricing and scheduling systems, allowing the information to become 
immediately accessible throughout the organization and to end consumers through the 
organization’s website.
Customer Service Activities  Whereas marketing and sales focus on presales activities, 
customer service focuses on post-sales (i.e., after the sale) activities. Customers may have 
questions and need help from a customer service representative. For most companies, such as 
Amazon.com, utilizing information systems to provide customer service is essential, especially 
given the vast number of products offered. These applications allow customers to search for and 
download information related to the products that they have purchased or the purchase itself. 


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    305
For example, on Amazon.com customers can view their order status or can view and print 
invoices of current and past orders. Similarly, customers can find additional information and 
support about the Amazon Kindle or other digital products. Rather than calling a customer 
service representative, customers can easily find the needed information through a self-service 
customer support application. Information systems also enable customer service representatives 
to quickly locate information about products or services offered.
Companies can also use information systems to track service requests. When a customer 
calls in for repairs to a product, customer service representatives can access a bevy of informa-
tion related to the customer. For instance, an agent can access technical information concerning 
the specific product as well as review any problems the customer has encountered in the past. 
This enables customer service representatives to react quickly to customer concerns, improving 
the customer service experience.
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES.  Support activities are business activities that enable the primary 
activities to take place. Support activities include administrative activities, infrastructure, human 
resources, technology development, and procurement.
Administrative Activities  Administrative activities focus on the processes and decision 
making that orchestrate the day-to-day operations of an organization, particularly those 
processes that span organizational functions and levels. Administration includes systems and 
processes from virtually all functional areas—accounting, finance, marketing, operations, and so 
on—at all levels of an organization.
Infrastructure Activities  Infrastructure refers to the buildings, machinery, and IS 
infrastructure components that must be implemented to provide the necessary components that 
GREEN IT
Why Your Enterprise Systems Should Be in the Cloud
Green IT refers to the practice of using computers and other IT 
resources in a more efficient and environmentally responsible 
way. A big part of the Green IT movement has focused on 
cloud computing. Recall that cloud computing refers to a com-
puting model that enables ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., servers, applications, etc.) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released as needed with very little human 
intervention. Compared with traditional in-house architec-
tures, cloud-based architectures are very efficient, allowing for 
the sharing of resources among multiple organizations in a 
much more efficient manner, and are therefore widely consid-
ered to be a much greener alternative than separate dedicated 
facilities for each company. One of the largest and most 
resource-consuming computer application for many compa-
nies is their enterprise-level systems. Thus, moving a company’s 
enterprise systems into the cloud can provide many benefits.
One obvious benefit of moving an enterprise system onto 
a greener platform is that the organization will become known 
for sustainable business practices. Being known as a sustain-
able business can provide a competitive advantage in a world 
where a company’s social responsibility (or lack thereof) can 
play a great role in its success (or failure). In addition to the 
marketing benefits, the economics of a cloud-based architec-
ture can be compelling. Benefits of using a cloud-based 
architecture include low capital outlays to get a system up and 
running, lower operating costs, better IT resource utilization, 
increased security, better ability to adjust to demand changes, 
and faster and more efficient deployment and upgrading. By 
going to the cloud, companies are often concerned with the 
reduced control over data and operations, but as cloud archi-
tectures continue to mature, such concerns are rapidly 
diminishing.
Increasingly, companies are moving their enterprise systems 
to the cloud, feeling that the benefits outweigh the risks. When 
moving to the cloud, it is critical that a strong and reliable cloud 
service provider be chosen. If a provider unexpectedly shuts 
down, the benefits of choosing the lowest-priced provider will 
quickly turn into an IT nightmare. Likewise, companies moving 
their enterprise systems to the cloud should take into account 
the energy sources used by the cloud service provider.
Based on:
Boyce, A. (2016, April 27). The difference between on-premises 
and cloud ERP software. TechTarget. Retrieved May 17, 2016, 
from http://searchmanufacturingerp.techtarget.com/feature/
The-differences-between-on-premises-and-cloud-ERP-software
Williams, S. (2016, January 13). How to give your business the com-
petitive edge. BizEdge. Retrieved May 17, 2016, from https://bizedge 
.co.nz/story/how-give-your-business-competitive-edge

306    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
facilitate both primary and support activities (see Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems 
Infrastructure and Services”). For example, an order entry application requires that employees 
who enter orders have a computer that is connected via the network to a database containing the 
order information so that the order can be saved and recalled later for processing.
Human Resource Activities  Human resource activities encompass all business activities 
associated with employee management, such as hiring, interview scheduling, payroll, and 
benefits management. Human resource activities are classified as support activities because 
the primary activities cannot be accomplished without the employees to perform them. In other 
words, all the primary activities rely on human resource–related business activities.
Technology Development Activities  Technology development includes the design and 
development of applications that support the primary business activities so as to improve products 
and/or services. If you are planning on pursuing a career in the management information systems 
(MIS) field, you will frequently participate in activities related to the development or acquisition of 
new applications and systems. Technology development can involve a wide array of responsibilities, 
such as the selection of packaged software or the design and development of custom software 
to meet a particular business need. Many companies are leveraging the technology development 
business activity to build Internet, intranet, extranet, or mobile applications to support a wide 
variety of primary business activities. Likewise, technology development increasingly involves 
developing analytics solutions to support the transition to a data-driven organization.
Procurement Activities  Procurement refers to the purchasing of goods and services that 
are required as inputs to the primary activities. Procurement receives, approves, and processes 
requests for goods and services from the primary activities and coordinates the purchase of 
those items. Allowing each functional area to send out purchase orders can create problems for 
companies, such as maintaining relationships with more suppliers than necessary and not being 
able to take advantage of volume discounts. The procurement business activity can leverage 
information systems by accumulating purchase orders from the different functional areas within 
the organization and combining multiple purchase orders containing the same item into a single 
purchase order. This facilitates negotiating volume discounts and allows the primary activities to 
concentrate on running the business rather than adding to their workload.
VALUE CHAIN ACTIVITIES IN SERVICE INDUSTRIES.  Originally, the value chain framework was 
developed for analyzing the value-adding activities of manufacturing industries, but it can also 
be used to understand service-based industries. Many of the processes within service industries 
are similar to processes performed in manufacturing industries (e.g., customer service, sales, 
and support). However, whereas manufacturing industries deal with physical products, service 
industries deal with tangible and/or intangible products, which typically have to be experienced 
and often cannot be tried out in advance. As a result, activities such as inbound logistics and 
outbound logistics are sometimes less important in the service sector, and many activities can 
occur simultaneously (e.g., both delivery and consumption). Likewise, in the manufacturing 
sector, operations include the physical handling of goods when transforming them from raw 
materials or components to finished products; in contrast, operations in the service sector often 
encompass the manipulation of data and information. For example, consider the value chain 
activities for booking and taking a commercial airline flight. Such activities would include 
booking the flight, checking in, in-flight experience, baggage handling, and so on. While 
service activities don’t always perfectly map to Porter’s value chain steps, there are clearly a 
set of integrated or related service-oriented activities that together provide value to a customer. 
Additionally, in many service encounters, each separate activity is essentially a value chain in 
and of itself. For instance, booking a flight is a series of steps, from advertising to obtaining a 
ticket, including flight selection, payment, confirmation, and various types of customer services 
that might include seat selection and other changes. In such service encounters, a finished 
product equates to a booked ticket, a closed file such as a bank loan that has been issued, an 
insurance claim that has been filed, or an investment that has been made. As a result, optimizing 
the value-adding activities in the services sector does typically not include eliminating physical 
bottlenecks or improving inventory management but enhancing the flow of information.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    307
Value Systems: Connecting Multiple Organizational Value Chains
The flow of information can be streamlined not only within a company but across organizational 
boundaries as well. A company can create additional value by integrating internal applications 
with suppliers, business partners, and customers. Companies accomplish this by connecting their 
internal value chains to form a value system (Porter & Millar, 1985), in which information 
flows from one company’s value chain to another company’s value chain. Figure 7.8 depicts the 
value system framework. In this diagram, three companies are aligning their value chains to 
form a value system. First, Company A processes information through its value chain and for-
wards the information along to its customer, Company B, which processes the information 
through its value chain and sends the information along to its customer, Company C, which pro-
cesses the information through its value chain. Adding additional suppliers, business partners, 
and customers can create complex value systems. However, for our purposes, we simply view an 
organization’s information systems as an important part of a value chain that interacts with the 
value chains of other organizations.
As information systems can be used to streamline an organization’s internal value chain, 
they can also be used to coordinate a company’s value chain with another company’s value chain 
or with consumers (such as in business-to-consumer electronic commerce). Any information 
that feeds into a company’s value chain, whether its source is another company’s value chain or 
an end consumer, is considered part of the value system.
A supply chain can be viewed as a river, where physical goods “flow” from a source to an 
ultimate destination. Like a river, at any particular point there is a flow coming from upstream 
and progressing downstream. In a similar way, a value system can be viewed as a river of infor-
mation, comprising upstream and downstream information flows. An upstream information 
flow consists of information that is received from another organization, whereas a downstream 
information flow relates to the information that is produced by a company and sent along to 
another organization. For instance, in the value system depicted in Figure 7.8, the upstream and 
downstream information flows for Company B become quite evident. In this case, Company B 
receives information from its upstream supplier, processes the information through its internal 
value chain, and subsequently passes information downstream to its distributors and/or custom-
ers (see Chapter 8 for a discussion of product and information flows in the opposite direction). 
These flows of external information into and from a company can be leveraged to create addi-
tional value and gain competitive advantage.
Enterprise Systems
Businesses have leveraged information systems to support business processes for decades, 
beginning with the installation of individual, separate applications to assist companies with spe-
cific business tasks, such as issuing paychecks. However, in order to efficiently and effectively 
conduct the core business processes (as well as other business processes), the different func-
tional areas within a company need to share data. For example, data about your book order need 
Value System
Inbound
Logistics
Operations and
Manufacturing
Outbound
Logistics
Marketing and
Sales
Customer
Service
Company A
Value Chain
Inbound
Logistics
Operations and
Manufacturing
Outbound
Logistics
Marketing and
Sales
Customer
Service
Company B
Value Chain
Procurement
Inbound
Logistics
Operations and
Manufacturing
Outbound
Logistics
Marketing and
Sales
Customer
Service
Technology Development
Human Resources
Firm Infrastructure
Company C
Value Chain
Administration
Procurement
Technology Development
Human Resources
Firm Infrastructure
Administration
Procurement
Technology Development
Human Resources
Firm Infrastructure
Administration
FIGURE 7.8
Three companies combine their value chains, forming a value system. 
Source: Based on How Information Gives You Competitive Advantage, July 1985.

308    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
to be shared between accounting (for billing purposes), marketing and sales (e.g., to feed into 
product recommendations for other customers), and operations and supply chain management 
(e.g., to fulfill the order and replenish the inventory).
The Rise of Enterprise Systems
As companies began to leverage IS applications, they typically started out by fulfilling the needs 
of particular business activities in a particular department within the organization, and purchased 
a variety of proprietary software systems from different software vendors or developed 
department-specific software (e.g., accounting) to support specific business processes. Systems 
that focus on the specific needs of individual departments are typically not designed to commu-
nicate with other systems in the organization (essentially, they are “speaking different lan-
guages”) and are therefore referred to as standalone applications. Although such systems 
enable departments to conduct their daily business activities efficiently and effectively, these 
systems often are not very helpful when people from one part of the firm need information from 
another part of the firm. For example, if the applications for inbound logistics and operations are 
not integrated, companies will lose valuable time in accessing information related to inventory 
levels. When an order is placed through operations, personnel may have to access two separate 
applications to verify that the components are available in inventory before the order can be pro-
cessed. Figure 7.9 provides an example of how information flows through standalone systems 
within an organization. As the diagram depicts, information is generated by the inbound logistics 
business activity, but it does not flow through to the next business activity, in this case opera-
tions; in other words, there are too many “rocks” in the river, impeding the flow of information. 
Since the inbound logistics and operations departments use different standalone systems, infor-
mation cannot readily flow from one business activity to another.
Understandably, this creates a highly inefficient process for operations personnel, who must 
have access to two systems or a common interface that pulls data together in order to get both 
the order entry and the inventory information. This can be challenging, as applications running 
on different computing platforms are difficult to integrate, and IS managers are faced with the 
problem of “knitting together” a hodgepodge portfolio of discordant proprietary applications 
into a system that shares data; often, custom interfaces are required in order for one system to 
communicate with another, and such integration is typically very costly. In some cases, data may 
be stored on both systems, creating redundancy. Should data be updated in one system but not 
the other, the data become inconsistent. In addition, there are further unnecessary costs associ-
ated with entering, storing, and updating data redundantly. As a result, many standalone applica-
tions are typically either fast approaching or beyond the end of their useful life within the 
organization; such systems are referred to as legacy systems.
To utilize data stored in separate standalone systems to facilitate business processes and 
decision making, data must be reentered from one system to the next (by either manual typing, 
copying and pasting, or even downloads to Excel) or be consolidated by a third system. Further, 
the same data may also be stored in several (sometimes conflicting) versions throughout the 
Inbound Logistics
Operations
Outbound Logistics
Inventory
Order
Invoice
Business Activity
Information
FIGURE 7.9
Information flows using 
standalone systems.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    309
organization, making the data harder to consolidate, often causing the business to lose money 
because of inefficiencies or missed business opportunities. In addition, organizations need inte-
grated data to demonstrate compliance with standards, rules, or government regulations. To 
address these challenges, organizations have turned to enterprise-wide information systems. An 
enterprise-wide information system (or enterprise system) is an integrated suite of business 
applications for virtually every business process, allowing companies to integrate data across 
functional areas on a company-wide basis. Rather than storing data in separate places through-
out the organization, enterprise systems use an integrated database to provide a central reposi-
tory common to all users. The central database alleviates the problems associated with multiple 
computing platforms by providing a single place where all data relevant to the company and 
particular departments can be stored and accessed. This, along with a common user interface, 
allows personnel to share information seamlessly, no matter where the user is located or who is 
using the application (Figure 7.10).
Enterprise systems come in a variety of shapes and sizes, each providing a unique set of 
features and functionality. When deciding to implement enterprise solutions, managers need to 
be aware of a number of issues. One of the most important involves selecting and implementing 
applications that meet the requirements of the business as well as of its customers and suppliers. 
In the following sections, we examine the ways in which information systems can be leveraged 
to support business processes and how companies are using these systems to support their inter-
nal and external operations.
Supporting Business Processes
As discussed previously, information systems can be used to gain and sustain competitive advan-
tage by supporting and/or streamlining activities along the value chain. For example, an infor-
mation system could be used to support a billing process in such a way that it reduces the use of 
paper and, more important, the handling of paper, thus reducing material and labor costs. This 
system can help managers keep track of that same billing process more effectively because they 
will have more accurate, up-to-date information about the billing process, enabling them to make 
smart, timely business decisions.
Information systems can be used to support either internally or externally focused business 
processes. Internally focused systems support functional areas, business processes, and deci-
sion making within an organization. These activities can be viewed as a series of links in a chain 
along which information flows within the organization. At each stage (or link) in the process, 
value is added in the form of the work performed by people associated with that process, and 
Operations
Inbound Logistics
Inventory
Order
Invoice
Business Activity
Information
Database
Outbound Logistics
FIGURE 7.10
Enterprise systems allow 
companies to integrate information 
on a company-wide basis.

310    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
new, useful information is generated. Information begins to accumulate at the point of entry and 
flows through the various links, or business processes, within the organization, progressing 
through the organization with new, useful information being added every step of the way 
(Figure 7.11).
Companies can gain several advantages by integrating and converting legacy systems so 
that data stored on separate computing platforms can be consolidated to provide a centralized 
point of access. However, although internally focused systems do an excellent job of serving the 
needs of internal business operations on an organization-wide basis, they are not necessarily 
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
Too Much Intelligence? RFID and Privacy
Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags have become increas-
ingly popular for tracking physical objects. Each tag contains 
unique identification information that can be accessed by an 
RFID reader. The identification is then sent to the information 
system that can identify the product that was tagged. For 
example, the pharmaceutical industry tags certain drugs in 
large quantities, such as 100-pill bottles of Viagra and Oxycon-
tin, in order to track them as they move through the supply 
chain and thus prevent counterfeits from reaching the public.
As with all electronic tracking devices, privacy advocates are 
concerned about misuse. Because RFID tags can be read by any-
one who has an RFID reader, the tags have the potential of 
revealing data customers may wish to keep private. For example, 
if you buy a product that has an RFID tag, someone with an RFID 
reader could possibly identify where you bought the product and 
how much you paid for it, if the retailer does not have erasers 
that can clear data from the tags before you leave the store. The 
amount of data imprinted on an RFID tag is limited, however, 
and because few retail businesses have purchased RFID writers or 
readers, the likelihood of privacy abuse is currently slim.
In addition to tracking products, RFID technologies can be 
embedded within people. For example, Mexico’s attorney gen-
eral and senior members of his staff have been implanted with 
security chips from a company called VeriChip that give them 
access to secure areas of their headquarters. VeriChip has been 
actively working to promote its chips to be used in older 
patients with Alzheimer’s or patients with diabetes to aid med-
ical staff in tracking their care and recently announced a part-
nership with the National Foundation for the Investigation of 
Lost and Kidnapped Children to promote embedding VeriChips 
in children to help prevent kidnappings.
Questions
1.	 Using RFID implants to speed up medical assistance may 
be a good thing, but what if crackers manage to access a 
person’s medical conditions?
2.	 What are the ethical implications of using RFID chips to 
track one’s child?
Based on:
Gillespie, I. (2014, April 17). Human microchipping: I’ve got you 
under my skin. The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved May 19, 2016, 
from http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/digital-life-news/human-
microchipping-ive-got-you-under-my-skin-20140416-zqvho.html
Griffiths, S. (2015, September 3). Would YOU be microchipped? Daily-
Mail.com. Retrieved April 29, 2016, from http://www.dailymail.co.uk/
sciencetech/article-3221287/Would-microchipped-Kaspersky-implants-
chip-man-s-hand-one-day-used-pay-goods-unlock-home.html
Klugman, C. (2015, October 21). Human chipping: Fishing for uses. 
Bioethics.net. Retrieved April 29, 2016, from http://www.bioethics 
.net/2015/10/human-chipping-fishing-for-uses
Microchip implant (human). (2016, April 13). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved April 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia 
.org/w/index.php?title=Microchip_implant_(human)&oldid=715010273
Order Entry
Fulﬁllment
Order
Packing
List
Shipping
Invoice
Business Activity
Information
FIGURE 7.11
Information flow for a typical 
order.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    311
designed to completely accommodate the communication of information outside the organiza-
tion’s boundaries. The emergence of the Internet and the web has resulted in the globalization of 
customer and supplier networks, opening up new opportunities and methods to conduct busi-
ness. For example, raw materials and component parts for a computer may come from China and 
be shipped to Europe for fabrication, and the final products are assembled and shipped to cus-
tomers across the globe (see Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World”). Customers have an 
increasing number of options available to them, so they are demanding more sophisticated prod-
ucts that are customized to their unique needs. They also expect higher levels of customer ser-
vice. If companies cannot keep their customers satisfied, the customers will not hesitate to do 
business with a competitor. Therefore, companies need to provide quality customer service and 
develop products faster and more efficiently to compete in global markets.
To this end, externally focused systems help to streamline communications and coordinate 
business processes with customers, suppliers, business partners, and others who operate outside 
an organization’s boundaries. A system that communicates across organizational boundaries is 
sometimes referred to as an interorganizational system. The key purpose of an interorganiza-
tional system is to streamline the flow of information from one company’s operations to 
another’s (e.g., from a company to its potential or existing customers).
Competitive advantage can be achieved here by integrating multiple business processes in 
ways that enable a firm to meet a wide range of unique customer needs. Sharing information 
between organizations helps companies to adapt more quickly to changing market conditions. 
For instance, should consumers demand that an additional component be added to a product, a 
company can gain this information from its information systems that support sales and instanta-
neously pass it along to its component suppliers. Information systems allow the company and its 
suppliers to satisfy the needs of customers efficiently because changes can be identified and 
managed immediately, creating a competitive advantage for companies that can respond quickly. 
In addition, streamlining the information flows can help companies find innovative ways to 
increase accurate on-time shipments, avoid (or at least anticipate) surprises (such as shortages in 
raw materials or weather problems), minimize costs, and ultimately increase customer satisfac-
tion and the overall profitability of the company. We can view processes and information flows 
across organizations just as we previously viewed the processes and information flows within an 
organization. At each stage (or link) in the process, value is added by the work performed, and 
new, useful information is generated and exchanged between organizations (Figure 7.12). Using 
an interorganizational system, one company can create information and transmit it electronically 
to another company.
Systems that facilitate interorganizational communications focus on the upstream and 
downstream information flows. On the upstream side, supply chain management applications 
integrate the value chains of business partners within a supply chain, improving the coordination 
Shipping
Invoice
Supplier
External
Information
from Supplier
Supplier
Business Activity
Receiving
Inventory
Customer
Internal
Information from
Customer
Customer
Business Activity
FIGURE 7.12
Information flow for a typical 
shipment across organizational 
boundaries.

312    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
of suppliers, product or service production, and distribution. On the downstream side, customer 
relationship management applications concentrate on the activities involved in promoting and 
selling products to the customers as well as providing customer service and nourishing long-
term relationships (both types of applications are discussed in Chapter 8). Integrating internally 
focused and externally focused applications can be extremely valuable for companies operating 
in global markets.
IMPROVING BUSINESS PROCESSES THROUGH ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS.  Software programs come 
in two forms—packaged and custom. Packaged software, sometimes referred to as off-the-
shelf software, is written by third-party vendors for the needs of many different users and 
organizations, supporting standardized, repetitive tasks, such as word processing, payroll 
processing, or preparing taxes. These programs can be quite cost effective because the vendor 
that builds the application can spread out development costs through selling to a large number 
of users.
Yet packaged software may not be well suited for tasks that are unique to a particular busi-
ness. In these cases, companies may prefer to develop (or have developed for them) custom 
software, which is designed and developed exclusively for specific organizations (see Chapter 9, 
“Developing and Acquiring Information Systems”) and can accommodate their particular busi-
ness needs. However, obtaining custom software is much more expensive because the organiza-
tion has to bear all costs (in terms of time, money, and other resources) associated with designing 
and developing the software. Furthermore, applications need to be maintained internally when 
changes are required. With packaged software, the vendor makes the changes and distributes 
new versions to its customers. In all, there are trade-offs when choosing between the packaged 
and custom software routes. Managers must consider whether packaged software can meet the 
business requirements and, if not, conduct a cost–benefit analysis to ensure that taking the cus-
tom software approach will prove worthwhile to the company.
Because no two companies are alike, no packaged software application will exactly fit the 
unique requirements of a particular business. Thus, enterprise systems are designed around 
modules, which are components that can be selected and implemented as needed. In essence, 
each module is designed to replace a legacy system, be it a finance, human resources, or manu-
facturing system; after the conversion to an enterprise system, each business function has access 
to various modules that serve its needs, but the modules (and the underlying data) are tightly 
integrated and share the same look and feel (Figure 7.13).
Vanilla Versus Customized Software  The features and modules that an enterprise 
system comes with out of the box are referred to as the vanilla version. If the vanilla version 
does not support a certain business process, the company may require a customized version. 
Customization provides either additional software that is integrated with the enterprise system 
or consists of direct changes to the vanilla application itself. Most enterprise systems include 
FIGURE 7.13
Each module in an enterprise 
system is designed to replace a 
standalone legacy system.
Source: Dynamics NAV 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    313
literally thousands of elements that can be customized. Companies must take special care 
when dealing with customization, as customization can be extremely costly, and maintaining 
and upgrading customizations can be troublesome. For example, a customization made to the 
vanilla version will need to be reprogrammed when a new release of the system is implemented 
because subsequent releases of the software will not include the previous customizations. In 
other words, new vanilla versions must be continually upgraded to accommodate the company-
specific customizations. This process can involve a substantial investment of time and resources, 
diverting attention away from other key business activities and reducing company profits.
Best Practices–Based Software  One of the major hurdles facing companies that implement 
enterprise systems involves changing business processes to accommodate the manner in which 
the software works. Enterprise system implementations are often used as a catalyst for overall 
optimization of underlying business processes. As a result, most enterprise systems are designed 
to operate according to industry-standard business processes, or best practices, and vendors 
offer many industry-specific versions that have already been customized for particular industries 
based on best practices and the data types and requirements of the specific industries. Best 
practices reflect the techniques and processes, identified through experience and research, that 
have consistently shown results superior to those achieved with other means. In fact, because 
they have proven to consistently lead to superior performance, most enterprise system vendors 
build best practices into their applications to provide guidelines for management to identify 
business activities within their organizations that need to be streamlined. Implementations and 
future upgrades to the system will go more smoothly when companies change their business 
processes to fit the way the enterprise system operates, and companies that reject these best 
practices are in for a long and time-consuming implementation (although the vendors and 
external consultants typically offer help in the process).
However, many organizations have spent years developing business processes that provide 
them with a competitive advantage in the marketplace. Adopting their industry’s best practices 
may force these companies to abandon their unique ways of doing business, putting them on par 
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
The Internet of Things Will Transform ERP and Organizations
The Internet of Things (IoT), which refers to a broad range of 
physical objects (such as computers, sensors, or motors) that 
are interconnected and automatically share data over the Inter-
net, has seen rapid developments. Many think that the IoT is 
primarily about your toaster talking to your refrigerator. While 
this may (or may not) occur, there are many other applications 
of IoT, particularly when creating products and services, where 
IoT technologies can be transformative.
Early enterprise software focused on people; systems were 
designed to help people complete activities such as paying a 
bill, ordering a part, or paying an employee. The systems inter-
acted with people. People provided data, people started pro-
cesses, or people paid a bill. While all of these activities are 
needed and useful, the integration of “things” will significantly 
transform the way organizations do business. For example, 
there are many more things than people. When virtually every 
product, every assembly, and every machine is connected to 
the enterprise system, there is a lot more data available to 
understand what is happening. With such data, many opera-
tions can happen automatically without human intervention. 
Also, things can tell you more than people. Complex machines 
can have dozens of sensors that provide much more data than 
could ever be generated by a single machine operator. And 
these data can be collected continuously (e.g., every millisec-
ond if necessary) and, again, without human intervention. 
Finally, things never get tired or run out of things to say. Such 
things, and their sensors, will silently and diligently do their job 
sending updates as often as needed.
When IoT technologies provide data for enterprise-wide 
systems, the enterprise will have a better understanding of vir-
tually every aspect of the business, and at a depth and preci-
sion never before possible. With such business intelligence, 
organizations not only will operate more efficiently and effec-
tively, they also will learn much more about their business pro-
cesses, such as where improvements can be made and what 
tasks are most vulnerable to disruption. Such insights will result 
in process improvements and better products. Over time, IoT 
technologies will help companies rapidly and iteratively 
improve how their business is performed.
Based on:
Chou, T. (2016, May 17). The wide world of IoT and precision tech-
nology. CFO. Retrieved May 18, 2016, from http://ww2.cfo.com/
internet-of-things/2016/05/wide-world-iot-precision-technology

314    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
with their industry competitors. In other words, companies can potentially lose their competitive 
advantages by adopting the best practices within their industry. Given the importance and diffi-
culty of changing business processes with enterprise and other systems implementations, we 
now briefly describe business process management.
Business Process Management  Optimizing business processes is key for organizational 
efficiency, effectiveness, and agility, and over the years, various approaches for improving 
business processes have been developed. Given the magnitude of change that an enterprise 
system can impose on an organization’s business processes, understanding the role of business 
process management in the implementation of an enterprise system is necessary. Business 
process management (BPM) is a systematic, structured improvement approach by all or part of 
an organization whereby people critically examine, rethink, and redesign business processes in 
order to achieve dramatic improvements in one or more performance measures, such as quality, 
cycle time, or cost.
BPM, which became very popular in the 1990s (and was then called business process reengi-
neering [BPR]), is based on the notion that radical redesign of an organization is sometimes nec-
essary in order to lower costs and increase quality and that information systems are the key enabler 
for that radical change. The basic steps in BPM can be summarized as follows (Figure 7.14):
1.	Develop a vision for the organization that specifies business objectives, such as reducing 
costs, shortening the time it takes to get products to market, improving quality of products 
and/or services, and so on.
2.	Identify the critical processes that are to be redesigned.
3.	Understand and measure the existing processes as a baseline for future improvements.
4.	Identify ways that information systems can be used to improve processes.
5.	Design and implement a prototype of the new processes.
At the heart of BPM initiatives are information systems that enable the streamlining of busi-
ness processes. Given the importance of information systems in such endeavors, organizations 
are increasingly hiring IS consultants and business analysts who have a sound understanding of 
the business but who are also well versed in technology. In fact, business analysts and systems 
analysts are often listed among the hottest jobs because of good job prospects, high salaries, and 
the diversity of work. In enterprise systems projects, business analysts are deeply involved in 
FIGURE 7.14
The basic steps of BPM include 
developing a vision, identifying 
the critical processes that are to 
be redesigned, understanding and 
measuring the existing processes, 
identifying ways that information 
systems can be used to improve 
processes, and designing and 
implementing the new processes.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    315
analyzing and improving business processes and mapping the processes to the different enter-
prise systems modules.
BPM is similar to quality improvement approaches such as total quality management and 
continuous process improvement in that they are intended to be cross-functional approaches to 
improve an organization. BPM differs from these quality improvement approaches, however, in 
one fundamental way. These quality improvement approaches tend to focus on incremental 
change and gradual improvement of processes, while the intention behind BPM is radical rede-
sign and drastic improvement of processes.
When BPR was introduced in the 1990s, many efforts were reported to have failed. These 
failures occurred for a variety of reasons, including the lack of sustained management commit-
ment and leadership, unrealistic scope and expectations, and resistance to change. In fact, BPR 
gained the reputation of being a nice way of saying “downsizing.”
Nevertheless, BPR (and its successors such as BPM) lives on today and is still a popular 
approach to improving organizations. No matter what it is called, the conditions that appear to 
lead to a successful business process improvement effort include the following:
■
■Support by senior management
■
■Shared vision by all organizational members
■
■Realistic expectations
■
■Participants empowered to make changes
■
■The right people participating
■
■Sound management practices
■
■Appropriate funding
In any event, it is clear that successful business process change, especially involving enter-
prise systems, requires a broad range of organizational factors to converge that are far beyond 
the technical implementation issues.
Benefits and Costs of Enterprise Systems  Beyond the improvements in critical business 
processes, there are various types of benefits and costs associated with the acquisition and 
development of enterprise systems. According to industry research, implementation costs run 
over budget 57 percent of the time (Panorama, 2016), and 11 percent of organizations surveyed 
had not recouped their implementation costs. On average, projects costs were around US$10 
million but running nearly US$2 million over budget. Top reasons cited for budget overruns are 
that the initial project scope was expanded and that unanticipated technical or organizational 
change management issues resulted in additional costs.
Gaining a better understanding of both project benefits and costs can help to develop an 
improved understanding of the project’s total cost of ownership and help make the business case 
for a particular investment decision (see Chapter 9). Benefits of enterprise systems that can be 
used to make the business case include:
■
■Improved availability of information
■
■Increased interaction throughout the organization
■
■Improved (reduced) lead times for manufacturing
■
■Improved customer interaction
■
■Reduced operating expenses
■
■Reduced inventory
■
■Reduced IS costs
■
■Improved supplier integration
■
■Improved compliance with standards, rules, and regulations
The two mostly likely benefits realized from utilizing enterprise systems are improvements 
in information availability and increased interaction across the organization as a result of stream-
lining business processes.
Just as there are many possible benefits that can be realized when implementing an enter-
prise system, there are also many potential costs that can affect the total cost of ownership of 
these large and complex systems. Many companies underestimate these costs and, as a result, 
ultimately go over budget. Understanding all of the items that make up the total cost of owner-
ship will help guide organizations into making better financial projections and project approval 
decisions. Beyond the system acquisition costs—for example, software licenses and 

316    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
maintenance costs, technical implementation, and hardware costs—other costs that are often 
overlooked when estimating project costs include:
■
■Travel and training costs for personnel
■
■Ongoing customization and integration costs
■
■Business process studies
■
■Project governance costs
If all costs are not considered, it can result in unexpected budget increases, delayed project 
timelines, and angry management. Next, we examine enterprise resource planning systems.
Enterprise Resource Planning
Today, most enterprise-wide information systems come in the form of enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) systems. In the 1990s, we witnessed companies’ initial push to implement inte-
grated applications, as exhibited by skyrocketing sales of ERP systems at that time. Be aware 
that the terms resource and planning are somewhat misnomers, meaning that they only partially 
describe the purpose of ERP systems, since these applications do much more than just planning 
or managing resources. The reason for the term enterprise resource planning is that these sys-
tems evolved in part during the 1990s from material requirements planning and manufacturing 
resource planning packages. Do not get hung up on the words resource and planning. The key 
word to remember from the acronym ERP is enterprise.
ERP systems replace standalone applications by providing various modules based on a 
common database and similar application interfaces that serve the entire enterprise rather than 
portions of it. Data stored on legacy systems is converted into a large, centralized database that 
stores data related to the various business activities of an organization. Thus, ERP systems make 
accessing data easier by providing a central repository, giving personnel access to accurate, 
up-to-date information throughout the organization. For example, inventory data is accessible 
not only to inbound logistics and operations but also to accounting, sales, purchasing, and cus-
tomer service personnel (Figure 7.15). Storing data in a single place and making it available to 
everyone within the organization empowers all employees in the organization to be aware of the 
current state of business and to perform their jobs better. In addition, many ERP systems support 
business processes of globally operating organizations. For example, the ERP systems of SAP, 
the German enterprise systems pioneer, have multilingual interfaces and automatically convert 
measurement units (e.g., kilograms to pounds or centimeters to inches) and currencies. This 
way, engineers in Germany, Spain, or Italy can input the bill of materials, manufacturing engi-
neers and factory specialists can buy the parts and set up the production run, and marketing and 
sales staff in the United States can easily communicate with their clients.
FIGURE 7.15
An ERP system can provide 
employees with relevant, up-to-
date information. 
Source: Dynamics NAV 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    317
ERP modules that access the database are designed to have the same look and feel regard-
less of the unique needs of a particular department. Inbound logistics and operations person-
nel will use a common user interface to access the same pieces of data from the shared 
database. Although the inbound logistics module and the operations module will have differ-
ent features tailored to the unique needs of the business functions, the screens will look com-
parable, with similar designs, screen layouts, menu options, and so on. The Microsoft Office 
products provide a useful analogy. Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel are designed to pro-
vide different functions (word processing and spreadsheets, respectively), but overall the 
products look and feel very similar to one another. Word and Excel have similar user inter-
faces but differ vastly in the purpose, features, and functionality that each application offers. 
Likewise, the look and feel of Microsoft Dynamics (Microsoft’s suite of enterprise-wide 
information systems) resembles that of Microsoft Office so as to reduce the learning curve for 
new users.
Responding to Compliance and Regulatory Demands
In addition to helping improve business processes, ERP systems improve and ease an organi-
zation’s ability to implement audit controls and comply with government-imposed regula-
tions. Compliance with far-reaching government mandates like the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and 
other evolving and emerging regulatory standards is based on the implementation and docu-
mentation of internal controls, procedures, and processes. All ERP systems are designed to 
include an abundance of control features that can mirror an organization’s business processes 
(e.g., controlling who has access to data and process steps, segregating duties across job func-
tions, etc.). Such enterprise-wide capabilities provide organizations with tested solutions for 
developing and deploying a comprehensive compliance strategy. While the ERP system may 
not provide answers to all regulatory requirements, deploying an ERP system has been a cen-
tral strategy for many organizations struggling to adhere to the myriad legal, regulatory, and 
supply chain mandates that are common in today’s highly regulated business environment.
Choosing an ERP System
When selecting an appropriate ERP system for an organization, management needs to take many 
factors into careful consideration. Although ERP systems come in a variety of shapes and sizes, 
each designed to accommodate certain transaction volumes, industries, and business processes, 
they come as packaged software, which means that they are designed to appeal to many different 
companies. However, businesses have unique needs even within their own industries. In other 
words, like snowflakes, no two companies are exactly alike. Management must carefully select 
an ERP system that will meet the unique requirements of its particular company and must con-
sider a number of factors in the ERP selection. Among the most prevalent issues facing manage-
ment are ERP control and ERP business requirements.
ERP CONTROL.  ERP control refers to the locus of control over the computing systems and 
data contained in those systems as well as decision-making authority. Companies typically 
either opt for centralized control or allow particular business units to govern themselves. In 
the context of ERP, these decisions are based on the level of detail in the information that 
must be provided to management. Some corporations want to have as much detail as possible 
made available at the executive level, whereas other companies do not require such access. 
For instance, an accountant in one company may want the ability to view costs down to the 
level of individual transactions, while an accountant in another company may want only 
summary information. Another area related to control involves the consistency of policies and 
procedures. Some companies prefer that policies and procedures remain consistent throughout 
an organization. Other companies want to allow each business unit to develop its own policies 
and procedures to accommodate the unique ways that they do business. ERP systems vary 
widely in their allowance for control, typically assuming either a corporate or a business-unit 
locus of control. Some ERP systems allow users to select or customize the locus of control. In 
either case, management must consider the ERP’s stance on control to ensure that it will meet 
the business requirements of the company.

318    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
ERP BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS.  When selecting an ERP system, organizations must choose 
which modules to implement from a large menu of options—most organizations adopt only a 
subset of the available ERP components. There are two major categories of ERP components—
ERP core components and ERP extended components (Figure 7.16).
ERP Core Components  ERP core components support the important internal activities of 
the organization for producing its products and services. These components support internal 
operations such as the following:
1.	Financial Management.  Components to support accounting, financial reporting, perfor-
mance management, and corporate governance
2.	Operations Management.  Components to simplify, standardize, and automate business 
processes related to inbound and outbound logistics, product development, manufacturing, 
and sales and service
3.	Human Resource Management.  Components to support employee recruitment, 
assignment tracking, performance reviews, payroll, and regulatory requirements
SECURITY MATTERS 
To Update or Not to Update, That Shouldn’t Be the Question
Virtually all commercial software has known or unknown secu-
rity flaws. When such flaws are detected, the software vendor 
typically provides an update. Recall getting occasional updates 
on your personal computer, tablet, or smartphone. Such 
updates often provide a new capability, but more often than 
not, they provide updates to fix a discovered security problem.
For example, in May 2016, Homeland Security’s Computer 
Emergency Response Team (US-CERT) released an alert that 
36 unnamed organizations were running misconfigured or 
outdated SAP software that could leave them vulnerable to 
attacks by malicious hackers. According to US-CERT, if attack-
ers successfully exploited the flaw, they would be able to gain 
full access and complete control of the enterprise system. 
While the flaw was detected and fixed in 2010, it persists in 
many organizations’ computing platforms due to lax updating 
policies or other serious problems.
You might ask, “Why wouldn’t the company update its 
software?” Well, there is no single reason for this. In fact, there 
are many reasons why organizations fail to upgrade software to 
its latest version. For example, some may not upgrade because 
they feel that some new features may not be needed or be nec-
essary. Others may avoid an upgrade in order to avoid paying 
associated upgrading fees. Some may conclude that the system 
is running fine as is, so “why fix what isn’t broken?” However, 
for ERP software, the biggest reason for organizations not to 
update outdated software is that many of these systems have 
been customized to a particular organization’s manner of work-
ing and business processes. These custom software modules 
are often not compatible with the latest versions of the ERP 
without extensive rewriting and testing. So, rather than modify-
ing the customized modules to be compatible with the ERP’s 
latest release, many organizations literally “roll the dice” by 
keeping the older generating software so that they can con-
tinue to use their custom-designed features.
Failing to upgrade an ERP system is especially problematic 
and risks much more than losing some old text messages or 
photos. A single ERP system can support hundreds of different 
business process; the databases can be massive, often larger 
than many terabytes. ERP systems touch nearly every aspect of 
an organization, from sales to production and inventory to 
payroll. Given their massive size, scope, and complexity, a sys-
tem failure can literally bankrupt a company. Just as you should 
always run updates on your computer and smartphone, so too 
should organizations. Which risk is greater, a change in busi-
ness processes or bankruptcy? While the risks may be low, 
many companies are making the wrong choice when it comes 
to updating their ERP software.
Based on:
Grey, L. (2015, July 10). Why is ERP security so difficult? HelpNetSe-
curity. Retrieved May 17, 2016, from https://www.helpnetsecurity 
.com/2015/07/10/why-is-erp-security-so-difficult
Kronen, M. (2016, February 5). Top 6 reasons why your company  
shouldn’t use outdated software. LinkTek. Retrieved May 17, 2016,  
from http://www.linktek.com/top-6-reasons-why-your-company 
-shouldnt-use-outdated-software
Monahan, M. (2013, May 30). Top six ERP implementation fail-
ures. 360 Cloud Solutions. Retrieved May 17, 2016, from http://
blog.360cloudsolutions.com/Top-Six-ERP-Implementation-Failures
Shinder, D. (2015, January 14). Patch or not? Weighing the risks of 
immediate updating. WindowsSecurity.com. Retrieved May 17, 2016, 
from http://www.windowsecurity.com/articles-tutorials/misc_network_
security/patch-or-not-weighing-risks-immediate-updating.html
US-CERT (2016, May 11). Alert (TA16-132A) exploitation of SAP busi-
ness applications. Retrieved May 17, 2016, from https://www.us-cert 
.gov/ncas/alerts/TA16-132A
Whittaker, Z. 2016, May 11). Homeland Security warns of hackers  
exploiting SAP security flaw. ZDNet. Retrieved May 17, 2016,  
from http://www.zdnet.com/article/homeland-security-warns-of 
-hackers-exploiting-sap-security-flaw


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    319
Whereas the operations management components enable the core activities of the value 
chain, financial management and human resources management are associated with activities 
supporting the core activities (Figure 7.17).
ERP Extended Components  ERP extended components support the primary external 
activities of the organization for dealing with suppliers and customers. Specifically, ERP 
extended components focus primarily on supply chain management and customer relationship 
management. Both are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
Enabling Business Processes Using ERP Core Components
To fit the needs of various businesses in different industries, an ERP system’s core components 
are typically implemented using a building-block approach through a series of modules that sup-
port internally focused business processes. For example, Oracle’s JD Edwards EnterpriseOne 
offers more than 70 different modules to support a variety of business processes. ERP vendors 
typically package the various modules that enable industry-specific processes and offer such 
systems as “industry solutions.” This way, organizations have to spend less effort in selecting the 
needed modules and can more easily implement the ERP system. For example, SAP’s ERP 
application is built around modules that are modeled after the best practices for 25 different 
ERP Core
Components
(Internal Focus)
ERP Extended
Components
(External Focus)
Financial
Management
Operations
Management
Human
Resource
Management
Supply
Chain
Management
Customer
Relationship
Management
Database
FIGURE 7.16
An ERP system consists of core 
and extended components.
FIGURE 7.17
The financial management 
component of an ERP enables 
core value chain activities to take 
place.
Source: Dynamics NAV 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.

320    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
industries. Depending on the industries, the modules are localized for different countries: 
Whereas the modules for the automotive industry are localized for Japan or Germany, the mod-
ules for apparel and footwear industries are localized for China and India, the modules for the 
pharmaceutical industry are localized for Germany and the United States, and so on. Similarly, 
Microsoft offers its Dynamics ERP system for various industries, including construction, health-
care, manufacturing, retail, and others (Table 7.1). Depending on the way processes are typically 
performed in an industry, the modules within each industry-specific ERP system work together 
to enable the business processes needed to run a business efficiently and effectively. However, 
the modules provided by different vendors may vary in the specific business processes they sup-
port as well as in what they are called, and it is critical for managers to understand the vendors’ 
naming conventions and software modules to gain an understanding of how these features can be 
implemented to support the company’s business processes.
ORDER-TO-CASH.  As discussed, the order-to-cash process entails the processes related to selling 
goods or services. Depending on the industry, the order-to-cash process can be very simple or 
extremely complex. In a retail environment, this process can be as simple as capturing product 
data, modifying the sale price (if needed), processing payment cards, and processing loyalty 
cards for customer profiling purposes. For a wholesale distributor, the order-to-cash process 
is more elaborate and consists of price quotation, stock allocation, credit limit check, picking, 
packing, shipping, billing, and receiving payment. For these processes to take place, different 
modules of the financial and operations management components work together. For example, 
the financial management component provides modules for checking credit limits, billing, and 
processing incoming payments. The operations management component provides modules 
related to sales and warehouse management operations, such as price quotation, stock allocation, 
picking, packing, and shipping (Figure 7.18).
PROCURE-TO-PAY.  Recall that a generic procure-to-pay process entails negotiating price and 
terms, issuing purchase orders, receiving the goods, receiving the invoice, and settling the 
payment. As the order-to-cash process differs between industries, so does the procure-to-pay 
TABLE 7.1  Industry-Specific Versions of the Microsoft Dynamics ERP System
Construction
Distribution
Education
Financial services
Government
Healthcare
Manufacturing
Not-for-profit
Professional services
Retail
FIGURE 7.18
An ERP system can support 
all aspects of the order-to-cash 
process. 
Source: Dynamics NAV 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    321
process. A grocery store, for example, typically orders a standard assortment of products 
but also faces additional constraints such as having to optimize order quantities, taking into 
account not only demand and storage costs but also seasonality and perishability of products. 
In contrast, a construction company procures diverse materials, depending on the project at 
hand, and the procurement process could entail a lengthy sourcing process, including requests 
for quotations, a bidding process, reviewing of bids, awarding the contract, and thoroughly 
inspecting the delivered products or materials (see also Chapter 9 for the process of purchasing a 
new information system). Similar to the order-to-cash process, different modules of the financial 
management and operations management ERP components work together to enable the different 
activities related to the procure-to-pay process (Figure 7.19).
MAKE-TO-STOCK/MAKE-TO-ORDER.  The processes related to producing goods differ widely 
between different industries. The biggest distinction is between the make-to-stock and make-to-
order processes. As indicated, the make-to-stock process is typically used for commodities, whereas 
the make-to-order process is used for highly customizable goods or big-ticket items (such as aircraft 
or highway bridges). Many beverage companies, for instance, use a make-to-stock approach, 
involving production planning, manufacturing, and quality control. In contrast, an aerospace 
company has to start with planning the project and ordering subassemblies or raw materials with 
long lead times before planning and executing the production for each specific project and finally 
checking quality and shipping the product. Many of the activities associated with the production 
process are supported by the operations management component of an ERP system (Figure 7.20).
FIGURE 7.19
An ERP system can support all 
aspects of the procure-to-pay 
process. 
Source: Dynamics NAV 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.
FIGURE 7.20
An ERP system can support all 
aspects of the production process. 
Source: Dynamics NAV 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.

322    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
OTHER BUSINESS PROCESSES.  In addition to these business processes, ERP systems typically 
enable a variety of other generic as well as industry-specific business processes. Any business 
needs to manage its workforce, including managing the hiring processes, scheduling the 
workforce, recording time and attendance, processing payroll, managing benefits, and so 
on. All these processes are supported by the human resources management component of an 
ERP system. Similarly, the financial management component supports generic processes such 
as financial and managerial accounting, corporate governance, and the like. Industry-specific 
processes and the modules supporting these can vary widely. For example, the business of an 
aircraft manufacturer consists to a large extent of aftermarket support; a retail chain, in contrast, 
needs modules supporting retail space planning and price and markdown management; a 
commercial real estate company needs modules for managing assets, leases, and common 
spaces; and a large part of an airline’s operations is related to maintenance, repair, overhaul, 
flight operations, catering, and customer care.
ERP Installation
Previously, we discussed how organizations can benefit from the integration of standalone sys-
tems; further, you learned how business processes can differ between industries. Thus, any orga-
nization considering the implementation of an ERP system has to carefully evaluate the different 
options available not only in terms of the overall systems offered by different vendors but also in 
terms of the industry-specific solutions offered by the software vendors. An evaluation should 
entail the assessment of how far the different modules can support existing business processes, 
which modules may have to be added, and the extent to which existing business processes have 
to be modified in order to fit the modules offered by the ERP system.
An activity that is widely underestimated, however, is the configuration of ERP systems. 
Whereas customization involves the programming of company-specific modules or changing 
how business processes are implemented within the system and is often discouraged, configu-
ration is an activity to be performed during any ERP implementation. Specifically, the system 
must be configured to reflect the way an organization does business and the associated busi-
ness rules. As one of the most important parts of an ERP system is the underlying company-
wide database, setting up the database is key to a successful ERP implementation, and 
organizations have to make countless decisions on how to configure hundreds or thousands of 
database tables to fit the business’s needs. Similarly, organizations have to make thousands of 
decisions related to the different business processes. For example, what should be the format 
of the unique identifier for a customer, when will a bill be considered overdue, what is consid-
ered the “standard” method of shipping, and so on? To make all these decisions, a good under-
standing of the way the company does its business is needed. Hence, many organizations hire 
experienced business analysts or outside consultants to assist with these configuration tasks.
ERP Limitations
While ERP systems can help organizations streamline business processes, give personnel access 
to accurate, up-to-date information throughout the organization, and better respond to regulatory 
demands, they also pose limitations. In particular, ERP systems typically require organizations 
to modify various business processes; once an ERP system is implemented, the company is vir-
tually locked in, and it is very difficult to make further changes, limiting organizations’ flexibil-
ity and agility when facing new external challenges. Typically, even small changes to the way 
processes are implemented in the ERP system require programming changes, leading to higher 
costs for ongoing system maintenance.
Achieving Enterprise System Success
To summarize, the main objective of enterprise systems is to help achieve competitive advantage 
by streamlining business activities within and outside a company. However, many implementa-
tions turn out to be costlier and more time-consuming than originally envisioned. It is not 
uncommon to have projects that run over budget, meaning that identifying common problems 
and devising methods for dealing with these issues can prove invaluable to management. Indus-
try surveys have shown that more than 80 percent of companies that undertake enterprise system 
implementations realize some benefits; around 46 percent realize about half of the expected 
benefits, and 10 percent report that they did not realize any benefits (Panorama, 2016).


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    323
Given these numbers, should businesses even attempt to tackle large IS projects? The answer 
is, in most cases, yes. Typically, organizations do not (or should not) start such projects for the 
sake of starting the projects; rather, organizations are trying to fix certain problems, such as inef-
ficient or ineffective distribution, pricing, or logistics, or lack of compliance with government 
regulations. Further, businesses have realized that it is all but impossible to improve business pro-
cesses without the support of information systems. Companies that have successfully installed 
enterprise systems are found to follow a basic set of recommendations related to enterprise sys-
tem implementations. As with all large projects, governance and risk mitigation are critical to 
success, and companies should attempt to share both risks and rewards with the vendors. Although 
the following list is not meant to be comprehensive, these recommendations will provide an 
understanding of some of the challenges involved in implementing enterprise systems:
Recommendation 1. Secure executive sponsorship.
Recommendation 2. Get help from outside experts.
Recommendation 3. Thoroughly train users.
Recommendation 4. Take a multidisciplinary approach to implementations.
Recommendation 5. Evolve the implementation.
Secure Executive Sponsorship
The primary reason why enterprise system implementations fail is believed to be a lack of top-
level management support. Although executives do not necessarily need to make decisions con-
cerning the enterprise system, it is critical that they buy into the decisions made by project 
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Big ERP Systems Embracing Small Mobile Devices
As ERP technologies have transformed organizations of all sizes 
in all industries, mobile devices have transformed how people 
manage day-to-day activities and organizations. As a result, ERP 
vendors are rapidly evolving their systems to better support man-
agers with a variety of mobile ERP applications so that managers 
will be able to take advantage of the functionality, data, and 
benefits of their ERP application not only in the office but also on 
the road, enabling real-time management. Mobile ERP applica-
tions can provide many benefits to an organization, including:
1.	 Improving Service Quality. Mobile ERP will allow 
remote workers access to relevant customer information, 
improving service quality and responsiveness.
2.	 Improving Productivity. Mobile ERP will allow remote 
workers to access key resources when commuting or 
waiting in airports, improving productivity and reducing 
downtime.
3.	 Strengthening Customer Relationships. Mobile ERP 
will allow remote workers to have key customer informa-
tion when needed to strengthen customer relationships.
4.	 Improving Competitive Advantage. Mobile ERP can 
speed responsiveness to customer needs, improving 
competitive advantage.
5.	 Improving Data Timeliness and Accuracy. Mobile ERP 
allows for easier, less redundant, and more timely data cap-
ture, allowing workers in the field to capture critical data as 
they emerge without having to rekey the data into multiple 
systems where errors and inconsistencies can occur.
Historically, ERP systems have not had a reputation of being 
user friendly. Given the mainframe roots of most systems, high 
usability was not a priority. Vendors are working hard to improve 
usability, especially for mobile ERP. Early mobile ERP apps tried to 
do too much and, much like their desktop-based interfaces, 
were slow and cumbersome to use. To reduce complexity and 
improve usability, vendors are now creating apps designed to 
perform a narrow set of tasks related to a specific business prob-
lem. Each app can be streamlined to focus on one problem and 
is therefore fast and easy to use. ERP giant SAP, for example, has 
hundreds of different apps to perform specific tasks. While apps 
are helping with mobile access, such innovation and usability 
improvements are also being integrated into desktop systems, 
and overall, ERP systems are becoming much easier to use. As 
mobility is a megatrend that will only become more and more 
prevalent in the workplace, organizations should choose ERP 
systems that have the capability and flexibility to integrate with 
an expanding array of mobile devices and platforms.
Based on:
Borek, R. (2011, July 22). 5 benefits to mobile ERP. ERP Software-
Blog. Retrieved May 18, 2016, from http://www.erpsoftwareblog 
.com/2011/07/5-benefits-to-mobile-erp
SAP Mobile Technology (2016). Mobile technology. SAP. Retrieved May 
18, 2016, from http://go.sap.com/solution/mobile-technology.html
SAP Store. (2016). SAP store. SAP. Retrieved May 18, 2016, from 
https://store.sap.com/sap/cpa/ui/resources/store/html/Solutions 
.html?pcntry=US&sap-language=EN&catID=MOB

324    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
managers. Many problems can arise if projects fail to grab the attention of top-level manage-
ment. In most companies, executives have the ultimate authority regarding the availability and 
distribution of resources within the organization. If executives do not support the project, the 
probability of failure increases dramatically.
A second problem that may arise deals with top-level management’s ability to authorize 
changes in the way the company does business. When business processes need to be changed to 
incorporate best practices, these modifications need to be completed. Otherwise, the company will 
have a piece of software that does not fit the way people accomplish their business tasks. Also, as 
people, in general, are reluctant to change the way they are working, there is bound to be resistance 
to the implementation of an ERP system. If users and midlevel management perceive the enterprise 
system to be unimportant, they are not likely to view it as a priority. Enterprise systems require a 
concentrated effort, and executive sponsorship can propel or stifle the implementation.
Get Help from Outside Experts
Enterprise systems are complex. Even the most talented IS departments can struggle in coming 
to grips with any enterprise-level system. Most vendors have trained project managers and expe-
rienced consultants to assist companies with installing these complex systems. Using consul-
tants tends to move companies through the implementation more quickly and tends to help 
companies train their personnel on the applications more effectively. However, companies 
should not rely too heavily on support from the vendors. The salespeople’s job is, after all, sell-
ing a system, and they are unlikely to thoroughly understand the company’s exact business 
needs. Thus, organizations should also draw on external consultants to help define the function-
ality before selecting a vendor and to ensure that all requirements are incorporated in the con-
tract with the vendor. Once the application goes live and the consultants are no longer there, 
users have to do the job themselves. A key focus should therefore be facilitating user learning.
Thoroughly Train Users
Training is often the most overlooked, underestimated, and poorly budgeted expense involved in 
planning enterprise system implementations. Enterprise systems are much more complicated to learn 
than standalone systems. Learning a single application requires users to become accustomed to a 
new software interface, but enterprise system users typically need to learn a new set of business pro-
cesses as well. Once enterprise systems go live, many companies initially experience a dramatic 
drop-off in productivity. This issue can potentially lead to heightened levels of dissatisfaction among 
users, as they prefer to accomplish their business activities in a familiar manner rather than doing 
things the new way. By training users before the system goes live and giving them sufficient opportu-
nities to learn the new system, a company can allay fears and mitigate potential productivity issues.
Take a Multidisciplinary Approach to Implementations
Enterprise systems affect the entire organization; thus, companies should include personnel from 
different levels and departments on the implementation team. In customer relationship manage-
ment and supply chain management environments in which other organizations are participating 
in the implementation, it is critical to enlist the support of personnel in their organizations as 
well. During implementation, project managers need to include personnel from midlevel man-
agement, the IS department, external consultants, and, most important, end users.
Failing to include the appropriate people in the day-to-day activities of the project can prove 
problematic in many areas. From a needs-analysis standpoint, it is critical that all the business 
requirements be sufficiently captured before selecting an enterprise solution. Because end users 
are involved in every aspect of daily business activities, their insights can be invaluable. For 
instance, an end user might make salient a feature that no one on the project team had thought of. 
Having an application that does not meet all of the business’s requirements can result in poorly 
fitting software or customizations. Another peril in leaving out key personnel is the threat of 
alienation. Departments and/or personnel who do not feel included may develop a sense of ani-
mosity toward the new system and view it in a negative light. In extreme cases, users will refuse 
to use the new application, resulting in conflicts and inefficiencies within the organization.
Evolve the Implementation
As you can see, implementing ERP systems is a highly complex undertaking; although a suc-
cessful implementation can have huge payoffs for an organization, some organizations fear 


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    325
losing the ability to quickly respond to changing business requirements, particularly because 
large ERP systems are difficult to install, maintain, and upgrade. In addition, the life cycle of a 
large ERP installation is typically 10 to 15 years. A recent trend, especially for small and mid-
sized companies, is to move away from such large, comprehensive in-house systems toward 
cloud-based ERP solutions. As with other cloud-based solutions, companies implementing 
cloud-based ERP can benefit from scalability and agility. In addition, many companies extend-
ing into new markets are extending their existing ERP systems with cloud-based solutions. Such 
two-tier ERP strategy can support operations at the corporate level while providing the needed 
flexibility and agility at the subsidiary level. This can be especially beneficial when entering 
global markets, as the cloud-based solutions can be easily adapted to local needs and regulations 
without having to make extensive changes to the core ERP system.
Another key trend is the ability to manage a business in real time. With the costs of sensors 
decreasing at a tremendous pace (see Chapter 1), organizations are now able to acquire data 
about various operational processes in real time. Being able to use this data for business deci-
sions is regarded as critical for successfully competing in the digital world. Traditionally, organi-
zations separated the processing of transactions from the analysis (see Chapter 6, “Enhancing 
Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics”) so as to prevent the analytical applications 
from slowing down the transaction processing. Even then, batch transactions could take hours, 
and decision makers could not get quick answers to pressing business questions, as transactional 
data were loaded only periodically into the analytical systems and the data needed for real-time 
business intelligence were just not available. New technology, using in-memory computing (see 
Chapter 3), can help to tremendously increase processing speed by reducing disk latency while 
at the same time enabling the removal of the distinction between transactional and analytical 
systems. Paired with the continuing trend of mobile access to ERP systems, this enables manag-
ers to manage business in real time and quickly respond to changes as they occur.
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Software Error Frees Prisoners Early and Is Linked to Killings
The United States has the highest incarceration rate in the 
world, estimated to be 716 people per 100,000 residents in 
2013. To put this into perspective, consider that the United 
States represents about 4.4 percent of the world’s population, 
and it houses nearly 22 percent of the world’s prisoners. The 
cost of the corrections industry in the United States is substan-
tial, exceeding US$74 billion, which is more than the GDP of 
133 nations. The growth of the U.S. prison population is driven 
by several factors. First, many states have mandatory sentenc-
ing laws that require prison time for specific types of crimes 
(e.g., child molesting) or for repeat offenders. Such laws have 
acted to lower crime rates but have exploded prison popula-
tions. Second, many of the mandatory sentences can be as long 
as 25 years, which limits when and whether a prisoner can be 
released due to good behavior or other mitigating factors. With 
longer sentences in prison, populations continue to grow. 
Other factors such as the privatization of prisons, strict drug 
sentencing laws, and even 24-hour news programs have been 
cited as contributing reasons for increasing prison populations. 
Needless to say, there is a lot “wrong” with this picture.
In late 2015, a software glitch was discovered that was 
blamed for the early release of more than 3,200 prisoners since 
2002 in the state of Washington. The software problem was dis-
covered when a crime victim believed a convicted prisoner was 
going to be released too early. The glitch gave some prisoners 
more good behavior credit than was possible to earn. While many 
may feel that having such an error in the software for 13 years is 
not a huge deal, there were at least two incidents where released 
prisoners were charged with murder during a period of time they 
should have still been in confinement. In early 2016, 31 of the 
early released prisoners were back in custody, with only a few 
being accused of committing new crimes while they were on the 
outside. For those who were making positive progress, such as 
holding a job or working on their education, this unexpected 
re-incarceration came as an unwelcome surprise.
Based on:
Berman, M. (2016, February 9). What happened after Washington 
State accidentally let thousands of inmates out early. The Washing-
ton Post. Retrieved May 18, 2016, from https://www.washingtonpost 
.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/02/09/heres-what-happened-after-the-
state-of-washington-accidentally-let-thousands-of-inmates-out-early
Godard, T. (2016, March 23). The economics of the American prison 
system. Smart Asset. Retrieved May 18, 2016, from https://smartasset 
.com/insights/the-economics-of-the-american-prison-system
Kaste, M. (2016, January 1). 2 prisoners mistakenly released early now 
charged in killings. National Public Radio. Retrieved May 18, 2016, 
from http://www.npr.org/2016/01/01/461700642/computer-glitch-
leads-to-mistaken-early-release-of-prisoners-in-washington
United States incarceration rate. (2016, May 7). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved May 18, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=United_States_incarceration_rate&oldid=719139142

326    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
Although expansive enterprise system implementations are often cumbersome and difficult, 
the potential payoff is huge. As a result, organizations are compelled to implement these sys-
tems. Further, given the popularity and necessity of integrating systems and processes on an 
organization-wide basis, you are likely to find yourself involved in the implementation and/or 
use of such a system. We are confident that after reading this chapter, you will be better able to 
understand and help with the development and use of such systems.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
The Automobile Industry
There are more than 1.2 billion cars and light trucks on the 
road throughout the world, a number that is estimated to 
reach 2 billion by 2035. With almost 90 million vehicles sold 
worldwide in 2015, experts predict this number to climb to 
100 million by 2018, with China alone accounting for 25 mil-
lion vehicles sold. In addition, countries such as Brazil, Russia, 
and India and other emerging economies (especially in South-
east Asia) will significantly contribute to this growth.
Currently, there is growing global demand for small, 
energy-efficient vehicles. Since 2006, the “World Car of the 
Year” has been selected by a large jury of international auto-
motive journalists from 22 countries. Cars nominated for this 
award need to have been sold in at least five countries and on 
at least two continents. In addition to the overall winner, there 
are other categories including luxury, performance, and green 
automobiles. In recent years, the Audi A3 (2014), BMW 2 
Series (2015), and Mazda MX-5 (2016), all small and relatively 
efficient vehicles, have been chosen as the overall winners.
In the meantime, the automobile industry continues to 
explore other ways of responding to global market demands. 
Many automobile manufacturers have dramatically evolved 
their global networks of suppliers (such as Bosch and Conti-
nental from Germany, Magna and Lear from the United States, 
and Yazaki from Japan), leveraging these broad supply chains 
to bring new innovations to market, ranging from USB ports 
to hard drives for storing music to mobile data connectivity. In 
addition, manufacturers and technology companies are finding 
interesting ways to make cars safer and more convenient. Elec-
tric cars are also gaining a growing market share. In 2013, just 
over 400,000 electrical vehicles were sold globally; in 2015, 
this number grew to 1.2 million. In Norway, more than 22 per-
cent of all new car sales were electric in 2015.
Another coming trend in this market is driverless cars. For 
several years, Google has famously been working on technol-
ogy to support a self-driving car. The system drives the car at 
the speed limit it has stored from Google’s mapping database 
and maintains distance from other vehicles using an array of 
sensors. In addition to Google, many other technology compa-
nies and automobile manufacturers are focusing a lot of their 
R&D budgets to driverless cars. Key players include not only 
Google but also Apple, Ford, General Motors, Tesla, Baidu, and 
numerous universities around the world.
Beyond optimizing supply chains and adding new innova-
tive features, automakers are trying to attract new customers 
by finding new ways to present their newest models. For exam-
ple, automakers are using virtual reality (VR) technology to 
create virtual showrooms in upscale shopping centers or just 
about anywhere. In 2016, Audi is using VR headsets to allow 
potential customers to move around the exterior of the virtual 
vehicle, open the trunk and doors, check out the headlights 
and taillights, look underneath the hood, and even get inside 
and sit in the driver’s seat. In such immersive environments, 
customers can experience all aspects of the shopping experi-
ence except for the new car smell.
Questions
1.	 How has globalization changed the business processes of 
auto manufacturers?
2.	 What innovative technologies may be included in the cars 
of the future?
Based on:
Abkowitz, A. (2016, June 2). Baidu plans to mass produce autono-
mous cars in five years. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 21, 2016, 
from http://www.wsj.com/articles/baidu-plans-to-mass-produce-
autonomous-cars-in-five-years-1464924067.
Anonymous. (2015, August 12). Do you know the car population in 
the world? Tofucar. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from http://www.tofucar 
.com/do-you-know-the-car-population-in-the-world
Anonymous. (2016, May 1). World car market in 2015 hit 89.7 million 
sales. Focus2Move. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from http://focus2move 
.com/world-car-market
Anonymous. (2016). World Car Awards. WCOTY.com. Retrieved May 
1, 2016, from http://www.wcoty.com/web
Autonomous car. (2016, May 1). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Autonomous_car&oldid=718111778
Cavies, A. (2015, October 22). Obviously drivers are already abusing 
Tesla’s autopilot. Wired. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from http://www.wired 
.com/2015/10/obviously-drivers-are-already-abusing-teslas-autopilot
Electric car use by country. (2016, April 29). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Electric_car_use_by_country&oldid=717758461
Gaudiosi, J. (2016, January 8). Audi drives virtual reality showroom 
with HTC Vive. Fortune. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from http://fortune 
.com/2016/01/08/audi-showroom-uses-vr
Google self-driving car. (2016, April 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Google_self-driving_car&oldid=717557267


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    327
Key Points Review
1.	 Explain core business processes that are common in 
organizations. Most organizations are organized 
around distinct functional areas that work together to 
execute the core business processes order-to-cash, 
procure-to-pay, and make-to-stock/order. Together, 
these core business processes enable the creation of 
value chains that are involved in transforming raw 
materials into products sold to the end consumer. Value 
chains are composed of both core activities (inbound 
logistics, operations and manufacturing, outbound 
logistics, marketing and sales, and customer service) 
and support activities (administrative activities, 
infrastructure, human resources, technology 
development, and procurement). Companies connect 
their value chains with suppliers and customers, 
creating value systems such that information flows 
from one company’s value chain to another company’s 
value chain.
2.	 Describe what enterprise systems are and how they 
have evolved. Enterprise systems are information 
systems that span the entire organization and can be 
used to integrate business processes, activities, and 
information across all the functional areas of a firm. 
Enterprise systems evolved from legacy systems that 
supported distinct organizational activities by 
combining data and applications into a single 
comprehensive system and can be either prepackaged 
software or custom-made applications. The 
implementation of enterprise systems often involves 
business process management, a systematic, structured 
improvement approach by all or part of an organization 
that critically examines, rethinks, and redesigns 
processes in order to achieve dramatic improvements 
in one or more performance measures, such as quality, 
cycle time, or cost.
3.	 Describe enterprise resource planning systems and 
how they help to improve internal business processes. 
ERP systems allow information to be shared 
throughout the organization through the use of a large 
database, helping to streamline business processes and 
improve customer service. When selecting an ERP 
system, organizations must choose which modules to 
implement from a large menu of options—most 
organizations adopt only a subset of the available ERP 
components. ERP core components support the major 
internal activities of the organization for producing its 
products and services, while ERP extended 
components support the primary external activities of 
the organization for dealing with suppliers and 
customers.
4.	 Understand and utilize the keys to successfully 
implementing enterprise systems. Experience with 
enterprise system implementations suggests that there 
are some common problems that can be avoided and/or 
should be managed carefully. Organizations can avoid 
common implementation problems by (1) securing 
executive sponsorship, (2) getting necessary help from 
outside experts, (3) thoroughly training users,  
(4) taking a multidisciplinary approach to 
implementations, and (5) keeping track of evolving 
ERP trends.
Key Terms
best practices  313
business process management 
(BPM)  314
business process reengineering 
(BPR)  314
core activities  303
custom software  312
customization  312
downstream information flow  307
enterprise resource  
planning (ERP) system  316
enterprise system  309
enterprise-wide 
information system  309
ERP core components  318
ERP extended components  319
externally focused system  311
internally focused system  309
interorganizational system  311
legacy system  308
make-to-order process  302
make-to-stock process  302
module  312
off-the-shelf software  312
order-to-cash process  301
packaged software  312
procure-to-pay process  301
standalone application  308
support activities  305
upstream information  
flow  307
value system  307
vanilla version  312
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM

328    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
Review Questions
	 7-1. 	What are core business processes?
	 7-2. 	Compare and contrast the core and support 
activities of a value chain.
	 7-3. 	Give an example of upstream and down-
stream information flows in a value system.
	 7-4. 	Describe what enterprise systems are and how 
they have evolved.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
	 7-5. 	Compare and contrast customized and pack-
aged software as well as vanilla versions ver-
sus best practices–based software.
	 7-6. 	What are the core components of an ERP 
system?
	 7-7. 	What are the keys to successfully implement-
ing an ERP system?
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 7-8. 	______________ are information systems that allow 
companies to integrate information and support opera-
tions on a company-wide basis.
A.	Customer relationship management systems
B.	Enterprise systems
C.	Wide area networks
D.	Interorganizational systems
	 7-9. 	Which of the following is a core activity according to 
the value chain model?
A.	firm infrastructure
B.	customer service
C.	human resources
D.	procurement
	 7-10. 	According to the value chain model, which of the fol-
lowing is a support activity?
A.	technology development
B.	marketing and sales
C.	inbound logistics
D.	operations and manufacturing
	 7-11. 	All of the following are true about legacy systems 
except ______________.
A.	they are standalone systems
B.	they are older software systems
C.	they are ERP systems
D.	they may be difficult to integrate into other systems
	 7-12. 	The processes associated with obtaining goods from 
external vendors are referred to as ______________.
A.	make-to-order processes
B.	make-to-stock processes
C.	procure-to-pay processes
D.	order-to-cash processes
	 7-13. 	The processes associated with selling a product or ser-
vice are referred to as ______________.
A.	make-to-order processes
B.	make-to-stock processes
C.	procure-to-pay processes
D.	order-to-cash processes
	 7-14. 	Which processes are most often associated with 
pull-based manufacturing of products?
A.	make-to-order processes
B.	make-to-stock processes
C.	procure-to-pay processes
D.	order-to-cash processes
	 7-15. 	Information systems that focus on supporting 
functional areas, business processes, and decision 
making within an organization are referred to as 
______________.
A.	legacy systems
B.	enterprise-wide information systems
C.	interorganizational systems
D.	internally focused systems
	 7-16. 	An enterprise system that has not been customized is 
commonly referred to as ______________.
A.	a vanilla version
B.	a root version
C.	a core version
D.	none of the above
	 7-17. 	______________ is a systematic, structured improve-
ment approach by all or part of an organization that 
critically examines, rethinks, and redesigns processes 
in order to achieve dramatic improvements in one or 
more performance measures, such as quality, cycle 
time, or cost.
A.	Systems analysis
B.	Business process management
C.	Customer relationship management
D.	Total quality management
Answers are on page 330.


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    329
Problems and Exercises
	 7-18. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Enterprise system
ii.	 Legacy system
iii.	 Value system
iv.	 ERP extended components
v.	 Standalone application
vi.	 Vanilla version
vii.	 Make-to-stock process
viii.	 Business process management
ix.	 Procure-to-pay process
x.	 Internally focused system
a.	 Components that support the primary external ac-
tivities of the organization for dealing with suppli-
ers and customers
b.	 System that focuses on the specific needs of an in-
dividual department
c.	 The processes associated with producing goods 
based on forecasted demand
d.	 Older system that is not designed to communi-
cate with other applications beyond departmental 
boundaries
e.	 Information system that allows companies to inte-
grate data on a company-wide basis
f.	 The features and modules that a packaged software 
system comes with out of the box
g.	 The processes associated with acquiring goods 
from suppliers
h.	 A systematic, structured improvement approach 
by all or part of an organization whereby people 
critically examine, rethink, and redesign business 
processes in order to achieve dramatic improve-
ments in one or more performance measures, such 
as quality, cycle time, or cost
i.	 Information system that supports functional areas, 
business processes, and decision making within an 
organization
j.	 A collection of interlocking company value chains
	 7-19. 	Try to determine how many software applications your 
university is utilizing concurrently. Are the university’s 
information systems cohesive, or do they need updat-
ing and streamlining?
	 7-20. 	Find a business that has recently implemented a new 
information system and interview several end users. 
How much training have they received in using the 
new information system? How effective was the 
training? What types of training were most effective 
for learning the new system?
	 7-21. 	Find a business that has recently implemented a new 
enterprise-wide information system and interview end 
users from different departments. How involved were 
the end users in the project? How do they feel about 
the outcome?
	 7-22. 	For a business or organization that you are familiar 
with, describe the core activities in its value chain. In 
which areas may information systems be helpful for 
improving effectiveness or efficiency?
	 7-23. 	For a business or organization that you are familiar 
with, describe its procure-to-pay process using the 
steps outlined in Figure 7.4; if the organization doesn’t 
have a particular step, explain why this is so.
	 7-24. 	For a business or organization that you are familiar 
with, describe either its make-to-stock or make-to-
order process using the steps outlined in Figure 7.5; if 
the organization doesn’t have a particular step, explain 
why this is so.
	 7-25. 	Using Figure 7.6 as a guide, develop a supply chain 
diagram for some other product.
	 7-26. 	For a business or organization that you are familiar 
with, describe how this company could collabo-
rate with upstream partners in their value system 
to improve their ability to react to changing market 
conditions.
	 7-27. 	Based on your own experiences with using off-the-
shelf applications, in which instances would you have 
needed/liked customized functionality? Why?
	 7-28. 	Compare three different supermarkets you are familiar 
with and try to identify best practices from a custom-
er’s perspective. Summarize these best practices in a 
one-page report.
	 7-29. 	Examine the information systems used at your univer-
sity. Which systems are packaged, and which are likely 
to be custom software? For which systems would 
another approach have been better? Why?
	 7-30. 	Search the web for recent articles on ERP implementa-
tions. How successful were these implementations? 
How could problems have been avoided or overcome? 
Create a two-page report summarizing your findings.
	 7-31. 	Interview an IS manager within an organization about 
cloud-based ERP systems. Has the company consid-
ered using a cloud-based system? Why or why not?

330    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application:  
Choosing an ERP System at Campus Travel
	 7-32. 	Campus Travel is interested in integrating its business 
processes to streamline processes such as purchasing, 
sales, human resource management, and customer 
relationship management. Because of your success 
in implementing the e-commerce infrastructure, the 
general manager asks you for advice on what to do to 
streamline operations at Campus Travel. Use the data 
provided in the file ERPSystems.csv to make a recom-
mendation about which ERP system to purchase. The 
file includes ratings of the different modules of the 
systems and the weights assigned to these ratings. You 
are asked to do the following:
■
■Determine the product with the highest overall rat-
ing. (Hint: Use the SUMPRODUCT formula to 
multiply each vendor’s scores with the respective 
weights and add the weighted scores.)
■
■Prepare the necessary graphs to compare the products 
on the different dimensions and the overall score.
■
■Be sure to professionally format the graphs before 
submitting them to your instructor.
Database Application:  
Creating Forms at Campus Travel
	 7-33. 	After helping Campus Travel off to a good start with 
its databases, you have decided that it should enter 
data using forms rather than doing it from tables. 
From your experience, you know that employees have 
an easier time being able to browse, modify, and add 
records from a form view. As this can be implemented 
using your existing database, you decide to set up a 
form. You can accomplish this by doing the following:
■
■Open the database employeeData.mdb.
■
■Select the employee table in the database window.
■
■Create a form using the table. (Hint: This can be 
done by selecting “More Forms >> Form Wizard” 
under “Forms” in the “Create” tab.)
■
■Save the form as “employees.”
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats:  
Worldwide ERP Market Leaders
In the past few years, the worldwide ERP software market was 
showing only minimal growth, with many companies focusing 
on maintenance revenues, according to industry observers. While 
between 2012 and 2013, NetSuite, Cornerstone OnDemand, 
Workforce Software, and Workday were the fastest-growing 
ERP vendors, with revenue growth between 40 ­percent and 
86 percent, established players such as SAP and Oracle still 
dominated the market, with 24 percent and 12 percent market 
share, respectively.
Questions and Exercises
	 7-34.	 Search the web for the most recent statistics about 
ERP companies’ market share worldwide as well as in 
your own country.
	 7-35. 	As a team, interpret the statistics. How have the num-
bers changed? What type of vendor seems to be most 
successful in the ERP market?
	 7-36. 	As a team, discuss how the statistics might look in  
5 years and 10 years. Will the established players be 
able to keep their market share? Why?
	 7-37. 	Using your presentation software of choice, create two 
or three slides that summarize the findings you con-
sider most important.
Based on:
Columbus, L. (2014, May 12). Gartner’s ERP market share update 
shows the future of cloud ERP is now. Forbes. Retrieved November 25, 
2014, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2014/05/12/
gartners-erp-market-share-update-shows-the-future-of-cloud-erp-is-now.
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	
7-8.	 B, p. 307
	
7-9.	 B, p. 306
	 7-10.	 A, p. 306
	 7-11.	 C, p. 308
	 7-12.	 C, p. 301
	 7-13.	 D, p. 301
	 7-14.	 A, p. 302
	 7-15.	 D, p. 309
	 7-16.	 A, p. 312
	 7-17.	 B, p. 314


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    331
As you know by now, an organization’s IS 
infrastructure is not simple to construct or 
maintain but is a complex infrastructure of 
servers and databases useful for managing 
large amounts of information. With advances 
in cloud computing, software as a service 
(SaaS) has appeared as a model of IS infra-
structure and software and is rapidly chang-
ing the way many organizations do business. 
SaaS is a way for organizations to use cloud-
based Internet services to accomplish the 
goals that traditional IS infrastructure and 
software models have in the past. SaaS 
allows software application vendors to 
deploy their products over the Internet 
through web-based services. SaaS customers 
pay to use applications on demand, giving 
them the freedom to access a software ser-
vice only when needed. Applications and 
software are developed, hosted, and operated 
by SaaS vendors, and customers are charged 
on a pay-per-use basis. Once the customer’s 
“license” expires, the customer no longer has 
to carry the cost of the software. If a future 
need for the software arises, the customer 
simply orders it again to have access. SaaS 
products can be licensed for single or multi-
ple users within the organization, making 
them flexible and scalable.
Using the SaaS model has several advan-
tages. Through SaaS applications, organiza-
tions can move their data storage into the 
cloud, reducing the cost of buying storage 
and diminishing the risk of catastrophic data 
loss, as it is in the vendor’s financial interest 
to keep the services it provides running at 
peak performance or risk losing customers to 
another vendor. In addition, SaaS allows for 
less resource expenditure on long-term soft-
ware licensing because an organization can 
get what it needs when it needs it. SaaS utili-
zation also allows organizations to become 
more productive outside the physical con-
fines of their buildings. Because SaaS ser-
vices are in the cloud, employees can access 
services from remote offices or from their 
mobile devices.
One of the main disadvantages of SaaS 
is that customers must give up some auton-
omy over their applications and data. Some 
organizations require specialized software 
solutions and are used to customizing soft-
ware in-house to meet their needs. Although 
some SaaS vendors are beginning to offer 
customizable solutions, the problem is still a 
roadblock for some. Computing off-site also 
means that security may be an issue, as orga-
nizational operations and data are effectively 
running on someone else’s server. As it is 
virtually impossible for some types of orga-
nizations to keep their data—and their 
secrets—in the cloud, such concerns are 
another roadblock that organizations must 
overcome in order to use SaaS products.
These disadvantages aside, organiza-
tions are reaping the benefits of SaaS, utiliz-
ing them for human resources activities, 
e-mail services, collaboration efforts, storage 
solutions, and financial tasks such as billing, 
invoicing, and timekeeping. In addition to 
more general-purpose applications, many 
organizations are deploying ERP capabilities 
via SaaS vendors. And the growth of the 
SaaS industry doesn’t appear to be slowing. 
In fact, a recent study by Gartner found that 
the global SaaS market is projected to grow 
from US$49 billion in 2015 to US$67 billion 
in 2018.
Companies like Google, Amazon.com, 
and Microsoft have become well-known 
SaaS vendors offering a range of services to 
organizations, including shared-document 
management, communication services, 
cloud-based e-mail, calendaring, photo and 
video sharing, web and intranet page man-
agement, and data storage services, just to 
name a few. Given the challenges and issues 
associated with implementing in-house 
enterprise systems, ERP vendors are 
increasingly offering their software as a ser-
vice as well. For example, SAP offers SAP 
Business ByDesign, an integrated on-
demand ERP solution for small and 
medium-sized enterprises. Similarly, Micro-
soft offers its Dynamics customer relation-
ship management system as a service, and 
Oracle offers the subscription-based Oracle 
On-Demand customer relationship manage-
ment solution.
As more organizations continue to adopt 
SaaS services as a way of carrying out their 
day-to-day activities, vendors will continue 
to upgrade and expand the available technol-
ogies for use. The question of whether orga-
nizations will adopt SaaS services has, for 
the most part, been answered. The question 
has now become how much of their business 
they will put in the cloud.
Questions
	 7-38. 	 Would you trust an external provider with your organiza-
tion’s data? Why or why not? What would be needed to raise 
your trust in the reliability, security, and privacy of the data?
	 7-39. 	 What are the potential drawbacks of using a relatively simple 
in-house database with limited capabilities versus a more 
robust, SaaS database solution? Do the benefits outweigh 
these limitations? Why or why not?
	 7-40. 	 Are there any types of applications that should only be pur-
chased rather than obtained through a SaaS relationship? If 
so, why or why not?
CASE 1 
Software as a Service: ERP by the Hour
Based on:
Columbus, L. (2015, September 27). Roundup of cloud computing fore-
casts and market estimates Q3 update, 2015. Forbes. Retrieved May 1, 
2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/09/27/
roundup-of-cloud-computing-forecasts-and-market-estimates-q3-update-2015
Software as a service. (2016, March 5). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 1, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Software_as_a_service&oldid=708416639

332    CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems 
Founded in 2010, TH Milk is the top producer 
of fresh milk and dairy products in Vietnam. 
It is one of the top 15 enterprises in the coun-
try, with over 2,000 employees and approxi-
mately $200 million in revenue. Its products 
are sold through more than 130,000 stores 
nationwide via 180 distributors as well as its 
own chain of retail outlets, TH True Mart.
When the company was founded, its pro-
cesses and distribution practices were all 
manual.  For example, every morning, 1,000 
mobile salespersons of TH Milk would gather 
at their respective distributor’s office to obtain 
sales plans. They would then make their way 
to various outlets or stores carrying hard copy 
forms that were used to record sales orders. 
Towards the end of the day, teams would 
return to manually transfer the data written on 
the forms to a database at each distributor’s 
office. The data from all 180 offices would 
then be consolidated.  With this system, there 
was no real-time market visibility, knowledge 
about competitors’ brands, or new products in 
the market.  Sales and sales practices could 
not be monitored either.
To address these issues and streamline its 
distribution and sales processes, TH Milk ini-
tially implemented a sales and distribution 
management software from Zed-Sales, adopt-
ing a decentralized architecture in which data 
were stored in each distributor’s system and 
subsequently transferred to TH Milk. This did 
not allow 360-degrees visibility, and security 
and data integrity were also compromised. 
Furthermore, even after more than a year, Zed-
Sales couldn’t customize their software for TH 
Milk. Thus, in 2013, TH Milk decided to adopt 
Acumatica’s Cloud ERP platform instead. 
Within a span of about nine months, all 180 
distributors were connected to the system.
The Acumatica Cloud-based ERP system 
is based on a single, centralized database that 
can be accessed via the Internet. It thus pro-
vided TH with real-time information that is 
visible to all authorized staff, distributors, and 
salespersons. Furthermore, the system has a 
user-friendly and customizable web-based 
interface that minimized necessary training, 
thus making the deployment cheap, quick, 
and easy. The system also offers an open 
application program interface (API) that 
includes a set of routines enabling TH Milk to 
implement the new system with greater ease 
and to integrate it with its existing system. 
Finally, its licensing terms allow for an unlim-
ited number of users, thus enabling scalability 
and keeping pace with the growth of TH Milk 
and its expanding distribution network.
One of the key ERP modules imple-
mented by TH Milk was the Financial Man-
agement Suite, a web-based accounting 
software that is fully integrated with other 
modules such as Customer Management, 
Distribution Management, Manufacturing 
Management, and Project Accounting. 
Though web-based, the suite has industrial-
strength security controls that ensure not just 
the availability but also the safety of the sen-
sitive financial information at TH Milk.  The 
suite comes with built-in automation and 
workflow that have helped TH Milk to close 
their financial accounts faster and prepare 
financial statements accurately.
TH Milk has also implemented the Acu-
matica Distribution Management Suite, which 
comprises Inventory, Sales Order, Purchase 
Order, and Requisition Management applica-
tions. The Distribution Management module 
helps TH Milk manage its activities related to 
distribution channels, such as ordering, pur-
chasing, tracking inventory, and customer 
support. With this implementation, TH Milk 
is now able to receive real-time measurement 
and updates of the amount of inventory it has.
TH Milk deployed the ERP modules on 
its private cloud with the assistance of 
DMSPro, an Acumatica-certified partner in 
Vietnam. While the private cloud allows TH 
milk to enjoy the benefits of a cloud infra-
structure, it is also highly secure and was spe-
cially designed to meet the data security 
requirements of TH Milk. Through the use of 
a private cloud, TH Milk avoided security 
issues, which are a main challenge in cloud-
based ERP systems. In addition, there was 
very little customization required, and TH 
Milk was aware of its scalability requirements 
and thus signed an appropriate licensing deal, 
circumventing the rigidity and licensing 
issues of cloud-based ERP implementations.
The ERP system has completely trans-
formed the business practices at TH Milk. 
Salespersons can now retrieve updated and 
complete product and promotion information 
from the TH Milk system through the AiM 
(All-in Mobile) app loaded on their tablets 
and integrated with the ERP system. The 
system made workflow more efficient; once 
orders are confirmed by customers, salesper-
sons can immediately update the system 
through the mobile app, after which the 
orders are consolidated on the server and 
processed immediately instead of sales 
orders being consolidated at the end of the 
day. Market intelligence has also become 
more widespread, because salespersons can 
update everyone on competitors’ promotions 
and new products. The system also provides 
visibility about inventory at each distribu-
tor’s warehouse and when to replenish stock. 
This has resulted in better production and 
logistics along with lower costs. In the same 
way, TH Milk has more insight into the 
activities of the salespersons through moni-
toring of their daily sales route plans and 
sales. This has enabled TH milk to become 
effective in managing and mentoring sales-
persons to achieve their sales targets.
TH Milk’s success with ERP is noteworthy 
given that enterprise systems have a history of 
only 15 years in Vietnam, and ERP implemen-
tation is still far behind developed countries.
CASE 2
TH Milk Vietnam Adopts Cloud ERP
Questions
	 7-41. 	 What problems did TH Milk face prior to installing the ERP 
system? 
	 7-42.	 How did implementing an ERP system transform TH Milk’s 
business?
	 7-43. 	 What is a Cloud ERP system, and what are the benefits of 
Acumatica’s Cloud ERP to TH Milk?
Based on:
Acumatica (n.d.). Vietnam’s leading fresh milk producer transforms distribu-
tion management system with Acumatica. www.acumatica.com. Retrieved 
December 17, 2016, from http://www.acumatica.com/success-stories/
erp-system-for-th-milk/
Acumatica (n.d.). Financial Management. www.acumatica.com. Retrieved 
December 17, 2016, from http://www.acumatica.com/cloud-erp/
financial-management/
Acumatica (n.d.). Distribution Management. www.acumatica.com. 
Retrieved December 17, 2016, http://www.acumatica.com/cloud-erp/
distribution-management/
DMS Pro (n.d.). AiM (All-in-Mobile). www.dmspro.vn. Retrieved December 
17, 2016, from http://www.dmspro.vn/solutions/aim-all-in-mobile.html
DMS Pro (n.d.). TH Food Chain Joint Stock Company. www.dmspro.vn. 
Retrieved December 17, 2016, from http://www.dmspro.vn/customer.html
Le, M.D., & Han, K.S. (2016). Understanding the Impact of ERP system 
implementation on firm performance—focused on Vietnamese SMEs. Inter-
national Journal of Software Engineering and its Applications, Vol. 10, pp. 
87–104


CHAPTER 7  •  Enhancing Business Processes Using Enterprise Information Systems    333
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 7-44. 	 Describe and contrast order-to-cash, procure-to-pay, make-to-stock, and make-to-order business processes.
	 7-45. 	 Contrast internally and externally focused systems.
References
Jacobs, F. R., & Chace, R. B. (2013). Operations and supply chain 
management (14th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Porter, M. E., & Millar, V. E. (1985, July–August). How informa-
tion gives you competitive advantage. Harvard Business Review, 
149–160.
Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management. New 
York: Harper Bros.
Wagner, B., & Monk, E. (2013). Concepts in enterprise resource 
planning (4th ed.). Boston: Cengage.
Wailgum, T. (2008, April 17). ERP definition and solutions. 
CIO.com. Retrieved June 1, 2014, from http://www.cio.com/
article/40323/ERP_Definition_and_Solutions
Anonymous. (2016). 2016 Report on ERP systems and enter-
prise software. Panorama Consulting Solutions. Retrieved 
May 1, 2016, from http://panorama-consulting.com/
resource-center/2016-erp-report
Bradford, M. (2015). Modern ERP: Select, implement, and use 
today’s advanced business systems. Raleigh, NC: Lulu.
Christensen, C. M. (1997). The innovator’s dilemma. Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press.
Fleisher, C. S. (2015). Business and competitive analysis: Effective 
application of new and classic methods (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hammer, M., & Champy, J. (1993). Reengineering the corporation: 
A manifesto for business revolution. New York: Harper Business 
Essentials.

334
334
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Walmart
A
s the world’s largest retailer, Walmart is known 
for its relentless pursuit of lowering costs and 
passing those savings on to shoppers to under-
cut competitors’ prices. Much of the company’s success 
has been widely attributed to its effective use of tech-
nology to support its supply chain. Through a combina-
tion of distribution practices, truck fleet management, 
and technological innovations, Walmart became a 
model of supply chain efficiency. Being the largest 
retailer and private-sector employer in the world, 
Walmart employs more than 2.2 million people world-
wide (1.4 million in the United States) and, in 2016, had 
about 11,500 stores in 28 countries.
One of Walmart’s famous supply chain innovations is 
vendor-managed inventory, where manufacturers are 
responsible for monitoring inventory levels of their 
products in Walmart’s warehouses, helping Walmart 
achieve close to 100 percent order fulfillment on mer-
chandise and essentially eliminating the loss of sales due 
to out-of-stock items. Walmart further streamlined its 
supply chain by creating communication networks with 
suppliers to improve product flow and reduce invento-
ries. The network of global suppliers, warehouses, and 
retail stores has been described as behaving almost 
like a single firm. Walmart also developed the concept 
of “cross docking”—direct transfers from inbound 
to outbound truck trailers without extra storage 
Strengthening Business-to-
Business Relationships via 
Supply Chain and Customer 
Relationship Management
8
This chapter extends the prior discussion regarding how 
companies are deploying enterprise-wide information 
systems to build and strengthen organizational partner-
ships. Enterprise systems help integrate various business 
activities, streamline and better manage interactions with 
customers, and better coordinate with suppliers in order 
to meet changing customer demands more efficiently and 
effectively. In this chapter, two additional powerful 
systems are introduced: supply chain management (SCM) 
systems supporting business-to-business (B2B) transac-
tions and customer relationship management (CRM) 
systems for promoting and selling products and building 
and nourishing long-term customer relationships. When 
added to enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, both 
of these systems tie the customer to the supply chain that 
includes the manufacturer and suppliers all the way back 
to the raw materials that ultimately become the product 
no matter where in the world they originate.
More and more companies find that they need 
systems that span their entire organization to tie every-
thing together. As a result, an understanding of supply 
chain management and customer relationship manage-
ment is critical to succeed in today’s competitive and ever-
changing digital world.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

335
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
2.	How can Walmart use the retail data it gathers to 
improve the activities involved in promoting and 
selling products to customers as well as providing cus-
tomer service and nourishing long-term relationships?
3.	How can companies like Walmart benefit from 
combining their SCM and CRM systems into one 
integrated information system?
Based on:
Chao, L. (2015, August 18). Wal-Mart reins back inventory in a revamped  
supply chain. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 4, 2016, from  
http://www.wsj.com/articles/wal-mart-reins-back-inventory-in-a-
revamped-supply-chain-1439933834
Robinson, A. (2015, May 13). Walmart: 3 keys to successful supply chain 
management any business can follow. Cerasis. Retrieved May 4, 2016, 
from http://cerasis.com/2015/05/13/supply-chain-management
Walmart. (2016). Company facts. Walmart.com. Retrieved May 4, 2016, 
from http://corporate.walmart.com/newsroom/company-facts
Walmart. (2016, May 4). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo-
pedia. Retrieved May 4, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia 
.org/w/index.php?title=Walmart&oldid=718550925
(see Figure 8.1). The company’s trucks continuously 
deliver goods to distribution, where they are stored, 
repackaged, and distributed without sitting in inventory.
Walmart’s investments in technology to support its sup-
ply chain have also resulted in powerful customer rela-
tionship management capabilities. Walmart’s information 
systems record every purchase in every store around the 
world, along with a host of other information (location, 
time of day, other items purchased in the same order, 
etc.). Its data warehouse containing all of these data is 
one of the largest in the world. As a result, Walmart can 
stock more of the most popular products and cluster items 
that people tend to buy at the same time. As Walmart’s 
online business continues to grow, it is carefully refining 
its supply chain to optimize both traditional and online 
sales. These and other innovations have fueled and main-
tained Walmart’s impressive growth and market share. In 
early 2016, Walmart was estimated to have 11.2 percent 
of U.S. retail sales, with e-commerce sales of nearly US$14 
billion, and global sales of nearly US$500 billion in 2015.
Information systems are increasingly central to 
streamlining supply chains, coordinating with suppliers 
and distributors, and managing and leveraging relation-
ships with customers. Those organizations that develop 
advanced systems capabilities in these crucial areas of 
business will, like Walmart, gain a significant edge over 
competitors in the market.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How has Walmart used its supply chain manage-
ment systems to lower costs and outperform the 
competition?
1.	 Describe supply chain management systems and how they help to improve business-
to-business processes.
2.	 Describe customer relationship management systems and how they help to improve 
the activities involved in promoting and selling products to customers as well as 
providing customer service and nourishing long-term relationships.
FIGURE 8.1
Walmart uses cross docking to optimize its supply chain.
Source: Fertnig\E+\Getty Images.

336    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
Supply Chain Management
In the previous chapter, we discussed the need to share internal data in order to streamline busi-
ness processes, improving coordination within the organization to improve efficiency and effec-
tiveness. Let’s now turn our attention to collaborating with partners along the supply chain. 
Obtaining the raw materials and components that a company uses in its daily operations is an 
important key to business success. When deliveries from suppliers are accurate and timely, com-
panies can convert them to finished products more efficiently. Coordinating this effort with sup-
pliers has become a central part of many companies’ overall business strategy, as it can help 
them reduce costs associated with inventory levels and get new products to market more quickly. 
Ultimately, this helps companies drive profitability and improve their customer service because 
they can react to changing market conditions swiftly. Collaborating or sharing information with 
suppliers has become a strategic necessity for business success. In other words, by developing 
and maintaining stronger, more integrated relationships with suppliers, companies can more 
effectively compete in their markets through cost reductions and responsiveness to market 
demands.
What Is a Supply Chain?
The term supply chain is commonly used to refer to a collection of companies and processes 
involved in everything from extracting raw materials to moving a product from the suppliers 
of raw materials to the suppliers of intermediate components, then to final production, and, 
ultimately, to the customer. Companies often procure specific raw materials and components 
from many different “upstream” suppliers. These suppliers, in turn, work with their own sup-
pliers to obtain raw materials and components; their suppliers work with additional suppliers, 
and so forth. The further out in the supply chain one looks, the more suppliers are involved. 
As a result, the term “chain” becomes somewhat of a misnomer since it implies one-to-one 
relationships facilitating a chain of events flowing from the first supplier to the second to the 
third and so on. Similarly, on the “downstream” side, the products move to many different 
customers. The flow of materials from suppliers to customers can thus be more accurately 
described as a supply network because of the various interrelated parties involved in moving 
raw materials, intermediate components, and, finally, the end product within the production 
process (Figure 8.2).
Most companies are depending on a steady source of key supplies to produce their goods or 
services. For example, luxury restaurants require their produce to be consistently of high quality; 
similarly, car manufacturers need steel, paint, or electronic components in the right quantities, at 
the right quality and price, and at the right time. Thus, most companies are seeking long-term 
B2B relationships with a limited number of carefully selected suppliers—rather than one-time 
deals—and invest considerable efforts in selecting their suppliers or business partners; often, 
suppliers are assessed not only on product features such as price or quality but also on suppliers’ 
characteristics, such as trustworthiness, commitment, or viability.
Business-to-Business Electronic Commerce: Exchanging Data in Supply 
Networks
Transactions conducted between different businesses in a supply network, not involving the end 
consumer, are referred to as business-to-business electronic commerce (EC). This type of com-
merce accounts for more than 90 percent of all EC (excluding services such as healthcare, 
accommodation, real estate, or finance) in the United States (U.S. Census Bureau, 2016). B2B 
transactions require proprietary information (such as orders for parts) to be communicated to 
an organization’s business partners. For many organizations, keeping such information private 
can be of strategic value; for example, Apple tries to keep news about potential new product 
launches to a minimum, and any information about orders for key components (such as touch 
screens) could give away hints of what a new product may be. Prior to the introduction of the 
Internet and web, the secure communication of proprietary information in B2B EC was facili-
tated using Electronic Data Interchange (EDI). EDI refers to computer-to-computer commu-
nication (without human intervention) following certain standards as set by the UN Economic 
Commission (for Europe) or the American National Standards Institute. Traditionally, using 
EDI, the exchange of business documents and other information took place via dedicated tele-
communication networks between suppliers and customers, and thus the use of EDI was 

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    337
generally limited to large corporations that could afford the associated expenses. Today, the 
Internet has become an economical medium over which this business-related information can 
be transmitted, enabling even small to mid-sized enterprises to use EDI; many large companies 
(such as the retail giant Walmart) require their suppliers to transmit information such as advance 
shipping notices using web-based EDI protocols. Further, companies have devised a number of 
innovative ways to facilitate B2B transactions using web-based technologies. Specifically, 
organizations increasingly use extranets (see Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems 
Infrastructure and Services”) for exchanging data and handling transactions with their suppliers 
or organizational customers. Commonly, portals are used to interact with the business partners; 
these are discussed next.
PORTALS.  Portals, in the context of B2B supply chain management, can be defined as access 
points (or front doors) through which a business partner accesses secured, proprietary information 
that may be dispersed throughout an organization (typically using extranets). By allowing direct 
access to critical information needed to conduct business, portals can thus provide substantial 
productivity gains and cost savings for B2B transactions.
In contrast to business-to-consumer (B2C) EC, where anyone can set up a customer account 
with a retailer, the suppliers or customers in B2B transactions are typically prescreened by the 
business, and access to the company’s extranet will be given depending on the business relation-
ship (typically, after a review of the supplier’s or buyer’s application). To support different types 
of business relationships, portals come in two basic forms: supplier portals and customer portals. 
Supplier portals are owned or managed by a “downstream” company and automate the business 
processes involved in purchasing or procuring products from multiple suppliers; they connect a 
single buyer and multiple suppliers. On the other end of the spectrum, customer portals are 
owned or managed by an “upstream” company and automate the business processes involved in 
selling or distributing products to multiple buyers; they connect a single supplier und multiple 
Company
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
FIGURE 8.2
A typical supply network.

338    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
buyers. B2B marketplaces are typically run by separate entities and connect multiple buyers and 
multiple suppliers (Figure 8.3).
Supplier Portals  Many companies that are dealing with large numbers of suppliers (e.g., The 
Boeing Company, Lilly, P&G, and Hewlett-Packard [HP]) set up supplier portals (sometimes 
referred to as sourcing portals or procurement portals). A supplier portal is a subset of an 
organization’s extranet designed to automate the business processes that occur before, during, 
and after sales transactions between the organization (i.e., a single buyer) and its multiple 
suppliers. For example, on the HP Supplier Portal, companies can register their interest in 
becoming a supplier for HP; access terms and conditions or guidelines (such as guidelines 
related to labeling, shipment, or packaging); and, once a business relationship is established with 
HP, manage interorganizational business processes associated with ordering and payment.
Customer Portals  Customer portals are designed to automate the business processes that 
occur before, during, and after sales transactions between a supplier and multiple customers. 
In other words, customer portals provide efficient tools for business customers to manage 
all phases of the purchasing cycle, including reviewing product information, order entry, 
and customer service (Figure 8.4). For example, MyBoeingFleet, the customer portal of 
The Boeing Company, is part of Boeing’s extranet and allows airplane owners, operators, 
and other parties to access information about their airplanes’ configurations, maintenance 
documents, or spare parts. In other cases, customer portals are set up as B2B websites 
that provide custom-tailored offers or specific deals based on sales volume, as is the case 
with large office retailers such as OfficeMax (www.officemaxsolutions.com) or computer 
manufacturer Dell, which services business customers through its customer portal Dell 
Premier.
B2B MARKETPLACES.  The purpose of supplier portals and customer portals is to enable 
interaction between a single company and its many suppliers or customers. Being owned/
operated by a single organization, these portals can be considered a subset of the organization’s 
extranet. However, setting up such portals tends to be beyond the reach of small to midsized 
businesses because of the costs involved in designing, developing, and maintaining this type of 
system. Many of these firms do not have the necessary monetary resources or skilled personnel 
to implement such portals on their own, and the transaction volume does not justify the expenses. 
To service this market, a number of business-to-business marketplaces have sprung up. B2B 
marketplaces are operated by third-party vendors, meaning they are built and maintained 
by a separate entity rather than being associated with a particular buyer or supplier. These 
marketplaces generate revenue by taking a small commission for each transaction that occurs, 
by charging usage fees, by charging association fees, and/or by generating advertising revenues. 
Unlike customer and supplier portals, B2B marketplaces allow many buyers and many sellers to 
come together, offering firms access to real-time trading with other companies in their vertical 
markets (i.e., markets composed of firms operating within a certain industry sector). Such B2B 
marketplaces can create tremendous efficiencies for companies because they bring together 
numerous participants along the supply network. Some popular B2B marketplaces include 
http://www.b2bmetal.eu (metals), www.paperindex.com (paper), and www.fibre2fashion.com 
(textile and fashion supplies).
Customer
Portals
Customers
Suppliers
Supplier
Portals
B2B
Marketplaces
FIGURE 8.3
Supplier portals, B2B 
marketplaces, and customer 
portals.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    339
In contrast to B2B marketplaces serving vertical markets, other B2B marketplaces are not 
focused on any particular industry. One of the most successful examples is the Chinese market-
place Alibaba.com. Alibaba.com brings together buyers and suppliers from around the globe, 
from almost every industry, selling almost any product, ranging from fresh ginger to manufac-
turing machinery. Alibaba.com offers various services, such as posting item leads, displaying 
products, and contacting buyers or sellers but also features such as trading tips or price watch for 
raw materials. Offering various trading tools including online storefronts, virtual factory tours, 
and real-time chat, such B2B marketplaces have enabled many small or little-known suppliers to 
engage in trade on a global basis.
Managing Complex Supply Networks
A prime example of a company having to manage extremely complex supply networks is Apple 
and its extremely successful mobile devices, such as the iPhone and iPad. Typically, Apple sells 
millions of these devices within the first few days following the product launch. How does Apple 
manage to produce such an incredible number of these products? If you take a close look at the 
devices, you will find a statement saying “Designed by Apple in California Assembled in China.” 
Every time a new Apple device is launched, industry observers disassemble these devices to get 
a sneak peek into Apple’s supply chain. The iPhone, like other Apple devices, is by no means 
manufactured by Apple. The components of the iPhone are sourced from dozens of companies 
located in various different countries. For example, according to market research firm IHS iSup-
pli, a recent iPhone’s flash memory and central processing unit were produced by Korean Sam-
sung; the display was sourced from Korean LG; the phone chips were made by German Infineon 
(manufactured in Germany or Southeast Asia); the Wi-Fi and global positioning system (GPS) 
chips were produced by U.S.-based Broadcom (but possibly assembled in China, Korea, Singa-
pore, or Taiwan); the touchscreen controller was made by Texas Instruments; many other parts, 
such as the camera, were possibly made in Taiwan; and so on (depending on the requirements, 
companies such as Apple use various suppliers for different product models). The final products 
are assembled in a factory owned by Taiwanese electronics giant Foxconn, located in Shenzhen, 
China (a city of more than 10 million people located just north of Hong Kong), from where the 
finished iPhones are shipped by air to the different countries where the iPhone is for sale 
(Figure 8.5). Although many have never heard of Foxconn, it is the largest electronics manufac-
turer in the world, producing components, cell phones, gaming consoles, and so on, for various 
other companies, including Dell, HP, and Sony.
FIGURE 8.4
Customer portals automate 
business processes that occur 
before, during, and after sales 
transactions.
Source: PureSolution/Shutterstock.

340    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
Coordinating such an extensive supply network requires considerable expertise, espe-
cially when facing unexpected events such as shortages in touchscreen panels or other issues 
at suppliers’ factories; likewise, natural disasters, such as the series of back-to-back earth-
quakes that hit Japan in April 2016, can cause disruptions in supply chains, resulting in work 
stoppages and delayed orders. For example, Toyota, which uses a “just in time” inventory 
philosophy (discussed below) faced shutdowns and delays; in addition, the earthquakes dis-
rupted production at many other Japanese manufacturing companies including Honda and 
Sony, which also utilize Toyota’s “just in time” inventory philosophy. It is important to note 
that the impacts of such events are often not limited to the products manufactured locally but 
ripple through supply networks throughout the world. Disrupted supply chains in Japan also 
shut down plants around the world, as many key components for downstream products are 
produced in Japan; due to the earthquakes, these components could not be produced in Japan 
and be delivered to assembly lines in other countries, creating a domino effect on global sup-
ply networks. A limited pool of suppliers for critical components can further exacerbate such 
problems, as companies have fewer options to switch suppliers if necessary. It is thus impor-
tant not only to monitor one’s own direct suppliers but also to constantly monitor the compa-
ny’s extended supply chain so as to anticipate any issues that may have an impact on one’s 
direct suppliers.
Benefits of Effectively Managing Supply Chains
Whereas effectively managing the supply chain can create various opportunities, many problems 
can arise when firms within the network do not collaborate effectively. For example, collabora-
tion within supply networks has enabled process innovations such as just-in-time manufacturing 
and vendor-managed inventory (discussed in the following sections). On the other hand, if firms 
do not collaborate effectively, information can easily become distorted as it moves through the 
supply network. Problems such as excessive inventories, inaccurate manufacturing capacity 
plans, and missed production schedules can run rampant, causing huge ripple effects that lead to 
degradations in profitability and poor customer service by everyone within the supply network. 
Further, effectively managing the supply chain is becoming increasingly important in terms of 
corporate social responsibility.
Design
Wi-Fi Chips
Phone Chips
Touchscreen
Controller
Final
Assembly
Camera &
Other Parts
Flash Memory,
Processor, &
Display
FIGURE 8.5
The iPhone is assembled in China from globally sourced components.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    341
JUST-IN-TIME PRODUCTION.  One of the most significant advances in manufacturing has 
been the use of just-in-time (JIT) approaches. Based on the notion that keeping inventory is 
costly (in terms of both storage costs and the capital that is tied up) and does not add value, 
companies using a JIT method are trying to optimize their ordering quantities such that parts or 
raw materials arrive just when they are needed for production. As the orders arrive in smaller 
quantities (but at higher frequency), the investment in storage space and inventory is minimized. 
Pioneered by Japanese automaker Toyota, a JIT approach has now been adopted by many 
other businesses. For example, computer maker Dell realized the problems with keeping large 
inventories, especially because of the fast rate of obsolescence of electronics components. To 
illustrate, recall our discussion of Moore’s Law, which suggests that processor technology is 
doubling in performance approximately every 24 months. Because of this, successful computer 
manufacturers have learned that holding inventory that can quickly become obsolete or devalued 
is a poor strategy for success. In fact, Dell now only keeps about 2 hours of inventory in its 
factories. Obviously, using a JIT method is heavily dependent on tight cooperation between all 
partners in the supply network, not only suppliers but also other partners, such as shipping and 
logistics companies.
VENDOR-MANAGED INVENTORY.  Under a traditional inventory model, the manufacturer or 
retailer would manage its own inventories, sending out requests for additional items as needed. In 
contrast, vendor-managed inventory (VMI) is an approach to inventory management in which 
the suppliers to a manufacturer (or retailer) manage the manufacturer’s (or retailer’s) inventory 
based on negotiated service levels. To make VMI possible, the manufacturer (or retailer) allows 
the supplier to monitor stock levels and ongoing sales data. Such arrangements can help to 
optimize the manufacturer’s (or retailer’s) inventory, both saving costs and minimizing stockout 
situations (thus enhancing customer satisfaction); the supplier, in turn, benefits from the intense 
data sharing, which helps produce more accurate forecasts, reduces ordering errors, and helps 
prioritize the shipment of goods.
REDUCING THE BULLWHIP EFFECT.  One major problem affecting supply chains are ripple effects 
referred to as the bullwhip effect. Each business forecasting demand typically includes a safety 
buffer in order to prevent possible stockouts. However, forecast errors and safety stocks multiply 
when moving up the supply chain, such that a small fluctuation in demand for an end product 
can lead to tremendous fluctuation in demand for parts or raw materials farther up the supply 
chain. Like someone cracking a bullwhip, a tiny “flick of the wrist” will create a big movement 
at the other end of the whip. Likewise, a small forecasting error at the end of the supply chain 
can cause massive forecasting errors farther up the supply chain. Implementing integrated 
business processes allows a company to better coordinate the entire supply network and reduce 
the impact of the bullwhip.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.  Effectively managing the supply chain has also become 
tremendously important for aspects related to corporate social responsibility. Specifically, 
transparency and accountability within the supply chain can help organizations save costs and/
or create a good image. Two related issues are product recalls and sustainable business practices; 
both are discussed next.
Product Recalls  Given that a typical supply network comprises tens, hundreds, or sometimes 
thousands of players, many of which are dispersed across the globe, there are myriad 
possibilities where shortcuts are being taken or quality standards are not being met. Often, 
such issues are caught somewhere along the supply chain, but sometimes such incidents go 
unnoticed until the product reaches the end consumer. These problems can be exacerbated if 
companies are sourcing their products or raw materials globally, as more potential points of 
failure are added due to differences in quality or product safety regulations in the originating 
countries.
Hence, it is extremely important to have the necessary information to trace back the move-
ment of products through the supply chain so as to be able to quickly identify the problematic 
link. Being able to single out the source of a problem can help a company to perform an appro-
priate response, helping to save goodwill and limiting the costs of a recall. Further, in many 
cases, only some batches of a product may be problematic (such as when certain raw materials 
or components are sourced from different suppliers). If a company is not able to clearly identify 

342    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
the affected batches, the recall will have to be much broader, costing the company much more 
(in both goodwill and money) than just having to recall the affected batches. Hence, companies 
need to have a clear picture of their supply chain and also need to store these data in case of 
problems at a later point in time.
Sustainable Business Practices  Another aspect related to corporate social responsibility is 
a growing emphasis on sustainable business practices. Particularly, organizations have come 
under increasing scrutiny for issues such as ethical treatment of workers (especially overseas) 
or environmental practices. For instance, because of Apple’s vast success in marketing its 
products around the world, the tech giant has also received an abundance of negative press 
related to the poor conditions for many workers who assemble the world’s favorite phone. A 
typical worker in such plants endures a 12-hour work shift six days a week. These workers 
typically live next to the assembly plant in crowded dorms that are often infested with bedbugs, 
and many have no working toilets. Over the past several years, there were also reports of 
numerous workers committing suicide due to the stress and poor conditions. While Apple 
is certainly aware of the negative effects that a supplier’s action can have on a company’s 
reputation, it also faces a conundrum, as few (if any) companies have sufficient production 
capacity, especially when offering such low wages, to meet the demand for hugely popular 
products such as the iPhone.
Other companies are trying to portray a “green” image and attempt to minimize their carbon 
footprint. For example, HP takes a proactive approach, being the first major information tech-
nology company to publish its aggregate supply chain greenhouse gas emissions, restrict the use 
of hazardous materials, implement environmentally friendly packaging policies, and so on. In 
order to do that and to provide sound, convincing numbers to back a “green” image, a company 
such as HP needs to have a clear view of its entire supply chain. Similarly, U.S. regulations 
require 95 percent of computers purchased by the U.S. federal government to carry the EPEAT 
eco-label. To achieve this certification, a manufacturer has to possess and produce extensive evi-
dence that the products meet EPEAT’s strict requirements.
Optimizing the Supply Chain Through Supply Chain Management
Information systems focusing on improving supply chains have two main objectives: to acceler-
ate product development and innovation and to reduce costs. These systems, called supply chain 
management (SCM) systems, improve the coordination of suppliers, product or service pro-
duction, and distribution. When implemented successfully, SCM systems help in not only reduc-
ing inventory costs but also enhancing revenue through improved customer service. SCM 
systems are often integrated with ERP systems to leverage internal and external information in 
order to better collaborate with suppliers. Like ERP and customer relationship management sys-
tems, SCM systems are delivered in the form of modules (Table 8.1) that companies select and 
implement according to their differing business requirements.
As discussed previously, ERP systems are primarily used to optimize business processes 
within the organization, whereas SCM systems are used to improve business processes that 
span organizational boundaries. Whereas some standalone SCM systems only automate the 
logistics aspects of the supply chain, organizations can reap the greatest benefits when the 
SCM system is tightly integrated with ERP and customer relationship management systems 
modules; this way, SCM systems can use data about customer orders or sales forecasts (from 
the customer relationship management system), data about payments (from the ERP system), 
and so on. Given its scope, SCM is adopted primarily by large organizations with a large and/
or complex supplier network. At the same time, many smaller suppliers are interacting with 
the systems of large companies. To obtain the greatest benefits from the SCM processes and 
systems, organizations need to extend the system to include all trading partners regardless of 
size, providing a central location for information integration and common processes so that 
all partners benefit.
For an effective SCM strategy, several challenges have to be overcome. First and foremost, 
as with any information system, an SCM system is only as good as the data entered into it. This 
means that to benefit most from an SCM system, the organization’s employees have to actually 
use the system and move away from traditional ways of managing the supply chain, as an order 
placed by fax or telephone will most likely not find its way into the system. Another challenge 
to overcome is distrust among partners in the supply chain; for many companies, sales and 

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    343
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
SpaceX Rocket Failure due to Supply Chain Failure
The Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, or SpaceX, is 
an American aerospace manufacturer and space transport ser-
vices company. Founded in 2002 by former PayPal entrepre-
neur and current CEO of Tesla Motors Elon Musk, SpaceX has 
the goal of making space exploration less expensive and ulti-
mately enabling the colonization of the planet Mars. In 2008, 
SpaceX was the first privately funded company to develop a 
liquid-propellant rocket (called Falcon 1) to reach orbit. Since 
then, many other firsts have occurred, including having the 
first stage of a rocket return and vertically land back at the 
launch site or onto a platform floating in the ocean. SpaceX 
has also been contracted by NASA to resupply cargo to the 
International Space Station (ISS). Overall, SpaceX has had tre-
mendous success and provides evidence that space exploration 
can be accomplished by a commercial company.
In June 2015, however, SpaceX had a major setback when 
a rocket destined to bring supplies to the ISS failed soon after 
launch. The problem that caused the disaster was a failed 
strut—a commonly used piece of support hardware—that is 
used to secure a liquid oxygen tank. The strut that failed was 
designed and certified to handle 10,000 pounds of force but 
failed at 2,000 pounds, a fifth of what was independently certi-
fied. The strut was provided by a long-term contractor to 
SpaceX. Given that NASA no longer sends rockets to the ISS, 
the failure was a major setback for the United States. Both 
Japan and Russia also bring supplies to the ISS, but this failure 
delayed the delivery of needed equipment and supplies to the 
station, including those to repair the station’s water purification 
system.
After the failure, SpaceX pledged to more closely scrutinize 
its supply chain. Specifically, SpaceX outlined that it would 
implement additional hardware quality audits throughout the 
vehicle prior to launch and further ensure that all parts received 
from suppliers perform as expected per their certification 
requirements. By late 2015, SpaceX resumed flying rockets and 
plans to launch astronauts for the first time in 2017. When 
SpaceX’s supply chain failed, it created a domino effect, also 
affecting the supply chain of the ISS.
Based on:
Clark, S. (2015, June 29). SpaceX failure adds another kink 
in station supply chain. SpaceflightNow.com. Retrieved May 
4, 2016, from https://spaceflightnow.com/2015/06/29/
spacex-failure-adds-another-kink-in-station-supply-chain
McGarry, B. (2015, July 21). SpaceX to scrutinize supply  
chain after rocket failure. Defensetech.org. Retrieved on 
May 4, 2016, from http://www.defensetech.org/2015/07/21/
spacex-to-scrutinize-supply-chain-after-rocket-failure
SpaceX. (2016, May 4). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
May 4, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SpaceX
&oldid=718620407
TABLE 8.1   Functions That Optimize the Supply Network
Module
Key Uses
Demand planning and forecasting
Forecast and plan anticipated demand for products
Safety stock planning
Assign optimal safety stock and target stock levels in all inventories in the supply network
Distribution planning
Optimize the allocation of available supplies to meet demand
Supply network collaboration
Work with partners across the supply network to improve accuracy of demand forecasts, reduce 
inventory buffers, increase the velocity of materials flow, and improve customer service
Materials management
Ensure that the materials required for production are available where needed when needed
Manufacturing execution
Support production processes taking into account capacity and material constraints
Order promising
Provide answers to customer relationship management queries regarding product availability, 
costs, and delivery times
Transportation execution
Manage logistics between company locations or from company to customers, taking into 
account transportation modes and constraints
Warehouse management
Support receiving, storing, and picking of goods in a warehouse
Supply chain analytics
Monitor key performance indicators to assess performance across the supply chain
Source: Based on http://www.sap.com.

344    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
supply chain data are strategic assets, and no one wants to show his or her cards to other mem-
bers in the supply chain. Further, many organizations (such as Apple) tend to be very clandes-
tine about their suppliers, as such information could reveal their pricing strategies or give clues 
about new product development. In addition, more and more organizations are reluctant to 
share data along the supply chain because of an increase in intellectual property theft, espe-
cially in China, a major source of supplies for many companies. A final challenge is to get all 
partners within the supply chain to adopt an SCM system. Several years ago, the retail giant 
Walmart began mandating its suppliers to use its RetailLink supply chain system and refused to 
engage in a business relationship with any supplier that was not willing to use the system. 
Whereas large companies can force their suppliers or partners to use a system, smaller compa-
nies typically do not have this power.
Developing an SCM Strategy
When developing an SCM strategy, an organization must consider a variety of factors that 
will affect the effectiveness and efficiency of the supply chain. Supply chain effectiveness 
is the extent to which a company’s supply activities meet the requirements of the external 
partners involved. In contrast, supply chain efficiency is the extent to which a company 
optimizes the use of resources in its supply chain activities. Focusing on one or the other can 
result in excessive costs or in not meeting stakeholders’ needs, so companies have to evaluate 
the trade-offs in different areas, such as procurement, production, and transportation (Figure 
8.6). In other words, the design of the supply chain must consider natural trade-offs between 
a variety of factors and should match the organization’s competitive strategy to offer the 
greatest benefits. For example, an organization utilizing a low-cost-provider competitive 
strategy would likely focus on supply chain efficiency. In contrast, an organization pursuing 
a superior customer service differentiation strategy would focus on supply chain 
effectiveness.
SCM systems typically allow for making trade-offs between efficiency and effectiveness for 
individual components or raw materials. For example, if a hurricane is likely to delay the arrival 
of a key component by sea, the company can perform simulations to evaluate the effect of the 
delay on production and can assess the feasibility of temporarily switching suppliers, switching 
modes of transportation (e.g., expediting the shipment via air freight), or substituting the compo-
nent altogether. In such cases, making changes to the original plans may be costlier but can help 
the organization meet promised delivery deadlines, thus maintaining goodwill and avoiding pos-
sible contract penalties. On the other hand, companies can dynamically adjust schedules for 
noncritical components or raw materials so as to minimize costs while still meeting the targets 
set in the production schedule.
An SCM system includes more than simply hardware and software; it also integrates busi-
ness processes and supply chain partners. As shown in Table 8.1, an SCM system consists of 
many modules or applications. Each of these modules supports supply chain planning, supply 
chain execution, or supply chain visibility and analytics. All are described next.
Supply Chain
Strategy
Procurement
Production
Transportation
Eﬀectiveness
Eﬃciency
More Inventory
Multiple Inventory Sources
...
General-Purpose Facilities
More Facilities
Higher Excess Capacity
...
Fast Delivery Times
More Warehouses
...
...
Single Inventory Source
Less Inventory
...
Less Excess Capacity
Fewer Facilities
Special-Purpose Facilities
...
Fewer Warehouses
Longer Delivery Times
FIGURE 8.6
In developing a supply chain 
strategy, companies have to 
evaluate the trade-offs between 
effectiveness and efficiency 
in different areas, such as 
procurement, production, and 
transportation.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    345
Supply Chain Planning
Supply chain planning involves the development of various resource plans to support the effi-
cient and effective production of goods and services (Figure 8.7). Four key processes are gener-
ally supported by supply chain planning modules:
1.	Demand Planning and Forecasting.  Supply chain planning begins with product demand 
planning and forecasting. To develop demand forecasts, SCM modules examine historical 
data to develop the most accurate forecasts possible. The accuracy of these forecasts will 
be influenced greatly by the stability of the data. When historic data are stable, plans can be 
longer in duration, whereas if historic data show unpredictable fluctuations in demand, the 
forecasting time frame must be narrowed. SCM systems also support collaborative demand 
and supply planning such that a sales representative can work together with the demand 
planner, taking into account data provided by the organization’s point-of-sale system, pro-
motions entered in the customer relationship management system, and other factors influ-
encing demand. Demand planning and forecasting leads to the development of the overall 
demand forecast.
2.	Distribution Planning.  Once demand forecasts are finalized, plans for moving products 
to distributors can be developed. Specifically, distribution planning focuses on delivering 
products or services to consumers as well as warehousing, delivering, invoicing, and pay-
ment collection. Distribution planning leads to the development of the overall transporta-
tion plan.
GREEN IT
Nike’s Green Supply Chain
Consumerism, globalization, and mass production are creating 
large costs for economies, societies, and the environment, with 
negative effects arising everywhere from resource extraction to 
manufacturing to the disposal of products. Having realized 
this, more and more companies are striving to reduce these 
impacts, aiming to improve their economic, environmental, 
and social performance through reducing the use of resources, 
eliminating or reusing waste, or renewing resources by recov-
ering materials from used products. Green supply chain man-
agement includes green supply chain planning, green 
procurement, green distribution, and green logistics. For exam-
ple, already during the planning stage, products can be engi-
neered so as to reduce their environmental impact, such as by 
using recycled materials or designing products to be easily 
recyclable at the end of their lifetime. Better demand and sup-
ply planning can also help reduce excess production. When 
procuring components or raw materials, companies can strive 
to use sustainable sources, or collaborate with and provide 
incentives to their suppliers. When packing and shipping 
goods, companies can use green packaging (e.g., using card-
board rather than Styrofoam), recycle or reuse packaging 
materials, utilize alternative fuel vehicles, or group shipments 
to reduce the number of trips needed. At all stages in the sup-
ply chain of a product, responsible companies increasingly 
strive to minimize their carbon footprint.
As with almost all business processes, information systems 
play a key role in enabling green supply chain management, 
evaluating performance, and helping to continuously improve 
the performance of the green supply chain. The sportswear 
company Nike is but one of many organizations that have real-
ized the many benefits of a green supply chain. Nike is contin-
uously innovating with the aim of “doubling [its] business 
while halving [its] impact,” focusing not only on what they 
produce, but also on how they produce it and what they pro-
duce it from. Nike starts with trying to source regenerative or 
reclaimed materials, which can be reused after a product’s life. 
In manufacturing, Nike uses information-systems enabled 
innovations such as 3D printing or digital knitting, which not 
only reduce waste and improve working conditions, but also 
help to increase efficiency and enable mass customization. 
Having realized that sustainability is a common goal, Nike even 
open-sourced many of its sustainable innovations, promoting 
sustainability throughout the industry. Fueled by its innovative 
products, Nike’s success shows that focusing on a green supply 
chain can not only minimize a company’s environmental foot-
print, but can have large positive impacts on a company’s bot-
tom line.
Based on:
Blanco, E., Bateman, A., & Craig. A. (2014). ESD.S43 Green Supply 
Chain Management, Spring 2014. Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy: MIT OpenCourseWare. Retrieved July 25, 2016, from http://ocw 
.mit.edu
Nike (2016). FY14/15 Nike, Inc. sustainable business report. Nike 
.com. Retrieved July 25, 2016, from http://about.nike.com/pages/
sustainable-innovation
Srivasta, S.K. (2007). Green supply-chain management: A state-of-the-
art literature review. International Journal of Management Reviews 
9(1), 53-80.

346    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
3.	Production Scheduling.  Production scheduling focuses on the coordination of all activi-
ties needed to create the product or service. When developing this plan, analytical tools are 
used to optimally utilize materials, equipment, and labor. Production also involves product 
testing, packaging, and delivery preparation. Production scheduling leads to the develop-
ment of the production plan.
4.	Inventory and Safety Stock Planning.  Inventory and safety stock planning focuses on 
the development of inventory estimates. Using inventory simulations and other analytical 
techniques, organizations can balance inventory costs and desired customer service levels 
to determine optimal inventory levels. Once inventory levels are estimated, suppliers are 
chosen who contractually agree to preestablished delivery and pricing terms. Inventory and 
safety stock planning leads to the development of a sourcing plan.
As suggested, various types of analytical tools—such as statistical analysis, simulation, and 
optimization—are used to forecast and visualize demand levels, distribution and warehouse 
locations, resource sequencing, and so on. Once these plans are developed, they are used to 
guide supply chain execution. Additionally, it is important to note that SCM planning is an 
ongoing process—as new data are obtained, plans are updated. For example, if shortages in the 
capacity for manufacturing touchscreen displays suddenly become evident, Apple has to dynam-
ically adjust its plans so as to obtain the needed quantities to meet customer demand.
Supply Chain Execution
Supply chain execution is the execution of supply chain planning. Essentially, supply chain 
execution puts the planning into motion and reflects the processes involved in improving the 
collaboration of all members of the supply chain—suppliers, producers, distributors, and cus-
tomers. Supply chain execution involves the management of three key elements of the supply 
chain: product flow, information flow, and financial flow (Figure 8.8). Each of these flows is 
discussed next.
PRODUCT FLOW.  Product flow refers to the movement of goods from the supplier to 
production, from production to distribution, and from distribution to the consumer. Although 
products primarily “flow” in one direction, an effective SCM system will also support the 
activities associated with product returns. Effectively processing returns and customer refunds 
and recycling or properly disposing of products after the end of their life span are critical parts 
of supply chain execution. Thus, an SCM system should support not only the “downstream” 
forward logistics processes but also reverse logistics. Reverse logistics refers to the processes 
Sourcing Plan
Production
Plan
Demand 
Forecast
Supply Chain
Planning
Supplier
Production
Distribution
Customer
1. Demand Planning
    and Forecasting
2. Distribution Planning
3. Production Planning
4. Inventory and Safety
    Stock Planning
Transportation
Plan
FIGURE 8.7
Supply chain planning includes 
(customer) demand planning 
and forecasting, distribution 
planning, production planning, 
and (supplier) inventory and safety 
stock planning.
Raw
Materials
Product
Flow
Manufactured
Product
Product
Inventory
Product
Supply Chain
Execution
Supplier
Production
Distribution
Consumption
Delivery Status,
Updates
Information
Flow
Financial
Flow
Payments
FIGURE 8.8
Supply chain execution focuses 
on the efficient and effective flow 
of products, information, and 
finances along the supply chain.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    347
in place to efficiently receive products from the point of consumption. With an increasing need 
to recapture value by reusing or recycling materials, recovering these after use is an important 
aspect of managing product flows, and companies need to plan reverse logistics, where 
materials flow back from the consumer to the producer, so that valuable materials can be 
recycled, or hazardous materials can be properly disposed of. In case of receiving excessive or 
defective products, these processes also include shipping replacements or crediting customer 
accounts.
As introduced in Chapter 3, RFID (radio frequency identification) systems offer great 
opportunities for managing supply chains, and virtually all major retailers are adopting RFID to 
better manage product flows, as are governments for tracking military supplies and weapons, 
drug shipments and ingredients (i.e., for eliminating counterfeit drugs), and citizens with RFID 
chips on passports.
INFORMATION FLOW.  Information flow refers to the movement of information along the supply 
chain, such as order processing and delivery status updates. Like the product flow, information 
can also flow up or down the supply chain as needed. The key element to the information flow 
is the complete removal of paper documents. Specifically, as all information about orders, 
fulfillment, billing, and consolidation is shared electronically, these paperless information flows 
save not only paperwork but also time and money. Additionally, because SCM systems use a 
central database to store data, all supply chain partners have at all times access to the most 
current data necessary for scheduling production, shipping orders, and so on.
Extensible Markup Language  A key enabler for optimizing information flows is XML. 
Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a standard for exchanging structured data over the 
web. XML allows creating documents consisting of customized tags, enabling the definition, 
transmission, validation, and interpretation of data between applications and between 
organizations.
As described in Chapter 3, Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) uses tags to specify the 
structure and content of a document—such as a web page—that will be presented by a user’s 
browser. Much like HTML, XML also uses tags but focuses on sharing data between applica-
tions. An XML tag is a label that is inserted into an XML document in order to specify how the 
data contained in the document or a portion of the document should be interpreted and/or used. 
For example, the tags <item_no> . . . </item_no> would instruct the application reading the 
XML file that the numbers enclosed in the tags should be interpreted as a product’s item number 
(Figure 8.9). The application could use this information when displaying a product on a web 
page or when updating inventory records. As a result, XML is a powerful tagging system that 
can be tailored to share similar data across applications over the web. With these advanced data 
FIGURE 8.9
An XML file for transmitting a 
bill of materials for a bicycle.
Source: Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation.

348    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
definition capabilities built into web applications, organizations can use the web as the world-
wide network for electronic commerce and SCM.
XML has become the standard for automating data exchange between business information 
systems and may well replace all other formats for electronic data interchange. Companies can, 
for example, use XML to create applications for web-based ordering, for checking on and man-
aging inventory, for signaling to a supplier that more parts are needed, for alerting a third-party 
logistics company that a delivery is needed, and so on. All these various applications can work 
together using the common language of XML.
XML is customizable, and variations of XML have been developed. For example, Extensi-
ble Business Reporting Language (XBRL) is an XML-based specification for publishing 
financial information. XBRL makes it easier for public and private companies to share informa-
tion with each other, with industry analysts, and with shareholders. XBRL includes tags for data 
such as annual and quarterly reports, Securities and Exchange Commission filings, general led-
ger information, and net revenue and accounting schedules (Figure 8.10). Similarly, many appli-
cations, such as Microsoft Office or OpenOffice, use XML-based file formats, such as 
Microsoft’s Open XML or the Open Document Format (ODF).
FINANCIAL FLOW.  Financial flow refers primarily to the movement of financial assets 
throughout the supply chain. Financial flows also include information related to payment 
schedules, consignment and ownership of products and materials, and other relevant information. 
Linkages to electronic banking and financial institutions allow payments to automatically flow 
into the accounts of all members within the supply chain.
Managing B2B Financial Transactions  In B2C electronic commerce, most transactions 
are settled using credit cards or electronic payment services such as PayPal; in contrast, B2B 
payments are lagging far behind. In fact, according to some estimates, about 75 percent of all 
noncash B2B payments in the United States are made by check. While this may sound archaic, 
the time needed to process a check serves as a form of trade credit, which can amount to a 
significant part of an organization’s working capital. For smaller purchases, organizations also 
often use purchasing cards. However, although productivity gains can be realized from using 
purchasing cards instead of checks, such cards are typically not used for large B2B transactions 
because of preset spending limits. In global B2B transactions, organizations often use letters of 
credit issued by a bank to make payments. While letters of credit help to reduce credit risk, these 
are often used only for relatively large amounts. Alternatively, businesses can make international 
transfers using providers such as Western Union. In any case, making a B2B payment is far from 
being as simple as making a purchase at Amazon.com using your credit card, and making B2B 
payments easier can greatly enhance efficiency as well as reduce costs for organizations. Thus, 
it is no wonder that businesses have started asking for payment methods as simple as PayPal for 
B2B transactions. When dealing with new, unknown suppliers, there is considerable fraud risk 
involved; this is especially of concern in global EC, so businesses often use third-party escrow 
FIGURE 8.10
An XBRL file for sharing 
Securities and Exchange 
Commission filings.
Source: Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    349
services, which release payment only when the buyer has confirmed satisfactory delivery of the 
goods, reducing the risks for the buyer.
Supply Chain Visibility and Analytics
Supply chain visibility refers to the ability not only to track products as they move through the 
supply chain but also to foresee external events. Being able to see where a shipment is at any 
given time can be of tremendous help, especially when using JIT methods or when maintaining 
low inventory levels. For example, knowing where a shipment is and being able to expedite it 
can help in not losing a sale or help in taking away a sale from a competitor. Further, knowing 
where a supplier’s facilities are located can help to anticipate and react to issues arising from 
adverse weather conditions, natural disasters, or political issues; if I don’t know where in Taiwan 
my suppliers’ factories are located, how will I know whether they might be affected by a fast-
approaching typhoon? Similarly, some companies even want to know when labor contracts of 
key suppliers’ workers expire in order to plan for potential labor disputes. Needless to say, such 
levels of information sharing throughout the supply chain require tremendous trust among the 
partners. The Internet of Things (IoT) has opened up various ways of enhancing supply chain 
visibility. For example, sensors or on-board telematics units can transmit data about the location 
of trucks, enabling real-time location monitoring as well as making accurate predictions about 
when shipments will arrive. Further, various sensors can provide valuable information about the 
condition of shipments throughout all phases of the journey: Temperature or humidity sensors 
can provide information about whether sensitive goods have been kept within the correct tem-
perature or humidity range, or sensors or cameras can be used to send alerts if a shipment has 
been tampered with.
Supply chain analytics refers to the use of key performance indicators to monitor per-
formance of the entire supply chain, including sourcing, planning, production, and distribu-
tion. For example, a purchasing manager can identify the suppliers that are frequently unable 
to meet promised delivery dates. Being able to access key performance metrics can help to 
identify and remove bottlenecks, such as by switching suppliers, spreading orders over mul-
tiple suppliers, expediting shipping for critical goods, and so on. With the increase in avail-
able data from a variety of sources, ranging from IoT sensors used in logistics, to Industrial 
Internet of Things (IIoT) sensors used in manufacturing, to news reports about global events, 
Big Data analytics plays an increasingly important role in optimizing supply chains.
Customer Relationship Management
With the changes introduced by the web, in most industries a company’s competition is sim-
ply a mouse click away. It is increasingly important for companies not only to generate new 
business but also to attract repeat business from existing customers. This means that to 
remain competitive, companies must keep their customers satisfied. In today’s highly com-
petitive markets, customers hold the balance of power; if customers become dissatisfied with 
the levels of customer service they are receiving, they have many alternatives readily 
available.
It is important to note that customers are not just the end consumer but also other busi-
nesses in B2B transactions. As mentioned earlier, B2B e-commerce is many times larger than 
business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce. So, any rules or best practices for keeping custom-
ers happy apply to not only retailers but also any company within a supply chain. In the past, 
companies would try to establish long-term relationships with business customers, and estab-
lishing relationships with end customers was virtually impossible, especially for large compa-
nies. Today, the emphasis has shifted from conducting business transactions to managing 
relationships even when dealing with individual customers. If a company successfully man-
ages its relationships with customers—satisfying them and solving their problems—then cus-
tomers are less price sensitive. Hence, leveraging and managing customer relationships is 
equally as important as product development. Indeed, customer relationship management sys-
tems often collect data that can be mined to discover the next product line extension that cus-
tomers covet.
The megatrends mobile, social media, Big Data, cloud computing, and IoT have tremen-
dously changed the way organizations need to interact with their customers. Some researchers 

350    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
argue that we have moved from the Internet age to the age of the customer. The age of the cus-
tomer is characterized by customers being part of social circles and being increasingly empow-
ered by social media (Figure 8.11). For example, customers have much more access to information 
from various sources; at the same time, customers’ word of mouth can be spread anywhere, any-
time using mobile devices and has a much wider reach through social media such as blogs, 
Twitter, or Facebook. This can pose tremendous challenges for organizations trying to present and 
maintain a positive public image, as unmonitored conversations can have huge negative impacts, 
and monitoring and participating in ongoing conversations can be an important part of shaping 
public opinion. In addition, companies face significant changes in the competitive landscape. 
For example, the Internet has freed customers from having to purchase goods locally and has thus 
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Augmenting Supply Chain Success
In the 2002 film Minority Report, Tom Cruise used gestures and 
natural language to interact with a futuristic computer that dis-
played information on massive screens that surrounded him. 
Today, such interaction is no longer science fiction but science 
fact. Augmented reality (AR) refers to interactions in a live direct 
or indirect view of a physical, real-world environment that is aug-
mented (or supplemented) by computer-generated sensory input 
such as sound, video, graphics, or GPS data. Visual information, 
for example, can be presented on optical projection systems, 
monitors, handheld devices, and so on. Such information can be 
provided on a heads-up display using a headset or eyeglasses or 
be projected onto large screens or even a vehicle’s windshield.
Many believe that AR is going to transform various aspects of 
supply chain management. For example, an important part of 
assembling or packing orders is the picking process, where a 
human “picks” components or completed items for assembly or 
delivery. AR can allow each picker to see a “digital packing list” 
on a heads-up display. When an item is selected in a warehouse, 
the heads-up display can then show the most efficient path to 
the next item to pick, guiding the person perfectly to the next 
step in the process. Virtually no mistakes or missteps are made. 
Once products are collected to be shipped, AR can also aid in 
loading containers and trucks by providing step-by-step instruc-
tions on a heads-up display on how to most efficiently arrange 
cargo given the size, dimension, and weight of the items. When 
delivering items, AR can provide more than widely used GPS navi-
gation by providing a heads-up windshield display with real-time 
traffic analysis so rerouting can occur on the fly without any inter-
actions that might distract the driver. Additional information 
about the cargo can also be provided if needed (e.g., tempera-
ture sensitive items). And the best part of this is that workers 
using AR support will feel like Tom Cruise in Minority Report.
Based on:
Augmented reality. (2016, May 3). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved May 10, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Augmented_reality&oldid=718470443
Glocker, H., Jannek, K., Mahn, J., & Theis, B. (2014). Augmented real-
ity in logistics. DHL. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://www.dhl 
.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/logistics_insights/csi_ 
augmented_reality_report_290414.pdf
Robinson, A. (2016, January 4). 2016 Supply chain trends: 
7 of 12 trends that will drive supply chain management in 
2016. Cerasis. Retrieved on May 10, 2016, from http://cerasis 
.com/2016/01/04/2016-supply-chain-trends
Customers
Blogs
Online Product
Reviews
Video-Sharing
Sites
Search Engines
Price Comparison
Sites
Microblogs
Social Networks
FIGURE 8.11
Today’s empowered customers 
have many ways to obtain and 
spread information and opinions 
about companies.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    351
lowered the barriers to entry for potential rivals. Similarly, many products have been replaced or 
marginalized by digital substitutes. The power of buyers has increased, as people can quickly and 
easily find information, reviews, or prices at a competitor’s store. At the same time, employees, an 
important source of supply, have more mobility and thus have higher power. Last but not least, not 
only one’s customers but also one’s competitors have tremendous amounts of information about 
one’s products (and their strengths and weaknesses) available at their fingertips and can more eas-
ily predict one’s next strategic move. Thus, businesses have to rethink their interactions with cus-
tomers; rather than seeing customers as a passive audience, organizations need to engage in 
conversations with their customers. In their attempts to engage with customers and build long-
lasting relationships, organizations are increasingly utilizing cloud-based systems and Big Data to 
better understand their customers and predict their needs and desires. Likewise, the IoT serves as 
a source for additional data not only about customers but also about their usage of products and 
can offer various opportunities to offer customers better value.
Many of the world’s most successful corporations have realized the importance of develop-
ing and nurturing relationships with their customers. For example, Starbucks Coffee uses a vari-
ety of means to engage with its customers: Like many other businesses, Starbucks uses a loyalty 
card to entice people to return to its stores; further, Starbucks actively solicits feedback and new 
product ideas from its customers, not only within the stores but also via its open innovation plat-
form mystarbucksidea.com, and it has one of the most successful fan pages on Facebook. Com-
puter manufacturer Dell, in contrast, has different needs when interacting with its customers. For 
instance, when Dell sales representatives are dealing with large corporate clients that routinely 
make large computer purchases, issues of quantity pricing and delivery are likely to be para-
mount, whereas when dealing with less-computer-savvy individuals ordering a new notebook 
for personal use, questions about compatibility with an older printer or the ability to run a spe-
cific program may be asked. No matter the customer, Dell attempts to provide all customers with 
a positive experience during both the presale and the ongoing support phases. Large banks and 
insurance companies are trying to widen and deepen relationships with customers so as to be 
able to sell more financial services and products, maximizing the lifetime value of each individ-
ual customer. Chase Card Services, for example, has more than 4,000 agents handling 200 mil-
lion customer calls a year. Being able to increase first-call resolution (sometimes referred to as 
first-contact resolution), that is, addressing the customers’ issues during the first contact, can 
help to save costs tremendously while increasing customer satisfaction.
Marketing researchers have found that the cost of trying to win back customers who have 
gone elsewhere can be up to 50 to 100 times as much as keeping a current one satisfied. Thus, 
companies are finding it imperative to develop and maintain customer satisfaction and widen 
(by attracting new customers), lengthen (by keeping existing profitable customers satisfied), 
and deepen (by transforming minor customers into profitable customers) the relationships 
with their customers in order to compete effectively in their markets (Figure 8.12). To achieve 
Widen
Attract New Customers
Lengthen
Keep Current 
Customers Satisﬁed
Deepen
Transform Minor 
Customers into 
Proﬁtable Customers
FIGURE 8.12
Companies search for ways to 
widen, lengthen, and deepen 
customer relationships.

352    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
this, companies need to not only understand who their customers are but also determine the 
lifetime value of each customer. With the increasing popularity of social media such as social 
networks, blogs, and microblogs, companies have more ways than ever to learn about their 
customers.
To assist in deploying an organization-wide strategy for managing these increasingly com-
plex customer relationships, organizations are deploying customer relationship management 
(CRM) systems. CRM is not simply a technology but also a corporate-level strategy to create 
and maintain, through the introduction of reliable systems, processes, and procedures, lasting 
relationships with customers by concentrating on downstream information flows. Applications 
focusing on downstream information flows have three main objectives: to attract potential cus-
tomers, to create customer loyalty, and to portray a positive corporate image. The appropriate 
CRM technology combined with the management of sales-related business processes can have 
tremendous benefits for an organization (Table 8.2). To pursue customer satisfaction as a basis 
for achieving competitive advantage, organizations must be able to access data and track cus-
tomer interactions throughout the organization regardless of where, when, or how the interaction 
occurs. This means that companies need to have an integrated system that captures data from 
retail stores, websites, social networks, microblogs, call centers, and various other channels that 
organizations use to communicate downstream within their value chain. More important, man-
agers need the capability to monitor and analyze factors that drive customer satisfaction (as well 
as dissatisfaction) as changes occur according to prevailing market conditions.
CRM systems come in the form of packaged software that is purchased from software ven-
dors. CRM systems are commonly integrated with a comprehensive ERP implementation to 
leverage internal and external information to better serve customers. Thus, most large vendors of 
ERP systems, such as Oracle, SAP, and Microsoft, also offer CRM systems; further, specialized 
vendors, such as Salesforce.com or SugarCRM, offer CRM solutions on a software-as-a-service 
basis. Like ERP, CRM systems come with various features and modules. Managers must care-
fully select a CRM system that will meet the unique requirements of their business processes.
TABLE 8.2  Benefits of a CRM System
Benefit
Examples
24/7/365 operation
Web-based interfaces provide product information, sales status, 
support information, issue tracking, and so on.
Individualized service
Learn how each customer defines product and service quality so 
that customized product, pricing, and services can be designed or 
developed collaboratively.
Improved information
Integrate all information for all points of contact with the 
customers—marketing, sales, and service—so that all who interact 
with customers have the same view and understand current issues.
Improved problem 
identification/resolution
Improved record keeping and efficient methods of capturing customer 
complaints help to identify and solve problems faster.
Optimized processes
Integrated information removes information handoffs, speeding both 
sales and support processes.
Improved integration
Information from the CRM can be integrated with other systems to 
streamline business processes and gain business intelligence as well 
as make other cross-functional systems more efficient and effective.
Improved product 
development
Tracking customer behavior over time helps to identify future 
opportunities for product and service offerings.
Improved planning
This provides mechanisms for managing and scheduling sales 
follow-ups to assess satisfaction, repurchase probabilities, time 
frames, and frequencies.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    353
Companies that have successfully implemented CRM systems can experience greater cus-
tomer satisfaction and increased productivity of their sales and service personnel, which can 
translate into dramatic enhancements to the company’s profitability. CRM allows organizations 
to focus on driving revenue as well as on reducing costs as opposed to emphasizing only cost 
cutting. Cost cutting tends to have a lower limit because there are only so many costs that com-
panies can reduce, whereas revenue generation strategies are bound only by the size of the mar-
ket itself. The importance of focusing on customer satisfaction is emphasized by findings that 
institutional investors increase a company’s valuation when customer satisfaction is higher and 
reduce valuations when customer satisfaction is lower (Aalto University, 2013).
Developing a CRM Strategy
To develop a successful CRM strategy, organizations must do more than simply purchase and 
install CRM software. The first consideration is whether a comprehensive CRM system is even 
needed for a company; for example, the closer an organization is to the end customer, the more 
important CRM becomes. Further, companies have to realize that a successful CRM strategy 
must include enterprise-wide changes, including changes to:
■
■Policies and Business Processes. Organizational policies and procedures need to reflect a 
customer-focused culture.
■
■Customer Service. Key metrics for managing the business need to reflect customer-
focused measures for quality and satisfaction as well as process changes to enhance the 
customer experience.
SECURITY MATTERS 
Disclosing the Customer Data of the Most Vulnerable
VTech is a Hong Kong–based global supplier of cordless phones 
as well as electronic learning products designed for infants to 
preschool children. In November 2015, VTech’s learning prod-
ucts app store “Learning Lodge” was compromised by hackers 
who obtained customers’ names, addresses, passwords, and 
other personal data, including 190 GB of photos and chat 
logs. The data breach exposed personal data about millions of 
individuals, including children, who had accounts that allowed 
them to register or utilize services related to specific products.
While companies are increasingly focusing on ways to bet-
ter connect with customers, the VTech hack highlights the dark 
side of CRM in the digital world. VTech did contact all affected 
customers immediately after the breach. And, fortunately, the 
hacker didn’t appear to be malicious; after completing the 
breach, the hacker contacted the website Motherboard and 
provided files containing the sensitive data to prove that 
VTech’s sites had been compromised. According to the hacker, 
the breach demonstrated how insecure the VTech sites were 
and suggested that others, with malicious intent, might have 
compromised the servers prior to November 2015. Security 
experts gave VTech failing grades for its security policies. In 
response the breach, VTech changed its end user license agree-
ment to state:
You acknowledge and agree that any information you 
send or receive during your use of the site may not be 
secure and may be intercepted or later acquired by unau-
thorized parties. You acknowledge and agree that your 
use of the site and any software or firmware downloaded 
therefrom is at your own risk. (Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation)
While some countries are questioning the legality of 
VTech’s policy change, it is clear that VTech is trying to avoid 
any liability if future hacks occur. Security experts cite that such 
incidents are increasing and companies would be better off 
getting their security right before such failure occurs rather 
than changing policies to limit their responsibility to their “val-
ued” customers.
Based on:
Ellison, M. (2016, April 21). These toys have eyes (and ears too): VTech 
security breach raises “Internet of Things” privacy fears. Lexology. 
Retrieved May 8, 2016, from http://www.lexology.com/library/detail 
.aspx?g=e9fc4a57-4bbb-43d7-a414-24c72b383ac4
Franceschi-Bicchierai, L. (2015, November 27). One of the largest 
hacks yet exposes data on hundreds of thousands of kids. Mother-
board. Retrieved May 8, 2016, from http://motherboard.vice.com/
read/one-of-the-largest-hacks-yet-exposes-data-on-hundreds-of- 
thousands-of-kids
Gibbs, S. (2015, November 30). Toy firm VTech hack exposes pri-
vate data of parents and children. The Guardian. Retrieved May 8, 
2016, from https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/30/
vtech-toys-hack-private-data-parents-children
VTech. (2016, March 21). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php 
?title=VTech&oldid=711267165

354    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
■
■Employee Training. Employees from all areas—marketing, sales, and support—must have 
a consistent focus that values customer service and satisfaction.
■
■Data Collection, Analysis, and Sharing. All aspects of the customer experience—
prospecting, sales, support, and so on—must be tracked, analyzed, and shared to optimize 
the benefits of the CRM.
In sum, the organization must focus and organize its activities to provide the best customer 
service possible (Figure 8.13). Additionally, a successful CRM strategy must carefully consider 
the ethical and privacy concerns of customers’ data (discussed later in this chapter).
Architecture of a CRM System
A comprehensive CRM system comprises three primary components:
1.	Operational CRM.  Systems for automating the fundamental business processes—
marketing, sales, and support—for interacting with the customer
2.	Analytical CRM.  Systems for analyzing customer behavior and perceptions (e.g., quality, 
price, and overall satisfaction) in order to provide business intelligence
3.	Collaborative CRM.  Systems for providing effective and efficient communication with the 
customer from the entire organization
Operational CRM enables direct interaction with customers; in contrast, analytical CRM 
provides the analyses necessary to more effectively manage the sales, service, and marketing 
activities. Whereas analytical CRM aids in the development of a company’s CRM strategy, oper-
ational CRM aids in the execution of CRM strategy; thus, either component alone provides no 
real benefit for a business. Finally, collaborative CRM provides the communication capabilities 
of the CRM environment (Figure 8.14). Next, we examine each of these components.
OPERATIONAL CRM.  Operational CRM includes the systems used to enable customer interaction 
and service. For example, operational CRM systems help create mass e-mail marketing campaigns 
wherein each consumer receives an individualized e-mail based on prior purchase history. With 
an effective operational CRM environment, organizations are able to provide personalized and 
highly efficient customer service. Customer-focused personnel are provided complete customer 
information—history, pending sales, and service requests—in order to optimize interaction and 
service. It is important to stress that the operational CRM environment provides all customer 
information regardless of the touch point (i.e., technical support, customer service, and in-store 
Successful
CRM Strategy
Customer
Service
Employee
Training
Policies and
Business Processes
Data Collection,
Analysis, and Sharing
Putting the
Customer
First!
FIGURE 8.13
A successful CRM strategy 
requires enterprise-wide changes.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    355
sales as well as website interactions such as downloading content and e-commerce clickstream 
data). This means that marketing, sales, and support personnel see all prior and current interactions 
with the customer regardless of where it occurred within the organization. To facilitate the sharing 
of information and customer interaction, three separate modules are utilized (Figure 8.15).
Sales Force Automation  The first component of an operational CRM is sales force 
automation (SFA). SFA refers to modules that support the day-to-day sales activities of an 
Customers
Sales and
Marketing
Managers
Collaborative CRM
Methods and Technologies to
Facilitate Communication
Operational CRM
• Sales Force Automation
• Customer Service and Support
• Enterprise Marketing Management
Analytical CRM
• Data Warehouses
• Data Mining and Visualization
• Business Intelligence
• ERP Systems
FIGURE 8.14
A comprehensive CRM environment includes operational, analytical, and collaborative components.
Customer
Operational CRM
Sales Force
Automation
Enterprise Marketing
Management
Customer Service
and Support
S
FIGURE 8.15
An operational CRM environment 
is used to enable customer 
interaction and service.

356    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
organization. For example, companies such as Dell have thousands of sales staff in various 
different countries working with many different clients. Unless sales personnel and sales 
managers have an integrated view of Dell’s entire sales pipeline, Dell sales staff may be 
competing with each other for the same contracts unbeknownst to each other. SFA supports a 
broad range of sales-related business processes, such as order processing and tracking; managing 
accounts, contacts, opportunities, and sales; and tracking and managing customer history and 
preferences (both in terms of product and communication). Together, this can help in creating 
more accurate sales forecasts and analyzing sales performance.
SFA systems provide advantages for sales personnel, sales managers, and marketing man-
agers. For sales personnel, SFA reduces the potentially error-prone paperwork associated with 
the selling process. Because all the information is within the system, personnel can more easily 
hand off work and collaborate; it is also easier to train new personnel. Sales personnel can then 
use their time more efficiently and ultimately focus more on selling than on paperwork and other 
non-selling tasks. Likewise, for sales managers, the SFA system provides tremendous benefits, 
such as accurate, up-to-the-minute information on all customers, markets, and sales personnel. 
This improved information allows for better planning, scheduling, and coordination. Ultimately, 
SFA provides better day-to-day management of the sales function. For example, SFA allows 
sales managers to track a plethora of sales performance measures, such as the sales pipeline for 
each salesperson, including rating and probability (Figure 8.16), revenue per salesperson, per 
territory, or as a percentage of sales quota, or number of calls per day, time spent per contact, 
revenue per call, cost per call, or ratio of orders to calls. Further, sales managers can obtain other 
useful information such as number of lost customers per period or cost of customer acquisition; 
product-related information such as margins by product category, customer segment, or cus-
tomer; or percentage of goods returned, number of customer complaints, or number of overdue 
accounts. All of these measures aid in assessing sales performance and detecting potential prob-
lems in certain regions or issues with product or service quality.
Finally, SFA improves the effectiveness of the marketing function by providing an improved 
understanding of market conditions, competitors, and products. This enhanced information will 
provide numerous advantages for the management and execution of the marketing function. 
Specifically, SFA aids in gaining a better understanding of markets, segments, and customers as 
well as competitors and the overall economic structure of the industry. Such broad and deep 
understanding of the competitive landscape can help organizations assess their unique strengths 
and weaknesses, thereby facilitating new product development and improving strategic 
planning.
In sum, the primary goals of SFA are to better identify potential customers, streamline 
selling processes, and improve managerial information. Next, we examine systems for improv-
ing customer service and support.
Customer Service and Support  The second component of an operational CRM system 
is customer service and support. Customer service and support refers to modules that 
FIGURE 8.16
SFA allows sales managers to 
track sales performance.
Source: Dynamics CRM 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    357
automate service requests, complaints, product returns, and information requests. In the past, 
organizations had help desks and call centers to provide customer service and support. Today, 
organizations are deploying customer engagement centers that use multiple communication 
channels to support the communication preferences of customers, such as the web, the 
company’s Facebook page, industry blogs, face-to-face contact, telephone, and so on (see 
the section “Collaborative CRM “ later in this chapter). A customer engagement center 
utilizes a variety of communication technologies for optimizing customers’ communications 
with the organization. For example, automatic call distribution systems forward calls to the 
next available person; while waiting to connect, customers can be given the option to use 
the keypad or voice response technologies to check account status information. Southwest 
Airlines improves customer service by using “virtual hold technology,” where customers can 
choose to stay on the line or be called back when the next agent is available; this helped to 
save almost 25 million toll minutes in just one year and reduced the number of abandoned 
calls, which provided additional opportunities for ticket sales and signals increased customer 
satisfaction. In essence, the goal of customer service and support is to provide great customer 
service—anytime, anywhere, and through any channel—while keeping service and support 
costs low. For example, many customer engagement centers use powerful self-service 
diagnostic tools that guide consumers to their needed information. Customers can log service 
requests or gain updates to pending support requests using a variety of self-service or assisted 
technologies (Figure 8.17). On their websites, companies increasingly use automated chatbots 
Customers
Communication Methods
Customer Support Needs
Self-Service
Assisted
Service
Sales
Marketing
M
C
9
*
0+
#
PQRS
8TUV
WXYZ
4GHI
5JKL
6MNO
2ABC
3 DEF
1
7
OK
FIGURE 8.17
A customer engagement center 
allows customers to use a variety 
of self-service and assisted 
technologies to interact with the 
organization.

358    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
(see Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Big Data and Analytics”) to initiate 
conversations and gain preliminary information from the user in order to route the user to 
the relevant human customer service representative. Successful customer service and support 
systems enable faster response times, increased first-contact resolution rates, and improved 
productivity of service and support personnel. Managers can utilize digital dashboards to 
monitor key metrics such as first-contact resolution and service personnel utilization, which 
allows for improved management of the service and support functions.
Enterprise Marketing Management  The third component of an operational CRM system 
is enterprise marketing management. Enterprise marketing management tools help a 
company in the execution of the CRM strategy by improving the management of promotional 
campaigns (Figure 8.18). Today, many companies use a variety of channels (such as e-mail, 
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Developing a Mobile CRM App for Customers
In the past, mobile CRM was focused primarily on allowing 
employees on the go to use mobile devices to access, update, 
and interact with customer data wherever they are. These 
mobile CRM solutions let mobile workers do everything they 
could do with CRM at their desktop. CRM mobility, in organi-
zations where the sales staff is frequently in the field, is a criti-
cal component to the CRM solution and has a significant 
impact on sales performance for staff and the company.
Mobile CRM is not just for a company’s employees any-
more, but it is also for customers. Today, mobile apps have 
become a powerful way for customers to connect with a 
brand. Mobile apps allow customers to access useful content 
and information while on the go. Smart companies will care-
fully design a mobile CRM app to leverage the mobile plat-
form, not just repurpose a set of desktop features. Effective 
strategies for mobile, for example, will leverage push notifica-
tions, and provide personalized and relevant messages based 
on specific events, segmentation criteria, and in-app behavior.
According to comScore, we now spend more time engag-
ing with mobile sites than with desktop websites, with most of 
that time being spent on apps. Unfortunately, only 3 percent of 
apps are still actively used after 30 days past initial download. 
So, it is critical to build the right app for customers. The real 
measure of mobile CRM success is not initial downloads but 
how many people remain engaged 30 to 60 days after initial 
engagement. To be successful, companies need specific metrics 
to measure progress and success. How many customers opt in 
and download the app, how long customers remain engaged, 
what events motivate interaction, when push notifications con-
vert to sales, and various other factors must be tracked to learn 
and sharpen the organization’s strategy. Mobile CRM is much 
more than a replication of a traditional CRM strategy. The com-
pany must put the customer first and design an app that helps 
to increase customer engagement and loyalty.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2015, December 7). How many apps do smartphone own-
ers use? eMarketer. Retrieved May 8, 2016, from http://www.emarketer 
.com/Article/How-Many-Apps-Do-Smartphone-Owners-Use/1013309
Turner, N. (2016, April 16). Mobile CRM—the six metrics that matter. 
PerformanceIN. Retrieved on May 8, 2016, from http://performancein 
.com/news/2016/04/11/mobile-crm-six-metrics-matter
FIGURE 8.18
CRM systems allow for managing 
various types of promotional 
campaigns.
Source: Dynamics CRM 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    359
telephone, direct mail, Facebook pages and YouTube channels, Twitter status updates, and so 
on; see Chapter 4, “Enabling Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce,” and Chapter 5, 
“Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using Social Media”) to reach 
potential customers and drive them to web pages customized for their target market (based on 
demographics and lifestyle). Using enterprise marketing management tools can help integrate 
those campaigns such that the right messages are sent to the right people through the right 
channels. This necessitates that customer lists are managed carefully to be able to personalize 
messages that can deliver individualized attention to each potential or existing customer (or to 
avoid targeting people who have opted out of receiving marketing communication). At the same 
time, enterprise marketing management tools provide extensive analytical capabilities that can 
help to analyze the effectiveness of marketing campaigns and can help to efficiently route sales 
leads to the right salespeople, leading to higher conversion rates.
ANALYTICAL CRM.  Analytical CRM focuses on analyzing customer behavior and perceptions in 
order to provide the business intelligence necessary to identify new opportunities and to provide 
superior customer service. Organizations that effectively utilize analytical CRM can more easily 
customize marketing campaigns from the segment level to even the individual customer. Such 
customized campaigns help to increase cross- or up-selling (i.e., selling more profitable products 
or identifying popular bundles of products and services tailored to different market segments) 
as well as retain customers by having accurate, timely, and personalized information. Analytical 
CRM systems are also used to spot sales trends by ZIP code, state, and region as well as specific 
target markets within those areas.
Key technologies within analytical CRM systems include Big Data analytics and other busi-
ness intelligence technologies that attempt to create predictive models of various customer attri-
butes (see Chapter 6). These analyses can focus on enhancing a broad range of customer-focused 
business processes; for example, marketing campaign analysis can help organizations to opti-
mize campaigns by improving customer segmentation and sales coverage as well as by optimiz-
ing the use of each customer’s preferred communication channels. Similarly, analytical CRM 
tools can help in analyzing customer acquisition and retention. In addition, analytical CRM tools 
help in pricing optimization by building models of customer demand, taking into consideration 
not only factors such as product usage and customer satisfaction but also price, quality, and sat-
isfaction of competitors’ products or services.
Once these predictive models are created, they can be delivered to marketing and sales man-
agers using a variety of visualization methods, including digital dashboards and other reporting 
methods (Figure 8.19). To gain the greatest value from analytical CRM applications, data 
FIGURE 8.19
Digital dashboards help to 
visualize key CRM performance 
metrics.
Source: Dynamics CRM 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.

360    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
collection and analysis must be continuous so that all decision making reflects the most accu-
rate, comprehensive, and up-to-date information.
One goal that customer-focused organizations are constantly striving for is to get a 
360-degree view of the customer so as to be able to maximize the outcomes of sales and market-
ing campaigns and to identify the most profitable customers. In order to get the most complete 
picture of a sales prospect or a customer, marketers have to tie together data from various 
sources, such as demographic data provided when signing up for a loyalty card program, the 
customer’s address, purchase and contact history, clickstream data on the company’s website, 
and so on. In addition to the data captured when interacting with a person, marketers can com-
plete the picture with publicly available information posted on the person’s Facebook or Linke-
dIn profile or the person’s Twitter updates. Unfortunately, many people have various different 
online identities (e.g., for different social networks), use multiple e-mail addresses, and access 
websites from different computers (Figure 8.20). Analytical CRM systems can help merge dif-
ferent identities by using fuzzy logic–based algorithms (see Chapter 6) to identify multiple 
records belonging to the same person.
Social CRM  Social media applications enable companies to engage with their customers using 
a variety of social media channels. For example, many companies directly react to customer 
enquiries on their Facebook pages or on Twitter. This allows companies to quickly react to 
customers’ concerns and provide a level of customer service that was typically not possible in 
offline environments. This use of social media for customer relationship management is often 
referred to as social CRM. As companies are using various social media channels, customers 
use various social media channels to quickly share both positive and negative experiences with 
a product or service. Monitoring such conversations can help organizations to better measure 
public perceptions, and by participating in such conversations, organizations can more effectively 
manage customer satisfaction and maintain a positive brand image.
Social Media Monitoring  Social media monitoring is the process of identifying and 
assessing the volume and sentiment of what is being said about a company, individual, product, 
or brand. For example, monitoring online conversations can help to assess customer sentiments, 
find out what people really think about a product, and discover ways for improving a product: 
Whereas most customers do not bother to fill out a survey about a product, they are likely to 
voice their thoughts on Facebook or Twitter if they are very satisfied or very dissatisfied with 
a product. Similarly, many people participate in online discussion forums related to a product 
or company, and the company should monitor the conversation and step in when needed 
(e.g., when customers have questions about a product but no other customer answers within a 
certain time frame). To collect this information, organizations utilize a variety of tools to track 
Name: John Doe
Age: 46
Address: 462 Main Street, Pullman, WA 99163
Occupation: Sales Representative
Employer: Bigorg, Inc.
Spouse: Jane Doe
J_Doe@bigorg.com
johndoe@hotmail.com
john@doe.com
DJ2010@yahoo.com
facebook.com/johndoe
twitter.com/johndoe
@
FIGURE 8.20
Many people interact with a 
company in many different ways 
using various online identities.

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    361
and aggregate social media content from blogs, wikis, news sites, microblogs such as Twitter, 
social networking sites like Facebook, video- and photo-sharing websites like YouTube and 
Flickr, forums, message boards, blogs, and user-generated content in general. Depending 
on the goal of the social media monitoring program, a simple tool like Google Alerts might 
be adequate; alternatively, specialized applications that provide sophisticated analyses and 
full integration with existing CRM systems help to gain timely understanding of evolving 
customer sentiment. For example, Hootsuite, a popular tool for social media monitoring 
(and there are many), allows a company to keep track of chatter in real time on social media 
platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and many others. Using such tools, companies 
are not only able to listen to what people are saying about their brand or products, they can 
also consolidate and analyze trends and other summary information to improve strategy and 
decision making. Many CRM systems such as Microsoft Dynamics CRM now include various 
tools to help in monitoring and analyzing ongoing conversations on social media sites, helping 
to spot potential perception issues or to discover trends in customer sentiment (see Figure 
8.21). Needless to say, an organization should have an appropriate social CRM strategy in 
place and should have clear policies, such as when to step into an online discussion, which (or 
how many) tweets to reply to, or how to strike a balance between grassroots marketing and 
deceiving people by posing as casual conversation partners.
Given the rise in importance of social media for reaching out to and communicating with 
customers, many organizations are creating a formal organizational group to engage in social 
media monitoring.
With the increasing use of social media, social media monitoring has become a central part 
of analyzing and understanding evolving market trends and customer sentiments. In addition, 
social media monitoring helps in identifying the “influencers” who are most likely to share 
their views through social media. Even though social media allow anybody to voice opinions, 
not everyone does so. For example, while many people regularly read blogs, only a few people 
write their own blogs; yet these blogs can be influential in swaying others’ opinions. The 
importance of social media monitoring is exemplified by large companies such as Dell, which 
established a Social Media Listening Command Center, where a number of full-time staff mon-
itor more than 22,000 daily posts made about the company on various social media. Having a 
dedicated team helps Dell to quickly react to customer complaints or changes in public senti-
ment about the company, enabling near-real-time communication with the customers through 
social media.
COLLABORATIVE CRM.  Collaborative CRM refers to systems for providing effective and 
efficient communication with the customer from the entire organization. Collaborative CRM 
systems facilitate the sharing of information across the various departments of an organization 
in order to increase customer satisfaction and loyalty. Sharing useful customer information 
FIGURE 8.21
Many CRM applications 
include various tools to help in 
monitoring and analyzing ongoing 
conversations on social media 
sites.
Source: Dynamics CRM 2016,  
Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.

362    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
on a company-wide basis helps improve information quality and can be used to identify 
products or services a customer may be interested in. A collaborative CRM system supports 
customer communication and collaboration with the entire organization, thus providing more 
streamlined customer service with fewer handoffs. The customer engagement center (as 
described previously) enables customers to utilize the communication method they prefer 
when interacting with the organization. In other words, collaborative CRM integrates the 
communication related to all aspects of the marketing, sales, and support processes in order 
to better serve and retain customers. Collaborative CRM enhances communication in the 
following ways:
■
■Greater Customer Focus. Understanding customer history and current needs helps to focus 
the communication on issues important to the customer.
■
■Lower Communication Barriers. Customers are more likely to communicate with the 
organization when personnel have complete information and when they utilize the commu-
nication methods and preferences of the customer.
■
■Increased Information Integration. All information about the customer as well as all prior 
and ongoing communication is given to all organizational personnel interacting with the 
customer; customers can get status updates from any organizational touch point.
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
When Algorithms Discriminate
Promising companies the ability to get to know their custom-
ers and maximize the benefit gained from each one, CRM sys-
tems could be called a marketer’s dream. CRM software allows 
companies to look closely at customer behavior, drilling down 
to smaller and smaller market segments. Once so segmented, 
customers can be targeted with specific promotions. For the 
company, this process reaps the greatest returns from market-
ing efforts because only those customers are targeted who are 
likely to respond to the marketing campaign.
From a customer’s perspective, CRM systems seem like a 
great idea. You finally stop receiving advertisements for things 
that don’t interest you. But what if a company uses its CRM 
software in a more discriminating way? Where do companies 
draw the line between using CRM data to offer certain clients 
customized deals and unethically discriminating against other 
customers? For example, lenders, which often segment their 
customers according to their creditworthiness, might use this 
credit risk data to target customers having a low credit rating 
with underhanded payday or subprime loans. Although these 
customers are riskier for the lender, the higher fees and interest 
charged for credit make these customers especially lucrative.
CRM and all software contain countless algorithms for 
manipulating, aggregating, and summarizing data. Algorithms 
reflect a set of rules to be followed in calculations and other 
problem-solving operations. While there is a widespread belief 
that such algorithms must be objective and fair, CRM software, 
and the underlying algorithms, is not free of human bias. 
Instances of bias reported in the popular press include a report 
that Google’s online advertising system displayed an advertise-
ment for high-income jobs for men more often than for 
women. Similarly, ads for accessing arrest records were signifi-
cantly more likely to show up on searches for distinctively black 
names. In a similar way, CRM systems based on biased or dis-
criminatory algorithms can potentially do more harm than 
good, destroying rather than building customer relationships.
Questions
1.	 Whose responsibility is it to ensure that algorithms are not 
discriminatory? Explain.
2.	 Google, Facebook, and many other widely used software 
platforms have been accused of using algorithms that 
present biased search results or news feeds. Should such 
platforms be bias free (at least as much as possible), or is it 
acceptable for platforms to reflect the biases of the devel-
opers? Explain.
Based on:
Jourdier, A. (2002, May 1). Privacy & ethics: Is CRM too close for com-
fort? CIO.com. Retrieved May 8, 2016, from http://www.cio.com/
article/31062/Privacy_Ethics_Is_CRM_Too_Close_for_Comfort_
Miller, C.C. (2015, July 9). When algorithms discriminate. The New 
York Times. Retrieved on May 8, 2016, from http://www.nytimes 
.com/2015/07/10/upshot/when-algorithms-discriminate.html
Miller, C.C. (2015, August 10). Algorithms and bias: Q. and A. with 
Cynthia Dwork. The New York Times. Retrieved on May 19, 2016, from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/upshot/algorithms-and-bias-q-
and-a-with-cynthia-dwork.html
Sydell, L. (2016, March 14). Can computers be racist? The human-
like bias of algorithms. National Public Radio. Retrieved on May 
19, 2016, from http://www.npr.org/2016/03/14/470427605/
can-computers-be-racist-the-human-like-bias-of-algorithms

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    363
In addition to these benefits, collaborative CRM environments are flexible such that they 
can support both routine and nonroutine events.
Ethical Concerns with CRM
Although CRM has become a strategic enabler for developing and maintaining customer rela-
tionships, it is not viewed positively by those who feel that it invades customer privacy and 
facilitates coercive sales practices. Proponents of CRM warn that relying too much on the “sys-
tems” profiles of customers, based on statistical analysis of past behavior, may categorize cus-
tomers in a way that they will take exception to. Additionally, given that a goal of CRM is to 
better meet the needs of customers by providing highly personalized communication and service 
(such as Amazon.com’s recommendations), at what point does the communication get too per-
sonal? It is intuitive to conclude that when customers feel that the system knows too much about 
them, personalization could backfire on a company. Clearly, CRM raises several ethical con-
cerns in the digital world (see Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World,” for a comprehensive 
discussion of information privacy). Nevertheless, as competition continues to increase in the 
digital world, CRM will remain a key technology for attracting and retaining customers.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Manufacturing
Regardless of whether you’re thinking about a new com-
puter, TV, automobile, or toy for your baby brother, most of 
today’s consumer products have undergone an elaborate 
design and manufacturing process, and few companies do 
not make heavy use of information systems in the process. 
Traditionally, designers and engineers used large drawing 
boards to sketch detailed drawings of each component of a 
product. Today, designers use computer-aided design (CAD) 
software for this task, allowing them to create drawings 
faster and more accurately, thus cutting down cycle time 
(i.e., the time from inception to the shipment of the first 
product) tremendously. Further, CAD allows easier sharing of 
designs and can be used to produce 3D drawings of a new 
product. However, while you can create realistic 3D drawings 
of a new product, people often still prefer holding a physical 
model in their hands to evaluate it. 3D printing, sometimes 
known as “fabbing,” can greatly speed up the creation of 
prototypes as well as an increasing range of finished prod-
ucts. In essence, 3D printers add successive layers of material 
onto a surface, thus building a 3D model out of myriad indi-
vidual slices. In fact, some 3D printers even use materials 
such as titanium, allowing battleships to produce spare parts 
on an as-needed basis rather than carrying warehouses full of 
parts. 3D printing is rapidly evolving. Another implication of 
3D printing relates to where products are manufactured. In 
the past decades, product manufacturing was often moved 
to parts of the world where labor was ample and wages were 
low. Countries such as China, Mexico, and Taiwan have 
become global heavyweights, manufacturing products for 
Apple, Nike, and countless other leading brands. 3D printing 
is potentially a global disrupter for manufacturing products. 
Many believe that the “workers” with the lowest wages and 
unlimited capacity will ultimately be 3D printers, which would 
result in moving the manufacturing of many products close 
to the location of final sale. While 3D printing is not a suit-
able manufacturing method for all products, and it may take 
many years before it emerges as the dominant manufacturing 
method, it clearly will have global implications for employ-
ment and trade balances.
The use of technology doesn’t stop there. Inventory plan-
ning, job scheduling, or warehouse management are all sup-
ported by information systems, often in the form of ERP and 
SCM systems. Using RFID and other IoT sensors, new data can 
be integrated into various systems. With such highly granular 
data, companies will have enhanced information throughout 
the entire manufacturing value chain. From inventory man-
agement to production to logistics, all steps will be more 
transparent and efficient; complete information on the sta-
tus of raw materials, production, and delivery will allow for 
improved inventory management, production scheduling, and 
delivery. Once a product leaves the manufacturer, IoT will be 
used throughout the distribution of the product to the final 
customer. Clearly, information systems will continue to trans-
form the process of designing, manufacturing, and shipping 
products to you.
Based on:
3D printing. (2016, May 9). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=3D_printing&oldid=719412123
D’Aveni, R.A. (2013, March). 3-D printing will change the world. 
Harvard Business Review. Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://hbr 
.org/2013/03/3-d-printing-will-change-the-world
Macaulay, J., Buckalew, L., & Chung, G. (2015). Internet of Things in 
logistics. DHL. Retrieved on May 9, 2016, from http://www.dhl.com/
en/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trend_research/internet_of_things 
.html

364    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
Key Points Review
1.	 Describe supply chain management systems and how 
they help to improve business-to-business processes. 
SCM focuses on improving interorganizational 
business processes in B2B relationships and has two 
main objectives: to accelerate product development and 
to reduce costs associated with procuring raw 
materials, components, and services from suppliers. 
Supplier and customer portals provide secure access 
points for established business partners. Smaller 
organizations often use B2B marketplaces for sourcing 
supplies. Organizations must match their overall supply 
chain strategy to their overall competitive strategy to 
reap the greatest benefits. SCM systems consist of 
supply chain planning, supply chain execution, and 
supply chain visibility and analytics components. 
Supply chain planning involves the development of 
various resource plans to support the efficient and 
effective production of goods and services. Supply 
chain execution involves the management of product 
flows, information flows, and financial flows. Supply 
chain visibility and analytics help in foreseeing the 
impacts of external events and monitoring the 
performance of the supply chain.
2.	 Describe customer relationship management systems 
and how they help to improve the activities involved in 
promoting and selling products to customers as well 
as providing customer service and nourishing long-
term relationships. CRM is a corporate-level strategy 
to create and maintain lasting relationships with 
customers by concentrating on downstream 
information flows, to attract potential customers, to 
create customer loyalty, and to portray a positive 
corporate image. To develop a successful CRM 
strategy, organizations must make changes to policies 
and business processes, customer service, employee 
training, and data utilization. A CRM system consists 
of operational CRM, analytical CRM, and 
collaborative CRM. Operational CRM focuses on 
activities that deal directly with customers. Analytical 
CRM focuses on activities that aid managers in 
analyzing the sales and marketing functions as well as 
monitoring ongoing conversations in social media. 
Finally, collaborative CRM provides effective 
communication capabilities within the organization and 
externally with customers.
Key Terms
analytical CRM  359
bullwhip effect  341
business-to-business marketplace  338
collaborative CRM  361
customer engagement center  357
customer portal  338
customer relationship management 
(CRM) system  352
customer service and support  356
Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI)  336
enterprise marketing management  358
Extensible Business Reporting 
Language (XBRL)  348
Extensible Markup  
Language (XML)  347
financial flow  348
first-call resolution  351
information flow  347
just-in-time (JIT)  341
operational CRM  354
portal  337
product flow  346
reverse logistics  346
sales force automation (SFA)  355
social CRM  360
social media monitoring  360
supplier portal  338
supply chain  336
supply chain analytics  349
supply chain effectiveness  344
supply chain efficiency  344
supply chain execution  346
supply chain management  
(SCM) system  342
supply chain planning  345
supply chain visibility  349
supply network  336
vendor-managed inventory  
(VMI)  341
vertical market  338
XML tag  347
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    365
Review Questions
	 8-1. 	Describe supply chains and explain why sup-
ply network may be a more accurate term.
	 8-2. 	Contrast B2B portals with B2B marketplaces.
	 8-3. 	What are two process innovations enabled 
by effective collaboration within supply 
networks?
	 8-4. 	How does supply chain planning differ from 
supply chain execution?
	 8-5. 	How does supply chain visibility help an 
organization react to external events?
MyLab MIS
	 8-6. 	Contrast supply chain effectiveness and sup-
ply chain efficiency.
	 8-7. 	What is XML, and what is its role in SCM?
	 8-8. 	What is RFID’s role in SCM?
	 8-9. 	How does CRM differ from SCM?
	 8-10. 	What is a CRM system, and what are its pri-
mary components?
	 8-11. 	Contrast operational and analytical CRM.
	 8-12. 	How does analytical CRM help in monitoring 
social conversations?
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 8-13. 	Which of the following is commonly used to refer to 
the producers of supplies that a company uses?
A.	procurement
B.	sales force
C.	supply network
D.	customers
	 8-14. 	Under a VMI model, ______________.
A.	a manufacturer has to signal restocking quantities to 
the supplier
B.	the suppliers to a manufacturer manage the manu-
facturer’s inventory levels based on negotiated ser-
vice levels
C.	the vendor has access only to stock levels
D.	stockout situations are more likely to occur
	 8-15. 	The bullwhip effect refers to ______________.
A.	contract penalties resulting from a supplier’s inabil-
ity to deliver raw materials on time
B.	small forecasting errors at the end of the supply 
chain causing massive forecasting errors farther up 
the supply chain
C.	pressure to use a specific SCM system by a com-
pany in a supply chain
D.	rising stock values due to effective SCM practices
	 8-16. 	Which type of flow does supply chain execution not 
focus on?
A.	procurement flow
B.	product flow
C.	information flow
D.	financial flow
	 8-17. 	During supply chain planning, which four plans are 
created?
A.	demand forecast, logistics plan, production plan, 
supplier plan
B.	needs analysis, logistics plan, production plan, 
sourcing plan
C.	needs analysis, transportation plan, outsourcing 
plan, partnership plan
D.	demand forecast, transportation plan, production 
plan, sourcing plan
	 8-18. 	A comprehensive CRM system includes all but which 
of the following components?
A.	operational CRM
B.	analytical CRM
C.	cooperative CRM
D.	collaborative CRM
	 8-19. 	SFA is most closely associated with what?
A.	operational CRM
B.	analytical CRM
C.	cooperative CRM
D.	collaborative CRM
	 8-20. 	All the following are channels used for promotional 
campaigns except ______________.
A.	Twitter
B.	telephone
C.	direct mail
D.	all of the above are used
	 8-21. 	A metric for being able to quickly resolve customers’ 
issues is called ______________.
A.	customer satisfaction and complaint management
B.	customer communication optimization
C.	virtual-hold technology
D.	first-call resolution
	 8-22. 	Categorizing customers based on statistical analysis of 
past behavior is ______________.
A.	illegal
B.	a sometimes ethically questionable business 
practice
C.	ethical and a common business practice
D.	technically impossible
Answers are on page 367.

366    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
Problems and Exercises
	 8-23. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 JIT
ii.	 Supply chain efficiency
iii.	 Supply chain
iv.	 Supply chain visibility
v.	 CRM systems
vi.	 Customer engagement center
vii.	 SCM systems
viii.	 VMI
ix.	 Vertical market
x.	 First-call resolution
a.	 The ability not only to track products as they move 
through the supply chain but also to foresee exter-
nal events
b.	 A market composed of firms within a specific in-
dustry sector
c.	 Addressing the customers’ issues during the first 
call
d.	 The extent to which a company’s supply chain is 
focusing on minimizing procurement, production, 
and transportation costs
e.	 An SCM innovation that optimizes ordering quanti-
ties such that parts or raw materials arrive just when 
they are needed for production
f.	 Applications that help to create and maintain last-
ing relationships with customers by concentrating 
on the downstream information flows
g.	 Commonly used to refer to the collection of pro-
ducers of supplies that a company uses
h.	 A business model in which the suppliers to a manu-
facturer (or retailer) manage the manufacturer’s 
(or retailer’s) inventory levels based on negotiated 
service levels
i.	 A part of operational CRM that provides a central 
point of contact for an organization’s customers
j.	 Applications that help to improve interorganiza-
tional business processes to accelerate product de-
velopment and innovation and to reduce costs
	 8-24. 	Compare and contrast the supply chains of two retail-
ers you are familiar with. What are the similarities and 
differences? Which supply chain seems to be more 
efficient or effective? Why?
	 8-25. 	Visit local supermarkets and see which ones are using 
VMI. Does this approach appear to work, or do you 
frequently see stockouts?
	 8-26. 	Visit Patagonia’s “Footprint Chronicles” (http://www 
.patagonia.com/us/footprint). How does Patagonia try 
to portray a green image? What information is missing 
from the site? Why? 
	 8-27. 	Analyze the supplier portals of two companies. What 
types of relationships are the companies looking for? 
From the portals, what can you learn about the com-
panies’ approaches to and priorities in managing their 
supply chains?
	 8-28. 	How have news reports about factory fires and collaps-
ing textile factories influenced your buying behavior? 
How can companies demonstrate corporate social 
responsibility in managing their supply chains?
	 8-29. 	Compare and contrast two B2B marketplaces. What 
industries do the marketplaces focus on? How do the 
marketplaces generate revenues?
	 8-30. 	Assume you are a sales manager. What sales performance 
measures would you want the CRM system to provide 
you in order to better manage your sales force? For each 
measure, describe how you would use it and at what 
interval you would need to update this information.
	 8-31. 	Assume you are a customer service representative for a 
manufacturer of consumer electronics. What customer 
information would the CRM system need to supply to 
provide the best possible customer service? For each 
piece of information, describe how it could be obtained.
	 8-32. 	When you last contacted a company with a product or 
service request, which contact options did you have? 
Which option did you choose, and why?
	 8-33. 	Provide an example of an IVR system you have inter-
acted with. How effective was the system in helping 
you find the desired information? For what types of 
requests may an IVR system be best suited?
	 8-34. 	Search for a company’s Twitter feed. Does the com-
pany use Twitter mainly for one-directional or bi-
directional conversations with its followers? Is the 
company’s use of Twitter effective? Why or why not?
	 8-35. 	Visit the website of your favorite fashion brand. How 
does the company try to communicate and connect via 
social media? Does it seem like the company’s social 
media strategy is coherent across different channels? 
Why or why not?
	 8-36. 	Search on YouTube for your favorite company’s channel. 
How does this company present itself? What is the pri-
mary content displayed on YouTube? Is the use of this 
medium effective? Why or why not?

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    367
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application: Tracking  
Website Visits at Campus Travel
	 8-37. 	Do you feel that your privacy is threatened when you 
see targeted ads appear on random Web pages? Why 
or why not? What if the ads were related to potentially 
objectionable content you may have viewed online?
Database Application: Managing Customer Rela-
tions at Campus Travel
	 8-38. 	Not all frequent fliers accumulate large amounts of 
miles. There are many who never travel for years but 
have frequent-flier accounts. As manager of sales and 
Application Exercises
marketing, you want to find out how to target these 
individuals with promotions and special offers. To 
accomplish this task, you will need to create the fol-
lowing reports:
■
■A report displaying all frequent fliers, sorted by dis-
tance traveled
■
■A report displaying all frequent fliers, sorted by the 
total amount spent on air travel
	
	 In the file InfrequentFliers.mdb, you will find travel 
data on the members of a frequent-flier program for 
the previous year. Professionally format all reports, 
including headers, footers, dates, and so on. (Hint: Use 
the report wizard to create the reports; use queries to 
sum up the fares and distances for each traveler before 
creating the respective reports.)
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats: 3D Printing
3D printing, sometimes called additive manufacturing (AM), 
refers to innovative technology that utilizes processes to form (or 
manufacture) three-dimensional objects, models, and parts under 
precise control and a set of detailed instructions. It works by 
forming successive layers that add up to a complete object. This 
implies, in principle, that a machine can produce (or manufac-
ture) objects of any shape, with substantial cost reduction, more 
delicate design, less shipping, and lower inventories.  
While demand rises for certain goods and products, this 
revolutionary technology will allow companies to create their 
own products quicker and in certain locations even minimize 
complications in supply chain management and global logis-
tics. With opportunities for reduced costs and improved prod-
uct quality, increased warehouse efficiency, and the ability to 
meet customer-specific demands, the supply chain will be the 
most impacted segment of the manufacturing industry if 3D 
printing takes off. As a result, experts from the consulting firm 
Canalys expect that the global market for 3D printing technol-
ogy and its products and services will grow to more than $20 
billion by 2019 from near $2.5 billion in 2013. 
The promise of 3D printing is to make manufacturing easy 
and affordable and to ease global logistics, transportation, and 
supply chain procedures. Research is looking at 3D printing to 
economically scale up manufacturing, with an estimated 
impact close to $550 billion a year, according to the McKinsey 
Global Institute. Moreover, some experts think that 3D printing 
will be the next industrial revolution, and it may change manu-
facturing just as the web changed commerce and retailing 
worldwide. Although 3D printing is still not fully adopted and 
faces some challenges and concerns—such as intellectual 
property rights infringement—its market is growing fast. 
According to Wohlers Associates, a consulting firm specializ-
ing in 3D printing reports, annual industry growth of 20 percent 
to 30 percent is reasonably expected as major manufacturers 
gradually adopt the technology.
Questions and Exercises
	 8-39. 	Search the web for products that can be customized 
and manufactured by 3D printing.
	 8-40. 	As a team, discuss the effect on supply chain manage-
ment as manufacturers adopt 3D printing. What are the 
main advantages and disadvantages?
	 8-41. 	As a team, discuss the future of 3D printing and 
­possible trends. What changes have to be made to 
global logistics? What issues and opportunities do  
you see arising? 
	 8-42. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, predict 3D 
printing trends and create a graph or figure to effec-
tively visualize the likely trend.
Based on:
Chuck Intrieri. (2014). Cerasis.com. Retrieved February 1, 2017, from http://
cerasis.com/2014/02/10/3d-printing-supply-chain/.
Christy Pettey. (2016). Gartner.com. Retrieved February 1, 2017, from http:// 
www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/what-3d-printing-means-for-your- 
supply-chain/.
Anonymous. (n.d). Usanfranonline.com. Retrieved February 10, 2017, from 
https://www.usanfranonline.com/resources/supply-chain-management/ 
3d-printing-and-its-impact-on-the-supply-chain/.
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 8-13.	 C, p. 336
	 8-14.	 B, p. 341
	 8-15.	 B, p. 341
	 8-16.	 A, p. 346
	 8-17.	 D, p. 345
	 8-18.	 C, p. 354
	 8-19.	 A, p. 354
	 8-20.	 D, p. 359
	 8-21.	 D, p. 351
	 8-22.	 B, p. 363

368    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
Information systems have assisted in the cre-
ation of global supply networks that allow 
for the worldwide procurement of raw mate-
rials and components needed as inputs into 
production processes. For the purpose of 
achieving an optimal balance between qual-
ity and costs, manufacturers often have had 
to rely on complicated and fragile supply 
chains. Imagine that you are the manufac-
turer of a trendy new gadget that is gaining 
popularity worldwide. Also imagine that a 
tsunami just rolled over the factory of a key 
manufacturer of a certain critical component 
in your device. At best, you may encounter 
long shipment delays and lost sales; at worst, 
your opportunity in the marketplace fades 
and you go out of business. Thus, shielding 
the delicate supply chain from negative 
impacts arising from external events is a tre-
mendous challenge for many organizations, 
especially in a reality where disruptions can 
rarely be forecast and the results can be 
devastating.
There are a variety of events that can put 
a supply chain in havoc. In addition to 
extreme weather events, other events such as 
cargo crime and terrorism can lead to disrup-
tions. For instance, in 2015, the British Stan-
dards Institute (BSI) estimated that global 
supply chains incurred a combined US$56 
billion in extra costs from these and other 
factors.
While it’s not something most people 
think about, cargo crime is a significant fac-
tor influencing the efficiency and effective-
ness of a global supply chain. The BSI 
estimated that US$23 billion were lost glob-
ally due to cargo crime in 2015, reporting a 
30 percent increase in truck theft in 
South Africa alone. Much of this theft was 
ruthless, “with thieves using high levels of 
violence and switching from targeting only 
high-value goods to also targeting low-value 
items.” In China, there were alarming 
increases in aggressive robbery from trucks 
traveling along major highways. In addition 
to increased violence, there was more sophis-
tication in many of the attacks. In India, for 
example, criminal gangs found ways to 
remove the contents of large shipping con-
tainers without breaking customs seals in 
order to avoid detection.
Terrorism is also increasingly wreaking 
havoc on supply chains. In particular, in 
2015, Europe suffered severe supply chain 
disruptions due to both terror attacks in 
France and Belgium and the influx of 
migrants into Europe to avoid the fighting in 
Syria and other parts of the Middle East. In 
the European Union, the so-called Schengen 
Agreement allows European citizens to cross 
borders without checks and greatly facili-
tates the movement of goods across Europe. 
After the terrorist attacks of 2015, many 
countries reestablished border controls, at 
least temporarily. It was estimated that per-
manently reestablishing controls in Germany 
alone would cost its economy US$25 
billion.
Often highlighted for disrupting supply 
chains, natural disasters and extreme weather 
also were significant disrupters, resulting in 
more than US$33 billion in losses. In 2015, 
natural disasters disrupting supply chains 
included forest fires in Indonesia, earth-
quakes in Nepal, typhoons in China and the 
Philippines, and floods in the United States 
and India.
Other incidents are even more unex-
pected, such as the series of explosions in 
Tianjin (China) that killed more than 170 
people and injured hundreds of others was 
highly disruptive. The blasts began on 
August 12, 2015, at the busy Port of Tianjin, 
the largest port in Northern China and the 
main maritime gateway to Beijing. Annu-
ally, this port handles more than 500 million 
tons of cargo and more than 13 million con-
tainers, making it the largest manmade port 
in mainland China and one of the largest in 
the world. The first blast was caused by an 
overheated container of dry nitrocellulose. 
The second was far larger and involved the 
detonation of about 800 tons of ammonium 
nitrate. The fires caused by the initial explo-
sions burned uncontrolled for days, causing 
many secondary explosions. Ultimately, the 
BSI report estimated the supply chain losses 
to be US$3.3 billion.
Lastly, social unrest in many developing 
countries led to additional supply chain 
losses. Factory strikes in China in 2015, for 
example, increased by nearly 60 percent over 
the prior year. Other threats that might play a 
role in future disruptions include infectious 
diseases such as the Zika virus and Ebola. 
Concerns with climate change and El Niño 
may also result in increased extreme weather 
events. Clearly, many factors can create sup-
ply chain havoc. And because it is impossi-
ble to elude disruptions within today’s global 
supply networks, organizations must care-
fully plan for disasters because they simply 
cannot be avoided.
Questions
	 8-43. 	 What are various ways a supply chain can be disrupted?
	 8-44. 	 What can companies do to make sure they are less vulner-
able to supply chain disruptions?
	 8-45. 	 What do you see as the greatest event currently (as of read-
ing this chapter) disrupting supply chains? Why?
Based on:
Abuzobaa, S. (2016, March 23). BSI’s Global Supply Chain Intelligence report 
reveals 2015 top supply chain risks. PR Newswire. Retrieved on May 11, 2016, 
from http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/bsis-global-supply-chain-
intelligence-report-reveals-2015-top-supply-chain-risks-300240089.html
BSI. (2016). European migrant crisis: Impacts on the supply chain. The British Stan-
dards Institution. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://bsi-supplychainsolutions 
.com/en-US/resources/special-reports/european-migrant-crisis
BSI. (2015). 2015 SCREEN global intelligence report. The British Standards 
Institution. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://bsi-supplychainsolutions.com/
LocalFiles/US/reports/bsi-2015-screen-global-intelligence-report.pdf
Van Marle, G. (2016, March 24). Supply chain disruption cost $56 billion last 
year … and there’s more risk to come. SDC Executive. Retrieved May 11, 
2016, from http://www.sdcexec.com/news/12186470/supply-chain-disruption-
cost-56-billion-last-year-and-theres-more-risk-to-come
CASE 1
Supply Chain Havoc

 CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management    369
In the delivery business, the industry is 
aggressively working to improve the effi-
ciency of the “last mile,” which reflects the 
delivery of a product to the end consumer. 
Such delivery historically has been per-
formed by a postal service or package deliv-
ery company like UPS, FedEx, or DHL. 
With the growth of e-commerce, there has 
been a huge reduction in traditional shopping 
where customers go to a physical store, pur-
chase products, and then carry those prod-
ucts home. Likewise, with the rapid growth 
of e-commerce, the last mile of delivery has 
grown in importance. Delivering a 5-pound 
package for same-day delivery within the 
same city using a traditional delivery 
method, costs anywhere from US$5 to 
US$13. Amazon Prime Now is about US$8 
for orders under US$35 (free for those over 
that amount). If such costs are added onto a 
lower-priced product, same-day delivery 
becomes uneconomical for many customers. 
Thus, creating ways to deliver products fast 
and cheaply to the end consumers can pro-
vide an incredible competitive advantage.
With such high stakes in mind, Amazon 
.com’s CEO Jeff Bezos announced plans for 
Amazon Prime Air (APA) in late 2013. 
APA’s plan is to use small, unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs, commonly known as 
drones) to transport packages to customers. 
The goal is to deliver packages in under 30 
minutes for locations within 10 miles of a 
warehouse. Not all items will be suitable for 
APA delivery, however, as they must be 
small enough to fit within the cargo box of 
the UAV and cannot exceed a weight of 5 
pounds (which applies to 86 percent of Ama-
zon’s packages, according to official docu-
ments). In early 2016, the biggest hurdle for 
getting APA off the ground was not a techni-
cal problem but regulations concerning the 
use of UAVs for commercial delivery. While 
the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) granted Amazon permission to begin 
testing prototypes of the delivery vehicle, the 
approval for making widespread deliveries 
has not yet been finalized. During testing, 
APA’s flights were limited to a maximum 
height of 400 feet and a speed of 100 mph. 
The UAV planned for use by Amazon is 55 
pounds in weight and flies at speeds up to 55 
mph. A report by ARK Invest estimates that 
APA would cost Amazon about 88 cents per 
delivery. Thus, if Amazon offered 30-minute 
delivery for $1, it would significantly under-
cut other options for same-day delivery, fur-
ther strengthening its online dominance; 
some experts estimate that even at those 
prices, Amazon would still be able to make a 
comfortable 50 percent return on its invest-
ment in the drone infrastructure. Needless to 
say, given the importance of solving the last 
mile problem, many other companies are 
exploring UAVs for product delivery, 
including Google, USPS, DHL, and many 
others as well as many governments around 
the world.
In addition to UAV delivery, there is tre-
mendous innovation occurring around 
ground-based autonomous delivery. In Feb-
ruary 2016, for example, Google was granted 
a U.S. patent for an autonomous delivery 
truck. Google plans to leverage its driverless 
vehicle technology, delivering anything from 
online purchases to your Saturday night 
pizza. Google emphasized the importance of 
the last mile problem in its patent applica-
tion, stating that the “two largest delivery 
services in the US operate over 100,000 last 
mile vehicles—each of which requires a 
human operator.” Google is not the only one 
thinking of autonomous delivery. In early 
2016, Domino’s built and tested an autono-
mous pizza delivery robot in Australia. 
When the delivery arrives at a customer’s 
door, the customer needs to enter a mobile 
code to open the vehicle’s insulated storage 
area, which can keep items both hot or cold. 
While e-commerce has transformed how 
most of us shop for goods and services, 
UAVs and autonomous delivery will further 
transform the digital world.
Questions
	 8-46. 	 What is meant by the last mile, and why would retailers and 
delivery services want UAV and driverless vehicle delivery?
	 8-47. 	 What are some of the drawbacks and challenges to overcome 
to make UAV and driverless vehicle delivery a reality?
	 8-48. 	 If you were the chief executive officer at Amazon.com, 
would you be comfortable using UAV or driverless vehicle 
delivery? What are some of the potential risks of using either 
of these approaches? Explain.
Based on:
Amazon Prime Air. (2016, February 27). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Amazon_Prime_Air&oldid=707245085
Autonomous logistics. (2016, March 28). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Autonomous_logistics&oldid=712257224
Brian, M. (2016, March 18). Domino’s has built an autonomous pizza deliv-
ery robot. Engadget. Retrieved May 10, 2016, from http://www.engadget 
.com/2016/03/18/dominos-autonomous-pizza-delivery-vehicle
Delivery drone. (2016, May 1). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Delivery_drone&oldid=718107716
Hall-Geisler, K. (2016, February 18). Google gets a patent for an autonomous 
delivery truck. Popular Science. Retrieved May 9, 2016, from http://www.popsci 
.com/google-gets-patent-for-an-autonomous-delivery-truck
Last mile (transportation). (2016, May 5). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved May 9, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Last_mile_(transportation)&oldid=718723793
Wang, D. (n.d.). The economics of drone delivery. Flexport. Retrieved on 
May 9, 2016, from https://www.flexport.com/blog/drone-delivery-economics
CASE 2 
Efficiently Delivering Products Over the “Last Mile”
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 8-49. 	 Explain how effectively managing the supply chain can help an organization be a responsible social citizen.
	 8-50. 	 Describe the enterprise-wide changes necessary for realizing a successful CRM strategy.

370    CHAPTER 8  •  Strengthening Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship Management 
References
Aalto University. (2013, August 13). Customer satisfaction increases 
the value and interest of company shares for institutional inves-
tors. ScienceDaily. Retrieved May 19, 2016, from https://www 
.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/08/130829093034.htm
Anonymous. (2016). About vendor managed inventory. VendorMan-
agedInventory.com. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://www 
.vendormanagedinventory.com/index.php.
Banker, S. (2016, April 6). A fresh look at supply chain visibility. 
Forbes. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/
sites/stevebanker/2016/04/07/a-fresh-look-at-supply-chain-visibility
Cooperstein, D. (2013, October 10). Competitive strategy in the age 
of the customer. Forrester. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://
solutions.forrester.com/Global/FileLib/Reports/Competitive_
Strategy_In_The_Age_Of_The_Customer.pdf
Capgemini. (2016). Top 10 trends in payments in 2016. Capgemini. 
Retrieved May 11, 2016, from https://www.capgemini.com/
resource-file-access/resource/pdf/payments_trends_2016.pdf
Chopra, S., & Meindl, P. (2016). Supply chain management: Strat-
egy, planning, and operation (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Coen, B. (2016, January 18). Using social media for customer rela-
tionship management. Social Media Today. Retrieved May 11, 
2016, from http://www.socialmediatoday.com/social-business/
using-social-media-customer-relationship-management
Dean, J. (2007, August 11). The forbidden city of Terry Gou. Wall 
Street Journal. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://www.wsj 
.com/articles/SB118677584137994489
E2Open. (2015). Vendor managed inventory: A win-win 
proposition. E2Open. Retrieved may 11, 2016, from 
http://www.e2open.com/assets/pdf/papers-and-reports/
VMI_Win_Win_Proposition_WP.pdf
G2 Crowd. (2015, December 17). The best social media monitor-
ing software according to G2 crowd winter 2016 rankings. G2 
Crowd. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from https://www.g2crowd.com/
press-release/best-social-media-monitoring-software-winter-2016
Gartner. (2014, February 12). Gartner says CRM will be at the heart 
of digital initiatives for years to come. Gartner. Retrieved May 
11, 2016, from http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2665215
Goldenberg, B. (2015). The definitive guide to social CRM. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Harrison, A., & Van Hoek, R. (2011). Logistics management and 
strategy: Competing through the supply chain (4th ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Holmes, R. (2012, October 25). NASA-style mission control centers 
for social media are taking off. Fortune. Retrieved May 11, 2016, 
from http://fortune.com/2012/10/25/nasa-style-mission-control-
centers-for-social-media-are-taking-off
Keuky, R., & Clarke, S. (2011). Socializing CRM: Merits and 
approaches to deploying social CRM solutions. Capgemini. 
Retrieved May 11, 2016, from http://www.capgemini.com/
discover/pdf/dilemma_4/Socializing%20CRM.pdf
Macaulay, J., Buckalew, L., & Chung, G. (2015). Internet of Things 
in logistics. DHL. Retrieved on May 9, 2016, from http://www 
.dhl.com/en/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trend_research/ 
internet_of_things.html
Reuters (2016, April 17). Toyota, other major Japanese 
firms hit by quake damage, supply disruptions. Fortune. 
Retrieved May 4, 2016, from http://fortune.com/2016/04/17/
toyota-earthquake-disruptions
Stangler, C. (2015, October 22). Apple supplier factory in  
Shanghai rife with labor abuses: Report. International Business 
Times. Retrieved May 5, 2016, from http://www.ibtimes 
.com/apple-supplier-factory-shanghai-rife-labor-abuses-
report-2152722
Tilley, A. (2016, April 2). Inside the iPhone SE reveals surprising 
developments in Apple’s supply chain. Forbes. Retrieved May 11, 
2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/aarontilley/2016/04/02/
inside-the-iphone-se-reveals-surprising-developments-in-apples-
supply-chain
U.S. Census Bureau. (2016, June 7). E-stats 2014. Retrieved July 25, 
2016, from https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/
publications/2016/econ/e14-estats.pdf
Waller, M. A., & Esper, T. L. (2014). The definitive guide to inven-
tory management: Principles and strategies for the efficient flow 
of inventory across the supply chain. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson FT Press.

This page intentionally left blank

372
372
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD:
The Maker Movement
T
o build and deliver a product used to require a 
substantial support infrastructure. Physical prod-
ucts required machine tools, injection molding 
machines, and substantial space for manufacturing, 
inventory, and fulfillment. The digital components 
required large teams of developers with highly special-
ized skills. Recent innovations have led to a dramatic 
shift in these requirements. Today, individuals and small 
groups can participate in the full cycle of product inno-
vation much more readily. This trend toward an increase 
in do-it-yourself (DIY) and do-it-with-others (DIWO) is 
often referred to as the “maker movement” and partici-
pants as “makers.” Key technologies that have enabled 
the maker movement are inexpensive and small com-
puting devices, rapid prototyping machinery, and 
streamlined software development platforms.
Small, inexpensive computing devices like the Rasp-
berry Pi—a device costing as little as $5 that can per-
form all the functions of a full-scale computer—have 
made processing power more available and flexible. The 
low cost allows more people access—for example, 
schools can now afford to supply their students with 
their own computers. The small size and flexibility allow 
for many more possible uses—the Raspberry Pi Zero is 
about the size of a credit card and can be integrated 
into everything from school projects to Internet of 
Things (IoT) devices to designer clothing. Low-cost rapid 
Developing and 
Acquiring Information  
Systems
9
As you have read throughout this book and have experi-
enced in your own life, information systems and technolo-
gies are of many different types, including high-speed web 
servers to rapidly process customer requests, business 
intelligence systems to aid managerial decision making, 
and customer relationship management systems to pro-
vide improved customer service. Given this variety, when 
we refer to “systems” in this chapter, we are talking about 
a broad range of technologies, including hardware, soft-
ware, and services. Just as there are different types of sys-
tems, there are different approaches for developing and 
acquiring them. If you are a business student majoring in 
areas such as marketing, finance, accounting, or manage-
ment, you might be wondering why we have a discussion 
about developing and acquiring information systems. The 
answer is simple: No matter what area of an organization 
you are in, you will be involved in systems development or 
technology acquisition processes. In fact, research indi-
cates that spending on systems in many organizations is 
controlled by the specific business functions rather than by 
the information systems (IS) department. What this means 
is that even if your career interests are in something other 
than information systems, it is very likely that you will be 
involved in the development and acquisition of systems, 
technologies, or services. Understanding these processes is 
important to your future success.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

373
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	How can makers formulate and present the business 
case for selecting various hardware and software 
platforms?
2.	How can makers ensure that they successfully com-
plete their development projects?
3.	How can makers decide which components to create 
themselves and which to obtain externally?
Based on:
3DPrinting. (n.d.). What is 3D printing? 3DPrinting.com. Retrieved May 
20, 2016, from http://3dprinting.com/what-is-3d-printing
Maker movement. (n.d.). Techopedia. Retrieved May 20, 2016, from 
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/28408/maker-movement
Raspberrypi. (n.d.). Raspberrypi.org. Retrieved May 20, 2016, from 
https://www.raspberrypi.org.
RepRap. (n.d.). Welcome to RepRap.org. RepRap. Retrieved May 20, 
2016, from http://reprap.org
prototyping machines have given makers the ability to 
bring their imagination to life. An object that may have 
previously required expensive custom machine tools to 
manufacture can be printed on a relatively affordable 
desktop 3D printer, which uses techniques like fused 
deposition modeling to directly create parts from com-
puterized designs. 3D printers can even print other 
3D printers!
The software side has seen a similar shift. The Rasp-
berry Pi has a large community devoted to making cod-
ing easier and more accessible. Online retailer SparkFun 
designs various open source microcontroller boards and 
sensors that provide the basis for developing innovative 
software and products that utilize data from embedded 
sensors and other microelectronics. The use of open 
source hard- and software and standard interfaces 
makes it easy for anyone to learn and develop code to 
support their own devices.
Maker spaces are physical locations designed to facili-
tate such innovation. In addition to making resources 
such as 3D printers available to individuals and teams, 
maker spaces provide access to other innovators and 
makers. Someone with a great IoT idea and a hardware 
design but without coding skills can get connected with 
someone to fill in the gaps. These collaborative environ-
ments are enabling innovation on a scale never seen 
before, such that today, anyone can be a software and 
hardware engineer.
FIGURE 9.1
3D printing is an enabler of the maker movement.
Source: Alexei Sysoev/Fotolia.
1.	 Describe how to formulate and present the business case for technology 
investments.
2.	 Describe the systems development life cycle and its various phases.
3.	 Explain how organizations acquire systems via external acquisition and outsourcing.

374    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
Making the Business Case
Before people are willing to spend money to acquire or develop a new system or spend more 
money on an existing one, they want to be convinced that this will be a good investment. Making 
the business case refers to the process of identifying, quantifying, and presenting the value pro-
vided by a system.
Business Case Objectives
What does making the business case mean? Think for a moment about what defense lawyers do 
in court trials. They carefully build a strong, integrated set of arguments and evidence to prove 
that their clients are innocent to those who will pass judgment on their clients. In much the same 
way, a manager has to build a strong, integrated set of arguments and evidence to prove that an 
information system (or any type of investment) is adding value to the organization or its constit-
uents. This is, in business lingo, “making the business case” for a system.
As a business professional, you will be called on to make the business case for systems and 
other capital investments, you will have to make the case for a new system or application you 
may need for your work to improve certain business processes, or you will be involved in evalu-
ating the business case for a proposed system. Thus, as a finance, accounting, marketing, or 
management professional, you are likely to be involved in these processes and will therefore 
need to know how to effectively make or evaluate the business case for a system (or other capital 
expenditures) and need to understand the relevant organizational issues involved. It will be in the 
organization’s best interest—and in your own—to ferret out systems that are not adding value. 
In these cases, you will need to either improve the systems or replace them. Traditionally, busi-
ness units turned to IS departments for new systems or applications. Today, business units often 
directly purchase applications from outside vendors and expect these applications to function in 
the infrastructure provided by the IS departments. As more and more applications are purchased 
from external vendors, organizations have to make sure to go through a proper process in select-
ing the right applications.
Making the business case is as important for proposed systems as it is for the continued 
investment in an existing system. For a proposed system, the case will be used to determine 
whether the new system is a “go” or a “no-go.” For an existing system, the case will be used to 
determine whether the company will continue to fund the system. Whether a new system or an 
existing one is being considered, your goal is to make sure that the investment adds value, that it 
helps the firm achieve its strategy and competitive advantage over its rivals, and that money is 
being spent wisely.
The Productivity Paradox
Unfortunately, while it is easy to quantify the costs associated with developing an information 
system, it is often difficult to quantify tangible productivity gains from its use. Over the past sev-
eral years, the press has given a lot of attention to the impact of IS investments on worker produc-
tivity. In many cases, IS expenditures, salaries, and the number of people on the IS staff have all 
been rising, but results from these investments have often been disappointing. For instance, the 
information and technology research firm Gartner (2016) reports that worldwide spending on 
systems and technologies will surpass US$3.6 trillion in 2016. American and Canadian compa-
nies are spending, on average, about 4 percent of company revenues on system-related invest-
ments. As a result, justifying the costs for IS investments has been a hot topic among senior 
managers at many firms. In particular, “white-collar” productivity, especially in the service sector, 
has not increased at the rate one might expect, given the trillions of dollars spent.
Why has it been difficult to show that these vast expenditures on technologies have led to 
productivity gains? Have information systems somehow failed us, promising increases in perfor-
mance and productivity and then failing to deliver on that promise? Determining the answer is 
not easy. Information systems may have increased productivity, but other forces may have simul-
taneously worked to reduce it, the end results being difficult to identify. Factors such as govern-
ment regulations, more complex tax codes, stricter financial reporting requirements (such as the 
Sarbanes–Oxley Act; see Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”), and more complex 
products can all have major impacts on a firm’s productivity.
It is also true that information systems introduced with the best intentions may have had 
unintended consequences. A paramount example is giving employees access to e-mail and the 


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     375
Internet—now employees are spending excessive amounts of time surfing the web to check 
sports scores on ESPN.com, read volumes of electronic junk mail received from Internet mar-
keting companies or from personal friends, post status updates on social networking sites, or use 
company PCs to download and play software games (Figure 9.2). Recently, it was reported that 
89 percent of surveyed employees admitted “wasting time” at work; most wasted an hour or less, 
but 4 percent admitted wasting more than half the workday on non-work-related activities 
including doing personal work as well as visiting social networking sites such as Facebook and 
Twitter. The cost for this time wasting is billions of dollars in lost productivity every year. In 
such situations, information systems can result in less efficient and less effective communication 
among employees and less productive uses of employee time than before the systems were 
implemented. Nevertheless, sound technology investments should increase organizational pro-
ductivity. If this is so, why have organizations not been able to show larger productivity gains? A 
number of reasons have been given for the apparent productivity paradox of technology invest-
ments (Figure 9.3). The four most prominent factors are examined next.
MEASUREMENT PROBLEMS.  In many cases, the benefits of information systems are difficult 
to pinpoint because firms may be measuring the wrong things. Often, the biggest increases 
in productivity result from increased effectiveness (i.e., the extent to which goals or tasks are 
Unintended
Consequences
of Technology
Investments
Junk and Personal E-Mailing
Game Playing
Personal Surﬁng
and Shopping
FIGURE 9.2
Unintended consequences can 
limit the productivity gains from 
IS investments.
Redistribution
Measurement
Mismanagement
Time Lags
Productivity
Paradox
FIGURE 9.3
Factors leading to the IS 
productivity paradox.

376    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
accomplished well). Unfortunately, many business metrics focus on efficiency (i.e., the extent to 
which goals are accomplished faster, at lower cost, or with relatively little time and effort).
A good example of measurement problems associated with a technology investment is the 
use of online banking. How much has online banking contributed to banking productivity? Tra-
ditional statistics might look at the adoption rate of the service and associated reductions in 
branch-based services and locations. While informative, such statistics may not work well for 
evaluating online banking, at least at this point in time. For instance, some older customers may 
not want to bank online, so a reduction in the number of traditional branches could threaten a 
potentially large number of very good customers while at the same time inflating the percentage 
of online banking users (i.e., if the number of traditional banking customers leave the bank 
because of a reduction of branches, the adoption rate of online customers as a percentage will be 
increased). So, investing in online banking may be unimportant for an important segment of cus-
tomers while essential for others. Nevertheless, can you imagine a bank staying competitive 
without offering online services? Deploying technologies such as online banking has become a 
strategic necessity—something an organization must do in order to survive (see Chapter 2, 
“Gaining Competitive Advantage Through Information Systems”). The value of necessary 
investments is often difficult to quantify.
TIME LAGS.  A second explanation for why productivity is sometimes difficult to demonstrate 
for some technology investments is that there may be significant time lags between a company 
making an investment and observable impacts on the bottom line. Let us return to our online 
banking example. In some markets, it may take years from the first implementation of this new 
system before the magnitude of benefits may be felt by the organization.
REDISTRIBUTION.  A third possible explanation for why IS productivity figures are not always 
easy to define is that a new type of system may be beneficial for individual firms but not for 
a particular industry or the economy as a whole. Particularly in competitive situations, new 
innovations may be used to redistribute the pieces of the pie rather than making the whole 
pie bigger. The result for the industry or economy as a whole is a wash—that is, the same 
number of products are being sold, and the same number of dollars are being spread across 
all the firms.
MISMANAGEMENT.  A fourth explanation is that the new system has not been implemented and 
managed well. Some believe that people often simply build bad systems, implement them poorly, 
and rely on technology fixes when the organization has problems that require a joint technology/
process solution. Rather than increasing outputs or profits, IS investments might merely be a 
temporary bandage and may serve to mask or even increase organizational inefficiency. Also, 
as we mentioned in Chapter 2, an information system can be only as effective as the business 
model that it serves. Bad business models can’t be overcome by good information systems.
If it is so difficult to quantify the benefits of information systems for individual firms and for 
entire industries, why do managers continue to invest in information systems? The answer is that 
competitive pressures force managers to invest in information systems whether they like it or not. 
Also, for many organizations, information systems are an important source of competitive advan-
tage. You might ask, then, so why waste time making the business case for a system? Why not just 
acquire or develop it? The answer: Given limited resources on the one hand and the vast number 
of potential systems and technologies that could be selected on the other hand, a strong business 
case aids the decision-making process and helps direct resources in more strategic ways.
Making a Successful Business Case
People make a variety of arguments in their business cases for information systems. When man-
agers make the business case for an information system, they typically base their arguments on 
faith, fear, and/or facts (Wheeler & Marakas, 1999). (Wheeler also adds a fourth F for fiction 
and notes that, unfortunately, managers sometimes base their arguments on pure fiction, which is 
not only bad for their careers but also not at all healthy for their firms.) Table 9.1 shows exam-
ples of these three types of arguments.
Do not assume that you must base your business case on facts only. It is entirely appropriate 
to base the business case on faith, fear, or facts (Figure 9.4). Indeed, the strongest and most con-
vincing business case will include a little of each type of argument. In the following sections, we 
talk about each of these types of arguments for the business case.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     377
BUSINESS CASE ARGUMENTS BASED ON FAITH.  In some situations, arguments based on faith (or 
fear) can be the most compelling and can drive the decision to invest in an information system 
despite the lack of any hard data on system costs or even in the face of some data that say that the 
dollar cost for the system will be high. Arguments based on faith often hold that an information 
system must be implemented in order to achieve the organization’s strategy effectively and to 
gain or sustain a competitive advantage over rivals.
For example, a firm has set as its strategy that it will be the dominant global force in its 
industry. As a result, this firm must adopt a variety of collaboration technologies in order to 
enable employees from different parts of the globe to work together effectively and efficiently. 
Similarly, a firm that has set as its strategy a broad scope—producing products and services 
across a wide range of consumer needs—may need to adopt some form of an enterprise resource 
planning system to better coordinate business activities across its diverse product lines.
Making the Business Case
for an Information System
Faith
Fear
Fact
FIGURE 9.4
A successful business case will be 
based on faith, fear, and facts.
TABLE 9.1   Three Types of Arguments Commonly Made in the Business Case for 
an Information System
Type of Argument
Description
Example
Faith
Arguments based on beliefs 
about organizational strat-
egy, competitive advantage, 
industry forces, customer 
perceptions, market share, and 
so on
“I know I don’t have good data to 
back this up, but I’m convinced that 
having this customer relationship 
management system will enable us to 
serve our customers significantly bet-
ter than our competitors do and, as a 
result, we’ll beat the competition… 
You just have to take it on faith.”
Fear
Arguments based on the notion 
that if the system is not imple-
mented, the firm will lose out 
to the competition or, worse, 
go out of business
“If we don’t implement this enter-
prise resource planning system, we’ll 
get killed by our competitors because 
they’re all implementing these kinds 
of systems … We either do this or 
we die.”
Facts
Arguments based on data, 
quantitative analysis, and/or 
indisputable factors
“This analysis shows that implement-
ing the inventory control system will 
help us reduce errors by 50 percent, 
reduce operating costs by 15 percent 
a year, and increase production by 
5 percent a year and will pay for 
itself within 18 months.”

378    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
In short, successful business case arguments based on faith should clearly describe the 
firm’s mission and objectives, the strategy for achieving them, and the types of information sys-
tems that are needed in order to enact the strategy. A word of caution is warranted here. In 
today’s business environment, cases based solely on strategic arguments, with no hard numbers 
demonstrating the value of the information system under consideration, are not likely to be 
funded.
BUSINESS CASE ARGUMENTS BASED ON FEAR.  There are several different factors to take into 
account when making a business case containing arguments based on fear. These include 
a number of factors involving competition and other characteristics of the industry in which 
the firm operates. For example, a mature industry, such as the automotive industry, may need 
systems simply to maintain the current pace of operations. While having the newest systems 
and technologies available may be nice, they may not be essential to stay in business. However, 
a company in a newer, expanding industry, such as the green technology industry, may find it 
more important to be on the leading edge of technology in order to compete effectively in the 
marketplace. Likewise, some industries are more highly regulated than others. In these cases, 
companies can use technology investments to better control processes and ensure compliance 
with appropriate regulations. The argument for the business case here would be something like 
“If we do not implement this system, we run the risk of being sued or, worse, being thrown in 
jail” (see Chapter 10).
Probably the most important industry factor that can affect technology investments is the 
nature of competition or rivalry in the industry. For example, when competition in an industry is 
high and use of the newest technologies is rampant, as it is in the mobile phone industry, 
GREEN IT
Project Natick—Microsoft’s Underwater Data Centers
A data center is a specially designed facility to house computer 
systems and associated components, such as telecommunica-
tion and data storage systems. Data centers are typically huge 
facilities, with countless data centers around the world being 
larger than 1 million square feet. In 2016, the Range Interna-
tional Information Hub in Langfang, China, was the largest 
data center in the world with a floor size of 6.3 million square 
feet. Because of their massive size, data centers are often 
located in remote locations.
Each data center can provide computer processing and 
storage for billions of individuals and millions of companies. 
Some of the biggest data centers are the backbone for the 
largest tech companies such as Facebook, Google, Microsoft, 
and Apple. These data centers, with millions of computers, 
produce a tremendous amount of heat and require an equal 
amount of cooling to keep machines and equipment from 
overheating. Many centers are located near fresh water, such 
as the Columbia River in the Pacific Northwest of the United 
States, where Google, Microsoft, and Facebook have massive 
facilities. These centers use millions of gallons of water from 
the river to keep the facility cool and the computers from over-
heating; massive pumps are used to cycle the water from the 
river into the facility and then to outdoor cooling ponds before 
moving the water back into the river.
Microsoft recently extended this idea of using natural ways to 
cool a data center by developing a standalone data center—called 
Project Natick—that can reside hundreds of feet underwater in 
the oceans around the world. Much of the world’s population 
lives in urban centers off the coasts of the world’s oceans. Placing 
the data centers underwater closer to most of the world’s users 
will speed up data access and virtually reduce cooling costs to 
zero. Because an ocean is so huge, there is literally no heat impact 
from the data center on the surrounding environment. However, 
building a self-contained data center that can resist the corrosive 
elements of the sea as well as operate for up to 5 years without 
maintenance remains the most challenging aspect of this project. 
Nevertheless, Project Natick may be the future of how data cen-
ters are constructed to both reduce the massive footprint of cur-
rent data centers and help to reduce the energy requirements and 
environmental impacts of the digital world.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016). The 5 largest data centers in the world. Forbes. 
Retrieved March 11, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/pictures/
gikh45hdm/range-international-info
Data center. (2016, March 1). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 12, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Data_center&oldid=707775130
Markoff, J. (2016, January 31). Microsoft plumbs ocean’s depths to 
test underwater data center. The New York Times. Retrieved March 
11, 2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/01/technology/
microsoft-plumbs-oceans-depths-to-test-underwater-data-center.html
Vincent, J. (2016, February 1). Microsoft is experiment with underwater 
data centers. The Verge. Retrieved March 11, 2016, from http://www 
.theverge.com/2016/2/1/10883866/microsoft-underwater-data-centers


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     379
strategic necessity, more than anything else, forces firms to adopt new systems. Given how tight 
profit margins are in this industry, Apple, Samsung, and other manufacturers must use inventory 
control systems, business intelligence systems, and a host of other systems that help them to be 
more effective and efficient. If they do not adopt these systems, they will likely go out of busi-
ness. As introduced in Chapter 2, a common way for assessing the level of competition within an 
industry is the five forces model (Porter, 1979). By assessing the various competitive forces, you 
can determine which specific technologies may be more or less useful. For instance, in a highly 
price-competitive market, where buyers have strong bargaining power, investments to reduce 
production costs might be advantageous. Business case arguments formulated this way sound 
something like “If we do not implement this system, our competitors are going to beat us on 
price, we will lose market share, and we will go out of business.”
BUSINESS CASE ARGUMENTS BASED ON FACTS.  Many people, including most chief financial 
officers, want to see the business case for an information system based on a convincing, 
quantitative analysis that proves beyond the shadow of a doubt that the benefits of the system 
will outweigh the costs. The most common way to prove this is to provide a detailed cost–benefit 
analysis of the information system. Although this step is critical, the manager must remember 
that there are inherent difficulties in and limits to cost–benefit analyses for information systems. 
To illustrate how a cost–benefit analysis could be used to build a fact-based business case, let us 
consider the development of a web-based order entry system for a relatively small firm.
Identifying Costs  One goal of a cost–benefit analysis is to accurately determine the total 
cost of ownership (TCO) for an investment. TCO is focused on understanding not only the 
total cost of acquisition but also all costs associated with ongoing use and maintenance of a 
system. Consequently, costs can usually be divided into two categories: non-recurring costs 
and recurring costs. Non-recurring costs are one-time costs that are not expected to continue 
after the system is implemented. These include costs for things such as site preparation and 
technology purchases. These one-time costs may also include the costs of attracting and training 
a webmaster or renovating some office space for new personnel or for hosting the web servers. 
Non-recurring costs such as for the acquisition or upgrade of long-term physical assets such as 
equipment and buildings are often classified as a capital expenditure.
Recurring costs are ongoing costs that occur throughout the life of the system. Recurring 
costs include the salary and benefits of the webmaster and any other personnel assigned to main-
tain the system, electricity, upgrades and maintenance of the system components, monthly fees 
paid to a local Internet service provider, and the continuing costs for the space in which the web-
master works or the data center where the servers reside. Such recurring costs are typically clas-
sified as a non-capital expenditure (or operational expenditure). Personnel costs are usually 
the largest recurring costs, and the web-based system is no exception in this regard. These recur-
ring expenses can go well beyond the webmaster to include expenses for customer support, con-
tent management, ongoing maintenance, and more.
The sample costs described thus far are tangible costs that are relatively easy to quantify. 
Some intangible costs ought to be accounted for as well, even though they will not fit neatly 
into the quantitative analysis. These might include the costs of reduced traditional sales, losing 
some customers that are not “web ready,” or losing customers if the web application is poorly 
designed or not on par with competitors’ sites. You can choose to either quantify these in some 
way (i.e., determine the cost of losing a customer) or simply reserve these as important costs to 
consider outside of—but along with—the quantitative cost–benefit analysis.
Identifying Benefits  Next, you determine both tangible benefits and intangible benefits. 
Some tangible benefits are relatively easy to determine. For example, you can estimate that 
the increased customer reach of the new web-based system will result in at least a modest 
increase in sales. Based on evidence from similar projects, you might estimate, say, a 5 percent 
increase in sales the first year, a 10 percent increase the second year, and a 15 percent increase 
the third year. In addition, you might also include as tangible benefits the reduction of order 
entry errors because orders will now be tracked electronically and shipped automatically. You 
could calculate the money previously lost on faulty and lost orders along with the salaries and 
wages of personnel assigned to find and fix these orders and then consider the reduction of these 
costs as a quantifiable benefit of the new system. Cost avoidance is a legitimate, quantifiable 

380    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
benefit of many systems. Similarly, the new system may enable the company to use fewer order 
entry clerks or redeploy these personnel to other, more important functions within the company. 
You could consider these cost reductions as benefits of the new system.
A web-based system may have intangible benefits as well. Some intangible benefits of this 
new system might include improvements in customer service resulting from faster turnaround 
on fulfilling orders. These are real benefits, but they might be hard to quantify with confidence. 
Perhaps an even more intangible benefit would be the overall improved perception of the firm. 
Customers might consider it more progressive and customer service–oriented than its rivals; in 
addition to attracting new customers, this might increase the value of the firm’s stock if it is a 
publicly traded firm. Another intangible benefit might be simply that it was a strategic necessity 
to offer customers web-based ordering to keep pace with rivals. While these intangibles are dif-
ficult to quantify, they must be considered along with the more quantitative analysis of benefits. 
In fact, the intangible benefits of this web-based system might be so important that they could 
carry the day despite an inconclusive or even negative cost–benefit analysis.
Performing Cost–Benefit Analyses  An example of a simplified cost–benefit analysis that 
contrasts the total expected tangible costs versus the tangible benefits is presented in Figure 9.5. 
Notice the fairly large investment up front, with another significant outlay in the fifth year 
for a system upgrade. You could now use the net costs/benefits for each year as the basis of 
your conclusion about this system. Alternatively, you could perform a break-even analysis—a 
type of cost–benefit analysis used to identify at what point (if ever) tangible benefits equal 
tangible costs (note that break-even occurs early in the second year of the system’s life in this 
example)—or a more formal net-present-value analysis of the relevant cash flow streams 
associated with the system at the organization’s discount rate (i.e., the rate of return used by 
an organization to compute the present value of future cash flows). In any event, these cost–
benefit analyses help you make the business case for this proposed web-based order fulfillment 
system. It clearly shows that the investment for this system is relatively small, and the company 
can fairly quickly recapture the investment. In addition, there appear to be intangible strategic 
benefits to deploying this system. These analyses—and the accompanying arguments and 
evidence—go a long way toward convincing senior managers in the firm that this new system 
makes sense. For more on cost–benefit analyses, see any introductory finance or managerial 
accounting textbook.
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Harvesting Human Energy
If you have a smartwatch or a fitness tracker, it is frustrating 
that you can deplete your battery within a few days or less; 
likewise, you probably have to recharge your phone at least 
once a day. For any electric or electronic device, be it a mobile 
phone, a laptop computer, or an electric vehicle, battery life 
continues to be the Achilles’ heel. To overcome this problem, 
MIT researchers are exploring how to power our gadgets, such 
as our smartwatches and fitness trackers, by our body move-
ments. The idea of generating energy from human body move-
ments is not new; already at the beginning of the 20th century, 
watchmakers developed self-winding (mechanical) watches, 
which used natural body movements to wind the watch. What 
is new is the idea of translating bending movements into elec-
trical energy in order to charge electronic gadgets. The 
researchers at MIT have developed a “sandwich” of metal and 
polymer, not unlike inside lithium ion batteries. If this material 
is bent, electrochemical processes create an electrical current, 
thus translating mechanical into electrical energy. Integrating 
such a device into, for example, the sole of a shoe could trans-
late human movement into enough energy to power many 
types of wearable devices, most of which require relatively low 
amounts of power. For devices that require more energy, such 
as devices connected to smartphones via Bluetooth, this 
approach could greatly extend the device’s need for recharge 
by days or even weeks. While there are many challenges, one 
that is particularly difficult to forecast is the reliability of our 
movements. Those who are fitness fanatics will have no prob-
lem keeping their gadgets charged. For couch potatoes, this 
approach will have limited value. Nevertheless, powering your 
gadgets by your movements is on the horizon. Want to IM 
your friends on Facebook? Take a walk!
Based on:
Wang, U. (2016, February 4). The scientists harvesting energy from 
humans to power our wearables. The Guardian. Retrieved March 11, 2016, 
from http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/04/
harvesting-energy-humans-walking-charge-wearables-bending-mit


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     381
Comparing Competing Investments  One method for deciding among different IS investments 
or when considering alternative designs for a given system is weighted multicriteria analysis, 
as illustrated in Figure 9.6. For example, suppose that for a given application being considered 
for purchase, there are three alternatives that could be pursued—A, B, or C. Let’s also suppose 
that early planning meetings identified three key system requirements and four key constraints 
that could be used to help make a decision on which alternative to pursue. In the left column of 
Net costs/beneﬁts
$179,500
$155,250
$130,250
$103,500
$  (4,500)
Total beneﬁts
$290,000
$230,000
$195,000
$165,000
$135,000
Cost reduction
$100,000
$100,000
$100,000
$100,000
$100,000
Error reduction
$  15,000
$  15,000
$  15,000
$  15,000
$  15,000
Increased sales
$175,000
$115,000
$  80,000
$  50,000
$  20,000
Beneﬁts
Total costs
$110,500
$  74,750
$  64,750
$  61,500
$139,500
Personnel
$  90,000
$  70,000
$  62,500
$  60,000
Infrastructure
$    1,500
$       500
$       250
Service fees
$       500
$       250
$       250
$       250
Networking
$    1,000
$       500
$       250
$       250
Software
$    2,500
$    1,000
$       500
$       500
Hardware
$  15,000
$    2,500
$    1,000
$       500
Recurring
Personnel
$100,000
Infrastructure
$    7,500 
Networking
$    4,500
Software
$    7,500
Hardware
$  20,000
Non-recurring
Costs
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
FIGURE 9.5
Worksheet showing a simplified 
cost–benefit analysis for a web-
based order fulfillment system.
Alternative A
Weight
Rating
Score
Rating
Criteria
Requirements
Web-based Interface
Security capabilities
BI capabilities
18
18
14
50
Alternative B
Alternative C
Constraints
Software Costs
Hardware Costs
Operating Costs
15
15
15
Ease of Training
5
4
4
5
5
5
4
1
3
50
60
60
75
25
220
75
60
15
15
165
3
3
5
3
45
45
75
15
180
90
18
14
5
1
1
122
90
90
70
5
5
5
250
90
Total
100
342
415
430
90
70
5
5
5
250
Score
Rating
Score
FIGURE 9.6
Decisions about alternative 
projects or system design 
approaches can be assisted using a 
weighted multicriteria analysis.

382    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
Figure 9.6, three system requirements and four constraints are listed. Because not all requirements 
and constraints are of equal importance, they are weighted on the basis of their relative importance. 
In other words, you do not have to weight requirements and constraints equally; it is certainly 
possible to make requirements more or less important than constraints. Weights are arrived at in 
discussions among the analysis team, users, and managers. Weights tend to be fairly subjective and, 
for that reason, should be determined through a process of open discussion to reveal underlying 
assumptions followed by an attempt to reach consensus among stakeholders. Notice that the total 
of the weights for both the requirements and constraints is 100 percent.
Next, each requirement and constraint is rated on a scale of 1 to 5. A rating of 1 indicates 
that the alternative does not meet the requirement very well or that the alternative violates the 
constraint. A rating of 5 indicates that the alternative meets or exceeds the requirement or clearly 
abides by the constraint. Ratings are even more subjective than weights and should also be deter-
mined through open discussion among users, analysts, and managers. For each requirement and 
constraint, a score is calculated by multiplying the rating for each requirement and each con-
straint by its weight. The final step is to add up the weighted scores for each alternative. Notice 
that we have included three sets of totals: for requirements, for constraints, and for overall totals. 
If you look at the totals for requirements, alternative B or C is the best choice because each 
meets or exceeds all requirements. However, if you look only at constraints, alternative A is the 
best choice because it does not violate any constraints. When we combine the totals for require-
ments and constraints, we see that the best choice is alternative C. Whether alternative C is actu-
ally chosen for development, however, is another issue. The decision makers may choose 
alternative A because it has the lowest cost, knowing that it does not meet two key requirements. 
In short, what may appear to be the best choice for a systems development project may not 
always be the one that ends up being developed or acquired. By conducting a thorough analysis, 
organizations can greatly improve their decision-making outcomes.
Presenting the Business Case
Up to this point, we have discussed the key issues to consider as you prepare to make the busi-
ness case for a system. We have also shown you some tools for determining the value that a sys-
tem adds to an organization. Now you are actually ready to make the case—to present your 
arguments and evidence to the decision makers in the firm.
KNOW THE AUDIENCE.  Depending on the firm, a number of people from various areas of the 
firm might be involved in the decision-making process. People from different areas of the firm 
typically hold very different perspectives about what investments should be made and how those 
investments should be managed (Table 9.2). Consequently, presenting the business case for a 
TABLE 9.2   Characteristics of Different Stakeholders Involved in Making IS 
Investment Decisions
Stakeholder
Perspective
Focus/Project Characteristics
Management
Representatives or managers from 
each of the functional areas within the 
firm
Greater strategic focus; larg-
est project sizes; longest project 
durations
Steering committee
Representatives from various interest 
groups within the organization (they 
may have their own agendas at stake 
when making investment decisions)
Cross-functional focus; greater 
organizational change; formal 
cost–benefit analysis; larger and 
riskier projects
User department
Representatives of the intended users 
of the system
Narrow, nonstrategic focus; faster 
development
IS executive
Has overall responsibility for manag-
ing IS development, implementation, 
and maintenance of selected systems
Focus on integration with exist-
ing systems; fewer development 
delays; less concern with cost–
benefit analysis
Source: Based on Valacich and George (2017) and McKeen, Guimaraes, and Wetherbe (1994).


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     383
new system investment can be quite challenging. Ultimately, a number of factors come into play 
in making investment decisions, and numerous outcomes can occur (Figure 9.7). For instance, 
decisions and choices are driven by perceived needs, resource availability, evaluation criteria, 
and so on. Numerous outcomes can occur from this decision process. Of course, the project can 
be accepted or rejected; often, projects can be conditionally accepted or flagged for revision in 
order to more carefully consider resource, time, or other constraints. Understanding the audience 
and the issues important to them is a first step in making an effective presentation. Various ways 
to improve the development of a business case are examined next.
CONVERT BENEFITS TO MONETARY TERMS.  When making the case for an IS investment, it is 
desirable to translate all potential benefits into monetary terms. For example, if a new system 
saves department managers an hour per day, try to quantify that savings in terms of dollars. 
Figure 9.8 shows how you might convert time savings into dollar figures. While merely 
explaining this benefit as “saving managers’ time” makes it sound useful, managers may not 
consider it a significant enough inducement to warrant spending a significant amount of money. 
Justifying a US$50,000 system because it will “save time” may not be persuasive enough. 
However, an annual savings of US$90,000 is more likely to capture the attention of decision 
makers and is more likely to result in project approval. Senior managers can easily rationalize a 
US$50,000 expense for a US$90,000 savings and can easily see why they should approve such 
a request. They can also more easily rationalize their decision later on if something goes wrong 
with the system.
DEVISE PROXY VARIABLES.  The situation presented in Figure 9.8 is fairly straightforward. 
Anyone can see that a US$50,000 investment is a good idea because the return on that investment 
is US$90,000 the first year. Unfortunately, not all cases are this clear-cut. In cases in which it 
is not as easy to quantify the impact of an investment, you can come up with proxy variables 
(i.e., alternative measures of outcomes) to help clarify what the impact on the firm will be. Proxy 
variables can be used to measure changes in terms of their perceived value to the organization. 
Project
Selection
Decision
Existing and
Available
Resources
Decision Outcome
Accept Project
Reject Project
Delay Project
Refocus Project
End-User Development
Proof of Concept
List of Potential
and Ongoing
Projects
Perceived and
Real Needs
Evaluation
Criteria
Current
Organizational
Environment
FIGURE 9.7
Investment selection decisions 
must consider numerous factors 
and can have numerous outcomes.
Beneﬁt:
New system saves at least one hour per day for 12 mid-level managers.
Quantiﬁed as:
Manager’s salary (per hour)                                 
Number of managers aﬀected                                
Daily savings (one hour saved × 12 managers)   
Weekly savings (daily savings × 5)                           
Annual savings (weekly savings × 50)                  
$30.00
12
$360.00
$1,800.00
$90,000.00
FIGURE 9.8
Converting time savings into 
dollar figures.

384    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
For example, if mundane administrative tasks are seen as low-value activities (perhaps a 1 on a 
5-point scale) but direct contact with customers is seen as a high-value activity (a rating of 5), 
you can use these perceptions to indicate how new systems will add value to the organization. 
In this example, you can show that a new system will allow personnel to have more contact with 
customers while at the same time reducing the administrative workload. Senior managers can 
quickly see that individual workload is being shifted from low-value to high-value activities.
You can communicate these differences using percentages, increases or decreases, and so 
on—whatever best conveys the idea that the new system is creating changes in work, in perfor-
mance, and in the way people think about their work. This gives decision makers some relatively 
solid data on which to base their decision.
MEASURE WHAT IS IMPORTANT TO MANAGEMENT.  One of the most important things you 
can do to show the benefits of a system is one of the simplest: Measure what senior managers 
think is important. You may think this is trivial advice, but you would be surprised how often 
people calculate impressive-looking statistics in terms of downtime, reliability, and so on, 
only to find that senior managers disregard or only briefly skim over those figures. You should 
concentrate on the issues senior business managers care about. The “hot-button” issues with 
senior managers should be easy to discover, and they are not always financial reports. Hot issues 
with senior managers could include cycle time (how long it takes to process an order), regulatory 
or compliance issues, customer feedback, and employee morale. By focusing on what senior 
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
Ethical App Development
In the past, systems development was in the hands of large 
software companies, with large development teams and legal 
departments that would scrutinize new functionalities for legal 
and ethical compliance. With the advent of the smartphone 
and social media came the promise of getting rich quick by 
developing the next Facebook, WhatsApp, Pinterest, or some 
other killer app. Nowadays, it’s not only large companies build-
ing those apps but individuals with a creative idea aided by 
easy-to-use development tools.
However, with the hope of developing the next killer app, 
ethical implications are often overlooked or outright ignored, 
as evidenced by uKnow, the Arlington, Virginia, provider of the 
world’s first “Parental Intelligence System.” While uKnow was 
designed to help parents track their children, lack of proper 
security resulted in the app leaking a huge database of nearly 
7 million text messages, 2 million images (many depicting chil-
dren), and 1,700 in-depth child profiles.
In addition to sloppy app development, mobile devices 
offer various tempting ways of collecting user data, with many 
apps requesting access to functionalities such as your phone 
book, location, camera, microphone, and so on. Given these 
vulnerabilities, a new code of conduct for app development is 
needed. Just because you can collect certain types of data, 
should you? Many argue that an app should only be allowed to 
collect and utilize data it needs to provide its functionality, 
nothing more. Developers should also carefully consider the 
consequences of personal data being compromised. Who 
would be affected, and how serious might the consequences 
be? Given the high value of your personal data, the maxim of 
the app development industry should be: “Even though you 
can, don’t collect data unless absolutely necessary!”
Questions
1.	 Mobile phones provide the possibility to collect various 
data about the user. Assume that you are developing 
a new weather app and are considering collecting user 
data that you don’t need right away but may need in 
the future to build a different app. Is this practice ethi-
cal? What types of data would you be comfortable 
collecting? Which would you not consider collecting? 
Why?
2.	 You know that your competitors’ apps are collecting 
much more data than you do, potentially giving them 
an advantage today or at least some time in the future. 
Should you follow their lead and collect more data about 
your customers? Why or why not?
Based on:
Allamsetty, T. (2013, March 19). User privacy and the ethics of  
app data collection. [X]Cubelabs. Retrieved March 13, 2016,  
from http://www.xcubelabs.com/blog/user-privacy-and-the- 
ethics-of-app-data-collection
Fox-Brewster, T. (2016, February 22). Child track app “leaks 6.8 million 
texts, 1.8 million photos” from kids’ phones. Forbes. Retrieved March 13, 
2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/thomasbrewster/2016/02/22/
kids-texts-and-photos-leaked-by-uknow
Green, C. (2015, October 16). Where does the responsibility for “ethical” 
apps lie? Information Age. Retrieved March 13, 2016, from http://www 
. i n f o r m a t i o n - a g e . c o m / t e c h n o l o g y / a p p l i c a t i o n s - a n d -
development/123460349/where-does-responsibility-ethical-apps-lie
Kotorov, R. (2015, June 12). Why ethics matters when build-
ing an app. Business 2 Community. Retrieved March 13, 2016, 
from http://www.business2community.com/mobile-apps/
ethics-matters-building-app-01248104


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     385
business managers believe to be important, you can make the business case for systems in a way 
that is more meaningful for those managers, which makes selling systems to decision makers 
much easier. Managers are more likely to buy in to the importance of systems if they can see the 
impact on areas that are important to them. Now that you understand how to make the business 
case for new information systems, we next examine the development process.
The Systems Development Process
No matter if a software company such as Microsoft is planning to build a new version of its 
popular Office software suite or if a company such as Netflix is trying to build a system to 
improve its movie recommendations, companies follow a standardized approach. This process 
of designing, building, and maintaining information systems is often referred to as systems 
analysis and design. Likewise, the individual who performs this task is referred to as a systems 
analyst. Because few organizations can survive without effectively utilizing information and 
computing technology, the demand for skilled systems analysts is very strong. In 2016, U.S. 
News named being a systems analyst one of the top jobs; in fact, it was ranked as number 3. 
Organizations want to hire systems analysts because they possess a unique blend of managerial 
and technical expertise—systems analysts are not just “techies.” Systems analysts remain in 
demand precisely because of their unique blend of abilities.
Custom Versus Off-the-Shelf Software
When deciding to deploy new systems to support their operations in order to gain or sustain a 
competitive advantage, organizations can typically choose between custom and off-the-shelf soft-
ware. For example, many types of application software (such as word processors, spreadsheet, or 
accounting software) can be used by a variety of businesses within and across industries. These 
types of general-purpose systems are typically purchased off the shelf. Often, however, organiza-
tions have very specific needs that cannot be met by generic technologies. This is especially true 
for companies trying to capitalize on a first-mover advantage and therefore unable to purchase a 
preexisting system to meet their specific needs. For example, pioneers in online retailing (such as 
Amazon.com) or budget air travel (such as Southwest Airlines) needed entirely new systems and 
technologies to support their revolutionary business models and had to develop (or have someone 
else develop) custom solutions. Likewise, mobile apps often need to be developed from scratch. 
The approaches to developing or acquiring custom and off-the-shelf software are quite different, 
but they also have many similarities. Before going into the details of developing or acquiring such 
systems, we’ll first contrast these two types of systems.
CUSTOM SOFTWARE.  Custom software is developed to meet the specifications of an organization 
(it is thus also sometimes called tailor-made or bespoke software). Such software may be 
developed (or configured) in-house by the company’s own IS staff, or the development may be 
contracted, or outsourced, to a specialized vendor charged with developing the system to the 
company’s contractual specifications. Custom software has two primary advantages over general 
purpose commercial technologies:
1.	Customizability.  The software can be tailored to meet unique organizational requirements. 
Such requirements, for example, can reflect a desire to achieve a competitive advantage 
through a specific type of system (e.g., Amazon.com’s one-click ordering); to better fit 
business operations, characteristics of the organizational culture, or proprietary security 
requirements; or to better interface with existing systems. Further, company- or industry-
specific terms or acronyms can be included in a new software application, as can unique 
types of required reports. Such specificity is not typically possible in off-the-shelf systems 
that are targeted at a more general audience.
2.	Problem Specificity.  The company pays only for the features specifically required for its 
users. In contrast to software packages such as Microsoft Office, which include a wide 
range of individual programs (some of which may never be used), only those components 
that are really needed can be implemented.
Today, building a complete system from scratch is quite rare; most information systems that 
are developed within an organization for its internal use typically include a large number of prepro-
grammed, reusable modules that are purchased from development organizations or consultants.

386    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
OFF-THE-SHELF SOFTWARE.  Although custom software has advantages, it is not automatically 
the best choice for an organization. Off-the-shelf software (or packaged software) is typically 
used to support common business processes that do not require any specific tailoring. In general, 
off-the-shelf systems, whether hardware or software, are less costly, faster to procure, of higher 
quality, and less risky than custom systems. Table 9.3 summarizes examples of off-the-shelf 
application software.
Traditionally, the most common option for packaged software was so-called commercial 
off-the-shelf (COTS) software; this type of software is typically developed by software compa-
nies that spread the development costs over a large number of customers. An alternative to com-
mercial off-the-shelf software is open source software.
Open Source Software
Open source is a philosophy that promotes developers’ and users’ access to the source of a 
product or idea. Particularly in the area of software development, the open source movement 
has taken off with the advent of the Internet; people around the world are contributing their 
time and expertise to develop or improve software, ranging from operating systems to 
application software. As the programs’ source code is freely available for use and/or 
modification, this software is referred to as open source software. Open source software owes 
its success to the inputs from a large user base, helping to fix problems or improve the soft-
ware. One of the great success stories of open source software is the Android operating sys-
tem. In early 2016, Android’s share of the global smartphone shipment market—led by 
Samsung products—was near 80 percent! Android is based on another open source operating 
system called Linux, developed as a hobby by the Finnish university student Linus Torvalds in 
1991. Linux has since become the operating system of choice for web servers, embedded 
systems (such as set-top boxes and network routers), and supercomputers alike (as of June 
2016, 99.4 percent of the world’s 500 fastest supercomputers ran Linux operating systems 
[Top 500, 2016]). In addition to the Linux operating system, other open source software has 
been gaining increasing popularity because of its stability and low cost. For example, in early 
2016, 33.6 percent of all websites were powered by the Apache web server, another open 
source project (Netcraft, 2016).
Open source projects have also become indispensable for Big Data initiatives ranging from 
storing and managing vast amounts of unstructured data to analyzing these data. Not only do 
open source applications provide the tools to deal with Big Data, the openness of the source 
code also helps instill confidence as to where the results come from. Today, many Big Data start-
ups, but also established companies from Adobe to Yahoo!, use Hadoop, a framework for distrib-
uted processing of large-scale data sets. For example, recently, the oil company Chevron turned 
to the open source project Hadoop for storing and managing huge amounts of seismic data 
needed to locate oil or gas deposits on the ocean floor. Other popular examples of open source 
application software include the Firefox web browser and the office productivity suite Apache 
OpenOffice.
TABLE 9.3   Examples of Off-the-Shelf Application Software
Category
Application
Description
Examples
Business information 
systems
Payroll
Automation of payroll ser-
vices, from the optical reading 
of time sheets to generating 
paychecks
ZPAY
Intuit Payroll
Inventory
Automation of inventory 
tracking, order processing, 
billing, and shipping
Intuit QuickBooks
NetSuite
Office automation
Personal 
productivity
Support for a wide range of 
tasks from word processing to 
graphics to e-mail
OpenOffice
Corel Office
Microsoft Office


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     387
How do large open source projects such as Firefox work? Typically, contributors suggest 
modifications for changes; for example, they contribute to program code or provide new designs 
for the system’s user interface; a small group of carefully selected “committers” can then test 
and implement these modifications into the official releases of the software so as to ensure the 
quality and stability of the software.
While there are many benefits to open source software, vendors of proprietary software are 
still highlighting “hidden” costs of running open source software, such as obtaining reliable cus-
tomer support. On the other hand, however, commercial open source vendors are providing cus-
tomer support, installation, training, and so on, to their paying customers. Men’s Wearhouse, the 
State of Oregon, and many other large organizations are using a CRM system offered by Sugar-
CRM, Inc., a commercial open source vendor that offers free “community editions” as well as 
other, more feature-rich paid editions of its software. Similarly, the popular MySQL database, 
which is used by Facebook, GitHub, Verizon Wireless, and many other companies, is provided 
under an open source license for personal use, but the company employs its own developers and 
offers commercial licenses (including dedicated 24/7 technical support, consulting, and indem-
nification clauses) to business users. Further, many open source projects are now backed by 
major information technology (IT) companies such as IBM, which give money and human 
resources to Linux projects, or Oracle, which donated the source code of the OpenOffice pro-
ductivity suite to the Apache Software Foundation.
Systems Integration: Combining Custom, Open Source, and 
Off-the-Shelf Systems
The process of linking together different computing systems and software applications physi-
cally or functionally to act as a coordinated whole is referred to as systems integration (see 
Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World”). Organizations can perform this integration them-
selves or hire experts who are well versed in weaving together various technologies into an inte-
grated solution. Systems integration is an important skill because it allows an organization to 
bring together cheaper, preconfigured components and off-the-shelf software to meet business 
needs rather than having to pursue the more expensive approach of building a customized sys-
tem from scratch.
Through systems integration, it is possible to combine the unique advantages of custom, 
open source, and commercial off-the-shelf systems into an integrated solution. For example, an 
online retailer may want to purchase an off-the-shelf inventory management system and then add 
tailor-made modules it needs to conduct its day-to-day business. This system could be based on 
the open source database MySQL; further, the online retailer could use the open source Apache 
web server to power its online shopping site. In some cases, for example, with large ERP sys-
tems, companies selling off-the-shelf software make customized changes for a fee. Other ven-
dors, however, may not allow their software to be modified (as is the case with generic, 
all-purpose software, such as Microsoft Office).
Commercial off-the-shelf systems are almost always acquired from an external vendor, 
whereas custom systems can be either developed in-house or developed by an outside vendor 
(Figure 9.9). Regardless of the source of the new system—custom, open source, or off-the-
shelf—the primary role of managers and users in the organization is to make sure that it will 
meet the organization’s business needs. This may be especially important in the case of end 
users developing systems. End users typically do not program elaborate systems but frequently 
use spreadsheet or database software to create solutions for accomplishing narrow, well-defined 
tasks; while such applications may be useful for accomplishing certain tasks, end user develop-
ment may cause problems related to the adherence to standards, lack of documentation, security 
concerns, or a lack of continuity if the employee who built the spreadsheet or database leaves the 
organization.
IS Development in Action
The tools and techniques used to develop information systems are continually evolving with the 
rapid changes in IS hardware and software. As you will see, IS development is a fairly disciplined 
and structured process that moves from step to step. Systems analysts become adept at decom-
posing large, complex problems into many small, simple problems. The goal of the systems 
analyst is to design the final system by piecing together many small software modules and 

388    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
technologies into one comprehensive system (Figure 9.10). For example, think about using 
LEGOtm blocks for building a model of a space station. Each individual block is a small, simple 
piece that is nothing without the others. When put together, the blocks can create a large and 
very complex design (Google co-founder Larry Page had gained some notoriety for building a 
working printer out of LEGO™ bricks). When systems are built in this manner, they are much 
easier to design, build, and, most important, maintain.
Although many people in organizations, such as managers and users, are responsible and 
participate in a systems development project, the systems analyst has primary responsibility. 
Some projects may have one or several systems analysts working together, depending on the size 
and complexity of the project. The primary role of the systems analyst is to study the problems 
and needs of an organization in order to determine how people, methods, and information tech-
nology can best be combined to bring about improvements in the organization. A systems ana-
lyst helps systems users and other business managers define their requirements for new or 
enhanced information systems.
A systems analyst typically also manages the development project. As the project man-
ager, the systems analyst needs a diverse set of management, leadership, technical, conflict 
management, and customer relationships skills. The project manager is the person most respon-
sible for ensuring that a project is a success. The project manager must deal with continual 
change and problem solving. Successful projects require effective resource and task 
New Information System
for the Organization
Source for New
Information System
Option 1:
Build Information System
Option 2:
Buy Prepackaged System/Use
Open Source Software
Option 3:
Outsource Development
to Third Party
Option 4:
Open Source Software
FIGURE 9.9
There are a variety of sources for 
information systems.
System Construction Process
Time
Identify Large Organizational
Problem to Solve
Start
End
Translate Each Small Problem
into a Software Module
Piece Together the Separate
Modules into an
Overall Comprehensive
Information System
Decompose Large Problem
into Many Small Problems
Large Organizational Problem
Problem 1
Problem 2
.....
.....
Problem N
Module 1
Module 2
Comprehensive Information System
Module N
FIGURE 9.10
Problem decomposition makes 
solving large, complex problems 
easier.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     389
management as well as effective communication as the project moves through its various steps. 
Project management is an important aspect of the system development or acquisition process 
and a critical skill for successful systems analysts. The focus of project management is to 
ensure that projects meet customer expectations and are delivered within budget and time con-
straints. Clearly, a systems analyst is an agent of change and innovation in modern 
organizations.
The Role of Users in the Systems Development Process
Many organizations have a huge investment in transaction processing and management informa-
tion systems. These systems are most often designed, constructed, and maintained by systems 
analysts within the organization using a variety of methods. When building and maintaining 
information systems, systems analysts rely on information provided by system users, who are 
involved in all phases of the system’s development process. To effectively participate in the pro-
cess, it is important for all members of the organization to understand what is meant by systems 
development and what activities occur. A close, mutually respectful working relationship 
between analysts and users is key to project success.
Systems Development Controls
In any systems development or acquisition process, it is key to ensure that all systems (including 
hardware and software) are properly developed, acquired, and maintained. Following a struc-
tured systems development process helps to minimize threats arising from software bugs, secu-
rity holes, or other issues. A software bug is an error or flaw in a computer program or system 
that causes it to produce an incorrect or unexpected result or to behave in unintended ways. In 
general, systems development controls should ensure that the necessary security features are 
implemented and enabled and that proper change management processes are followed. When 
acquiring systems from outside vendors, organizations face risks not only from software bugs 
but also from backdoors (such as default administrator passwords) that may exist in the system. 
Thus, organizations should exercise due diligence to ensure that the software is trustworthy, for 
example, by reviewing the software’s source code (if possible) and by performing background 
checks on the vendor’s history and trustworthiness. In all cases, these processes should be prop-
erly documented to establish an audit trail that allows tracing back who reviewed, authorized, 
implemented, or tested the systems.
Steps in the Systems Development Process
Just as the products that a firm produces and sells follow a life cycle, so do organizational infor-
mation systems. For example, a new type of tennis shoe follows a life cycle of being designed, 
introduced to the market, being accepted into the market, maturing, declining in popularity, and 
ultimately being retired. The term systems development life cycle (SDLC) describes the life of 
an information system from conception to retirement (Valacich & George, 2017). The SDLC has 
four primary phases:
1.	Systems planning and selection
2.	Systems analysis
3.	Systems design
4.	Systems implementation and operation
Figure 9.11 is a graphical representation of the SDLC containing four boxes connected by 
arrows. Within the SDLC, arrows flow from systems planning and selection, to systems analy-
sis, to systems design, and, finally, to systems implementation and operation. Once a system is 
in operation, it moves into an ongoing maintenance phase that parallels the initial development 
process. For example, when new features are added to an existing system, analysts must first 
plan and select which new features to add, then analyze the possible impact of adding these fea-
tures to the existing system, then design how the new features will work, and, finally, implement 
these new features into the existing system. While some consider maintenance another SDLC 
phase, it is really a repeated application of the core SDLC phases. In this way, the SDLC 
becomes an ongoing cycle. During ongoing systems maintenance, the entire SDLC is followed 
to implement system repairs and enhancements.

390    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
Systems
Planning and
Selection
Systems
Analysis
Systems
Implementation
and Operation
Systems
Design
FIGURE 9.11
The SDLC defines the typical 
process for building systems.
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Creating Mobile Apps
With the rapid rise of smartphone usage, various useful and 
entertaining apps are rapidly being developed, greatly enhancing 
the phones’ capabilities. In July 2015, both Google and Apple 
announced that they had more than 1.5 million apps in their app 
stores, with many more apps appearing every day. The primary 
reason there are so many apps is that anyone can build and try to 
sell apps, from software companies focused on translating their 
existing products (such as Adobe Reader) onto mobile platforms 
to individuals who have a clever idea for a game.
Owing to the intense competition between these apps, it 
is not surprising that only relatively few are highly successful. 
However, if you have the right idea, creating a winning app 
can be surprisingly easy. In fact, it is estimated that it took the 
maker of the widely successful game Flappy Bird a mere two 
to three days to create that game (alone, that is). At its peak, 
the game netted US$50,000 per day for the person who built 
the game. Given that games for popular consoles such as the 
PlayStation or the Xbox cost millions of dollars to develop, 
how did Flappy Bird’s creator manage to pull that off?
In the past few years, a number of marketplaces have 
sprung up where anyone can purchase game templates for as 
low as US$49. These templates typically include certain game 
mechanics, which the buyer can modify to create a functioning 
game. Typically, there’s not even a need to write a single line of 
code; all that is needed is a winning idea; coming up with a 
good story, game title, and key words; and the skills needed to 
create the graphics.
What if your idea is for an app other than a game, such as 
a productivity tool for students or a better way to keep track of 
your passwords? There are tools to help develop these as well. 
Once the app is created, all that is needed is uploading the app 
to the various marketplaces and watching the download 
count. Good luck!
Based on:
Anonymous. (2016). AppMachine. Retrieved March 13, 2016, from 
www.appmachine.com
Rigney, R. (2014, March 5). How to make a No. 1 app with $99 and 
three hours of work. Wired. Retrieved March 13, 2016, from http://
www.wired.com/2014/03/flappy-bird-clones
Rubens, P. (February 18, 2014). Flap happy: How you too can become 
a mobile games mogul. BBC. Retrieved March 13, 2016, from http://
www.bbc.com/news/business-26224428
Phase 1: Systems Planning and Selection
The first phase of the SDLC is systems planning and selection (see Figure 9.11). Understand-
ing that it can work on only a limited number of projects at a given time because of limited 
resources, an organization must take care that only those projects that are critical to enabling the 
organization’s mission, goals, and objectives are undertaken. Consequently, the goal of systems 
planning and selection is simply to identify, plan, and select a development project from all pos-
sible projects that could be performed. Organizations differ in how they identify, plan, and select 
projects. Some organizations have a formal information systems planning process whereby a 
senior manager, a business group, an IS manager, or a steering committee identifies and assesses 
all possible systems development projects that the organization could undertake. Project manag-
ers present the business case for the new system, and it is accepted or rejected. Others follow a 
more ad hoc process for identifying potential projects. Nonetheless, after all possible projects 


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     391
are identified, those deemed most likely to yield significant organizational benefits, given avail-
able resources, are selected for subsequent development activities.
Just as there are often differences in the source of systems projects within organizations, 
there are often different evaluation criteria used within organizations when classifying and rank-
ing potential projects, such as strategic alignment, costs and benefits, resource availability, proj-
ect size and duration, or technical difficulties and risks. During project planning, the analyst 
works with the customers—the potential users of the system and their managers—to collect a 
broad range of information to gain an understanding of the project size, potential benefits and 
costs, and other relevant factors. After collecting and analyzing this information, the analyst 
builds the business case that can be reviewed and compared with other possible projects. If the 
organization accepts the project, systems analysis begins.
Phase 2: Systems Analysis
The second phase of the SDLC is called systems analysis (see Figure 9.11). One purpose of the 
systems analysis phase is for designers to gain a thorough understanding of an organization’s cur-
rent way of doing things in the area for which the new information system will be constructed. The 
process of conducting an analysis requires that many tasks, or subphases, be performed. The first 
subphase focuses on determining system requirements. To determine the requirements, an analyst 
works closely with users to determine what is needed from the proposed system. After collecting 
the requirements, analysts organize this information using data, process, and logic modeling tools.
COLLECTING REQUIREMENTS.  The collection and structuring of requirements is arguably the most 
important activity in the systems development process because how well the IS requirements are 
defined influences all subsequent activities. The old saying “garbage in, garbage out” very much 
applies to the systems development process. Requirements collection is the process of gathering 
and organizing information from users, managers, customers, business processes, and documents to 
understand how a proposed information system should function. Systems analysts use a variety of 
techniques for collecting system requirements, including the following (Valacich & George, 2017):
■
■Interviews. Analysts interview people informed about the operation and issues of the cur-
rent or proposed system.
■
■Questionnaires. Analysts design and administer surveys to gather opinions from people 
informed about the operation and issues of the current or proposed system.
■
■Observations. Analysts observe system users at selected times to see how data are handled 
and what information people need to do their jobs.
■
■Document Analysis. Analysts study business documents to discover issues, policies, and 
rules as well as concrete examples of the use of data and information in the organization.
■
■Joint Application Design. Joint application design (JAD) is a group meeting–based pro-
cess for requirements collection (Figure 9.12). During this meeting, the users jointly define 
and agree on system requirements or designs. This process can result in dramatic reduc-
tions in the length of time needed to collect requirements or specify designs.
Magnetic Board
Scanner
Printer
Flip Chart
Name Tents
Flip Chart
Sheets
Wall-Mounted
LCD Screen
FIGURE 9.12
A JAD room.
Source: Based on Joint Application 
Design: How to Design Quality Systems 
in 40% Less Time by Jane Wood and 
Denise Silver. Published by John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.

392    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
MODELING DATA.  In organizations, data are used to describe people, objects, or events. A lot of 
different data can be used to describe a person: name, age, gender, race, and occupation, among 
others. To construct an information system, systems analysts must understand what data the 
information system needs in order to accomplish the intended tasks. To do this, they use data 
modeling tools to collect and describe the data to users to confirm that all needed data are known 
and presented to users as useful information. Figure 9.13 shows an entity-relationship diagram, 
a type of data model describing students, classes, majors, and classrooms at a university. Each 
box in the diagram is referred to as a data entity, and each entity is related to other entities. 
Data modeling tools enable the systems analyst to represent data in a form that is easy for 
users to understand and critique. For more information on databases and data modeling, see the 
Technology Briefing.
MODELING PROCESSES AND LOGIC.  The next step in this phase is to model how data are being 
input, processed, and presented to the users. As the name implies, data flows represent the 
movement of data through an organization or within an information system. For example, your 
registration for a class may be captured in a registration form on paper or in an interactive form 
on the web. After it is filled out, this form probably flows through several processes to validate 
and record the class registration, shown as “Data Flows” in Figure 9.14. After all students have 
been registered, a repository of all registration information can be processed for developing class 
rosters or for generating student billing information, which is shown as “Data” in Figure 9.14. 
Processing logic represents the way in which data are transformed. Processing logic is often 
expressed in pseudocode, which is a representation of the program’s internal functioning, 
independent of the actual programming language being used. As there are no standards 
for pseudocode, the level of detail can vary. For example, pseudocode to calculate students’ 
grade-point averages at the conclusion of a term is shown in the “Processing Logic” section in 
Figure 9.14.
After the data, data flow, and processing logic requirements for the proposed system 
have been identified, analysts develop one or many possible overall approaches—sometimes 
called designs—for the information system. For example, one approach for the system may 
possess only basic functionality but has the advantage of being relatively easy and inexpen-
sive to build. An analyst might also propose a more elaborate approach for the system, but it 
may be more difficult and costlier to build. Analysts evaluate alternative system design 
approaches with the knowledge that different solutions yield different benefits and different 
costs. After a system design approach is selected, details of that particular approach can be 
defined.
Major
Student
Class
Room
Has
Has
Is Required
Is Scheduled
Has Assigned
Takes
Local
Address
ID
Name
. . .
FIGURE 9.13
A sample entity-relationship 
diagram for students.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     393
i = read (number_of_classes)
total_hours = 0
total_grade = 0
total_gpa = 0
for j = 1 to i do
 
begin
 
 
read (course [ j ], hours [ j ], grade [ j ])
 
 
total_hours = total_hours + hours [ j ]
 
 
total_grade = total_grade + (hours [ j ] * grade [ j ])
 
end
current_gpa = total_grade/total hours
Processing Logic
Requirements
Data Flows
Data
Name
Patty Nicholls
Brett Williams
Mary Shide
Class
Senior
Grad
Fresh
GPA
3.7
2.9
3.2
Notify
Student of
Error
Registration Error
Valid
Registration
Valid
Registration
Invalid
Registration
Class
Registration
Form
Class
Information
Registration
Success
Completed
Registration
Validate
Registration
Information
Register
Class
Notify
Student of
Success
Master
Class
List
Update
Student
Billing
Update
Class
Roster
Class
Database
FIGURE 9.14
Four key elements to the 
development of a system: 
requirements, data, data flows, and 
processing logic.

394    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
Phase 3: Systems Design
The third phase of the SDLC is systems design (see Figure 9.11). As its name implies, it is 
during this phase that the proposed system is designed; that is, the details of the chosen approach 
are elaborated. As with analysis, many different activities must occur during systems design. The 
elements that must be designed when building an information system include the following:
■
■Processing and logic
■
■Databases and files
■
■Human–computer interface
DESIGNING PROCESSING AND LOGIC.  The processing and logic operations of an information 
system are the steps and procedures that transform raw data inputs into new or modified 
information. There are typically different ways to complete each process, with some being more 
efficient or effective than others. Modeling the processes thus includes specifying not only what 
is to be done but also the specific algorithms, which outline the steps, or set of rules, to be 
followed (that is, how a certain process is accomplished). For example, when calculating your 
grade-point average, your school needs to perform the following steps:
1.	Obtain the prior grade-point average, credit hours earned, and list of prior courses
2.	Obtain the list of each current course, final grade, and course credit hours
3.	Combine the prior and current credit hours into aggregate sums
4.	Calculate the new grade-point average
The logic and steps needed to make this calculation can be represented in many ways, 
including structure charts, decision trees, pseudocode, programming code, and so on (see 
Figure 9.14). Regardless of how the logic is represented, the process of converting pseudocode, 
structure charts, or decision trees into actual program code during system implementation is a 
relatively straightforward process.
DESIGNING DATABASES AND FILES.  To design databases and files, a systems analyst must have 
a thorough understanding of an organization’s data and informational needs. For example, 
Figure 9.15 shows the database design to keep track of student information in a Microsoft 
Access database. The database design is more complete (shows each attribute of the student) 
and more detailed (shows how the information is formatted) than a conceptual data model built 
during systems analysis (as was shown in Figure 9.14).
DESIGNING THE HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERFACE.  Just as people have different ways of interacting 
with other people, information systems can have different ways of interacting with people. A 
human–computer interface (HCI) is the point of contact between a system and users. With 
people being used to interacting with easy-to-use systems and websites like Facebook, Twitter, 
FIGURE 9.15
The database design for student 
information from an Access 
database.
Source: Access 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     395
and Amazon.com, their expectations in terms of ease of use are ever increasing. In addition, 
increasing a system’s usability—that is, whether the system is easy to use and aesthetically 
pleasing—can lower error rates, increase efficiency, or increase customer satisfaction (in the 
case of customer-facing systems). Thus, analysts also take great care in designing data entry 
forms and management reports. A form is a business document containing some predefined data, 
often including some areas where additional data can be filled in (Figure 9.16). Similarly, a 
report is a business document containing only predefined data for online viewing or printing 
(Figure 9.17). For more on forms and reports, see Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business Intelligence 
Using Big Data and Analytics.”
Phase 4: Systems Implementation and Operation
Many separate activities occur during systems implementation, the fourth phase of the SDLC 
(see Figure 9.11). One group of activities focuses on transforming the system design into a 
working information system. These activities include software programming and testing. A 
second group of activities focuses on preparing the organization for using the new information 
system. These activities include system conversion, documentation, user training, and support. 
This section briefly describes what occurs during systems implementation.
SOFTWARE PROGRAMMING AND TESTING.  Programming is the process of transforming the 
system design into a working computer system. During this transformation, both programming and 
FIGURE 9.16 
A data entry form.
Ascend Systems Incorporated
SALESPERSON ANNUAL SUMMARY REPORT 2018
QUARTERLY ACTUAL SALES
FOURTH
THIRD
SECOND
FIRST
18,000
19,800
28,000
24,300
17,300
22,000
18,600
15,500
12,500
16,500
22,000
19,000
21,000
8,000
19,000
19,000
10,000
17,000
16,000
16,600
19,800
14,000
7,500
12,000
27,000
31,000
20,000
19,000
18,000
29,000
18,000
28,000
999-99-0001
999-99-0002
999-99-0003
999-99-0004
999-99-0005
999-99-0006
999-99-0007
999-99-0008
Wachter
Mennecke
Wheeler
SALESPERSON 
SSN 
REGION 
Northwest and Mountain
Midwest and Mid-Atlantic
New England
Spurrier
Powell
Topi
Speier
Wright
FIGURE 9.17
A sales summary report.

396    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
testing should occur in parallel. As you might expect, a broad range of tests is conducted before a 
system is complete, including developmental testing, alpha testing, and beta testing (Table 9.4).
SYSTEM CONVERSION, DOCUMENTATION, TRAINING, AND SUPPORT.  System conversion is 
the process of decommissioning the current way of doing things (automated or manual) and 
installing the new system in the organization. Effective conversion of a system requires not only 
that the new software be installed but also that users be effectively trained and supported. System 
conversion can be performed in at least four ways, as shown in Figure 9.18.
Many types of documentation must be produced for an information system. Programmers 
develop system documentation that details the inner workings of the system to ease future main-
tenance and to ensure reliability of the system. A second type of documentation is user-related 
documentation, which is typically written not by programmers or analysts but by users or pro-
fessional technical writers. The range of documents can include the following:
■
■User and reference guides
■
■User training manuals and tutorials
■
■Installation procedures and troubleshooting suggestions
In addition to documentation, users may also need training and ongoing support to use a 
new system effectively. Different types of training and support require different levels of 
investment by the organization. Self-paced training and tutorials are the least expensive 
options, and one-on-one training is the most expensive. Table 9.5 summarizes various user 
training options.
Besides training, providing ongoing education and problem-solving assistance for users 
may also be necessary. This is commonly referred to as system support, which is often provided 
by a special group of people in the organization who make up an information center or help 
desk. Support personnel must have strong communication skills and be good problem solvers in 
addition to being expert users of the system. An alternative option for a system not developed 
internally is to outsource support activities to a vendor specializing in technical system support 
Old System 
New System 
Old System 
New System 
(a) Parallel
Description
Old and new systems
are used at the same time.
Old system is discontinued
on one day, and the new is
used on the next.
Parts of the new system
are implemented over
time.
Entire system is used
in one location.
(b) Direct
(c) Phased
(d) Pilot
 
(single 
 
location)
Old System 
New System 
Old System 
New System 
FIGURE 9.18
Software conversion strategies.
TABLE 9.4   General Testing Types, Their Focus, and Who Performs Them
Testing Type
Focus
Performed by
Developmental
Testing the correctness of individual mod-
ules and the integration of multiple modules
Programmer
Alpha
Testing of overall system to see whether it 
meets design requirements
Software tester
Beta
Testing of the capabilities of the system in 
the user environment with actual data
Actual system users


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     397
and training. Regardless of how support is provided, it is an ongoing issue that must be managed 
effectively for the company to realize the maximum benefits of a system.
Repeating the SDLC: Systems Maintenance
After an information system is installed, it is essentially in the systems maintenance phase. A 
system does not wear out in the physical manner that cars, buildings, or other physical objects 
do, but it must still be systematically repaired and/or improved. The types of maintenance are 
summarized in Table 9.6.
During systems maintenance, it is typical that one person within the systems development 
group is responsible for collecting maintenance requests from system users. Periodically, these 
requests are analyzed to evaluate how a proposed change might alter the system and what busi-
ness benefits might result from such a change, and are prioritized accordingly (Figure 9.19). As 
with adaptive maintenance, both perfective maintenance and preventive maintenance are 
typically a much lower priority than corrective maintenance, which deals with repairing flaws 
in the system. Corrective maintenance is most likely to occur after initial system installation as 
well as over the life of a system after major system changes. This means that adaptive, perfec-
tive, and preventive maintenance activities can lead to corrective maintenance activities if they 
are not carefully designed and implemented.
As with developing or acquiring new systems, any changes to an existing system need to be 
carefully managed. Unmanaged changes can have a variety of negative consequences, including 
system malfunction, system failure, increasing unreliability (as errors tend to build up over time, 
making the system more fragile), or opening the door for fraud or deliberate misuse (e.g., if a 
“backdoor” is introduced during changes to a system). If a change request is approved, the 
TABLE 9.5   User Training Options
Training Option
Description
Tutorial
One person taught at a time
Course
Several people taught at a time
Computer-aided instruction
One person taught at a time by the computer system
Interactive training manuals
Combination of tutorials and computer-aided instruction
Resident expert
Expert on call to assist users as needed
Software help components
Built-in system components designed to train users and troubleshoot 
problems
External sources
Vendors and training providers offering tutorials, courses, and other 
training activities
TABLE 9.6   Types of Systems Maintenance
Maintenance Type
Description
Corrective maintenance
Making changes to an information system to repair flaws in the design, 
coding, or implementation
Adaptive maintenance
Making changes to an information system to evolve its functionality, to 
accommodate changing business needs, or to migrate it to a different 
operating environment
Preventive maintenance
Making changes to a system to reduce the chance of future system failure
Perfective maintenance
Making enhancements to improve processing performance or interface 
usability or adding desired but not necessarily required system features 
(in other words, “bells and whistles”)

398    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
system change is designed and then implemented. As with the initial development of the system, 
implemented changes need to be formally reviewed and tested before being installed into opera-
tional systems. Thus, change request management is a formal process that ensures that any 
proposed system changes are documented, reviewed for potential risks, appropriately autho-
rized, prioritized, and carefully managed (to establish an audit trail that allows tracing back who 
reviewed, authorized, implemented, or tested the changes). In other words, the systems mainte-
nance process parallels the process used for the initial development of the information system, 
as shown in Figure 9.20. Interestingly, it is often during system maintenance that the largest part 
of the system development effort occurs.
Today, vendors of commercial off-the-shelf software packages incorporate patch manage-
ment systems to facilitate the different forms of systems maintenance for the user; patch 
Change Request
Type?
Corrective
Other
Adaptive/Preventive
Perfective
Terminate
Request and
Notify Requester
Not Needed
Needed
Categorize/
Prioritize
Select Next
Task from
Queue
Evaluate
Type?
FIGURE 9.19
Change requests are prioritized 
based on business benefits.
Obtaining Maintenance Requests
Designing Changes
Implementing Changes
Transforming Requests into Changes
Systems
Planning and
Selection
Systems
Design
Systems
Analysis
Systems
Implementation
and Operation
FIGURE 9.20
Mapping of system maintenance 
activities to the SDLC.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     399
management systems use the Internet to check the software vendor’s website for available 
patches and/or updates. If the software vendor offers a new patch, the application will download 
and install the patch in order to fix the software flaw. An example of a patch management system 
in wide use is the Windows Update Service, which automatically connects to a Microsoft web 
service to download critical operating system patches for corrective maintenance (e.g., to fix 
bugs in the Windows operating system) or preventive maintenance (e.g., to fix security holes that 
could be exploited by malicious hackers).
As you can see, there is more to systems maintenance than you might think. Lots of time, 
effort, and money are spent in this final phase of a system’s development, and it is important 
to follow prescribed, structured steps. In fact, the approach to systems development described 
here—from the initial phase of identifying, selecting, and planning for systems to the final 
phase of systems maintenance—is a very structured and systematic process. Each phase is 
fairly well prescribed and requires active involvement by systems people, users, and 
managers.
Other Approaches to Designing and Building Systems
The SDLC is one approach to managing the development process, and it is a very good 
approach to follow when the requirements for the information system are highly structured 
and straightforward—for example, for a payroll or inventory system. Today, in addition to 
“standard” systems such as payroll and inventory systems, organizations need a broad vari-
ety of company-specific information systems, for which requirements either are very hard to 
specify in advance or are constantly changing. For example, an organization’s website is 
likely to evolve over time to keep pace with changing business requirements. How many 
websites have you visited in which the content or layout seemed to change almost every 
week? For this type of system, the SDLC might work as a development approach, but it 
would not be optimal.
SECURITY MATTERS 
Mobile Cybercrime
Whenever you look into your e-mail, you are likely to see mali-
cious messages intended to trick you into giving away sensitive 
information—such as your bank account number or login cre-
dentials—or install malicious software on your computer (see 
Chapter 10). In many cases, sophisticated spam filters recog-
nize the malicious intent, automatically route such messages 
into a spam folder, and disable hyperlinks to malicious web-
sites, thus protecting the user. In other cases, there are telltale 
signs that signal something fishy: for example, phishing mes-
sages mimicking that of a bank may contain multiple spelling 
or grammatical errors, hyperlinks pointing to non-bank 
domains, or missing name or account numbers.
However, other types of malicious software may be more 
difficult to detect, especially with mobile devices now being 
ubiquitous. In particular, mobile users who install apps from 
untrusted sources (i.e., outside of trusted app stores that per-
form various security scans on listed apps) risk installing mobile 
malware. In 2016, security researchers at the Slovakian IT secu-
rity company ESET discovered a type of mobile malware that 
was primarily targeted at Australian online banking users. The 
software was designed to trick users into giving away login 
credentials by presenting a fake login screen when the user 
opened the online banking application; the login credentials 
would then be sent to the criminals. What made this malware 
particularly dangerous was the fact that it was designed to cir-
cumvent two-factor authentication systems (where the user 
receives an SMS with a one-time code when accessing a legiti-
mate banking app); the malware intercepted the SMS and 
automatically forwarded the one-time code to the criminals, 
potentially allowing them to access the victim’s account.
In addition to targeting the apps of the largest banks in 
Australia, banking apps from New Zealand and Turkey were 
targeted as well. Further, the software could also provide fake 
login screens for other popular apps, including PayPal, Skype, 
eBay, and WhatsApp, thus putting potentially millions of users 
at risk. Thus, as a mobile user, you are not immune from secu-
rity issues; one of the most basic ways to protect yourself is to 
install apps only from trusted sources.
Based on:
Taha, M. (2016, March 10). Android bank app users targeted in 
sophisticated cybercrime attack. ABC Online. Retrieved March 
22, 2016, from http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-03-10/
cybercriminals-target-millions-of-bank-app-users/7237220

400    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
PROTOTYPING.  A commonly used alternative to the SDLC is prototyping, which uses a trial-
and-error approach for discovering how a system should operate. You may think that this does 
not sound like a process at all; however, you probably use prototyping all the time in many of 
your day-to-day activities, but you just do not know it. For example, when you buy new clothes, 
you likely use prototyping—that is, trial and error—by trying on several shirts before making a 
selection.
Figure 9.21 diagrams the prototyping process when applied to identifying/determining sys-
tem requirements. To begin the process, the system designer interviews one or several users of 
the system, either individually or as a group, in a JAD session. After the designer gains a general 
understanding of what the users want, he or she develops a prototype of the new system as 
quickly as possible to share with the users. The users may like what they see or ask for changes. 
If the users request changes, the designer modifies the prototype and again shares it with them. 
This process of sharing and refinement continues until the users approve the functionality of the 
system.
AGILE METHODOLOGIES.  The SDLC follows a fairly strict sequence and is very good for large 
projects with dozens or more developers as well as for problems where the system’s requirements 
are well understood. An alternative to the SDLC are a variety of agile methodologies. An agile 
methodology utilizes an evolutionary systems development approach that focuses on creating 
small, client-approved parts of the system as the project progresses rather than delivering one 
large application at the end of the project. Agile methodologies can be thought of as following 
a “spiral” development approach, where the system quickly evolves and improves over a series 
of iterations, or sprints, that spiral through each of SDLC phases. Each sprint has its own 
planning, analysis, design and implementation activities that inform the subsequent sprint (see 
Figure 9.22).
Proponents of the agile methodology approach argue that methodologies adapted from 
engineering, like the SDLC, generally do not fit well with many real-world software develop-
ment problems (Valacich & George, 2017). In engineering disciplines, such as civil engineering, 
requirements tend to be very well understood. Once the creative and difficult work of design is 
completed, construction becomes very predictable and may account for as much as 90 percent of 
the total project effort. For software, on the other hand, requirements are rarely well understood, 
and they typically change during software development process. With software, system con-
struction may account for as little as 15 percent of the total project effort, with design 
Collect
Requirements
Develop/Reﬁne
Prototype
Review Prototype
with User
Implement and
Use System
Does User
Accept
Prototype?
No
Yes
FIGURE 9.21
The prototyping 
process uses a trial-
and-error approach 
to discovering how a 
system should operate.
Analysis
Plan
Design
Implement/
Test
Sprints Toward
Completion
1
2
3
n...
FIGURE 9.22
Agile methodologies evolve using 
an iterative development approach.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     401
constituting as much as 50 percent. Techniques that work well for predictable, stable projects, 
such as bridge building, tend not to work as well for fluid, design-heavy projects such as writing 
new types of software. What is needed are methodologies that embrace change and that are able 
to deal with a lack of predictability. While agile methodologies are not for every project, they are 
highly recommended under the following conditions:
■
■Unpredictable or dynamic requirements
■
■Responsible and motivated developers
■
■Customers who understand the process and will get involved
An example of an agile methodology approach is eXtreme Programming. eXtreme Pro-
gramming (XP) is a software development methodology that centers around fast software 
release to customers, small development teams (usually pairs), and extensive code reviews and 
testing. With XP, all phases of the SDLC converge into a series of activities based on the basic 
processes of coding, testing, listening to customers, and designing. In addition to XP, there are 
many more approaches for designing and constructing information systems, such as Rapid 
Application Development (RAD) or object-oriented analysis and design (see the Technology 
Briefing). Each alternative approach has its strengths and weaknesses, providing a skilled sys-
tems analyst with a variety of tools to best meet the needs of a situation (for more, see Valacich 
& George, 2017).
Acquiring Information Systems
We have now explained some of the general approaches that organizations follow when building 
systems in-house with their own IS staff. Many times, however, this is not a feasible solution. 
The following are four situations in which you might need to consider alternative development 
strategies.
■
■Situation 1: Limited IS Staff. Often, an organization does not have the capability to build 
a system itself. Perhaps its development staff is small or deployed on other activities and 
does not have the capability to take on an in-house development project.
■
■Situation 2: IS Staff Has Limited Skill Set. In other situations, the IS staff may not have 
the skills needed to develop a particular kind of system. This has been especially true with 
the explosive growth of the web and mobile devices; many organizations are having out-
side groups develop and manage their websites and mobile apps.
■
■Situation 3: IS Staff Is Overworked. In some organizations, the IS staff may simply not 
have the time to work on all the systems that the organization requires or wants.
■
■Situation 4: Problems with Performance of IS Staff. Earlier in this book, we discussed 
how and why systems development projects could sometimes be risky. Often, the efforts 
of IS departments are derailed because of staff turnover, changing requirements, shifts in 
technology, or budget constraints. Regardless of the reason, the result is the same: another 
failed (or flawed) system.
When it isn’t possible or advantageous to develop a system in-house, organizations are pursuing 
two popular options:
1.	External acquisition of a prepackaged system
2.	Outsourcing systems development
These options are examined next.
External Acquisition
Purchasing an existing system from an outside vendor such as IBM, Oracle, or SAP is 
referred to as external acquisition. How does external acquisition of an information system 
work? Think about the process that you might use when buying a car. Do you simply walk 
into the first dealership you see, tell them you need a car, and see what they try to sell you? 
You had better not. Probably you have done some upfront analysis and know how much 
money you can afford to spend and what your needs are. If you have done your homework, 
you probably have an idea of what you want and which dealership can provide the type of car 
you desire.

402    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
Top Security Threats
There seems to be a never-ending stream of security threats. 
Each year, new vulnerabilities and threats are created (see 
Table 9.7). Ransomware is holding people’s data hostage. The 
Ashley Madison data breach has broken many hearts. Each 
leakage of nude photos of celebrities results in a near melt-
down of the Internet. As individuals and organizations increas-
ingly rely on information systems and gadgets, the stakes are 
increasingly higher. In 2015 alone, nearly 500 million records 
have been stolen by cyber thieves. Examples of such records 
include people’s health data, details of subscribers to an adul-
tery website, finance and banking accounts, detailed records 
of the background checks of virtually all U.S. governmental 
employees, and countless others.
How can this happen? Creators of legitimate as well as 
malicious software engage in systems development activities. 
Most (if not all) legitimate software contains vulnerabilities (or 
security holes). The reasons for this are manifold: increasing 
complexity of software makes it all but impossible to build a 
flawless system, developers may try to rush the product to mar-
ket and neglect proper testing procedures, security holes are 
introduced if change management procedures are not properly 
followed, or inexperienced developers may not be aware of the 
need for proper security measures. Cybercriminals try to dis-
cover these vulnerabilities and engage in systems development 
activities to build malicious software (i.e., threats) that exploit 
the vulnerabilities. Typically, cybercriminals use sophisticated 
software tools to discover the vulnerabilities. Once a vulnerabil-
ity is discovered, the process of creating the malware follows 
the systems development approaches discussed in this chapter; 
first, the criminals will need to analyze the requirements, then 
design and implement the software, and finally test its efficacy. 
The number of security incidents signals that in many cases, the 
criminals are successful. And what’s truly troubling is there is no 
end in sight. Experts believe that things are going to get worse 
before they get better. Given this dismal forecast, everyone 
needs to remain vigilant to best secure their online digital lives.
Based on:
Jain, K. (2015, September 7). These top 7 brutal cyber attacks prove 
“no one is immune to hacking.” The Hacker News. Retrieved March 
10, 2016, from http://thehackernews.com/2015/09/top-cyber-
attacks-1.html
Morgan, L. (2016, January 8). List of data breaches and cyber attacks 
in 2015—over 480 million leaked records. IT Governance Blog. 
Retrieved March 11, 2016, from http://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/
list-of-data-breaches-and-cyber-attacks-in-2015-over-275-million-
leaked-records
Osborne, C. (2015, November 10). The top security threats of 2016. 
ZDNet. Retrieved March 10, 2016, from http://www.zdnet.com/article/
the-top-security-threats-of-2016
Szoldra, P. (2015, December 29). The 9 worst cyber attacks of 2015. 
Tech Insider. Retrieved March 10, 2016, from http://www.techinsider 
.io/cyberattacks-2015-12
TABLE 9.7   Existing and Emerging Security Threats
Issue
Description
Hardware/IoT
Hardware-based cyber attacks are on the rise as criminals are finding ways to infiltrate various devices and gadgets 
(e.g., industrial control systems and IoT devices) that cannot be protected with normal antivirus software.
Ransomware
A type of malware that restricts access to the infected computer system in some way, and demands that the user 
pay a ransom to the malware operators to remove the restriction.
Unknown 
vulnerabilities
These reflect unintended flaws in hardware and software that leave it open to various forms of exploitation includ-
ing unauthorized access or malicious behavior.
Cloud services
Utilizing cloud services has allowed many companies to better manage IT costs and also provide individuals with 
incredible convenience; at the same time, this efficient model may come at a higher security price as malicious 
hackers increasingly focus on the cloud.
Wearables
Wearable technologies such as watches, fitness trackers, and smart clothing are typically connected to mobile 
device apps; poorly written apps can open backdoors to a cache of sensitive data.
Connected 
cars
Connected cars with onboard computers and applications are becoming mainstream; many of these technologies 
have inadequate security, potentially resulting in staggering safety concerns.
Warehouses of 
stolen data
The influx of widespread data breaches of patient, employee, and customer data has made available a treasure 
trove of data on the “dark web,” putting individuals and organizations at tremendous risk.
Hacktivism
The act of hacking, or breaking into a computer system, for a politically or socially motivated purpose continues to 
concern businesses and governments.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     403
This upfront analysis of your needs can be extremely helpful in narrowing your options and 
can save you a lot of time. Understanding your needs can also help you sift through the sales-
people’s hype that you are likely to encounter from one dealer to the next as each tries to sell you 
on why his or her model is perfect for you. After getting some information, you may want to 
take a couple of promising models for a test drive, actually getting behind the wheel to see how 
well the car fits you and your driving habits. You might even talk to other people who have 
owned this type of car to see how they feel about it. Ultimately, you are the one who has to 
evaluate all the different cars to see which one is best for you. They may all be good cars; how-
ever, one may fit your needs just a little better than the others.
The external acquisition of an information system is very similar to the purchase of a car. 
When you acquire a new system, you should do some analysis of your specific needs. For example, 
how much can you afford to spend, what basic functionality is required, and approximately how 
many people will use the system? Next, you can begin to “shop” for the new system by asking 
potential vendors to provide information about the systems that they have to offer. After you evalu-
ate this information, it may become clear that several vendors have systems that are worth consid-
ering. You may ask those vendors to come to your organization and set up their systems so that you 
and your colleagues are able to “test-drive” them. Seeing how people react to the systems and see-
ing how each system performs in the organizational environment can help you “see” exactly what 
you are buying. By seeing the actual system and how it performs with real users, with real or simu-
lated data, you can get a much clearer idea of whether that system fits your needs. When you take a 
car for a test drive, you learn how the car meets your needs. By seeing how the system meets your 
needs before you buy, you can greatly reduce the risk associated with acquiring that system.
STEPS IN EXTERNAL ACQUISITION.  In many cases, your organization will use a competitive bid 
process for making an external acquisition. In the competitive bid process, vendors are given an 
opportunity to propose systems that meet the organization’s needs. The goal of the competitive 
process is to help the organization ensure that it gets the best system at the lowest possible price. 
Most competitive external acquisition processes have at least five general steps (Figure 9.23):
1.	Systems planning and selection
2.	Systems analysis
3.	Development of a request for proposal
4.	Proposal evaluation
5.	Vendor selection
You have already learned about the first two steps because they apply when you build a sys-
tem yourself as well as when you purchase a system through an external vendor. Step 3, develop-
ment of a request for proposal, is where the external acquisition process differs significantly 
from in-house development.
DEVELOPMENT OF A REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL.  A request for proposal (RFP) is a document 
that is used to tell vendors what your requirements are and to invite them to provide information 
about how they might be able to meet those requirements. An RFP is sent to vendors who might 
potentially be interested in providing hardware and/or software for the system.
Among the areas that may be covered in an RFP are the following:
■
■A summary of existing systems and applications
■
■Requirements for system performance and features
■
■Reliability, backup, and service requirements
■
■The criteria that will be used to evaluate proposals
■
■Timetable and budget constraints (how much you can spend)
The RFP is then sent to prospective vendors along with an invitation to present their bids for the 
project. Eventually, you will likely receive a number of proposals to evaluate. If, on the other hand, 
you do not receive many proposals, it may be necessary to rethink the requirements—perhaps the 
requirements are greater than the budget limitations or the time frame is too short. In some 
Systems
planning and
selection
Systems
analysis
Development
of a request
for proposal
Proposal
evaluation
Vendor
selection
FIGURE 9.23
Steps in external 
acquisition.

404    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
situations, you may first need to send out a preliminary request for information simply to gather 
information from prospective vendors. This will help you determine whether, indeed, the desired 
system is feasible or even possible. If you determine that it is, you can then send out an RFP. Often, 
rather than trying to identify all potential vendors and sending out RFPs, companies set up a project 
website, allowing potential bidders to find out more about the organization and its current and 
planned information systems (Figure 9.24).
PROPOSAL EVALUATION.  The fourth step in external acquisition is to evaluate proposals 
received from vendors. This evaluation may include viewing system demonstrations, evaluating 
the performance of those systems, examining criteria important to the organization, and judging 
how the proposed systems “stack up” to those criteria. Demonstrations are a good way to get a 
feel for the different systems’ capabilities. Just as you can go to the showroom to look at a new 
car and get a feel for whether it meets your needs, it is also possible to screen various systems 
through a demonstration from the vendor. During a demonstration, a sales team from the vendor 
gives an oral presentation about the system, its features, and its cost followed by a demonstration 
of the actual system. Although such demonstrations are often useful in helping you understand 
the features of different systems being proposed, they are rarely enough in and of themselves to 
warrant purchasing the system without further evaluation.
One of the methods you can use to evaluate a proposed system is systems benchmarking, 
which is the use of standardized performance tests to facilitate comparison between systems. 
Benchmark programs are sample programs or jobs that simulate a system’s workload. You can 
have benchmarks designed to test portions of the system that are most critical to your needs, 
based on your systems analysis. A benchmark program might test how long it takes to calculate 
a set of numbers, how long it takes to access a set of records in a database, or how long it would 
take to access certain information given a certain number of concurrent users. Some common 
system benchmarks include the following:
■
■Response time given a specified number of users
■
■Time to sort records
■
■Time to retrieve a set of records
■
■Time to produce a given report
■
■Time to read in a set of data
In addition, vendors may also supply benchmarks that you can use, although you should not 
rely solely on vendor information. For popular systems, you may be able to rely on system 
benchmarks published in computer trade journals such as PC Magazine or on industry websites 
such as www.cnet.com. However, in most cases, demos and benchmarks alone do not provide all 
the information you need to make a purchase. The systems analysis phase should have revealed 
some specific requirements for the new system. These requirements may be listed as criteria that 
the organization can use to further evaluate vendor proposals. Depending on what you are 
www.fomoco.com/erp-rfp
RFP Requirements for Fomoco Enterprise-Wide System
Summary of existing systems and applications
System performance and features
Reliability, backup, and service requirements
Evaluation criteria
Timetable
Budget
FIGURE 9.24
Sample RFP website for an 
information systems project.


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     405
purchasing—hardware, software, or both—the criteria you use will change. Table 9.8 provides 
examples of commonly used evaluation criteria.
VENDOR SELECTION.  In most cases, more than one system will meet your needs, just as more 
than one car will usually meet your needs. However, some probably “fit” better than others. In 
these cases, you should have a way of prioritizing or ranking competing proposals. One way of 
doing this is by devising a scoring system for each of the criteria and benchmarking results as 
described when making the business case.
Companies may use other, less formalized approaches to evaluate vendors. Sometimes they 
use simple checklists; other times they use a more subjective process. Regardless of the mecha-
nism, eventually a company completes the evaluation stage and selects a vendor, ending the 
external acquisition process.
MANAGING SOFTWARE LICENSING.  When purchasing commercial, off-the-shelf software, 
companies usually have to agree to a license agreement. In general, software licenses can be 
classified based on their restrictiveness or the freedom they offer to use or modify the software. 
Software licensing has been a hot-button topic for software companies as they lose billions in 
piracy and mislicensed customers (see Chapter 10). Traditionally, software licensing is defined 
as the permissions and rights that are imposed on applications; the use of software without a 
proper license is illegal in most countries.
Most software licenses differ in terms of restrictiveness, ranging from no restrictions at all to 
completely restricted. Note that although freeware or shareware is freely available, the copyright 
owners often retain their rights and do not provide access to the program’s source code. For organi-
zations using proprietary software, two types of licenses are of special importance. The first type 
includes the shrink-wrap licenses and click-wrap licenses that accompany the software, which 
are used primarily for generic, off-the-shelf application and systems software. The shrink-wrapped 
contract has been named as such because the contract is activated when the shrink wrap on the 
packaging has been removed; similarly, a click-wrap license refers to a license primarily used for 
downloaded software that requires computer users to click on “I accept” before installing the soft-
ware. The second type of license is an enterprise license (also known as a volume license). Enter-
prise licenses can vary greatly and are usually negotiated. In addition to rights and permissions, 
enterprise licenses usually contain limitations of liability and warranty disclaimers that protect the 
software vendor from being sued if its software does not operate as expected.
As shown in Table 9.9, there are a variety of software licenses. For different business needs, 
organizations often depend on a variety of software, each having different licenses, which can 
cause headaches for many organizations. For organizations, not knowing about the software 
installed can have a variety of consequences. For example, companies are not able to negotiate 
volume licensing options, unused licenses strain the organization’s budget, or license violations 
can lead to fines or public embarrassment. Software asset management helps organizations to 
avoid such negative consequences. Usually, software asset management consists of a set of activi-
ties, such as performing a software inventory (either manually or using automated tools), match-
ing the installed software with the licenses, reviewing software-related policies and procedures, 
and creating a software asset management plan. The results of these processes help organizations 
to better manage their software infrastructure by being able to consolidate and standardize their 
software titles, decide to retire unused software, or decide when to upgrade or replace software.
TABLE 9.8   Commonly Used Evaluation Criteria
Hardware Criteria
Software Criteria
Other Criteria
Brand/manufacturer
Speed/storage
Reliability
Scalability for growth
Ease of installation
Ease of integration
Warranty
Business alignment
Required/desired features
Reliability
Operations integration
Scalability for growth
Support model
Usability
Installation/training
Vendor characteristics (years 
in business, flexibility, reputa-
tion, etc.)
Price

406    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
EXTERNAL ACQUISITION THROUGH THE CLOUD.  Undoubtedly, managing the software 
infrastructure is a complex task, often resulting in high operating costs for organizations; further, 
many systems are not scalable in response to large fluctuations in demand. To deal with these 
issues, business organizations increasingly use software as a service (SaaS)—that is, clients 
access applications in the cloud on an as-needed basis using standard web-enabled interfaces (see 
Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services”). For organizations, 
using SaaS provides a variety of benefits, such as a reduced need to maintain or upgrade software, 
variable costs based on the actual use of the services (rather than fixed IS costs), and the ability 
to rely on a provider that has gained considerable expertise because of a large number of clients.
Outsourcing Systems Development
Outsourcing systems development is a way to acquire new systems that closely resembles the 
process of in-house development. However, in the case of outsourcing, the responsibility for 
some or all of an organization’s information systems development (and potentially the day-to-
day management of its operation) is turned over to an outside firm such as Infosys or Accenture. 
Information systems outsourcing includes a variety of working relationships. The outside firm, 
or service provider, may develop your information systems applications and house them within 
their organization, it may run your applications on its computers, or it may develop systems to 
run on existing computers within your organization. Anything is fair game in an outsourcing 
arrangement. Today, outsourcing has become a big business and is a very popular option for 
many organizations (see Chapter 1 for more information on outsourcing).
WHY OUTSOURCING?  A firm might outsource some (or all) of its information systems services 
for varied reasons. Some of these are old reasons, but some are new to today’s environment 
(Applegate, Austin, & Soule, 2009):
■
■Cost and Quality Concerns. In many cases it is possible to achieve higher-quality systems 
at a lower price through economies of scale, better management of hardware, lower labor 
costs, and better software licenses on the part of a service provider.
■
■Problems in IS Performance. IS departments may have problems meeting acceptable ser-
vice standards because of cost overruns, delayed systems, underutilized systems, or poorly 
performing systems. In such cases, organizational management may attempt to increase 
reliability through outsourcing.
TABLE 9.9   Different Types of Software Licenses
Restrictiveness
Software Types
Rights
Restrictions
Examples
Full rights
Public domain software
Full rights
No restrictions; owner 
forsakes copyright
Different programs for 
outdated IBM mainframes
Non-protective open 
source (e.g., Berkeley 
software development 
[BSD] license)
Freedom to copy, modify, 
and redistribute the soft-
ware; can be incorporated 
into a commercial product
Creator retains copyright
Free BSD operating sys-
tem; BSD components in 
(proprietary) Mac OS X 
operating system
Protective open source 
(e.g., general public 
license [GPL])
Freedom to copy, modify, 
and redistribute the 
software
Modified or redistributed 
software must be made 
available under the same 
license; cannot be incor-
porated into commercial 
product
Linux operating system
Proprietary software
Right to run the software 
(for licensed users)
Access to source code 
severely restricted; no 
rights to copy or modify 
software
Windows operating 
system
No rights
Trade secret
Software typically only 
used internally
Access to source code 
severely restricted; soft-
ware is not distributed 
outside the organization
Google PageRanktm 
algorithm


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     407
■
■Supplier Pressures. Perhaps not surprisingly, some of the largest service providers are also 
the largest suppliers of software or computer equipment (e.g., IBM or HP). In some cases, 
the aggressive sales forces of these suppliers are able to convince senior managers at other 
organizations to outsource their IS functions.
■
■Simplifying, Downsizing, and Reengineering. Organizations under competitive pressure 
often attempt to focus on only their “core competencies.” In many cases, organizations 
simply decide that running information systems is not one of their core competencies and 
decide to outsource this function to companies such as Infosys, Accenture, or IBM whose 
primary competency is developing and maintaining information systems.
■
■Financial Factors. When firms turn over their information systems to a service provider, 
they can sometimes strengthen their balance sheets by liquidating their IT assets. Also, if 
users perceive that they are actually paying for their IT services rather than simply having 
them provided by an in-house staff, they may use those services more wisely and perceive 
them to be of greater value.
■
■Organizational Culture. Political or organizational problems are often difficult for an 
IS group to overcome. However, an external service provider often brings enough clout, 
devoid of any organizational or functional ties, to streamline IS operations as needed.
■
■Internal Irritants. Tensions between end users and the IS staff are sometimes difficult to 
eliminate. At times this tension can intrude on the daily operations of the organization, and 
the idea of a remote, external, relatively neutral IS group can be appealing. Whether the 
tensions between users and the IS staff (or service provider) are really eliminated is open 
to question; however, simply having the IS group external to the organization can remove a 
lingering thorn in management’s side.
MANAGING THE IS OUTSOURCING RELATIONSHIP.  The ongoing management of an outsourcing 
alliance is the single most important aspect of the outsourcing project’s success. Some advice 
includes the following:
1.	A strong, active chief information officer (CIO) and staff should continually manage the 
legal and professional relationship with the outsourcing firm.
2.	Clear, realistic performance measurements of the systems and of the outsourcing arrange-
ment, such as tangible and intangible costs and benefits, should be developed.
3.	The interface between the customer and the outsourcer should have multiple levels (e.g., links to 
deal with policy and relationship issues and links to deal with operational and tactical issues).
Managing outsourcing alliances in this way has important implications for the success of the 
relationship. For example, in addition to making sure a firm has a strong CIO and staff, McFarlan 
and Nolan (1995) recommend that firms assign full-time relationship managers and coordinating 
groups lower in the organization to “manage” the project. The structure and nature of the internal 
system activities change from exclusively building and managing systems to also including man-
aging relationships with outside firms that build and manage systems under legal contract.
USING OUTSOURCING STRATEGICALLY.  Outsourcing can have many benefits to an organization, 
but it is important to know what and when outsource. Apple, for example, designs its new 
products internally but outsources product manufacturing. To Apple, quality and innovative 
design are central to its strategy—this strategic task cannot be outsourced! However, once the 
product is designed successfully, getting it reliably constructed is critical but not central to 
Apple’s strategy. Apple simply needs a reliable partner to execute the manufacturing process. 
This suggests two key questions (Cohn, 2015):
1.	What to outsource?
2.	When to outsource?
To provide a product or service, a company must perform many different types of tasks. Under-
standing the difference between strategic, critical, and routine tasks is important when considering 
what to outsource. For example, imagine if you just launched an energy drink company. This energy 
drink is quite expensive, utilizing a proprietary formula and the finest ingredients. Given the impor-
tance of quality control, manufacturing of your drink is not likely the best candidate for outsourcing. 
However, how the product gets shipped to stores is critical but not strategic. So, a reliable outsourc-
ing partner like UPS might be attractive. Likewise, many routine tasks, such as the printing of a new 
product flier or even janitorial services in your offices, can be easily outsourced without putting the 
company in jeopardy. Such nonstrategic tasks are strong candidates for outsourcing.

408    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
It is almost always a good time to consider outsourcing nonstrategic tasks. However, some 
tasks will change in importance over time, creating a cost versus time trade-off to consider. For 
example, for your new energy drink company, you need an attractive and informative website so 
that customers can read all about your product and company. Nevertheless, at this time, you are 
distributing your product exclusively through retail outlets and are not utilizing the web and 
social media as a key aspect of your marketing and distribution strategy. However, you believe 
that sometime in the future, you plan to pursue an aggressive online marketing and social media 
strategy. So, you could justify hiring an internal web development team today (because you will 
need them someday) or push this decision into the future, utilizing a local web developer to cre-
ate your initial online identity. Hiring an internal team will be more expensive; outsourcing the 
development will be faster. Down the road, when you shift your strategy, you will likely be bet-
ter off having your own development and social media marketing team. So, at one point in time, 
it may make sense to use outsourcing; however, at some other time, the situation may change 
and outsourcing may no longer be the best approach. Just as in your new energy drink company, 
many organizations are identifying strategic ways to utilize outsourcing.
It is likely that you will have numerous opportunities to participate in the acquisition or 
development of a new system for an organization for which you currently work or will work in 
the future. Now that you have an understanding of the process, you should be better equipped to 
make a positive contribution to the success of any systems development project.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Broadcasting
Only a few years ago, radio and television were among the pri-
mary sources for satisfying the desire for both entertainment 
and up-to-date news and information. Over the past few years, 
this situation has changed dramatically, with many people turn-
ing to the Internet for both entertainment and information.
For many television news companies, the Internet has 
opened opportunities, as news features can be easily transmit-
ted over the Internet, allowing easier connection between the 
newsrooms and the “action” in the field. At the same time, 
viewing habits have changed, and many viewers prefer to 
obtain their latest news via the Internet or while on the move. 
As a reaction, television stations (both focusing on news and 
entertainment) are increasingly using the Internet as a distribu-
tion medium for their content.
These changes force TV stations to adjust their revenue 
models. Whereas traditionally large revenues were derived 
from TV advertising, advertisers are now less willing to pay 
high advertising fees in light of dwindling viewership. On the 
other hand, TV stations can potentially charge more for adver-
tising tied to online shows, as the Internet offers benefits such 
as advertising targeted at the individual viewer and provides 
detailed tracking metrics such as click-through rates, allowing 
the advertiser to directly assess the success of a campaign.
For radio stations, the situation is similar. With more and 
more people listening to various Internet radio stations, using 
music streaming services like Pandora or Spotify, listening to 
satellite radio, and downloading music or audiobooks, the 
number of listeners to traditional radio has dwindled and 
along with it advertising revenues. Online advertising now sur-
passes radio advertising spending. Facing competition from 
Internet radio, satellite radio, podcasting, and a plethora of 
other online diversions, many radio stations will have to find 
innovative ways to prosper in these times of profound change.
Questions
1.	 What is the effect of the Internet on the quality of television 
and radio content? With less advertising revenue, how can 
broadcasters continue to produce high-quality content?
2.	 Today, AM/FM stations are competing with thousands of 
Internet radio stations, music streaming, and downloading. 
Forecast their future and provide a strategy for retaining 
and gaining market share.
Based on:
Bennette, J. (2015, May 12). 4 trends shaping the future of television. 
Adobe Primetime Blog. Retrieved March 11, 2016, from http://blogs 
.adobe.com/primetime/2015/05/4-trends-shaping-future-of-tv
Halperin, S. & Trust, G. (2015, January 12). Roundtable: Five execs 
examine radio’s uncertain future in the streaming age. Billboard. 
Retrieved March 11, 2016, from http://www.billboard.com/ 
articles/6436526/roundtable-radios-future-streaming-charlie-walk- 
tom-poleman-anya-grundmann-steve-blatter-michael-martin
ITU. (2013). Trends in broadcasting: An overview of developments. 
International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved May 20, 2016, from 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Technology/Documents/Broadcasting/
TrendsinBroadcasting.pdf
Leggett, T. (2014, January 3). Is niche Internet television broadcasting 
the future? BBC.com. Retrieved March 11, 2016, from http://www 
.bbc.com/news/business-25457001
Rose, A. (2013, May 1). Exploring the connected future of TV and the 
challenge to broadcasters. The Guardian. Retrieved March 11, 2016, 
from http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/may/01/
connected-tv-broadcasters

 
CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     409
Key Points Review
1.	 Describe how to formulate and present the business 
case for technology investments. Making the business 
case is the process of building and presenting the set of 
arguments that show that an information system 
investment is adding value to an organization. In order 
to make a convincing presentation, you should be 
specific about the benefits this investment will provide 
for the organization. Choosing the wrong measures can 
yield a negative decision about a beneficial system.
2.	 Describe the systems development life cycle and its 
various phases. The development of information 
systems follows a process called the systems 
development life cycle. The SDLC is a process that first 
identifies the need for a system and then defines the 
processes for designing, developing, and maintaining an 
information system. The process is very structured and 
formal and requires the active involvement of managers 
and users. The SDLC has four phases: systems planning 
and selection, systems analysis, systems design, and 
systems implementation and operation. After the 
implementation, a system moves into an ongoing 
maintenance phase. A variety of other approaches are 
available to enhance the development process for 
different types of systems and contexts.
3.	 Explain how organizations acquire systems via 
external acquisition and outsourcing. External 
acquisition is the process of purchasing an existing 
information system from an external organization or 
vendor. External acquisition is a five-step process. 
Steps 1 and 2 mirror the first two steps of the SDLC. 
Step 3 is the development of a request for proposal 
(RFP). Step 4 is proposal evaluation, which focuses on 
evaluating proposals received from vendors. Step 5 is 
vendor selection, which focuses on choosing the 
vendor to provide the system. Outsourcing refers to the 
turning over of partial or entire responsibility for 
information systems development and management to 
an outside organization.
Key Terms
adaptive maintenance  397
agile methodology  400
alpha testing  396
beta testing  396
break-even analysis  380
capital expenditure  379
change request management  398
click-wrap license  405
corrective maintenance  397
cost–benefit analysis  380
data flows  392
developmental testing  396
discount rate  380
enterprise license  405
external acquisition  401
eXtreme programming (XP)  401
human–computer interface (HCI)  394
information systems planning  390
intangible benefit  379
intangible cost  379
joint application design (JAD)  391
making the business case  374
net-present-value analysis  380
non-capital expenditure  379
non-recurring cost  379
open source software  386
operational expenditure  379
patch management system  398
perfective maintenance  397
preventive maintenance  397
processing logic  392
productivity paradox  375
project manager  388
prototyping  400
proxy variable  383
pseudocode  392
recurring cost  379
request for proposal (RFP)  403
requirements collection  391
shrink-wrap license  405
software asset management  405
software bug  389
system conversion  396
systems analysis  391
systems analysis and design  385
systems analyst  385
systems benchmarking  404
systems design  394
systems development controls  389
systems development life cycle 
(SDLC)  389
systems implementation  395
systems integration  387
systems maintenance  397
systems planning and  
selection  390
tangible benefit  379
tangible cost  379
total cost of ownership  
(TCO)  379
usability  395
volume license  405
weighted multicriteria analysis  381
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM

410    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
Review Questions
	 9-1. 	Describe the productivity paradox.
	 9-2. 	Describe how to make a successful business 
case, contrasting faith-, fear-, and fact-based 
arguments.
	 9-3. 	Compare and contrast tangible and intangible 
benefits and costs.
	 9-4. 	What are the four phases of the systems 
development life cycle (SDLC)?
	 9-5. 	List and describe five techniques used in 
requirements collection.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
	 9-6. 	What are the three major components/tasks of 
the systems design phase of the SDLC?
	 9-7. 	What are the four options for system conver-
sion? How do they differ from each other?
	 9-8. 	Compare and contrast the four types of sys-
tems maintenance.
	 9-9. 	Describe the two key questions related to 
outsourcing.
	 9-10. 	List and describe two main types of software 
licenses.
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	 9-11. 	Which of the following is not one of the four phases of 
the systems development life cycle?
A.	systems analysis
B.	systems implementation
C.	systems design
D.	systems acquisition
	 9-12. 	______________ is the process of gathering and orga-
nizing information from users, managers, business pro-
cesses, and documents to understand how a proposed 
information system should function.
A.	Requirements collection
B.	Systems collection
C.	Systems analysis
D.	Records archiving
	 9-13. 	Which of the following is the correct order of phases 
in the systems development life cycle?
A.	analysis, planning, design, implementation
B.	analysis, design, planning, implementation
C.	planning, analysis, design, implementation
D.	design, analysis, planning, implementation
	 9-14. 	In the systems design phase, the elements that must be 
designed when building an information system include 
all of the following except ______________.
A.	the human–computer interface
B.	questionnaires
C.	databases and files
D.	processing and logic
	 9-15. 	______________ maintenance involves making 
enhancements to improve processing performance or 
interface usability or adding desired (but not necessar-
ily required) system features (in other words, “bells 
and whistles”).
A.	Preventive
B.	Perfective
C.	Corrective
D.	Adaptive
	 9-16. 	Which of the following is not one of the three types of 
arguments commonly made in the business case for an 
information system?
A.	fear
B.	fact
C.	faith
D.	fiction
	 9-17. 	A ______________ is a document that an organiza-
tion uses to tell vendors what its requirements are and 
to invite them to provide information about how they 
might be able to meet those requirements.
A.	request letter
B.	vendor request
C.	request for proposal
D.	requirements specification
	 9-18. 	A user of proprietary software has the right to 
____________ the software.
A.	copy
B.	run
C.	modify
D.	redistribute
	 9-19. 	Which of the following factors is a good reason to 
outsource?
A.	problems in IS performance
B.	supplier pressures
C.	financial factors
D.	all of the above
	 9-20. 	Most competitive external acquisition processes have 
at least five general steps. Which of the following is 
not one of those steps?
A.	vendor selection
B.	proposal evaluation
C.	development of a request for proposal
D.	implementation
Answers are on page 413.

 
CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     411
Problems and Exercises
	 9-21. 	Match the following terms with the appropriate definitions:
i.	 Request for proposal
ii.	 Systems benchmarking
iii.	 Alpha testing
iv.	 Systems development life cycle
v.	 Productivity paradox
vi.	 Prototyping
vii.	 Pilot conversion
viii.	 Systems analysis
ix.	 Outsourcing
x.	 External acquisition
xi.	 Data flows
xii.	 Requirements collection
a.	 The movement of data through an organization or 
within an information system
b.	 Term that describes the life of an information 
system from conception to retirement
c.	 The second phase of the systems development life 
cycle
d.	 The process of gathering and organizing informa-
tion from users, managers, business processes, and 
documents to understand how a proposed informa-
tion system should function
e.	 Testing performed by the development organiza-
tion to assess whether the entire system meets the 
design requirements of the users
f.	 Using a new system in one location before rolling it 
out to the entire organization
g.	 A systems development methodology that uses 
a trial-and-error approach for discovering how a 
system should operate
h.	 The practice of turning over responsibility for some 
or all of an organization’s information systems 
development and operations to an outside firm
i.	 The observation that productivity increases at a rate 
that is lower than expected when new technologies 
are introduced
j.	 The process of purchasing an existing system from 
an outside vendor
k.	 A way to evaluate a proposed system by testing a 
portion of it with the system workload
l.	 A document that is used to tell vendors what the 
requirements are and to invite them to provide 
information about how they might be able to meet 
those requirements
	 9-22. 	As a non-IS professional, would you want to be 
involved in IS investment decisions? Why or why not? 
In what aspects would you want to be involved? What 
would your desired level of involvement be?
	 9-23. 	Perform a cost-benefit analysis for the purchase of a 
new smartphone. Which costs or benefits are easiest or 
most difficult to quantify? Why?
	 9-24. 	Perform a weighted multicriteria analysis for the pur-
chase of a new smartphone. Identify four requirements 
and four constraints that would influence your purchase 
decision, and assign weights to these criteria. Now, 
research three different smartphone models, and rate 
them based on your criteria. Which model would you 
purchase? Why?
	 9-25. 	Convince your parents to give you money for a new car. 
Provide three examples each of fear, faith, or fact argu-
ments. Which arguments will be most successful in con-
vincing your parents? Why?
	 9-26. 	Interview an IS professional about the perspectives of 
different stakeholders in making IS investment deci-
sions. What are the main perspectives? How far do 
they influence the final outcome?
	 9-27. 	Envision a mobile app that helps you plan weekend 
­outdoor activities by providing location-specific weather 
updates based on data provided by the meteorological 
service. Specify a set of requirements, identify the data 
needs, and present the processing logic in pseudocode.
	 9-28. 	When Mozilla posts a new version of the Firefox 
browser on its website and states that this is a beta ver-
sion, what does it mean? Is this a final working version 
of the software, or is it still being tested? Who is doing 
the testing? Search the web to find other companies 
that have beta versions of their products available to the 
public. You might try Corel (www.corel.com) or Adobe 
(www.adobe.com). What other companies did you find?
	 9-29. 	Search the Web for alternatives to the SDLC. What 
alternatives do you find that have not been covered in 
the book? What types of systems are these alternative 
approaches most suited for? Why?
	 9-30. 	Interview an IS professional about the extent of test-
ing for a new information system. How is the testing 
planned? Who is involved in the testing? Under which 
circumstances may testing be cut short?
	 9-31. 	Interview an IS professional about the way changes to 
information systems software are managed. Is there a 
formal change request management process? Why or 
why not? How are change requests prioritized within the 
organization?
	 9-32. 	Find an organization on the Internet (e.g., at www 
.computerworld.com or www.infoworld.com) or a 
company you may want to work for in the future that 
outsources work. What are the managerial challenges 
of outsourcing, and why is this a popular alternative to 
hiring additional staff?
	 9-33. 	Search the Web for a request for proposal (RFP) for an 
information system. What type of system is the orga-
nization looking for? What areas are covered in the 
RFP? How detailed is the RFP? How much burden is 
placed on the respondents in preparing the proposal?

412    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application: Outsourcing Informa-
tion Systems at Campus Travel
	 9-34. 	Campus Travel wants to increase its customer focus 
and wants to be able to better serve its most valued 
customers. Many members of the frequent-flier pro-
gram have requested the ability to check on the status 
of their membership online; furthermore, the frequent 
fliers would welcome the opportunity to book reward 
flights online. As you know that there are a number of 
companies specializing in building such transactional 
systems, you have decided to outsource the develop-
ment of such a system. The following weights are 
assigned to evaluate the different vendors’ systems:
■
■Online booking capability: 20 percent
■
■User friendliness: 25 percent
■
■Maximum number of concurrent users: 20 percent
■
■Integration with current systems: 10 percent
■
■Vendor support: 10 percent
■
■Price: 15 percent
	
	 To evaluate the different offers, you need to calculate 
a weighted score for each vendor using the data pro-
vided in the Outsourcing.csv spreadsheet. To calculate 
the total points for each vendor, do the following:
■
■Open the file Outsourcing.csv.
■
■Use the SUMPRODUCT formula to multiply each 
vendor’s scores with the respective weights and add 
the weighted scores.
■
■Use conditional formatting to highlight all vendors 
falling below a total of 60 percent and above a total 
of 85 percent to facilitate the vendor selection.
Database Application: Building a Special Needs 
Database for Campus Travel
	 9-35. 	In addition to international travel, travel reservations 
for people with special needs is an area of specialty 
of Campus Travel. However, to be able to recommend 
travel destinations and travel activities, you should 
know what facilities are available at each destination. 
Therefore, you have been asked to create a database 
of the destinations and the type of facilities that are 
available for people with special needs. In order to 
make the system as useful as possible for all, you need 
to design reports for the users to retrieve information 
about each destination. Your manager would like to 
have a system that contains the following information 
about the destinations:
■
■Location
■
■Availability of facilities for the physically 
handicapped
■
■Distance to medical facilities
■
■Pet friendliness
	
	 Each location may have one or more handicap facility 
(e.g., hearing, walking, sight, and so on). A type of 
handicap facility can be present at multiple locations. 
Also, each location has to have one pet-friendly 
accommodation/activity and may also have accom-
modation for different types of pets (dogs, cats, and 
so on). After designing the database, please design 
three professionally formatted reports that (1) list the 
locations in alphabetical order, (2) list all locations that 
have the handicap facilities for those that find it dif-
ficult to walk, and (3) list all locations that have a cat-
friendly policy.
	
	 	
Hint: In Microsoft Access, you can create queries 
before preparing the reports. Enter a few sample data 
sets to populate the reports.
Team Work Exercise
Net Stats: Moore’s Law  
and the Laggards
The technology industry, laboring under Moore’s Law, depends 
on technology users to regularly adopt new hardware and soft-
ware. Millions of users, however, accustomed to the tried and 
true, would rather stick with those products they know—at 
least as long as possible. Sometimes the reason for not rushing 
to replace the old with the new is familiarity with and an 
acquired expertise in using the older version of a product or 
service. Some recent examples of people not rushing to replace 
the old include the following:
■
■In December 2015, 67 percent of U.S. households had 
broadband Internet access, but 13 percent had no broad-
band at home.
■
■In the third quarter of 2015, Microsoft still earned 
more revenue from selling feature phones (a leg-
acy from its Nokia acquisition) than from selling 
smartphones.
■
■In March 2016, worldwide, millions of users were still 
using Windows XP, released in 2001, with more than 
11 percent market share, even though Microsoft officially 
ended support for this product.
■
■In March 2016, Windows 7 still had 52 percent of the 
desktop market share. Windows 10 had only 13 percent.
Individual computer users are free to opt to be tortoises 
or hares regarding the adoption of new technology. Informa-
tion technology (IT) directors, however, must usually fol-
low company culture and management preferences when 
deciding whether to adopt new technology. If management is 


CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     413
comfortable with risk and likes to be on the cutting edge, for 
example, IT directors can probably feel safe in adopting new 
technology early on. A staid, risk-averse management attitude, 
however, would probably not appreciate an IT director who 
rushes to adopt the newest technologies. In any event, whether 
to adopt new technology immediately as it becomes available 
is a decision that will always be with us.
Questions and Exercises
	 9-36.	 Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics and 
forecasts on people lagging behind in their adoption of 
new technologies.
	 9-37.	 As a team, interpret the changes in numbers (or 
stories). What is striking/important about these 
findings?
	 9-38.	 As a team, discuss what these numbers will look like 
in 5 years and 10 years. How are things in the U.S. 
market the same or different compared with the world? 
Where are things moving faster/slower? Why?
	 9-39.	 Using your spreadsheet or presentation software of 
choice, create a graph/figure/presentation to effectively 
visualize the findings you consider most important.
Based on:
Gilbert, D. (2015, October 23). Microsoft is making more money 
from sales of feature phones than smartphones. International Busi-
ness Times. Retrieved July 25, 2016, from http://www.ibtimes.com/
microsoft-making-more-money-sales-feature-phones-smartphones-2154087
Horrigan, J. B. & Duggan, M. (2015, December 21). Home broadband 
2015. Pew Research. Retrieved March 9, 2016, from http://www.pewinternet 
.org/2015/12/21/home-broadband-2015
NetMarketShare.com. (2016). Desktop operating system market share. 
Retrieved March 10, 2016, from https://www.netmarketshare.com/operating-
system-market-share.aspx
Smith, A. (2015, April 1). U.S. smartphone use in 2015. Pew Research. 
Retrieved March 9, 2016, from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/
us-smartphone-use-in-2015
Usage share of operating systems. (2016, March 8). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 11, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Usage_share_of_operating_systems&oldid=708940491
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 9-11.	 D, p. 389
	 9-12.	 A, p. 391
	 9-13.	 C, p. 389
	 9-14.	 B, p. 392
	 9-15.	 B, p. 397
	 9-16.	 D, p. 376
	 9-17.	 C, p. 403
	 9-18.	 B, p. 406
	 9-19.	 D, p. 407
	 9-20.	 D, p. 403

414    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
As crime-solving aids, first there was finger-
printing; decades later came DNA analysis. 
Next is the US$1.2 billion Next Generation 
Identification (NGI) database of the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), used to store 
biometric identification data ranging from 
palm prints to iris patterns, photos of scars 
and tattoos, and distinctive facial characteris-
tics for criminal identification. In the past, 
fingerprints have been the most widely used 
means of uniquely identifying people, with 
the FBI keeping more than 100 million sets 
of fingerprints in its current database dubbed 
the Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identi-
fication System (IAFIS). The NGI system 
will be more flexible and modular and store 
additional biometric characteristics. Unfortu-
nately, taken alone, many of those have been 
proven to be rather unreliable (facial recog-
nition accuracy in public places can be as 
low as 10 to 20 percent, depending on light-
ing conditions), such that a real increase in 
identification accuracy can come only from 
combining the results of multiple biometrics. 
As of 2016, the NGI system contained 
approximately 547 million face photos; how-
ever, additional biometric features such as 
iris scans had yet to be added.
Similar to the FBI’s IAFIS database, the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
maintains the massive Automated Biometric 
Identification System (IDENT) database. 
The Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
Agency (ICE), part of the DHS, uses this 
database in its Priority Enforcement Program 
(PEP) to aid in capturing criminal aliens. The 
PEP is a federal, state, and local government 
partnership that allows state and local law 
enforcement officials to quickly share data 
with ICE on captured suspects. The data for-
warded to ICE are used to make immigration 
processing and removing more efficient if 
the suspect turns out to be a criminal alien. 
At the heart of PEP is the automatic integra-
tion of the IAFIS and IDENT databases. 
When someone is arrested, local law enforce-
ment puts the suspect’s fingerprints into the 
FBI’s database. However, the fingerprints 
are checked not only against the FBI’s IAFIS 
system but also against the DHS’s IDENT 
database to see if the suspect is in the coun-
try legally. If the suspect isn’t legal, ICE can 
immediately begin the deportation process. 
The system also prioritizes removal of crimi-
nal aliens based on their risk to national 
security and the local community. The prior-
itization helps ensure that serious criminals 
(aliens or otherwise) are not inadvertently 
released and cuts down on the time criminal 
aliens must be held in custody before being 
returned to their home country. Since its 
deployment (2009–2015), more than 47 mil-
lion queries into the database have been 
made with 2.4 million matches leading to 
more than 400,000 deportations. The FBI’s 
NGI database will take this a step further, as 
it will not only be based on data from both 
existing databases but will also include a 
host of other biometric identifiers.
Both the FBI and Secure Communities 
programs (the predecessor of the PEP) have 
been criticized by privacy advocates. Critics 
say that Secure Communities, for example, 
can lead to unnecessary or prolonged deten-
tion, make accessing a lawyer difficult, and 
prevent release on bail. There is also a fear 
that there is no complaint mechanism associ-
ated with the systems. Opponents believe 
that victims of system errors will have little 
redress if they are erroneously identified as a 
criminal or illegal alien. In addition, oppo-
nents to the Secure Communities program 
argue that the integration of databases under-
mines the trust between immigrant commu-
nities and local law enforcement agencies. 
Fearing that illegal immigrants may be dis-
suaded from reporting crimes or may not be 
willing to serve as witnesses, Washington, 
D.C., Mayor Vincent Gray announced in 
June 2012 that law enforcement officers 
would be prohibited from asking about peo-
ple’s immigration status.
While the FBI and ICE maintain that 
their programs are strictly limited to crimi-
nals and those in the country illegally, pri-
vacy and civil rights activists are watching 
the developments to ensure that the govern-
ment respects the rights of its citizens.
CASE 1 
Next Generation Identification: FBI, ICE Databases Expand and Join Forces
Questions
	 9-40. 	 List a set of tangible and intangible benefits as well as tan-
gible and intangible costs for the FBI database system.
	 9-41. 	 Develop a set of faith-, fear-, and fact-based arguments to 
support the continued and ongoing expansion of the FBI data-
base. Which arguments do you think are the strongest? Why?
	 9-42. 	 Some privacy advocates argue that biometric systems can 
become unreliable and single out innocent people, especially 
over time as these databases become less accurate because 
of a person’s natural aging process, weight loss, weight gain, 
injury, or permanent disability. Discuss the problems associ-
ated with having these systems single out innocent people.
Based on:
American Immigration Council. (2011, November 29). Secure Communities: 
A fact sheet. Immigrationpolicy.org. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from http://www 
.immigrationpolicy.org/just-facts/secure-communities-fact-sheet
Anonymous. (n.d.). Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification Sys-
tem. FBI.gov. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/
fingerprints_biometrics/iafis/iafis
Howell, J. (2012, June 4). D.C. prepares to walk fine line on deportations. The 
Washington Times. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from http://www.washingtontimes 
.com/news/2012/jun/4/dc-prepares-to-walk-fine-line-on-deportations
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System. (2016, May 16). 
In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integrated_Automated_Fingerprint_ 
Identification_System&oldid=720594456
Markowitz, E. (2016, March 5). The FBI now has the largest biometric data-
base in the world. Will it lead to more surveillance? International Business 
Times. Retrieved May 9, 2016 from http://www.ibtimes.com/fbi-now-has-
largest-biometric-database-world-will-it-lead-more-surveillance-2345062
U.S. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement. (2015, February 28). ICE’s use 
of IDENT/IAFIS interoperability: Monthly statistics through February 28, 
2015. ICE.gov. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from https://www.ice.gov/sites/default/
files/documents/FOIA/2015/sc_stats_YTD2015.pdf
U.S. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement. (n.d.). Priority enforcement pro-
gram. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from https://www.ice.gov/pep

 
CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems     415
It may seem obvious that the amount of data in 
the world keeps getting larger and larger, but 
what is really meant by Big Data? Physical 
size of the storage device? Number of records? 
How do we effectively store it, and how do we 
approach doing useful things with it?
Big Data can be defined using three attri-
butes: volume, velocity, and variety. Volume 
refers to traditional measures of size—how 
many bytes. A byte is an encoding of informa-
tion using 8 bits—on or off states, like 1s and 
0s. Large numbers of bytes are quantified 
using the same prefixes as metric units. Kilo- 
means “a thousand,” mega- “a million,” giga- 
“a billion,” and so on. A single e-mail may be 
a few kilobytes of data including the message 
itself and the associated address information. 
A word processor document may be anywhere 
from a few kilobytes to a few megabytes 
depending on how long the contents are and if 
there are any embedded images. A high-defi-
nition movie takes up around 5 gigabytes 
when encoded and stored on a Blu-ray disc. 
An example of the high velocity of Big Data is 
the amount of video submitted to YouTube—
every minute more than 300 additional hours 
of video are uploaded. The variety aspect of 
Big Data represents all the different types of 
digital data we encounter—everything from 
e-mails, to homework assignments, to fitness 
tracker data, to photos, status updates, and VR 
videos. As the Internet of Things expands and 
more and more devices are connected all the 
time, the volume, velocity, and variety of data 
will only continue to increase.
So, how do we store and do something 
useful with this much data being generated 
so fast? Traditional mechanisms for storing 
and searching large data sets don’t scale 
well. In the early 2000s, Google started uti-
lizing a new approach that allowed for cheap 
hardware to be used to easily store and pro-
cess large data sets. The key to the approach 
is to expect failure of any given component 
of the system and to design the system such 
that it can easily and rapidly recover when 
such failures do occur. The Google File Sys-
tem (GFS) spreads data across multiple serv-
ers and incorporates redundancy such that if 
any one server goes down, the others can 
pick up where it left off and no data get lost. 
To do something useful with this much data, 
however, requires even more ingenuity. 
Google developed an approach to split que-
ries into multiple steps that can be distrib-
uted across multiple servers, much as the 
data files themselves get split up in GFS. 
First, the input data files are filtered and 
sorted into chunks (referred to as “map-
ping”). Then these chunks are distributed 
across multiple servers for processing. Each 
chunk gets processed into a smaller output 
set (the “reduce” step). The algorithm is 
designed in such a way that these steps can 
be performed simultaneously on each chunk 
on different servers at the same time. Just 
like GFS, if any given server fails, the others 
can smoothly recover and keep processing. 
These smaller output sets are then combined 
back together, and the process is repeated 
until a solution is reached. These steps lead 
to the algorithm’s name: MapReduce.
MapReduce was a proprietary technology 
that belonged to Google and was a key part of 
its competitive advantage in the early 2000s. 
However, the underlying computer science 
research was published openly and known 
outside Google. As a result, many other 
CASE 2 
Big Data, Hadoop, Map Reduce
Questions
	 9-43. 	 How much data do you generate on a daily, weekly, monthly, 
and annual basis? Think about every digital encounter you 
have and what gets stored.
	 9-44. 	 What advantages are there to storing and processing Big 
Data? How can companies and individuals benefit?
	 9-45. 	 What skills might help you to pursue opportunities in the 
area of Big Data?
Based on:
Apache Hadoop. (2016, May 20). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved May 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Apache_Hadoop&oldid=721260800
Big Data. (2016, May 17). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.  
Retrieved May 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Big_data&oldid=720684418
MapReduce. (2016, April 16). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
May 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MapReduce&
oldid=715537426
Solsman, J. E. (2014, November 12). YouTube’s Music Key: Can paid streaming finally 
hook the masses? CNet.com. Retrieved May 20, 2016, from http://www.cnet.com/
news/youtube-music-key-googles-stab-at-taking-paid-streaming-songs-mainstream
projects implemented a similar approach. One 
of these projects, an open source effort, 
became very popular and widely used. The 
project was named Hadoop after a stuffed 
elephant belonging to the primary developer’s 
son. Hadoop implements the core functions of 
GFS as the Hadoop Distributed File System 
(HDFS) and MapReduce as Hadoop MapRe-
duce. Because it is open source technology 
and can be freely incorporated into anyone’s 
software system, it has been widely deployed. 
In keeping with the elephant name and logo, 
the suite of tools that grew up around Hadoop 
is called Mahout (a term for an elephant han-
dler). Mahout and Hadoop were incorporated 
into the Apache Software Foundation suite of 
open source technologies.
Google has moved past MapReduce as its 
primary Big Data processing model, and 
Mahout has also moved on to more capable 
processing models that are enabled by or 
improvements on Hadoop and MapReduce. 
Apache Pig is a high-level language for devel-
oping and implementing Hadoop programs. 
Hive is a data warehouse platform built on top 
of Hadoop and HDFS. New approaches to dis-
tributed processing beyond MapReduce that are 
being pursued by the Apache Foundation 
include Spark and Flink—both provide resilient 
distributed data set functionality and implement 
modern programming architectures using lan-
guages like Java and Scala. These technologies 
are a key part of the behind-the-scenes infra-
structure that makes our modern world work. 
Any platform, like an app store, a fitness app, or 
a social network, must deal with the challenges 
of volume, velocity, and variety. Technologies 
like Hadoop, Mahout, and their kin are what 
make it all possible.
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 9-46. 	 Contrast the perspectives of different stakeholders involved in making information systems investment decisions.
	 9-47.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of prototyping?

416    CHAPTER 9  •  Developing and Acquiring Information Systems  
References
Applegate, L. M., Austin, R. D., & Soule, D. L. (2009). Corporate 
information strategy and management (8th ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Cohn, C. (2015, March 19). Strategic ways to outsource, and 
when to do it. Forbes. Retrieved March 13, 2016, from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/chuckcohn/2015/03/19/
strategic-ways-to-outsource-and-when-to-do-it
Conner, C. (2015, July 31). Wasting time at work: the epidemic 
continues. Forbes. Retrieved March 9, 2016, from http://
www.forbes.com/sites/cherylsnappconner/2015/07/31/
wasting-time-at-work-the-epidemic-continues
Gartner. (2016). Gartner says worldwide IT spending is forecast to 
grow 0.6 percent in 2016. Retrieved March 9, 2016, from http://
www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3186517
McFarlan, F. W., & Nolan, R. L. (1995). How to manage an IT 
outsourcing alliance. Sloan Management Review, 36(2), 9–24.
McKeen, J. D., Guimaraes, T., & Wetherbe, J. C. (1994). A compara-
tive analysis of MIS project selection mechanisms. Database, 
25(2), 43–59.
Netcraft. (2016, March 13). January 16 web server survey. Netcraft.
com. Retrieved March 13, 2016, from http://news.netcraft.com/
archives/2016/01/26/january-2016-web-server-survey.html
Porter, M. E. (1979, March–April). How competitive forces shape 
strategy. Harvard Business Review, 57, 137–145.
Top 500. (2016, June). Retrieved July 25, 2016, from http://www 
.top500.org/list/2016/06
U.S. News. (2016). The 100 best jobs. U.S. News & World Report. 
Retrieved March 9, 2016, from http://money.usnews.com/careers/
best-jobs/rankings/the-100-best-jobs
Valacich, J. S. & George, J. F. (2017). Modern systems analysis and 
design (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Wheeler, B. C., & Marakas, G. M. (1999). Making the business 
case for IT investments through facts, faith, and fear. Retrieved 
June 1, 2014, from https://scholarworks.iu.edu/dspace/
handle/2022/15186?show=full
Wood, J., & Silver, D. (1989). Joint application design. New York: 
Wiley.

This page intentionally left blank

418
418
Preview
MANAGING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD: 
Not So “Anonymous”—
Activists, Hacktivists, or 
Just Plain Criminals?
F
ile-sharing sites like Megaupload.com, best known 
for its massive size and volume of downloaded 
content, are hotbeds of online piracy. After being 
shut down by U.S. authorities, Megaupload.com for-
mally bade goodbye in 2012 as New Zealand police 
raided several homes and businesses linked to its 
founder Kim Dotcom (a name he took on after making 
a fortune during the dotcom bubble). With only a slight 
warning from a tweet reading, “One thing is certain: 
EXPECT US!,” a hacktivist group called Anonymous 
launched “Operation Payback” (Figure 10.1); utilizing 
5,635 zombie computers distributed throughout the 
Internet, Anonymous delivered a retaliatory attack 
resulting in a string of highly coordinated takedowns of 
websites managed by the U.S. Department of Justice 
and a number of other organizations that have publicly 
supported anti-piracy legislation, including the Record-
ing Industry Association of America, the Motion Picture 
Association of America, and Universal Music.
Who is Anonymous? Having no formal organization 
and no formal leadership, Anonymous is often consid-
ered to be a loose collective of hacktivists—Internet users 
practicing civil disobedience by taking part in cyberat-
tacks on websites. The group has participated in several 
cyberattacks; the best known concerned a vigilante 
Securing Information  
Systems
10
With the proliferation of computing technologies in every 
corner of the world, most people and organizations have 
become completely dependent upon their smartphones, 
tablets, or other information systems (IS) to support com-
munication and commerce. With this increasing depen-
dency on technology to work flawlessly, we have never 
been more vulnerable to catastrophic security disasters. 
Because of this, individuals and organizations are focusing 
more of their attention on information systems security. 
Here, we first examine computer crime and other threats 
to information systems security, followed by a discussion 
of various approaches for securing information systems 
and the critical data they hold.
Managing in the digital world requires careful atten-
tion to IS security. Having thorough plans and approaches 
for dealing with IS security attacks and natural disasters is 
critical for effectively managing IS resources within organi-
zations and your personal life.
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.

419
After reading 
this chapter, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following:
pornography. In 2012, Anonymous members defended a 
teen victim of cyberbullying. Following the devastation 
of Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and massive tornado dam-
age in Oklahoma in 2013, Anonymous mobilized its 
online influence to support relief efforts. These efforts 
were considered by many to be more effective than 
those of government relief agencies. Although Anony-
mous claims to have good intentions, what the group 
does is sometimes illegal, and Anonymous and its sup-
porters face a dilemma of having to choose between 
pursuing (sometimes worthwhile) ideological goals and 
crossing the boundaries of legality.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to answer 
the following:
1.	What is the difference between hacktivists, cyberter-
rorists, and other computer criminals?
2.	What tools can hacktivists and other computer crimi-
nals use to conduct cyberwar or cyberterrorist attacks?
3.	How can organizations and individuals protect them-
selves from attacks by hacktivists and other computer 
criminals?
Based on:
Anonymous (group). (2016, March 17). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved March 18, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Anonymous_(group)&oldid=710517998
Hautala, L. (2016, March 15). Anonymous goes negative on Trump… again. 
Cnet.com. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.cnet.com/news/
anonymous-hack-goes-negative-on-donald-trump-again-election-2016
Murphy, L. (2012, November 14). How Anonymous helped prevent a 
teen’s suicide. The Daily Dot. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.dailydotcom/news/anonymous-kylie-suicide-trolls-bully
Reisinger, D. (2015, November 16). Anonymous declares cyber war on 
ISIS. Why it matters. Fortune. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
fortune.com/2015/11/16/anonymous-cyber-war-isis
movement against Visa, MasterCard, and PayPal as a pro-
test for their freezing the accounts of the whistleblower 
site WikiLeaks. Anonymous is also politically active, 
launching attacks on Israeli government websites in 
response to Israeli military actions in the Gaza Strip. In 
late 2015, Anonymous launched sustained operations 
against the ISIS terrorist group in retaliation for the Paris 
attacks that killed more than 100 people. And, in early 
2016, Anonymous targeted the U.S. presidential cam-
paign of Donald Trump for his “hateful campaign.”
Not all of Anonymous’s actions are controversial. 
Anonymous garnered much public sympathy with the 
2011 “Operation Darknet,” its attempt to battle child 
FIGURE 10.1
The symbol of the Anonymous group is a mask depicting the 
historical figure Guy Fawkes.
Source: dny3d/Shutterstock.
1.	 Define computer crime and describe several types of computer crime.
2.	 Describe and explain differences between cyberwar and cyberterrorism.
3.	 Discuss the process of managing IS security and describe various IS controls that can 
help in ensuring IS security.

420    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Computer Crime
We continue to hear and read about cases where a breach of computer security was catastrophic 
and/or had potentially dire consequences. For example, in 2014, retail giant Home Depot had a 
data breach of more than 56 million customers. In 2015, the U.S. Office of Personnel Manage-
ment (OPM) was hacked, exposing the personnel records of more than 4 million employees. In 
2016, the computers at Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center were held by ransomware for 
more than a week until the ransom was paid. It seems like there is an announcement of a major 
cyberattack or data breach virtually every week. It is becoming clear that no one is immune from 
computer crime and that information systems security strategies are often lacking. As computer 
criminals won’t become complacent anytime soon, organizations need to guard against attacks. 
Computer crime is defined as the use of a computer to commit an illegal act. This broad defini-
tion of computer crime includes the following:
■
■Targeting a computer while committing an offense. For example, someone gains unauthor-
ized entry to a computer system in order to cause damage to the computer system or to the 
data it contains.
■
■Using a computer to commit an offense. In such cases, computer criminals may steal credit 
card numbers from websites or a company’s database, skim money from bank accounts, or 
make unauthorized electronic fund transfers from financial institutions.
■
■Using computers to support a criminal activity despite the fact that computers are not actu-
ally targeted. For example, drug dealers and other professional criminals may use comput-
ers to store records of their illegal transactions.
The global economic impact of computer crime and cyber-espionage is estimated to be 
about US$400 billion (McAfee, 2014). While this is a fraction of the estimated US$80 trillion 
global gross domestic product (GDP) (Statista, 2016), its greater impact is its effect on trade, 
technology development, and competitiveness. Additionally, as many cyberattacks are so visible 
to customers and investors through 24-hour global news reporting, reports of an attack on a com-
pany can have a tremendously negatively effect on the company’s valuation and stock price, and 
many organizations do not report incidents of computer crime because of fear that negative pub-
licity could hurt stock value or provide advantages to competitors. Thus, experts believe that 
many incidents are never reported and that real losses exceed these estimates. It is clear, how-
ever, that computer crime is a fact of life, and for organizations, computer crime has become a 
strategic and board of directors–level issue, with many of the more than 500 U.S. respondents to 
the 2015 U.S. State of Cybercrime Survey feeling that their organizations are now focusing 
much more on computer crime than ever before. In this section, we briefly introduce this topic 
of growing importance.
Hacking and Cracking
Those individuals who are knowledgeable enough to gain access to computer systems without 
authorization have long been referred to as hackers. The name was first used in the 1960s to 
describe expert computer users and programmers who were students at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology. Based on curiosity and the desire to learn as much as possible about comput-
ers, they wrote programs for the mainframes they used that allowed them to roam freely through 
computer systems and freely exchanged information about their “hacks”; however, they fol-
lowed unwritten rules against damaging or stealing data belonging to others.
As computer crime became more prevalent and damaging, true hackers—those motivated 
by curiosity and not by a desire to do harm (sometimes referred to as “white hats”)—objected to 
use of the term to describe computer criminals (Figure 10.2). Today, those who break into com-
puter systems with the intention of doing damage or committing a crime are usually called 
crackers or “black hats.” Some computer criminals attempt to break into systems or deface web-
sites to promote political or ideological goals (such as free speech, human rights, and antiwar 
campaigns); these web vandals are referred to as hacktivists.
Types of Computer Criminals and Crimes
Computer crimes are almost as varied as the users who commit them. Some involve the use of a 
computer to steal money or other assets or to perpetrate a deception for money, such as advertis-
ing merchandise for sale on a web auction site, collecting orders and payment, and then sending 


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     421
either inferior merchandise or no merchandise at all. Other computer crimes involve stealing or 
altering data. Some of those thieves who steal data or disrupt a computer system have demanded 
a ransom from victims in exchange for returning the data or repairing the damage. Cyberterror-
ists have planted destructive programs in computer systems and then threatened to activate them 
if a ransom is not paid (see the upcoming discussion on cyberterrorism). Crimes in the form of 
electronic vandalism cause damage when offenders plant viruses, cause computer systems to 
crash, or deny service on a website.
Another type of crime that increasingly is using computers is industrial espionage. Indus-
trial espionage describes covert activities, such as the theft of trade secrets, bribery, blackmail, 
and technological surveillance to gain an advantage over rivals. Many notable companies have 
been victims of industrial espionage, including Procter & Gamble, IBM, DuPont, Gillette, 
Kodak, Starwood, and Microsoft. Industrial espionage is most commonly associated with tech-
nology-heavy industries, such as the computer hardware and software industries, but also with 
any other industry in which a significant amount of money is spent on research and develop-
ment, such as the defense, automobile, and pharmaceutical industries. Often, competitors 
attempt to steal prototypes to gain access to new technological developments. Industrial espio-
nage is also often carried out by compromising someone who works for a targeted company 
through bribery, coercion, or blackmail.
The proliferation of the Internet and mobile devices is providing additional avenues for 
industrial espionage. Cracking into a company’s computer system has become a fairly common 
practice, where criminals steal confidential data and trade secrets that could be sold to others. 
Laptops, mobile devices, and USB drives can be stolen or accessed while left unattended in 
hotel rooms or can be stolen while in transit (e.g., stolen out of checked baggage when travel-
ing). In the digital world, critical data is always vulnerable to attacks, and the loss of strategic 
data may give an organization’s rivals a competitive advantage and can have devastating impacts 
on the company’s bottom line.
Use of the Internet has fostered other types of criminal activity, such as the stalking of 
minors by sexual predators through newsgroups and chat rooms.
WHO COMMITS COMPUTER CRIMES?  When you hear the term cracker or computer criminal, you 
might imagine a techno-geek, someone who sits in front of his or her computer all day and night, 
attempting to break the ultra-super-secret security code of one of the most sophisticated computer 
systems in the world, perhaps a computer for the U.S. military, a Swiss bank, or the Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA). While this fits the traditional profile for a computer criminal, there is 
no clear profile today. More and more people have the skills, the tools, and the motives to hack into 
a computer system. A modern-day computer criminal could be a disgruntled, middle-aged, white-
collar worker sitting at a nice desk on the 14th floor of the headquarters building of a billion-dollar 
software manufacturer. Computer criminals have been around for decades. For the most part, we 
associate hackers and crackers with their pranks and crimes involving computer break-ins, virus 
FIGURE 10.2
Malicious hackers are referred 
to as black hats, and those not 
motivated to do harm are referred 
to as white hats.

422    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
distribution, and other malicious acts. Nevertheless, hackers and crackers have caused the loss of 
billions of dollars’ worth of stolen goods, repair bills, and lost goodwill with customers.
Studies attempting to categorize computer criminals show that they generally fall into one 
of four groups. These groups are listed next, from those who commit the most infractions to 
those who commit the fewest infractions:
1.	Current or former employees who are in a position to steal or otherwise do damage to 
employers; most organizations report insider abuses as their most common crime
2.	People with technical knowledge who commit business or information sabotage for 
personal gain
3.	Career criminals who use computers to assist in crimes
4.	Outside crackers simply snooping or hoping to find data of value—crackers commit mil-
lions of intrusions per year, but most cause no harm (Estimates are that only about 10 per-
cent of cracker attacks cause damage.)
Some crackers probe others’ computer systems, electronically stored data, or websites for 
fun, for curiosity, or just to prove they can. Others have malicious or financial motives and intend 
to steal for gain or do other harm. Whatever the motives, discovery, prosecution, fines, and jail 
terms can result.
How do computer criminals gain access to computer systems? Frequently, computer crimi-
nals use sophisticated software such as vulnerability scanners to automatically test targeted 
systems for weaknesses; packet sniffers to analyze network traffic and capture unencrypted 
passwords; keyloggers to capture every keystroke and thus gather data such as e-mail addresses, 
passwords, and credit card numbers; or tools to break passwords using a brute-force approach 
(note that vulnerability scanners and packet sniffers can also be used by organizations to test the 
effectiveness of controls, and keyloggers may be installed on companies’ computers to monitor 
employees; see the upcoming discussion of IS controls). Alternatively, crackers try to exploit 
human weaknesses by using methods such as phishing attacks (to be discussed), social engi-
neering (misrepresenting oneself to trick others into revealing information), shoulder surfing 
(looking over someone’s shoulder while the person is keying in access credentials), or dumpster 
diving (scouring wastebaskets for potentially useful information).
UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS.  Unauthorized access occurs whenever people who are not authorized 
to see, manipulate, or otherwise handle data search systems for interesting or useful data, peek at 
monitors displaying proprietary or confidential data, or intercept electronic messages on the way 
to their destination. Unauthorized access can include seemingly unproblematic actions such as an 
employee stealing time on company computers to do personal business, but also thieves stealing 
credit card numbers and Social Security numbers from electronic databases and then using the 
stolen information to charge thousands of dollars in merchandise to victims or competitors’ 
employees posing as interns steal proprietary information about products or corporate strategies 
(i.e., engaging in industrial espionage).
When electronic data are shared by several users, as in an organization, in-house system 
administrators can prevent casual snooping or theft of data by requiring correct permissions. 
Further, administrators can log attempts of unauthorized individuals trying to obtain access. 
Determined attackers, however, will try to gain access by giving themselves system administra-
tor status or otherwise elevating their permission level—sometimes by stealing passwords and 
logging on to a system as authorized users (Figure 10.3). Today, malicious insiders, referred to 
as insider threats, are a top concern for government and corporate agencies.
The term insider threats refers to “trusted adversaries” or “malicious insiders” who operate 
within an organization’s boundaries and are a significant danger to both private and public sec-
tors. Insider threats include disgruntled employees or ex-employees, potential employees, con-
tractors, business partners, or auditors. The damage caused by an insider threat can take many 
forms, including workplace violence; the introduction of malware into corporate networks; the 
theft of data, corporate secrets, or money; the corruption or deletion of data; and so on. Espe-
cially in very large organizations, identifying insider threats can be extremely difficult. For 
instance, identifying a small number of potential insider threats within an organization with 
thousands of employees is a “needle in the haystack” problem. In fact, in January 2014, James 
R. Clapper, director of National Intelligence, cited the malicious insider as the greatest threat to 
the United States, exceeding terrorism.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     423
The most famous insider threat in recent history is Edward Snowden, an American computer 
professional who once worked for the CIA and was a contract worker for the National Security 
Agency (NSA). He came to international attention when he disclosed thousands of classified 
documents—which he had acquired while working for the American consulting firm Booz Allen 
Hamilton—to several media outlets. Similarly, the whistleblower site Wikileaks frequently publishes 
information (mostly related to political relations) obtained from insiders. Insider threats may also take 
the form of backdoors (i.e., hidden access points allowing for unauthorized access), which are (inten-
tionally or unintentionally) built into systems by software developers. Such backdoors might be 
exploited by malicious crackers, intelligence agencies, or one’s competitors (for industrial espionage). 
An unintended backdoor is often referred to as a zero-day vulnerability. A zero-day is an undisclosed 
hardware or software vulnerability that crackers can exploit to adversely affect computer programs, 
data, other computers, or networks. Such vulnerabilities are referred to as a “zero-day” because once 
the flaw becomes known, the hardware or software vendor has zero days to mitigate the flaw.
UNAUTHORIZED DATA MODIFICATION.  Often related to unauthorized access, unauthorized 
data modification occurs when someone accesses electronic data and then changes it in 
some way, such as when crackers hack into government websites and change content or when 
employees give themselves electronic raises and bonuses (Figure 10.4).
FIGURE 10.3
Unauthorized access can occur in 
many ways.
Employee Accesses
Salary Information
Employee Increases Salary
FIGURE 10.4
Unauthorized data modification.

424    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
OTHER THREATS TO IS SECURITY.  Many times, IS security is breached simply because 
organizations and individuals do not exercise proper care in safeguarding information systems. 
Some examples follow:
■
■Employees keep passwords or access codes on slips of paper in plain sight.
■
■Individuals have never bothered to install antivirus software, or they install the software but 
fail to keep it up to date.
■
■Computer users within an organization continue to use default network passwords after a 
network is set up instead of passwords that are more difficult to break.
■
■Employees are careless about letting outsiders view computer monitors, or they carelessly 
give out information over the telephone.
■
■Organizations fail to limit access to company files and system resources.
■
■Organizations fail to install effective firewalls or intrusion detection systems, or they install 
an intrusion detection system but fail to monitor it regularly.
■
■Organizations fail to conduct proper background checks on new hires.
■
■Fired employees are resentful and install harmful code, such as computer viruses, when 
they leave the company.
With the increasing popularity of mobile devices like smartphones and tablets, many addi-
tional security threats have emerged, including:
■
■Individuals lose their mobile devices and don’t have capabilities to remotely wipe data 
from the device.
■
■Individuals keep sensitive data on mobile devices and do not use passcodes.
■
■Individuals “jailbreak” their mobile phone. Jailbreaking—that is, modifying the operat-
ing system to remove manufacturer or carrier restrictions in order to run applications other 
than those from the official app store—can allow unsecure applications to run on devices or 
make it difficult to upgrade devices that have been modified.
■
■Individuals use poorly designed mobile applications that can have security vulnerabilities.
GREEN IT
Anonymous Protests the Killing of Dolphins and Whales in Japan
As defined in Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems 
Infrastructure and Services,” green computing is defined as 
“attempts to use computing resources more efficiently to 
reduce environmental impacts as well as the use of informa-
tion systems to reduce negative environmental impacts.” In 
addition to its various other activities, the hacking group 
Anonymous (see the chapter-opening case) seems to use its 
computer prowess for its own “green computing.” In the 
Japanese city of Taiji, every year between September and 
March, hundreds of dolphins are captured for display in dol-
phinariums and thousands are slaughtered for consumption.
Although this hunt, depicted in the Oscar-winning docu-
mentary The Cove, has been criticized by environmentalists for 
years (and dolphin meat is potentially hazardous due to high 
mercury levels), there seems to be no end in sight. In early 
2016, Anonymous decided to launch its own actions to spread 
awareness about the annual killing spree and targeted hun-
dreds of Japanese websites in defense of wales and dolphins 
as part of its “OpWhales” campaign. One of the most promi-
nent targets was Japanese automaker Nissan. Although Nissan 
itself has no connections with the killings, its position as a 
major Japanese company made it a prime target for the hack-
ing group. In a concerted denial-of-service attack, Anonymous 
launched attacks on Nissan’s global websites, which crashed 
after being bombarded with traffic from bogus computer-
generated visitors, but stressed that it did not intend to steal or 
harm customer or system data. Anonymous believes it is acting 
in the best interests of the public and is supported by those 
who say that the secretive organization is justified in protesting 
against inequality, injustice, and other threats around the 
world. Critics, however, say that the group is a vigilante acting 
in its own interest and engaging in illegal activity.
Based on:
Kumar, N. (2016, January 14). Anonymous hackers protest the killing 
of dolphins in Japan with Nissan DDoS cyberattack. Computer Business 
Review. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.cbronline.com/
news/cybersecurity/business/annonymous-hackers-protest-the-killing-
of-dolphins-in-japan-with-nissan-ddos-cyberattack-4784712
Reisinger, D. (2016, January 14). Anonymous hacks Nissan site to sup-
port whales. Fortune. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://fortune 
.com/2016/01/14/anonymous-nissan-whales-hack


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     425
■
■Individuals use unsecure wireless networks, leaving their devices vulnerable to different 
types of attacks.
While there are many threats to IS security, there are also ways to combat those threats. 
Later, we discuss safeguards organizations can use to improve IS security.
Computer Viruses and Other Destructive Code
Malware—short for “malicious software” such as viruses, worms, and Trojan horses—continues 
to have a tremendous economic impact on the world, costing organizations more than US$114 
billion to respond to and to enact countermeasures (Brown, 2013). Accurate estimates of real 
costs to organizations and society are difficult to obtain, as many organizations choose not to 
report major incidents; most organizations do not want to alarm customers and shareholders of 
malware and other security breaches. Increasingly, malware targets not only traditional comput-
ers, but Internet of Things (IoT) devices as well.
COMPUTER VIRUSES.  A virus is a destructive program that disrupts the normal functioning of 
information systems. Viruses differ from other types of malicious code in that they can reproduce 
themselves. Some viruses are intended to be harmless pranks, but more often they do damage 
to a computer system by erasing files on the hard drive or by slowing computer processing or 
otherwise compromising the system. Viruses infect a single computer only, potentially spreading 
to other computers if infected files are shared. Viruses are planted in host computers in a number 
of ways (Figure 10.5) but are most often spread through malicious e-mail attachments, the 
sharing of removable media (such as USB sticks), or file downloads from malicious websites.
WORMS, TROJAN HORSES, AND OTHER SINISTER PROGRAMS.  Viruses are among the most 
virulent forms of computer infections, but other destructive code can also be damaging. A worm, 
a variation of a virus that is targeted at networks, is designed to spread by itself without the 
need for an infected host file to be shared. Worms take advantage of security holes in operating 
systems and other software to replicate endlessly across the Internet, thus causing servers to 
crash, which denies service to Internet users.
Another category of destructive programs is called Trojan horses. Like the Trojan horse in 
Greek mythology, Trojan horses appear to be legitimate, benign programs but carry a destructive 
payload. Unlike viruses, Trojan horses typically do not replicate themselves but, like viruses, can 
do much damage, such as by giving the creator unauthorized access to a system. When a Trojan 
Web
Server
1. Hacker creates a
virus and attaches
it to a real program
or ﬁle on a website.
3. E-mail attachments
and ﬁles shared with
friends and coworkers
contain the virus.
2. Users download
the ﬁle thinking it
is a legitimate ﬁle
or program. Once
downloaded, it
infects other ﬁles
and programs on
the machine.
4. Virus spreads rapidly
throughout the Internet.
FIGURE 10.5
How a computer virus is spread.

426    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
horse is planted in a computer, its instructions remain hidden. The computer appears to function 
normally, but in fact it is performing underlying functions dictated by the intrusive code. For 
example, under the pretext of playing chess with an unsuspecting systems operator, a cracker 
group installed a Trojan horse in a Canadian mainframe. While the game appeared to be pro-
ceeding normally, the Trojan horse program was sneakily establishing a powerful administrator 
account for the future use of the intruders.
Logic bombs or time bombs are variations of Trojan horses. They also do not reproduce 
themselves and are designed to operate without disrupting normal computer function. Instead, 
they lie in wait for unsuspecting computer users to perform a triggering operation. Logic bombs 
are set off by certain types of operations, such as entering a specific password or adding or 
deleting names and other data to and from certain databases. Time bombs are set off by specific 
dates, such as the birthday of a famous person. Disgruntled employees have planted logic and 
time bombs on being fired, intending for the program to activate after they have left the com-
pany. In at least one instance in recent history, a former employee in Minnesota demanded 
money to deactivate the time bomb he had planted in company computers before it destroyed 
employee payroll records.
Recently, a new type of malware called ransomware has emerged. In 2016, security giant 
McAfee Labs predicted a dramatic increase in the use of ransomware on all types of users. Ran-
somware holds a user’s computer hostage by locking or taking control of the user’s computer or 
encrypting files or documents. Once infected, the scammers demand a ransom to be paid by a 
certain deadline in order to unlock the computers or decrypt the files. Alternatively, an official-
looking message from a law enforcement agency (typically, the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
[FBI]) is displayed (complete with logos) that demands the payment of a fine to avoid being 
prosecuted for illegal activity/content detected on the computer. In either case, paying the ran-
som does not guarantee getting access to the files again, and having backups is the best safe-
guard against ransomware (see the upcoming discussion about controls).
DENIAL OF SERVICE.  Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks occur when electronic intruders 
deliberately attempt to prevent legitimate users of a service (e.g., customers accessing a website) 
from using that service, often by using up all of a system’s resources. To execute such attacks, 
intruders often create armies of zombie computers by infecting computers that are located in 
homes, schools, and businesses with viruses or worms. Any computer connected to the Internet 
can be infected if it is not protected by firewalls and antivirus software and is, therefore, open to 
attacks and to being used as a zombie computer (in fact, some security experts believe that more 
than 10 percent of all computers connected to the Internet are used as zombies, unbeknownst to 
the owners). The zombie computers, without users’ knowledge or consent, are used to spread the 
malware to other computers and to launch attacks on their targets. The computers under attack 
crash under the barrage of bogus computer-generated visitors, causing a denial of service to 
legitimate users (Figure 10.6). For example, in late 2016, the Mirai botnet used millions of IoT 
devices (such as Internet-connected CCTV cameras) to attack the DNS system, a critical part of 
the Internet infrastructure responsible for translating domain names into IP addresses (see the 
Technology Briefing). As a result, large parts of the U.S. experienced Internet blackouts, with 
major sites from Twitter to PayPal being unreachable for hours at a time.
SPYWARE, SPAM, AND COOKIES.  Three additional ways in which information systems can be 
threatened are by spyware, spam, and cookies.
Spyware  Spyware is any software that covertly gathers data about a user through an Internet 
connection without the user’s knowledge. Spyware is sometimes hidden within freeware or 
shareware programs. In other instances, it is embedded within a website and is downloaded 
to the user’s computer, without the user’s knowledge, in order to track data about the user for 
marketing and advertisement purposes. Spyware can monitor your activity (such as website 
visits) and secretly transmit that data to someone else or may include keyloggers that capture 
sensitive data as it is typed. Spyware presents problems because it uses your computer’s 
memory resources; eats network bandwidth as it sends data back to the spyware’s home base 
via your Internet connection; causes system instability or, worse, system crashes; and exposes 
users to identity theft, credit card fraud, and other types of crime. Adware (free software paid 
for by advertisements appearing during the use of the software) sometimes contains spyware 
that collects data about a person’s web surfing behavior in order to customize website banner 


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     427
advertisements. It is important to note that spyware is not currently illegal, although there is 
ongoing legislative hype about regulating it in some way. Fortunately, firewalls and spyware 
protection software can be used to scan for and block spyware.
Spam  Another prevalent form of network traffic that invades our e-mail is spam. Spam is 
electronic junk mail or junk newsgroup postings, usually for the purpose of advertising for some 
product and/or service (Figure 10.7). In addition to being a nuisance and wasting our time, spam 
also eats up huge amounts of storage space and network bandwidth, with about 50 percent of 
all e-mail being spam! Globally, there were an estimated 4.6 billion e-mail accounts in 2016, 
with more than 215 billion messages being sent per day. That equates to trillions of spam 
messages clogging up inboxes each year. Spammers commonly use zombie computers to send 
out millions of e-mail messages, unbeknownst to the computer users. Some spam consists of 
hoaxes, asking you to donate money to nonexistent causes or warning you of viruses and other 
Internet dangers that do not exist. Other times, spam includes attachments that carry destructive 
computer viruses. As a result, Internet service providers and those who manage e-mail within 
organizations often use spam filters to fight spam. Typical spam filters use multiple defense 
layers—consisting of dedicated hardware and software—to help reduce the amount of spam 
processed by the central e-mail servers and delivered to users’ inboxes. Using techniques such 
as sophisticated machine learning algorithms (see Chapter 6, “Enhancing Business Intelligence 
Using Big Data and Analytics”), spam filters have gotten better over the years, and fight not only 
spam but also other e-mail threats, such as directory harvest attacks (i.e., attempts to determine 
valid e-mail addresses for building spam databases), phishing attacks (discussed below), viruses, 
and more. Increasingly, spammers use instant messaging, cell phone text messaging (SMS), 
or other messaging services (such as WhatsApp) to spread their annoying (and sometimes 
malicious) messages.
In addition to advertisement, computer criminals use spam e-mails to spread hoaxes, 
encouraging the recipients to forward them to their friends. An Internet hoax is a false message 
circulated online about new viruses, funds for alleged victims of a global catastrophe, kids in 
trouble, cancer causes and cures, or any other topic of public interest. In most cases, the conse-
quences of passing on a hoax will be small, and your friends will just ridicule you; in other 
Intruder
Targeted Server
Flood Attack
Breaks into Computers &
Creates Zombies
FIGURE 10.6
Denial-of-service attack.

428    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
cases, spammers use such hoaxes to “harvest” e-mail addresses to identify future targets. Several 
websites, such as Snopes (www.snopes.com), Symantec, and McAfee, publish lists of known 
hoaxes, and you should always check to see if a message is a hoax before you forward it to 
others.
In its worst form, spam is used for phishing (or spoofing), which is attempts to trick finan-
cial account and credit card holders into giving away their authentication credentials, usually by 
sending spam messages to millions of e-mail accounts (i.e., attackers are “phishing” [fishing] for 
victims). These phony messages contain links to websites that duplicate legitimate sites to cap-
ture login credentials. For example, most e-mail users regularly receive phishing attempts from 
eBay, PayPal, various spoofed banks, or fake system administrators (Figure 10.8). As people 
learn that generically addressed e-mail from a bank is not likely legitimate, criminals have turned 
to spear phishing. Spear phishing is a more sophisticated fraudulent e-mail attack that targets a 
FIGURE 10.7
Spam is rampant and consumes an 
enormous amount of human and 
technology resources.
Source: Outlook 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
FIGURE 10.8
A phishing e-mail message.
Source: Outlook 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     429
specific person or organization by personalizing the message (phishing with a spear rather than a 
broad net) in order to make the message appear as if it is from a trusted source such as an indi-
vidual within the recipient’s company (often someone in a position of authority), a government 
entity, or a well-known company. While spear phishing can be very effective, the attacker needs 
some basic information in order to optimally target the phishing message. Many fear that social 
media sites like Facebook will increasingly provide valuable information about potential victims 
to criminals designing spear phishing attacks.
Often, spammers post their spam messages in online forums, blogs, or wikis or create thou-
sands of e-mail accounts at free providers such as Yahoo! or Oulook.com to send out their mes-
sages. Rather than manually going through such tedious tasks to set up these accounts or post 
thousands of messages, spammers use bots (i.e., software robots that work in the background to 
provide services to their owners; see Chapter 6) to do this. Faced with this problem, e-mail pro-
viders and managers of online forums are attempting to prevent spammers from using bots to 
automatically submit online forms. One commonly used approach for preventing bots from sub-
mitting forms is the use of CAPTCHAs. A CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing 
Test to Tell Computers and Humans Apart) typically consists of a distorted image displaying a 
combination of letters and/or numbers that a user has to input into a form (in addition to other 
required information) before submitting it (Figure 10.9). As the image is distorted, (currently) 
only humans can interpret the letters/numbers, preventing the use of automated bots for creating 
accounts or posting spam to forums, blogs, or wikis. CAPTCHAs are also used to prevent crack-
ers from trying to break passwords using a brute force approach, where a bot submits thousands 
or millions of possible passwords (usually from a list of common passwords) until the correct 
password is found.
However, trying to stop spammers is a cat-and-mouse game, and increasingly, webmasters 
are using a combination of multiple techniques to stop spammers, such as detecting mouse 
movements (as automated agents do not use a mouse), detecting the rate at which text is entered 
into forms, or incorporating invisible fields (which would be “seen” and filled out by an auto-
mated agent but not a human user) together with CAPTCHAs in order to distinguish between 
malicious bots and legitimate users.
Cookies  Another potential nuisance in Internet usage is cookies. A cookie is a small text file 
passed to a web browser on a user’s computer by a web server. The browser then stores the 
message in a text file, and the message is sent back to the server each time the user’s browser 
requests a page from that server.
Cookies are normally used for legitimate purposes, such as identifying a user in order to 
present a customized web page or for authentication purposes. Although you can choose to not 
accept the storage of cookies, you may not be able to visit the site, or it may not function 
FIGURE 10.9
A CAPTCHA is used to prevent 
bots from submitting an online 
form.
Source: Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation.

430    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
properly. For example, to read the New York Times online, you must register by entering your 
name and other information. When you go through the registration process, cookies are stored 
on your machine. If you don’t accept cookies or you delete the stored cookies, you are not 
allowed to access the online newspaper without reregistering. Similarly, you will have to accept 
cookies when purchasing from many e-tailers, as most online shopping carts require cookies to 
function properly. In some cases, cookies may contain sensitive data (such as credit card num-
bers) and thus pose a security risk in case unauthorized persons gain access to the computer. 
Many countries as well as the European Union now require websites to inform users about the 
use of cookies (except for cookies that are necessary to ensure the site’s functionality, such as for 
shopping carts or login information).
Specific cookie management or cookie killer software can be used to manage cookies, but 
an even simpler way to manage cookies is through the settings in your web browser. In the set-
tings for the Firefox web browser, for example, you can set levels of restrictions on the use of 
cookies, you can block them altogether, and, if you do allow them, you can go in periodically 
and delete them from your computer.
THE RISE OF BOTNETS AND THE CYBERATTACK SUPPLY CHAIN.  Destructive software robots 
called bots (see Chapter 6), working together on a collection of zombie computers via the 
Internet, called botnets, have become the standard method of operation for professional 
cybercriminals. For example, about 85 percent of all e-mail spam is sent out by only six major 
botnets. Attacks using botnets are utilizing a global supply chain of highly specialized criminals. 
For instance, a phishing attack can involve the following:
1.	A programmer writes a phishing attack template and makes this available for purchase.
2.	A phisher who wants to run an attack purchases the template and designs an attack (e.g., 
ask recipients of a spam e-mail to update their login credentials at the Wells Fargo Bank).
3.	The phisher contracts with a cracker to provide hosting space for the phishing websites.
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG 
The Bug That Almost Killed the Internet
On December 31, 2011, Stephen Henson reviewed a new sec-
tion of code for inclusion into the OpenSSL Project. OpenSSL is 
a popular encryption framework used to secure many Internet-
based transactions. Dr. Henson, one of the core developers of 
the software, apparently failed to notice a flaw in the code, 
and the bug was adopted into widespread use across the Inter-
net, where it remained undetected for more than 2 years. 
When a fix for the flaw was completed in April 2014, an esti-
mated 17 percent (about half a million) of web servers were 
believed to have been vulnerable to attack. Forbes magazine 
labeled the bug the worst since commercial traffic began to 
flow on the Internet.
The security bug—popularly known as Heartbleed—
allowed an attacker to read the active memory of systems with 
the vulnerability. This compromised various types of potentially 
sensitive data, including encryption keys, user names and pass-
words, and the actual data that those encryption and authenti-
cation technologies were intended to protect.
Though many companies were quick to update their sever 
software, it was reported that a vast majority of large organi-
zations had yet to fully remediate the security bug one year 
after the fix was released (early 2015); 2 years after the fix was 
released (early 2016), Heartbleed was still affecting web server 
security as the original bug was appearing in new variations. 
The vulnerability thus continues to have repercussions for 
thousands of companies and millions of users. It serves as a 
cogent reminder of the potential dangers associated with con-
ducting transactions via the Internet.
Based on:
Hackett, R. (2015, April 7). On Heartbleed’s anniversary, 3 of 4 big com-
panies are still vulnerable. Fortune. Retrieved March 18, 2016, from 
http://fortune.com/2015/04/07/heartbleed-anniversary-vulnerable
Heartbleed. (2016, February 20). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 18, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php 
?title=Heartbleed&oldid=706004410
Leyden, J. (2016, March 2). SSL’s DROWN not as bad as Heart-
bleed, still a security ship wreck. The Register. Retrieved March 
18, 2016, from http://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/03/02/
drown_exploitability_analysis
McMillan, R. (2014, April 11). How Heartbleed broke the Internet—
and why it can happen again. Wired. Retrieved March 18, 2016, from 
http://www.wired.com/2014/04/heartbleedslesson
Steinberg, J. (2014, April 10). Massive Internet security vulnerability—
here’s what you need to do. Forbes. Retrieved March 18, 2016, from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/josephsteinberg/2014/04/10/massive-
internet-security-vulnerability-you-are-at-risk-what-you-need-to-do


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     431
4.	The phisher contacts a bot herder—a criminal who has a botnet residing on a collection of 
zombie computers—to send out the spam e-mail that carries the attack to unsuspecting people.
5.	After launching the attack and collecting data from those who responded to the phishing 
attack, the phisher provides the stolen credentials to a collector who specializes in remov-
ing funds from the affected financial institutions.
6.	The collector works with a criminal called a mule herder who has a network of people 
(called mules) who carry out the withdrawals from affected banks.
Each member of the supply chain has very specialized skills and can be located anywhere in the 
world. In fact, one of the difficulties in stopping this global crime syndicate is the difficulty of 
not only tracking the locations of these villains but also prosecuting criminals across interna-
tional borders. Today, anonymization tools and cryptocurrencies (such as Bitcoin; see Chapter 4, 
“Managing Business-to-Consumer Electronic Commerce”) have lowered the entry barriers for 
cybercriminals, enabling various “cybercrime-as-a-service” offerings. Similar to service models 
used in cloud computing (see Chapter 3), crime-as-a-service offerings include not only crime-
ware as a service, hacking as a service, or cybercrime infrastructure as a service but also research 
as a service, selling things such as stolen credentials (Paganini, 2013). For example, a would-be 
cybercriminal can easily “rent” space on a botnet (including technical support, tremendous 
resources, and bandwidth) such as the Mirai botnet (which brought down large parts of the U.S. 
Internet infrastructure in late 2016), with weekly access costs of just US$7,500 for 100,000 bots.
IDENTITY THEFT.  One of the fastest-growing cybercrimes in recent years has been identity theft 
(Figure 10.10). Identity theft is the stealing of another person’s Social Security number, credit 
card number, and other personal data for the purpose of using the victim’s credit rating to borrow 
money, buy merchandise, and otherwise run up debts that are never repaid. In some cases, 
thieves even withdraw money directly from victims’ bank accounts. Because many government 
and private organizations keep data about individuals in accessible databases, opportunities 
abound for thieves to steal data. Reclaiming one’s identity and restoring a good credit rating can 
be frustrating and time-consuming for victims.
The solution to identity theft lies in the government and private sector working together to 
change practices used to verify a person’s identity. For example, a mother’s maiden name and an 
individual’s Social Security number are too easily obtained. Other methods of authentication, 
such as biometrics and encryption, may need to be used if the problem is to be solved. Methods of 
information security, including biometrics and encryption, are presented later in our discussion.
FIGURE 10.10
Identity theft is one of the fastest-
growing cybercrimes.
Source: Henrik5000/Getty Images.

432    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Cyberharassment, Cyberstalking, and Cyberbullying
The anonymity provided by the Internet is increasingly used to harass, stalk, and bully others. As 
defined in Chapter 5, “Enhancing Organizational Communication and Collaboration Using 
Social Media,” an Internet troll is a person who creates discord on the Internet by starting argu-
ments or upsetting people by posting inflammatory content on social media sites with the delib-
erate intent of provoking readers into an emotional response, often for their own amusement. In 
contrast, cyberharassment, a crime in many states and countries, broadly refers to the use of a 
computer to communicate obscene, vulgar, or threatening content about a person with the intent 
of harming or harassing that person. A single offensive message can be considered 
cyberharassment.
Intentionally following, threatening and/or intimidating someone using electronic means 
and causing that person to fear for his or her safety is referred to as cyberstalking. While cyber-
stalking can take many forms and can go undetected by the victim, the intent of cyberbullying is 
to deliberately cause emotional distress in the victim, often by manipulating, discrediting, or 
humiliating the victim. Cyberharassment, cyberstalking, and cyberbullying are typically targeted 
at a particular person or group as a means of taking revenge or expressing hatred. The wide-
spread and increasing use of mobile devices has led to increases in these incidents. Cyberharass-
ment, cyberstalking, and cyberbullying can take many forms, including the following:
■
■Making false accusations that damage the reputation of the victim on blogs, websites, chat 
rooms, or e-commerce sites (e.g., eBay)
■
■Gaining information about the victim by monitoring online activities, accessing databases, 
and so on
■
■Researching and broadcasting personally identifiable information about the victim (a prac-
tice known as doxing).
■
■Encouraging others to harass a victim by posting personal information about the victim on 
websites, chat rooms or social networking sites
■
■Attacking data and equipment of the victim by sending e-mail viruses and other destructive 
code
■
■Using the Internet to place false orders for goods and services, such as magazines, por-
nography, and other embarrassing items, as well as having such items delivered to work 
addresses
■
■Posting incriminating pictures on social networking sites
Many states, the U.S. government, and many countries have laws against cyberharassment 
and cyberstalking. Unfortunately, law enforcement has a difficult time catching most 
cyberstalkers.
Online predators typically target vulnerable people, usually the young or old, for sexual or 
financial purposes. While traditionally online chat rooms and instant messaging systems have been 
the primary playground for online predators, these villains are increasingly targeting many social 
networking sites like Facebook. To combat these online predators, parents must educate their chil-
dren not to share personal information and possibly must use monitoring software to track online 
activity. Fortunately, most social networking and online chat sites also provide ways to report abuse 
by these predators. Nevertheless, with the increase in cyberharassment, cyberstalking, cyberbully-
ing, and online predators, it is increasingly important to carefully manage one’s privacy in social 
networks, and to be aware of the potential consequences of any activities in social media.
Software Piracy
Software developers and marketers want you to buy as many copies of their products as you 
want, of course. But commercial software vendors do not want you or anyone else to buy one 
copy and then bootleg additional copies to sell or to give to others. Vendors also take a dim view 
of companies that buy one copy of a software application and then make many copies to distrib-
ute to employees. In fact, these practices are called software piracy and are illegal.
Both patent and copyright laws can apply to software, which is a form of intellectual 
property—creations of the mind (e.g., music, software, and so on), inventions, names, images, 
designs, and other works used in commerce. Patents and copyrights are recognized and enforced 
by most countries, giving the creator exclusive rights to benefit from the creation for a limited 
period of time. Patents typically refer to process, machine, or material inventions. For example, 


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     433
Amazon.com’s “one-click buying” process is protected by patent law, and Apple has patented its 
multitouch technology (including the “pinch” for shrinking and expanding items) used in the 
iPhone and iPad. Copyrights generally refer to creations of the mind such as music, literature, 
or software.
When you buy commercial software, it is typically legal for you to make one copy for your 
own use for backup purposes (although the software vendor can make it very difficult to copy 
the software). It is also legal to offer shareware or public domain software for free on a website. 
But warez peddling—offering stolen proprietary software for free or for sale over the Internet—
is a crime. (Warez is the slang term for such stolen software.)
Software piracy has become a problem because it is so widespread, costing the commercial 
software industry and the entire economy billions of dollars a year: A study conducted by the 
Business Software Alliance suggested that the worldwide value of unlicensed software in 2015 
was US$52 billion (BSA, 2016). The crime is difficult to trace, but many individuals and even 
companies have been successfully prosecuted for pirating software.
Many software vendors are trying to limit software piracy by requiring the users to enter 
license keys or verifying the key before allowing the customer to register or update the software. 
To discover and understand protection mechanisms (such as registration or license keys) built 
into the software by its original developer, computer criminals typically disassemble the soft-
ware, a practice referred to as reverse engineering. Once the crackers understand the inner 
workings of the protection mechanism, they can build a key generator that can be used to gener-
ate fake license keys to circumvent the protection mechanism. (Reverse engineering is not 
always destructive and may be legally used to improve a program, but use of the term here 
implies using the process for gaining unauthorized access to a program’s internal structure.)
SOFTWARE PIRACY IS A GLOBAL BUSINESS.  A major international issue that businesses deal with 
is the willingness (or unwillingness) of governments and individuals to recognize and enforce 
the ownership of intellectual property—in particular, software copyrights. Piracy of software 
and other technologies is widespread internationally (Figure 10.11). The BSA (2016) estimates 
that about 39 percent of all installed software is unlicensed. The BSA points to countries such 
as Armenia (86 percent), Moldova (86 percent), Libya (90 percent), and Zimbabwe (90 percent) 
as those with the highest percentages of illegal software. Countries with the lowest piracy rates 
include the United States (17 percent), Japan (18 percent), New Zealand (18 percent), and 
Luxembourg (19 percent). Because technology usage varies significantly by region, average 
piracy levels and dollar losses greatly differ across regions (Table 10.1). For instance, even 
though the United States has the lowest piracy rate, it also is the country where the greatest 
losses occur (more than US$9.1 billion) because of its high level of computer usage.
In addition to being a crime, software piracy can lead to fines or public embarrassment and 
make users vulnerable to attacks. According to the Business Software Alliance, there is a strong 
correlation (a correlation coefficient of .78) between unlicensed software and malware. In other 
words, it is clear that by using pirated software, organizations expose themselves to a high risk of 
FIGURE 10.11
In many parts of the world, using 
pirated software is a common 
practice.
Source: Courtesy of Christoph Schneider.

434    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
contracting malware. However, ethical questions surrounding the use of pirated software are often 
debated. While software piracy is often considered an ethical problem, businesspeople must 
acknowledge and deal with other perspectives as well. In part, the problem stems from other coun-
tries’ differing concepts of ownership. Many of the ideas about intellectual property ownership 
stem from long-standing cultural traditions. For example, the concept of individual ownership of 
knowledge is traditionally a strange one in many Middle Eastern countries, where knowledge is 
meant to be shared. Plagiarism does not exist in a culture where words belong to everyone. By the 
same token, piracy does not exist either. This view is gradually changing; the Saudi Arabia Patent 
Office granted its first patents several years ago, and its piracy rates have plummeted from 
79 percent in 1996 to 49 percent in 2015. Other factors leading to piracy or infringement of intel-
lectual property agreements throughout the world include lack of public awareness about the issue 
and the increasingly high demand for computers and other technology products.
In other cases, there are political, social, and economic reasons for piracy. In many countries, 
software publishers are not catering to the needs of those consumers who simply may not have the 
funds to purchase software legitimately. This is true in many areas of South America, Africa, and 
other regions with low per capita income. It is particularly true of students and other members of 
university communities whose needs are critical in some areas. Recognizing these issues, many 
software manufacturers offer educational versions or use differential pricing for different regions.
Cybersquatting
Another form of piracy is cybersquatting, the dubious practice of registering a domain name 
and then trying to sell the name for big bucks to the person, company, or organization most 
likely to want it. Domain names are one of the few scarce resources on the Internet, and victims 
of cybersquatting include Panasonic, Hertz, Avon, and numerous other companies and individu-
als. Fortunately, the U.S. government passed the Anti-Cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act 
in 1999, which made it a crime to register, traffic in, or use a domain name to profit from the 
goodwill of a trademark belonging to someone else. Fines for cybersquatting can reach as high 
as US$100,000, in addition to the forfeiture of the disputed domain name, and courts have not 
been kind to cybersquatters. Many feel, however, that it is often much easier simply to pay the 
cybersquatter because that will likely be much faster and cheaper than to hire a lawyer and go 
through a lengthy legal process. No matter how companies or individuals deal with this problem, 
valuable resources of time and money are wasted resolving these disputes.
Laws Against Computer Crime
In the United States, there are two main federal laws against computer crime: the Computer 
Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986. The 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 prohibits the following:
■
■Stealing or compromising data about national defense, foreign relations, atomic energy, or 
other restricted information
TABLE 10.1   Software Piracy Levels and Dollar Losses by Region
Region
Piracy Level
Dollar Loss (in US$ billions)
North America
17%
10.0
Western Europe
28%
10.5
Asia/Pacific
61%
19.1
Latin America
55%
5.8
Middle East and Africa
57%
3.7
Central and Eastern Europe
58%
3.1
Worldwide
39%
52.2
Source: Based on Business Software Alliance (2016).


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     435
■
■Gaining unauthorized access to computers owned by any agency or department of the U.S. 
government
■
■Violating data belonging to banks or other financial institutions
■
■Intercepting or otherwise intruding on communications between states or foreign countries
■
■Threatening to damage computer systems in order to extort money or other valuables from 
persons, businesses, or institutions
■
■Threatening the U.S. president, vice president, members of Congress, and other administra-
tive members (even if it’s just in a critical e-mail)
In 1996, the Computer Abuse Amendments Act expanded the Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act of 1986 to prohibit the dissemination of computer viruses and other harmful code. These 
and other relevant US laws are listed in Table 10.2. Throughout the world, most countries have 
some combination of laws to protect data, privacy, and security.
As computer capabilities continue to evolve, so do the crimes that new capabilities enable. 
Some critics argue that laws do not go far enough to prosecute computer crimes, while others 
believe that they should not be invoked when systems are breached but no damage is done. Even 
the definition of “damage” is debatable. For instance, has damage occurred if someone gains 
unauthorized access to a computer system but does not steal or change data?
There are additional difficulties in legislating and enforcing laws that affect global networks. 
Because many countries can be involved when break-ins and other crimes occur, who has juris-
diction? Should e-mail messages be monitored for libelous or other illegal content, and, if so, 
who should have monitoring responsibility? Should e-mail be subject to the same laws as mail 
delivered by the U.S. Postal Service, or should it be more akin to telephone conversations and 
the laws that apply to them?
Cyberwar and Cyberterrorism
Over the past several years, individual computer criminals have caused billions of dollars in 
losses by spreading malware or through unauthorized access to computers. In the future, many 
believe that coordinated efforts by national governments or terrorist groups have the potential to 
cause hundreds of billions of dollars in damage as well as put the lives of countless people at risk 
(Bremmer, 2015). Most experts believe that cyberwar and cyberterrorism are imminent threats to 
the United States and other technologically advanced countries. A major attack that cripples a 
country’s information infrastructure or power grid or even the global Internet could have 
TABLE 10.2   Examples of Several U.S. Federal Laws Related to Computer Crime
Law
Focus
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
Legislation making it a federal crime to access a protected computer without proper 
authorization.
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
Law related to various types of communication, including wiretaps and stored 
communication.
USA Patriot Act
Law passed shortly after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States giving 
law enforcement agencies increased, broad powers to bring terrorists to justice.
CAN-SPAM Act
Law that provides recipients of commercial e-mail messages with the right to opt out of these 
messages and have their opt-out (or unsubscribe) request be acted upon.
Telephone Consumer Protection Act
Law that restricts telephone solicitations and the use of automated telephone equipment such as 
automated dialing systems, prerecorded messages, and text messages and fax machine spam.
Right to Financial Privacy Act
Law that provides customers of financial institutions the right to some level of privacy from 
government searches; searches could only be performed if it could be demonstrated that the 
person was a foreign power.
U.S. Copyright Act
Law that protects the creator of a literary, artistic, musical, or other creative work, including 
software, providing the sole right to publish and sell that work.

436    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
devastating implications for a country’s (or the world’s) economic system and make transporta-
tion systems, medical capabilities, and other key infrastructure extremely vulnerable to disaster, 
especially given the proliferation of cloud computing for many personal, commercial, and gov-
ernmental applications.
Cyberwar
Cyberwar refers to an organized attempt by a country’s military to disrupt or destroy the infor-
mation and communication systems of another country. Cyberwar is often executed simultane-
ously with traditional methods to quickly dissipate the capabilities of an enemy, and intelligence 
agencies from countries around the world are secretly probing networks and looking for weak-
nesses in their potential enemies’ computer systems. For example, during the 78-day Serbia/
Kosovo war in 1999, the United States reportedly conducted its first cyberwar campaign using a 
team of information warriors to support its bombing campaign against Serbia. The U.S. informa-
tion operation cell electronically attacked Serbia’s critical networks and command-and-control 
systems. However, given that the United States and NATO alliance is the most technologically 
sophisticated war machine in the world—and also the most dependent on its networking and 
computing infrastructure—it is also the most vulnerable to cyberwar (or cyberterrorism) attacks.
CYBERWAR VULNERABILITIES.  The goal of cyberwar is to turn the balance of power—through 
information and knowledge—in one’s favor in order to enhance one’s capabilities while 
diminishing those of an opponent. Cyberwar utilizes a diverse range of technologies, including 
software, hardware, and networking technologies, to gain an information advantage over 
an opponent. These technologies can be used to electronically blind, jam, deceive, overload, 
and intrude into an enemy’s information systems infrastructure in order to diminish various 
capabilities, including the following:
■
■Command-and-control systems
■
■Intelligence collection, processing, and distribution systems
■
■Tactical communication systems and methods
WHO’S GOING MOBILE 
Backdoors in Every Mobile Phone?
In late 2015, Syed Rizwan Farook and his wife Tashfeen Malik 
killed 14 people and seriously injured 22 in a terrorist attack in 
San Bernardino, California. Following the attack, the FBI 
obtained Farook’s work iPhone. However, as the iPhone was 
locked with an access code, the contents of the phone would 
be erased if more than 10 failed login attempts occurred, so 
the FBI asked Apple to provide a backdoor into Farook’s iPhone 
in order to access the phone’s contents. After Apple refused to 
unlock the phone, arguing that it would violate trust with its 
customers, the FBI sued Apple to provide a new operating sys-
tem that would essentially provide a backdoor into the phone. 
In late March 2016, the FBI dropped the suit against Apple 
after finding another method for unlocking the phone.
The event has sparked a strong debate about the balance 
between security and privacy. Privacy advocates say that Apple 
should never be compelled to unlock one of its phones, as pro-
viding a backdoor can result in an unreasonable “search and 
seizure” of protected data; when a government accesses elec-
tronic devices through such backdoor, it is conducting an elec-
tronic version of such banned searches. Security advocates 
argue that security is a common good that is promised to all, 
and the most important job of government is to “secure the 
general welfare” of its citizens; thus, security must outweigh 
any personal concerns about privacy, and it is necessary to 
unlock some phones when it is important to protect society. 
This debate between privacy and security is not new. Over the 
millennia, there have been debates about the trade-offs 
between security and privacy, and the Apple versus FBI case 
will not end this debate.
Based on:
2015 San Bernardino attack. (2016, March 26). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 29, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=2015_San_Bernardino_attack&oldid=712033195
Anonymous. (n.d.). Privacy vs security. debatewise. Retrieved March 
28, 2016, from http://debatewise.org/debates/3040-privacy-vs-security
Corvitz, L. G. (2016, March 27). FBI vs. Apple isn’t over. The Wall Street 
Journal. Retrieved March 28, 2016, from http://www.wsj.com/articles/
fbi-vs-apple-isnt-over-1459116064
Johnson, K., Swartz, J., & della Cava, M. (2016, March 28). FBI hacks 
into terrorist’s iPhone without Apple. USA Today. Retrieved March 28, 
2016, from http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2016/03/28/
apple-justice-department-farook/82354040


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     437
■
■Troop and weapon positioning systems
■
■Friend-or-foe identification systems
■
■Smart weapons systems
Additionally, controlling the content and distribution of propaganda and information to an 
opponent’s civilians, troops, and government is a key part of a cyberwar strategy. At the simplest 
level, web vandalism can occur by defacing an opponent’s websites. Likewise, cyberpropa-
ganda can be quickly and easily distributed through websites, social media, and e-mail. Espio-
nage—stealing of secrets or modifying information—can occur if data and systems are not 
adequately protected and secure.
While there are several known attacks, most governments deny involvement. Typically, gov-
ernments accused of cyberwar activities blame uncontrolled patriot hackers—independent citi-
zens or supporters of a country that perpetrate attacks on perceived or real enemies. A recent 
example of such an attack was discovered in June 2010 when a Belarus-based computer security 
company discovered a computer worm called Stuxnet on a computer system belonging to an 
Iranian client. Stuxnet is a computer worm designed to find and infect a particular piece of 
industrial hardware inside Iranian nuclear plants. Once Stuxnet found its intended target—
centrifuges within Iran’s nuclear enrichment program—it was programmed to manipulate their 
motor speeds. The manipulation of the motor speeds beyond normal operating tolerances would 
ultimately destroy the equipment, slowing and degrading the nuclear program. Since its discov-
ery, computer security experts around the globe have studied its design. Stuxnet is a very sophis-
ticated and unprecedented method for attacking an adversary. While most experts agreed that 
Stuxnet was most likely designed by a nation-state, from the time of its discovery, no country 
had come forward to admit involvement in its creation. This suspicion ended in June 2012, when 
it was revealed that Israel and the United States worked together to design Stuxnet. It is one of 
the first examples where cyberwarfare was used to inflict physical damage to critical infrastruc-
tures of a nation-state. Another (admittedly less damaging attack) on the Iranian nuclear pro-
gram happened in 2012, when malware introduced into Iranian nuclear facilities caused 
computers to play AC/DC’s “Thunderstruck” at full volume in the middle of the night.
It is also often difficult to differentiate cyberattacks by known terrorist groups from those of 
legitimate governments. Many governments such as Iran, Syria, North Korea, and others have 
been suspected of supporting the activities of terrorist organizations. For example, in 2016, 
Pakistani intelligence agents used an app called SmeshApp to spy on Indian army personnel who 
were tricked into installing the app on their smartphones. SmeshApp provided similar capabili-
ties as the popular messaging apps WhatsApp and Telegram. After being downloaded, the app 
gained access to contacts, photos, and other personal data as well as captured the phone’s con-
tact list, messaging data, e-mail, browsing history, and so on. Ultimately, data gained from the 
app were sent to a database in Germany that was allegedly controlled by Pakistani intelligence. 
Data captured from this activity were provided to Pakistani-based terrorists who launched an 
attack on India’s Pathankot Air Force Station that killed several people.
In traditional war, destroying equipment by dropping a bomb is an act of war. Time will tell 
how nation-states will respond to cyberattacks that ultimately cause similar damage, and regard-
less of the source of these attacks, it is clear that one of the big challenges for governments mov-
ing forward will be to fully integrate a cyberwar strategy into their overall plans and 
capabilities.
Cyberterrorism
Unlike cyberwar, cyberterrorism is launched not by governments but by individuals and orga-
nized groups. Cyberterrorism is the use of computer and networking technologies against per-
sons or property to intimidate or coerce governments, civilians, or any segment of society in 
order to attain political, religious, or ideological goals. One of the great fears about cyberterror-
ism is that an attack can be launched from a computer anywhere in the world—no borders have 
to be crossed, no bombs smuggled and placed, and no cyberterrorists’ lives are lost in carrying 
out the attack. Because computers and networking systems control power plants, telephone sys-
tems, and transportation systems as well as water and oil pipelines, any disruption of these sys-
tems could cause loss of life or widespread chaos. Just as physical terrorist attacks have physical 
and psychological effects, so also do cyberattacks. Dealing with the unknown—where, when, 
and how—of an indiscriminant terrorist attack is what leads to “terror.”

438    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
WHAT KINDS OF ATTACKS ARE CONSIDERED CYBERTERRORISM?  Cyberterrorism could involve 
physical destruction of computer systems or acts that destroy economic stability or infrastructure. 
Cyberterrorist acts could likely damage the machines that control traffic lights, power plants, 
dams, or airline traffic in order to create fear and panic. Attacks launched in cyberspace could 
take many forms, such as viruses, denial of service, destruction of government computers, 
stealing classified files, altering web page content, deleting or corrupting vital information, 
disrupting media broadcasts, and otherwise interrupting the flow of information. Table 10.3 
summarizes several categories of attacks that experts believe cyberterrorists could try to deliver.
The goal of cyberterrorists is to cause fear, panic, and destruction. Through the power of 
computer technology and global networks, terrorists can gain access to critical parts of the 
world’s infrastructure to produce both physical and virtual terror. Given the great potential for 
cyberterrorism, many experts believe that it will, unfortunately, become the weapon of choice 
for the world’s most sophisticated terrorists.
HOW THE INTERNET IS CHANGING THE BUSINESS PROCESSES OF TERRORISTS.  Just as the 
Internet has fueled globalization for organizations and societies, it too has fueled global 
terrorism, and virtually all modern terrorist groups utilize the Internet. Beyond using the Internet 
to wage cyberattacks, the Internet is a powerful tool for improving and streamlining the business 
processes of the modern terrorist (Table 10.4).
ASSESSING THE CYBERTERRORISM THREAT.  Some experts claim that because of the general 
openness of access, the Internet infrastructure is extremely vulnerable to cyberterrorism. Each 
year, cyberattacks on critical infrastructure such as nuclear power plants, dams, and power grids 
are increasing. While the majority of such attacks have not done damage at this point, a few have 
been alarmingly successful and concerning:
■
■In May 2003, Romanian crackers compromised systems that housed life-support control 
for 58 scientists and contractors in Antarctica. FBI agents assisted in the arrest of the crack-
ers, who attempted to extort money from the research station.
■
■In May 2007, government networks and commercial banks within Estonia came under a 
very sophisticated cyberattack by cyberterrorists in retaliation for the removal of a Soviet-
era memorial to fallen soldiers.
■
■In 2010–2013, “The Jester,” believed to be a former U.S. soldier, claimed responsibility for 
attacks on WikiLeaks, Islamists’ websites, and even the website of Iranian President Mah-
moud Ahmadinejad. After a successful attack, The Jester broadcast “TANGO DOWN”—a 
military term that means a target has been injured or killed—on Twitter.
■
■In 2015, a group called CyberCaliphate attacked TV5, a French media outlet, taking con-
trol of its website and social media accounts and incapacitating its broadcasting for hours. 
TABLE 10.3   Categories of Potential Cyberterrorist Attacks
Category
Description
Coordinated bomb attacks
To distribute a number of devices—from small explosive devices to large weapons of mass destruction—
that communicate with each other through the Internet or cellular phone networks and are made to simul-
taneously detonate if one device stops communicating with the others
Manipulation of financial and 
banking information
To disrupt the flow of financial information with the objective of causing fear and lack of confidence in a 
country’s or the world’s financial system
Manipulation of the 
pharmaceutical industry
To make hard-to-detect changes in the formulas of medications in order to cause fear and lack of confi-
dence in this important industry
Manipulation of transportation 
control systems
To disrupt airline and railroad transportation systems, possibly leading to disastrous collisions
Manipulation of the broader 
civilian infrastructures
To compromise the communication, broadcast media, gas lines, water systems, and electrical grids in 
order to cause panic and fear within the population
Manipulation of nuclear 
power plants
To disrupt cooling systems in order to cause a meltdown that would disperse radiation


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     439
TABLE 10.4   How Terrorists Are Using the Internet
Use
Description
Information 
dissemination
The use of websites and social media to disseminate propaganda to current and potential supporters, to influence 
international public opinion, and to notify potential enemies of pending plans
Data mining
The use of advanced analytics to collect and analyze the vast amount of structured and unstructured data available 
on the Internet regarding virtually any topic for planning, recruitment, and numerous other endeavors
Fundraising
The use of websites for bogus charities and nongovernmental organizations to raise funds and transfer currencies 
around the world
Recruiting and 
mobilization
The use of websites to provide information for recruiting new members as well as roaming online chat rooms, 
social media, and cybercafés for receptive individuals
Networking
The use of the Internet to enable a less hierarchical, cell-based organizational structure that is difficult to com-
bat; networking capabilities also allow different groups with common enemies to better share and coordinate 
information
Information sharing
The use of the Internet as a powerful tool for announcing events as well as sharing best practices
Training
The use of the Internet to disseminate training materials. For example, the official Hamas website details how to 
make homemade poisons and gases, and Syrian rebels use YouTube to disseminate weapons training videos.
Planning and 
coordinating
The use of communication and information dissemination capabilities to facilitate designing and executing plans
Information gathering
The use of mapping software such as Google Earth to locate potential targets for terrorist attacks
Location monitoring
The use of public webcams to monitor and study potential attack sites (e.g., public places or civil infrastructure 
such as tunnels or power generation facilities)
It also published the names and family members, along with various threats, of French 
military personnel.
While cyberterrorism obviously remains a threat to computer and network security, some 
experts point out that there are disadvantages to using acts of cyberterrorism as a weapon, 
including the following:
1.	Computer systems and networks are complex, so cyberattacks are difficult to control and 
may not achieve the desired destruction as effectively as physical weapons.
2.	Computer systems and networks change and security measures improve, so an ever-increas-
ing level of knowledge and expertise on the part of intruders is required for cyberattacks to 
be effective. This means that perpetrators will be required to continuously study and hone 
their skills as older methods of attack no longer work.
3.	Cyberattacks rarely cause physical harm to victims; therefore, there is less drama and emo-
tional appeal than for perpetrators using conventional weapons.
Some experts believe that the likelihood of a devastating attack that causes significant dis-
ruption in the major U.S. infrastructure systems is quite low because of the resources and intel-
ligence needed carry out a sophisticated attack. Nevertheless, small attacks have been occurring 
for years and are likely to increase in frequency and severity—even a “small” attack, like an 
individual suicide bomber, can cause tremendous chaos in a society. While cyberterrorism and 
cyberwar may be methods of choice for future generations with advanced computer knowledge, 
experts are hopeful that the increasing sophistication of computer security measures will help 
reduce the number of such incidents.
RESPONDING TO GLOBAL CYBERTERRORISM THREATS.  With the proliferation of and dependence 
on technology increasing at an astronomical rate, the threat of cyberterrorism will continue to 
increase. As has been true with virtually all governments and business organizations, fueled by 
the digitization of information and the Internet, terrorism has become a global business. To be 
adequately prepared, national governments along with industry partners must design coordinated 

440    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
ETHICAL DILEMMA 
Ethics and Cyberwar: Just Because We Can, Should We?
One of the realities of the digital world is constant and unre-
lenting change. The exponential increase in performance of 
computers has helped to usher in new gadgets and technolo-
gies that can do new things that were once unimaginable. All 
this change has resulted in many positive advances, from the 
promise of commercial space travel to self-driving cars. What 
often doesn’t keep pace with all this innovation and change 
are the laws and ethical standards for what should or should 
not be legal or ethical to do. For example, because it is techni-
cally possible for the government to listen to any of your 
phone calls, read any of your e-mail messages, or monitor your 
online activity, what legal and ethical bounds should be 
enforced?
Just as technology is transforming how we work and live, it 
is also transforming how war can be conducted. By now, we 
are familiar with airstrikes conducted by drones, controlled by 
personnel located in a safe facility at a remote airbase. These 
drone strikes effectively enable the killing of people without 
putting oneself into harm’s way. Likewise, cyberwar raises many 
serious issues for societies, issues that need to be addressed by 
policies and agreements. Cyber-weapons are difficult to pre-
cisely target, given the interdependence of most modern com-
puter systems. As such, collateral damage to civilian targets is a 
major concern (e.g., a nasty computer virus targeting military 
computers might simultaneously take out civilian computers). 
Avoiding disproportionate damage to civilians is a key part of 
the Geneva Conventions and the law of war (i.e., a series of 
international agreements related to the humane treatment of 
war prisoners, acceptable justification to engage in war, accept-
able wartime conduct, and so on). In less technologically 
advanced societies, repairing the damage caused by a massive 
cyberattack may be especially difficult, resulting in excessive 
and long-term impacts on civilians and society. Crippling a 
country’s power grid, telephone, and banking systems may pro-
vide a strong strategic advantage in a war but may have equally 
damaging effects on its citizens and society.
Questions
1.	 What are the ethical implications of drone strikes?
2.	 Should cyberwar attacks be prosecutable as war crimes? 
If so, under which circumstances?
Based on:
Geneva Conventions. (2016, March 22). In Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. Retrieved March 28, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Geneva_Conventions&oldid=711345522
Law of war. (2016, March 21). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 28, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Law_of_war&oldid=711123158
Tucker, P. (2015, April 20). NSA chief: Rules of war apply 
to cyberwar, too. Defense One. Retrieved March 29, 2016, 
from http://www.defenseone.com/technology/2015/04/
nsa-chief-rules-war-apply-cyberwar-too/110572
responses to various attack scenarios. In addition to greater cooperation and preparedness, 
governments must improve their intelligence-gathering capabilities so that potential attacks are 
thwarted before they begin. Industry must also be given incentives to secure their information 
resources so that losses and disruptions in operations are minimized. International laws 
and treaties must rapidly evolve to reflect the realities of cyberterrorism, where attacks can 
be launched from anywhere in the world to anywhere in the world. Clearly, there are great 
challenges ahead.
Managing Information Systems Security
Everyone who uses an information system (IS) knows that disasters can happen to stored data or 
to entire systems. Some disasters are unintentional, such as accidents caused by power outages, 
inexperienced computer users, or mistakes, while others are deliberate, caused on purpose by 
malicious crackers. The primary threats to the security of information systems include the fol-
lowing (Figure 10.12):
■
■Natural Disasters: power outages, hurricanes, floods, and so on
■
■Accidents: inexperienced or careless computer operators (or cats walking across 
keyboards!)
■
■Employees and Consultants: people within an organization who have access to electronic data
■
■Links to Outside Business Contacts: electronic data that can be at risk when it travels 
between or among business affiliates as part of doing business
■
■Outsiders: hackers and crackers who penetrate networks and computer systems to snoop or 
to cause damage (Viruses, perpetually rampant on the Internet, are included in this category.)


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     441
For individuals as well as organizations, trying to recover from disasters carries high costs 
in terms of time and money; in addition, organizations can lose much goodwill if their systems 
are unavailable (no matter what the reason is), their systems are compromised by malicious 
crackers, or customer data are stolen. How do you secure information systems from such dan-
gers? How do you know what systems are at risk of being compromised? The rule of thumb for 
deciding whether an information system is at risk is simple: All systems connected to networks 
are vulnerable to security violations from both insiders and outsiders as well as to virus infec-
tions and other forms of computer crime. Further, no information system is immune to inten-
tional or unintentional physical harm. In short, threats to information systems can come from a 
variety of places internal and external to an organization.
Information systems security refers to precautions taken to keep all aspects of information 
systems (e.g., all hardware, software, network equipment, and data) safe from destruction, 
manipulation, or unauthorized access or use while providing the intended functionality to legiti-
mate users. Specifically, organizations have to consider the following:
■
■Availability: ensuring that legitimate users can access the system
■
■Integrity: ensuring that unauthorized manipulations of data and systems (that may compro-
mise accuracy, completeness, or reliability of data) are prevented
■
■Confidentiality: ensuring that data are protected from unauthorized access
■
■Accountability: ensuring that actions can be traced
Hence, for organizations, it is essential to carefully manage IS risk and to ensure business 
continuity by securing their IS infrastructure. As use of the Internet and related telecommunica-
tions technologies and systems has become pervasive, use of these networks now creates vari-
ous dangerous vulnerabilities for organizations. These networks can be infiltrated and/or 
subverted in a number of ways. As a result, the need for tight computer and network security 
has increased dramatically. Fortunately, there are a variety of managerial methods and security 
technologies that can be used to manage IS security effectively. However, as threats to informa-
tion systems constantly evolve, information systems security is an ongoing process, consisting 
of (Figure 10.13):
Employees &
Consultants
Links to Outside
Business Associates
E-mail Attachments
with Viruses
Accidents &
Natural Disasters
Outside Intruders
FIGURE 10.12
Threats to IS security.

442    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
1.	Assessing risks
2.	Developing a security strategy
3.	Implementing controls and training
4.	Monitoring security
In addition, organizations should continuously watch for emerging threats and vulnerabili-
ties as well as attacks (including attacks on other organizations) so as to update risk assessments 
and strategies and implement additional controls.
Assessing Risks
Maintaining customer confidence is essential for any organization, and any IS security-related 
incident can lead to reputation, operational, legal, and strategic risks. Consequently, any good 
approach to securing information systems begins first with a thorough information systems risk 
assessment to obtain an understanding of the risks to the availability, integrity, and confidentiality 
of data and systems. It would not make sense to spend literally millions of dollars a year to protect 
an asset the loss of which would cost the organization only a few thousand dollars. As a result, 
organizations attempt to identify and rank the risks in order to develop the most effective strate-
gies. In other words, organizations assess the value of the assets being protected, determine their 
probability of being compromised, and compare the probable costs of their being compromised 
with the estimated costs of whatever protections they might have to take. Protecting an asset only 
makes economic sense if the cost of protecting the asset is less than (or equal to) the value of the 
asset (and the associated data that can be lost or damage that can be done) multiplied by the prob-
ability of a disaster. Thus, organizations perform risk assessments for their systems to ensure that 
IS security programs make sense economically (Stallings & Brown, 2017).
Such assessment should encompass all of an organization’s systems, including hardware, 
software, data, networks, and any business processes that involve them, so as to identify threats 
and vulnerabilities, determine the probabilities of vulnerabilities being exploited, and assess the 
potential impact (i.e., the severity of the consequences if a threat indeed causes damage by 
exploiting a vulnerability) (Figure 10.14). Threats are typically defined as undesirable events 
that can cause harm and can arise from actions performed by agents internal or external to an 
organization. In other words, threats can come from current or former insiders (such as employ-
ees, contractors, etc.) as well as criminals, competitors, terrorists, or the elements. In contrast, 
vulnerabilities are defined as weaknesses in an organization’s systems or security policies that 
can be exploited to cause damage and can encompass both known vulnerabilities (such as vul-
nerabilities discovered during audits) and expected vulnerabilities (such as unpatched software, 
new attack methodologies, or staff turnover).
Assess risk
Develop security
strategy
Implement
controls
Review & update
security process
Monitor
security
FIGURE 10.13
Information systems security is an 
ongoing process.
Impacts
Controls
Vulnerabilities
Threats
FIGURE 10.14
Organizations have to understand 
the interplay between threats, 
vulnerabilities, and impacts to 
plan and implement effective IS 
controls.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     443
By understanding and evaluating these factors, organizations can then design and imple-
ment a security strategy that makes the best use of the available resources in order to eliminate 
vulnerabilities or reduce impacts. In addition to an information systems risk assessment, organi-
zations then periodically perform security audits to determine the effectiveness of the imple-
mented measures. People within the IS department are usually responsible for implementing the 
security measures chosen, though people from throughout the organization should participate in 
the risk assessment.
In order to get a thorough understanding of risks, organizations need to consider both tech-
nical information (such as information about databases, hardware and software, and networks) 
and nontechnical information (such as information about processes and procedures related to 
physical or personnel security) to determine and assess the threats and vulnerabilities. Typically, 
a thorough information systems risk assessment uses both quantitative data (such as value of the 
asset or implementation costs of security measures) and qualitative data (e.g., results from inter-
views or walkthroughs) to arrive at a risk rating that reflects the possible impact, likelihood, and 
ultimate risk level for each particular function or asset (Table 10.5).
This risk rating then enables the organization to determine what steps, if any, to take to 
secure systems. Large organizations typically use a balance of different approaches, taking steps 
in risk reduction for some systems, accepting risk and living with it in other cases (i.e., risk 
acceptance), and also insuring all or most of their systems activities (i.e., risk transference). A 
fourth category—risk avoidance (e.g., by not engaging in e-commerce, not having a website, or 
not using e-mail)—can often be impractical or even infeasible in today’s networked environ-
ment. See Table 10.6 for a summary of these options.
For organizations, the IT megatrends (see Chapter 1, “Managing in the Digital World”) have 
led to the need to a far more wide-reaching risk assessment. For example, data on mobile devices 
are often particularly vulnerable to being compromised, and organizations using cloud comput-
ing often place their data and applications in the hands of third parties, which may or may not 
have appropriate security measures in place (note that using reliable cloud service providers is a 
common risk transference strategy). Likewise, the Internet of Things can expose organizations 
TABLE 10.5   Sample Risk Rating Matrix for a Customer Database
Risk Category
Impact
Likelihood
Risk Level (Impact × 
Likelihood)
Confidentiality
3
2
6
Integrity
2
3
6
Availability
3
1
3
Overall
8
6
15
TABLE 10.6   Options for Addressing IS Risks
Option
Description
Condition
Risk reduction
Taking active countermeasures to 
protect your systems
■	 High risk cannot be accepted
Risk acceptance
Implementing no countermeasures 
and simply absorbing any damages 
that occur
■	 There exists a low likelihood/impact
■	 Other factors are more important 
than security
Risk transference
Having someone else absorb the 
risk
■	 Other parties may be better 
equipped to manage the risk
Risk avoidance
Using alternate means or not 
performing tasks that would 
cause risk
■	 Risk is unmanageable
■	 Risk is too high

444    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
to a multitude of vulnerabilities: Data generated by various sensors may open the door to iden-
tity theft or hacking, and criminals may attempt gain control over smart objects to use them for 
nefarious purposes; thus, risk assessment and management should cover all devices that compa-
nies use to interact with their customers (EY, 2016).
Developing a Security Strategy
Once risks are assessed, a strategy should be formulated that details what information systems 
controls (in terms of technology, people, and policies) should be implemented. By ensuring the 
availability, integrity, and confidentiality of information, the controls help an organization to 
control costs, gain and protect trust, remain competitive, and comply with internal or external 
governance mandates (e.g., the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, discussed later in this section). Such con-
trols can consist of a variety of different measures; to be most effective, an IS security strategy 
should focus on the following:
■
■Preventive controls: to prevent any potentially negative event from occurring, such as by 
preventing outside intruders from accessing a facility
■
■Detective controls: to assess whether anything went wrong, such as unauthorized access 
attempts, and to limit damage
■
■Corrective controls: to mitigate the impact of any problem after it has arisen, such as 
restoring compromised data
Whereas most efforts should focus on prevention, detection and correction are important 
to compensate for any weaknesses in preventive measures, and organizations have to strike 
the balance between implementing preventive measures and providing functionality for the 
users. Thus, organizations use the principles of least permissions and least privileges, mean-
ing that users should only be given access to the systems, data, or resources that are needed 
to perform their duties and should be restricted from accessing other resources (Figure 10.15). 
Typically, information systems controls comprise multiple layers such that a potential 
attacker has to break several layers to conduct a successful attack; using multiple defense 
layers not only helps in thwarting the attack but also increases the chances of detecting the 
attacker.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.  Very often some of the best things that people can do to secure 
their information systems are not necessarily technical in nature. Instead, they may involve 
changes within the organization and/or better management of people’s use of information 
systems. For example, one of the outcomes of the risk assessment described here may well be a 
FIGURE 10.15
Following the principles of least 
permissions and least privileges, 
users should only be given access 
to the systems, data, or resources 
that are needed to perform their 
duties.
Source: Windows 10, Microsoft 
Corporation.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     445
set of computer and/or Internet use policies (sometimes referred to as acceptable use policies) 
for people within the organization, with clearly spelled-out penalties for noncompliance 
(Figure 10.16).
In general, policies and procedures that guide users’ decisions and establish responsibilities 
include the following:
■
■Confidential Information Policy: outlines how sensitive information will be handled, 
stored, transmitted, and destroyed
■
■Security Policy: explains technical controls on all organizational computer systems, such 
as access limitations, audit-control software, firewalls, and so on
■
■Use Policy: outlines the organization’s policy regarding appropriate use of in-house com-
puter systems; may mandate no Internet surfing, use of company computer systems only 
for employment-related purposes, restricted use of social networking and e-mail, and so on
■
■Backup Policy: explains requirements for backing up data so that critical data can be 
restored in case of data loss
■
■Account Management Policy: lists procedures for adding new users to systems and remov-
ing users who have left the organization
■
■Incident Handling Procedures: lists procedures to follow when handling a security breach
■
■Disaster Recovery Plan: lists all the steps an organization will take to restore computer 
operations in case of a natural or deliberate disaster (Each department within the organiza-
tion generally has its own disaster recovery plan; see the following discussion.)
While establishing such policies and procedures is crucial, they need to be clearly commu-
nicated; organizations often require employees to acknowledge the acceptance of policies in 
order to mitigate risks arising from employee noncompliance, and mechanisms should be in 
place for enforcing these. Needless to say, such policies and procedures need to be continually 
reviewed and updated to account for environmental changes. More fundamental to security than 
management techniques such as these is that you make every effort to hire trustworthy employ-
ees and treat them well. Trustworthy employees who are treated well are less likely to commit 
offenses affecting the organization’s information systems.
DISASTER PLANNING.  In some cases, all attempts to provide a reliable and secure IS 
infrastructure are in vain, and disasters cannot be avoided. Thus, organizations need to be 
prepared for potential impacts. A business continuity plan describes how a business continues 
operating after a disaster before normal operations have been restored; relatedly, a disaster 
recovery plan spells out detailed procedures for recovering from systems-related disasters, such 
as virus infections and other disasters that might cripple the IS infrastructure. This way, even 
under the worst-case scenario, people will be able to replace or reconstruct critical files or data, 
FIGURE 10.16
Most organizations provide 
employees or customers with an 
acceptable use policy.

446    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
or they will at least have a plan readily available to begin the recovery process. A typical disaster 
recovery plan includes information that answers the following questions:
■
■What events are considered a disaster?
■
■What should be done to prepare the backup site?
■
■What is the chain of command, and who can declare a disaster?
■
■What hardware and software are needed to recover from a disaster?
■
■Which personnel are needed for staffing the backup sites?
■
■What is the sequence for moving back to the original location after recovery?
■
■Which providers can be drawn on to aid in the disaster recovery process?
Backup sites are critical for business continuity in the event a disaster strikes; in other words, 
backup sites can be thought of as a company’s office in a temporary location. In addition, organi-
zations should have backups of important data in place. Typically, such backups use media such 
as external hard drives, CDs, or tapes, or data are backed up to online backup service providers at 
regular intervals. No matter what the medium is, backed-up data should be encrypted so that in 
the event computer criminals gain access to the backup media, the data are useless to them.
Commonly, a distinction is made between cold and hot backup sites. A cold backup site is 
nothing more than an empty warehouse with all necessary connections for power and communi-
cation but nothing else. In the case of a disaster, a company has to first set up all necessary 
equipment, ranging from office furniture to web servers. While this is the least expensive option, 
it also takes a relatively longer time before a company can resume working after a disaster. A hot 
backup site, in contrast, is a fully equipped backup facility, having everything from office chairs 
to a one-to-one replication of the most current data. In the event of a disaster, all that has to be 
done is to relocate the employees to the backup site to continue working. Obviously, this is a 
very expensive option, as the backup site has to be kept fully equipped and all the IS infrastruc-
ture duplicated.
DESIGNING THE RECOVERY PLAN.  When planning for disaster, two primary objectives should 
be considered by an organization: recovery time and recovery point objectives. Recovery time 
objectives specify the maximum time allowed to recover from a catastrophic event. For example, 
should the organization be able to resume operations in minutes, hours, or days after the disaster? 
Companies using cloud-based backup services often forget that restoring large quantities of data 
from the cloud can take a long time; having completely redundant systems helps to minimize 
the recovery time and might be best suited for mission-critical applications, such as e-commerce 
transaction servers. For other applications, such as data mining, while important, the recovery 
time can be longer without disrupting primary business processes.
Recovery point objectives specify how current the backup data should be. Imagine that your 
computer’s hard drive crashes while you are working on a term paper. Luckily, you recently backed 
up your data. Would you prefer the last backup to be a few days old, or would you rather have the 
last backup include your most recent changes to the term paper? Hot backup sites typically have a 
redundant backup of the data so that the business processes are interrupted as little as possible and 
data loss is minimized (or even avoided) in the event of a catastrophic failure. To achieve this 
redundancy, all data are mirrored on separate servers (i.e., everything is stored synchronously on 
two independent systems). This might seem expensive, but for a critical business application 
involving customers, it may be less expensive to run a redundant backup system in parallel than it 
would be to disrupt business or lose customers in the event of catastrophic system failure.
Often, companies choose to replicate their data centers in multiple locations. Thinking about 
the location of redundant systems is an important aspect of disaster planning. If a company relies 
on redundant systems, all of which are located within the same building, a single event can inca-
pacitate all the systems. Similarly, events such as a hurricane can damage systems that are 
located across town from each other. Thus, even if the primary infrastructure is located in-house, 
it pays to have a backup located in a different geographic area to minimize the risk of a disaster 
happening to both systems.
Implementing Controls and Training
Once a comprehensive strategy has been formulated, organizations can decide which controls to 
implement and train personnel regarding security policies and measures. Such controls can encom-
pass different measures, such as systems security policies and their physical implementation, 


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     447
access restrictions, or record keeping, to be able to trace actions and transactions and who is 
responsible for these. IS controls thus need to be applied throughout the entire IS infrastructure. 
There are two broad categories of approaches for reducing risk—technological- and human-based 
approaches—and any comprehensive security strategy will include both. Commonly used controls 
to safeguard information systems include:
■
■Physical access restrictions
■
■Firewalls
■
■Encryption
■
■Virus monitoring and prevention
■
■Secure data centers
■
■Mobile device management
■
■Systems development controls
■
■Human controls
Within any type of control, there are a variety of ways in which it can be deployed. Next, we 
briefly review each of these methods.
PHYSICAL ACCESS RESTRICTIONS.  Organizations can prevent unauthorized access to information 
systems by keeping stored data safe and allowing access only to those employees who need it to 
do their jobs. Of course, organizations can protect computers and data resources by physically 
securing computers to desks or requiring users to lock hard drives with keys when leaving a 
computer unattended. However, most organizations don’t go to such lengths and control access 
only by requiring some form of identification and authentication to authorize the access of 
resources by a user (Figure 10.17). Typically, identification is a user’s claim or declaration of 
being someone. A user’s identity is normally established using publicly available information, 
SECURITY MATTERS 
Back to the Future: Analog May Be the Future of Securing Critical 
Infrastructure
Over the past 50 years, the world has evolved from the analog 
to the modern digital world. Analog devices represent data as 
continuous variable quantities, such as length, width, voltage, 
sound, or pressure. In an old car, for example, an analog 
speedometer would indicate the rate of travel in miles (or kilo-
meters) per hour by a dial that might range from 0 to 120 
MPH. As the car’s speed changed, so too would a center-
mounted needle to indicate the current speed. Other analog 
devices include classic record players and tube amplifiers that 
many top musicians like to use. One major drawback of analog 
data is that they cannot be easily and quickly shared or trans-
mitted over networks. In the modern digital world, however, 
we have embraced the power of precisely controlled com-
puter-based devices, leveraging databases, and sharing data 
across networks throughout the world; digital recordings of 
music are shared with millions of customers around the world 
using networked platforms like iTunes, companies use the 
Internet to interconnect their global supply chains to better 
serve their customers, and various devices or even entire facto-
ries can be controlled remotely.
While the use of digital computers has led to a tidal wave 
of positive change throughout the world, cyberterrorism expert 
Ralph Langner, a foremost expert on the security of critical 
infrastructure components such as nuclear power plants, 
power grid substations, and water treatment plants, is won-
dering whether the old, analog approach might be more 
secure than a fully digital infrastructure. A digitally networked 
control infrastructure provides many benefits, such as remote 
monitoring and greater flexibility. However, virtually every sys-
tem that is connected to a network can be remotely hacked, 
while old-school analog systems require a human operator to 
turn a dial or flip a switch. In other words, analog equipment 
cannot be infected by malware and commandeered by hack-
ers. Langner cautions against the wholesale replacement of 
digital with analog devices, as digital provides many benefits. 
However, he suggests that some key components should 
remain analog in order to isolate critical parts of a plant so that 
catastrophic damage cannot be remotely initiated by 
cyberterrorists.
Based on:
Roberts, P. (2014, March 17). Is analog the answer to cyber terrorism? The 
Security Ledger. Retrieved March 28, 2016, from https://securityledger 
.com/2014/03/is-analog-the-answer-to-our-digital-insecurity-dilemma
Sax, D. (2016, March 10). The best insurance may be analog. Bloomberg  
Business. Retrieved March 28, 2016, from http://www 
.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-10/cybersecurity-the- 
best-insurance-may-be-analog

448    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
such as a user name (or even bank account number); the identifying information is typically 
unique (within the context of a certain system). Authentication is the process of confirming 
the identity of a user who is attempting to access a restricted system or web site. In contrast to 
identification, authentication is private, such as a PIN or a password, but not necessarily unique. 
Passwords are effective only if chosen carefully and changed frequently. Likewise, organizations 
must take care to securely store the users’ passwords at the organizations’ end; if the passwords 
stored on the e-commerce server are not secure, determined crackers can easily get access to 
the users’ passwords. Thus, systems such as e-commerce websites typically do no store a user’s 
password but an encrypted version called a hash value (which is extremely difficult to decrypt), 
which is then compared to a hashed version of the password the user enters. Even if crackers 
are successful in breaking into the organization’s systems, they will be unable to gain access to 
users’ passwords.
Besides passwords, users may be asked to provide an ID combination, a security code 
sequence, or personal data, such as their mother’s maiden name. Employees may also be issued 
keys to physically unlock a computer, photo ID cards, smart cards with digital ID, and other 
physical devices allowing computer access. Based on the combination of identification and 
authentication, authorization is provided by the system and grants access to particular resources. 
In sum, authorization can be granted dependent on one or more of the following:
■
■Something You Have: keys, picture identification cards, smart cards, or smart badges that 
contain memory chips with authentication data on them (Figure 10.18)
Identification
Authentication
Authorization
&
?
|•••••••••••••••••••••••••
FIGURE 10.17
Users need to assert and prove 
their identity to get access to a 
system.
FIGURE 10.18
A smart card.
Source: al62/Fotolia.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     449
■
■Something You Know: passwords, code numbers, PINs, lock combinations, or answers to 
secret questions (your pet’s name, your mother’s maiden name, and so on)
■
■Something You Are: unique attributes, such as fingerprints, voice patterns, facial character-
istics, or retinal patterns (collectively called biometrics)
Biometrics  Biometrics is one of the most sophisticated forms of governing access to systems, 
data, and/or facilities. With biometrics, employees may be identified and/or authenticated by 
fingerprints, retinal patterns in the eye, facial features, or other bodily characteristics before 
being granted access to use a computer or to enter a facility (Figure 10.19). Biometrics has 
the promise of providing very high security while at the same time authenticating people 
extremely efficiently, so many governments and companies are investigating how best to use this 
technology. For example, many laptops and computer keyboards now incorporate fingerprint 
readers. Likewise, many smartphones now let you log in by using your fingerprint or looking 
into the phone’s camera (facial recognition software then matches the user’s face with a stored 
profile); MasterCard, Amazon, and others are introducing pay-by-selfie, allowing customers 
to authorize transactions by using their device’s camera (with other companies using different 
biometrics, such as voice recognition).
Two-Factor Authentication  Some measures that limit access to systems are more secure 
than others. For example, smart cards and smart badges, passwords, lock combinations, and 
code numbers can be stolen. Biometric devices are difficult to fool, but determined intruders may 
sometimes devise ways to bypass them; further, in contrast to passwords, biometric information 
cannot be hashed, and any cracker breaking into an organization could obtain the users’ actual 
biometric data (such as fingerprints, which are often relatively easy to obtain). If compromised, 
passwords can be easily changed; however, biometrics cannot be revoked if they are compromised 
(e.g., you can’t change your retinal patterns or fingerprints). Likewise, the use of biometrics 
for both identification and authorization may be problematic from a security standpoint. Thus, 
while any of the previously mentioned single items can be used, it is safer to use combinations of 
safeguards, such as a password and a smart card. The use of two types of credentials to gain access 
to a system is referred to as two-factor authentication. Today, two-factor authentication is often 
used for banking transactions, where the user has to enter not only a password but also a one-time 
token provided by the bank (such as provided by a key fob or sent to the user’s registered e-mail 
address or mobile phone number); similarly, residents of Hong Kong can quickly pass through 
immigration checkpoints by using a smart card and their thumbprints. No matter what safeguards 
are used, organizations should have formal processes in place for enrolling new users, authorizing 
specific users to access systems or data, identifying and authenticating the users, and monitoring 
the access of resources. Needless to say, policies should be in place to revoke access for employees 
who are leaving the company or who are taking on different roles or responsibilities. Next, we 
examine various methods for implementing physical access control.
Access-Control Software  Following the principles of least permissions and least privileges, 
access should only be granted to the resources needed to perform the work; anything beyond 
that can be a potential vulnerability. Access-control software can reduce such vulnerabilities by 
FIGURE 10.19
Biometric devices are used to 
verify a person’s identity.
Source: Grzegorz Kula/123RF GB Ltd.

450    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
allowing computer users access only to those files related to their work. The user might even be 
restricted to these resources only at certain times or for specified periods of time, and, depending 
on the access level, the user can be restricted to being able to only read a file, to read and edit 
the file, to add to the file, and/or to delete the file. Many common business systems applications 
now build in these kinds of security features so that you do not have to have additional, separate 
access-control software running on top of your applications software.
Wireless LAN Control  Given how easy and inexpensive wireless local area networks 
(WLANs) are to install and use, their use has skyrocketed, leaving many systems open to attack. 
On an unsecured network, for instance, unauthorized people can thus easily “steal” company 
resources (e.g., by surfing the web for free, which is illegal in many countries) or do considerable 
damage to the network. A new form of attack known as drive-by hacking has arisen, where an 
attacker accesses the network, intercepts data from it, and even uses network services and/or 
sends attack instructions to it without having to enter the home, office, or organization that owns 
the network (Figure 10.20). Wireless LAN control refers to methods of configuring the WLAN 
so that only authorized users can gain access.
Virtual Private Networks  A virtual private network (VPN) is a network connection 
that is constructed dynamically within an existing network—often called a secure tunnel—
in order to connect users or nodes (Figure 10.21). For example, a number of companies and 
software solutions enable you to create VPNs within the Internet as the medium for transporting 
data. These systems use authentication and encryption (discussed later) and other security 
mechanisms to ensure that only authorized users can access the VPN and that the data cannot 
be intercepted and compromised; this practice of creating an encrypted “tunnel” to send secure 
(private) data over the (public) Internet is known as tunneling. For example, the University of 
Arizona requires VPN software to be used when accessing some critical resources from remote 
(off-campus) locations.
FIREWALLS.  A firewall is a part of a computer system designed to detect intrusion and prevent 
unauthorized access to or from a private network (Figure 10.22). Think of a firewall essentially 
as a security fence around the perimeter of an organization’s networks that spots any intruders 
that try to penetrate the organization’s outer defenses. Firewalls can be implemented in hardware, 
in software, or in a combination of both. Firewalls are frequently used to prevent unauthorized 
Internet users from accessing private networks connected to the Internet, especially private 
corporate intranets (see Chapter 3). All data packets entering or leaving the intranet pass through 
the firewall, which examines each message and blocks those that do not meet the specified 
security criteria.
Internet
Internet
Connection
Remote Hacker
Wireless
Network
Wireless
Access 
Point
Wireless Signal
”Leaks“ Outside
Building
FIGURE 10.20
Drive-by hacking is on the 
rise given the proliferation of 
unsecured wireless LANs.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     451
ENCRYPTION.  When you do not have access to a secure channel for transmitting messages over 
a wired or wireless network, encryption is the best bet for keeping snoopers out. Encryption 
is the process of encoding messages using an encryption key before they enter the network or 
airwaves, then decoding them using a matching key at the receiving end of the transmission 
so that the intended recipients can read or hear them (Figure 10.23). Scrambling messages 
before you send using a key—the code that scrambles and then decodes messages—prevents 
eavesdroppers who might intercept them from deciphering them without the decoding key. (The 
science of encryption is called cryptography.) Encryption can be used to protect data that are 
transmitted over the Internet (e.g., your new purchase at Amazon.com), calls on your mobile 
phone, or files or folders containing sensitive data or for various other scenarios requiring 
confidentiality of data. Some chatting and instant messaging platforms like WhatsApp and 
The
Internet
Secure VPN
Tunnels
Corporate
Headquarters
Branch Office
Telecommuter
Notebook
Computer
FIGURE 10.21
A virtual private network (VPN) 
allows remote sites and users to 
connect to organizational network 
resources using a secure tunnel.
FIGURE 10.22
A firewall blocks unauthorized 
access to organizational systems 
and data, while permitting 
authorized communication to flow 
in and out of the organization to 
the broader Internet.

452    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Telegram use end-to-end encryption, making it impossible for eavesdroppers (criminals as well 
as governmental organizations) to gain access to the communication. Such end-to-end encrypted 
communication is controversial because it is alleged that many terrorist groups and criminals 
utilize end-to-end encryption to obscure their communications.
There are many different encryption approaches for different types of data transmission. Tra-
ditional encryption methods require the sending and receiving party to have the same key to encode 
and decode the message (these methods are referred to as symmetric encryption); however, such 
methods require a secure channel to share the encryption key between the two parties before mes-
sages can be securely transmitted. Public key encryption, in contrast, is a form of asymmetric 
encryption that uses a pair of keys—a public and a private key. Using public key encryption (such 
as PGP, or Pretty Good Privacy), a message can be encoded using the recipient’s public key, and 
the recipient can then use his or her private key to decode the message. As anyone can access the 
public key, anyone can encrypt a message; however, as only the recipient has access to the private 
key, no one else is able to decrypt the message. Implementing such encryption on a large scale, 
such as on a busy website, requires a third party, called a certificate authority, to help manage the 
distribution of keys. The certificate authority acts as a trusted middleman between computers and 
verifies that a website is a trusted site. The certificate authority knows that each computer is who it 
says it is and provides the encryption/decryption keys to each computer. Secure Sockets Layer 
(SSL), developed by Netscape, is a popular public key encryption method used on the Internet.
Cloud Security  With more and more data and applications being moved to the cloud, cloud 
security is becoming increasingly important; specifically, organizations not only need to secure 
data at rest (e.g., files or folders stored on a physical medium) and data in transit (i.e., data 
traveling across a network) but also data in use (i.e., data being processed by a computer) 
(Figure 10.24). Regular encryption approaches can be utilized to secure data at rest and data in 
transit; securing data in use is more problematic, as encrypted data typically need to be decrypted 
before being processed, even for simple manipulations such as summing up a range of numbers. 
However, in such cases, the cloud service provider would be able to access the decrypted data, 
potentially being able to compromise the availability, integrity, and confidentiality of the data. 
Recently, researchers have developed new algorithms that allow for “encryption in use,” such 
that the encrypted data can be processed without being accessible to a cloud service provider.
Ciphertext letters:
JOGPSNBUJPO TZTUFNT UPEBZ
Equivalent plaintext letters:
INFORMATION SYSTEMS TODAY
FIGURE 10.23
Encryption is used to encode data 
so that unauthorized people cannot 
understand it.
FIGURE 10.24
Cloud security is concerned with 
the need to secure data at rest, data 
in transit, and data in use.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     453
VIRUS MONITORING AND PREVENTION.  Virus prevention, which is a set of activities for 
detecting and preventing computer viruses, has become a full-time, important task for IS 
departments within organizations and for all of us with our personal computers. While viruses 
often have colorful names—Melissa, I Love You, Naked Wife—they can be catastrophic from 
a computing perspective. Here we describe some precautions you can take to ensure that your 
computer is protected:
■
■Install antivirus software, then update frequently to be sure you are protected against new 
viruses.
■
■Do not use flash drives or shareware from unknown or suspect sources and be equally care-
ful when downloading material from the Internet, making sure that the source is reputable.
■
■Delete without opening any e-mail message received from an unknown source. Be espe-
cially wary of opening attachments. It is better to delete a legitimate message than to infect 
your computer system with a destructive virus.
■
■Do not blindly open e-mail attachments, even if they come from a known source (such as a 
friend or coworker). Many viruses are spread without the sender’s knowledge, so it is better 
to check with the sender before opening a potentially unsafe attachment.
■
■If your computer system contracts a virus, report the infection to your school or company’s 
IS department so that appropriate measures can be taken.
SECURE DATA CENTERS.  Specialized facilities are an important component of creating a reliable 
and secure IS infrastructure. Data and the ability to process the data are the lifeblood for many of 
today’s large organizations, such as Amazon.com, Travelocity.com, or Facebook. Consequently, 
organizations need to protect important equipment from outside intruders and from the elements, 
such as water or fire. The most prominent threats to an organization’s IS facilities come from 
floods, seismic activity, rolling blackouts, hurricanes, and the potential of criminal activities 
(Figure 10.25). How can an organization reliably protect its facilities from such threats?
COMING ATTRACTIONS 
Can You Become Your Password?
Have you ever had a tough time remembering one of your 
passwords? If you are like most of us, this has happened 
more than once. Luckily, many new smartphones, laptops, 
and computer keyboards sport fingerprint scanners, enabling 
users to log in without having to remember the password. 
Likewise, other advanced security devices scan a person’s ret-
ina to grant access to systems or facilities. Yet, as you proba-
bly have seen in the movies, such security measures can be 
foiled. For example, you may have seen someone taking the 
fingerprints a person left on a drinking glass to produce a 
fake fingerprint; given that the surface of your phone is likely 
covered with fingerprints, the scanner could be easily foiled. 
In more gruesome movie scenes, you may have seen the vil-
lain mutilate someone’s thumb to obtain access to a secure 
facility. In addition, once criminals have gained access to a 
person’s fingerprint or retina data, the data will remain com-
promised forever, as, unlike a password, a person’s finger-
print or retina can’t be changed. Researchers at Binghamton 
University believe they have found a way to overcome these 
problems. They found that each person’s brain responds dif-
ferently when reading a particular word. Their approach, 
called “Brainprint,” found that when people read a list of 
acronyms, such as FBI and DVD, the part of the brain associ-
ated with reading and recognizing words reacted differently 
for each person. The researchers were able to use the brain-
wave signals generated to uniquely identify people at 94 per-
cent accuracy. The Brainprint approach suggests that 
brainwaves could be used by security systems to verify a per-
son’s identity by simply reading a standard sentence. On the 
one hand, one’s brainwaves leave no traces anywhere, can’t 
be stolen, and promise to be an effective way of confirming a 
person’s identity. On the other hand, even if someone’s Brain-
prints were compromised (e.g., due to someone cracking a 
database), a new sentence could be used to reset the Brain-
print. While it might be some time before we use Brainprints 
to unlock our phones, this could be a valuable method for 
authenticating a person’s identity in many voice-activated sys-
tems of the future.
Based on:
Anonymous. (2015, June 22). Brain’s reaction to certain words could  
replace passwords. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://
w w w. b i n g h a m t o n . e d u / i n s i d e / i n d e x . p h p / i n s i d e / s t o r y /
brains-reaction-to-certain-words-could-replace-passwords

454    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Ensuring Business Continuity  As many potential causes of disasters cannot be avoided 
(there’s no way to stop a hurricane), organizations should attempt to plan for the worst and 
implement necessary controls in their data centers. For companies operating in the digital 
world, the IS infrastructure is often critical for most business processes, so special care has to 
be taken to secure it. Whereas some applications can tolerate some downtime in case something 
malfunctions or disaster strikes, other applications (such as UPS’s package routing systems) 
can’t tolerate any downtime—these companies need 24/7/365 reliability (Figure 10.26).
Securing the Facilities Infrastructure  An organization’s data centers always need to be 
secured and protected from outside intruders. Absolute protection against security breaches 
remains out of reach, but here are a few safeguards organizations can employ:
■
■Site Selection. Organizations should ensure that data centers are not built in areas that are 
prone to earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, or other damaging natural forces.
■
■Physical Access Restrictions. As with any valuable asset, data centers should be protected 
from intruders using measures such as fences, barriers, and security guards. Organizations 
should also strive to maintain information about data center locations confidential.
■
■Intrusion Detection. Closed-circuit television (CCTV) systems should monitor the physi-
cal interior and/or exterior of a facility for physical intruders, allowing in-house security 
personnel or an outside security service to detect and immediately report suspicious activ-
ity. In addition, security alarm systems using motion, sound, and/or vibration detectors 
should be installed. Recording CCTV footage as well as all events from the security alarm 
systems can help investigate the causes of an intrusion.
■
■Uninterruptible Power and Cooling. To ensure uninterrupted service, the data centers 
should be self-sufficient and be able to operate for a pre-specified time period on self-
generated power. In addition to implementing an uninterruptible power supply for power-
ing the computers, the data center should provide for continuous cooling in case of a power 
interruption (some data centers store chilled water for such purposes).
■
■Protection from Environmental Threats. To protect the data centers from the elements, 
data centers should be built to withstand strong winds (depending on the location). 
Other measures include raised floors (to protect from floods) as well as heat sensors, 
smoke detectors, and fire suppression systems.
Potential Threats
to IS Facilities
Seismic Activity
Criminal Activities
Floods
Hurricanes
Power Outages
and Blackouts
FIGURE 10.25
Potential threats to IS facilities 
include floods, hurricanes, 
criminal activities, power outages, 
and seismic activity.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     455
For reasons of business continuity, companies such as UPS maintain large data centers in 
different geographic areas. Many (especially smaller) organizations do not need facilities the 
size of one of the UPS data centers; instead, they may just need space for a few servers. For such 
needs, companies can turn to collocation facilities. Organizations can rent space (usually in the 
form of cabinets or shares of a cabinet) for their servers in such collocation facilities, and the 
organizations managing collocation facilities provide the necessary infrastructure in terms of 
power, backups, connectivity, and security. Alternatively, organizations increasingly attempt to 
transfer risk by using cloud computing services.
MOBILE DEVICE MANAGEMENT.  With mobile devices being used by large numbers of 
organizational users, protecting mobile devices and the data stored thereon is of crucial 
importance. Mobile device management (MDM) is the administration of an organization’s 
mobile devices to enforce authorization policies, prevent the downloading or installing of non-
approved apps, or remotely lock the devices or wipe data. Often, third-party software is used for 
MDM; such software solutions can also be used to prevent jailbreaking, perform security scans, 
or preconfigure approved Wi-Fi hotspots or VPN services.
SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS.  As outlined in Chapter 9, “Developing and Acquiring 
Information Systems,” system development and acquisition processes must also be carefully 
controlled and managed. When systems are designed or purchased, care must be taken that all 
security features are implemented, enabled, and managed and that any changes are properly 
managed and documented so as to prevent risks from software bugs or hidden backdoors.
HUMAN CONTROLS.  In addition to the technological controls, various human safeguards 
can help to protect information systems, specifically ethics, laws, and effective management 
(Figure 10.27). IS ethics, discussed in Chapter 1, relates to a broad range of standards of 
appropriate conduct by users. Educating potential users as to what constitutes appropriate 
behavior can help, but unethical users will undoubtedly always remain a problem for those 
wanting to maintain IS security. Additionally, there are numerous federal and state laws against 
unauthorized use of networks and computer systems. Unfortunately, individuals who want 
unauthorized access to networks and computer systems usually find a way to exploit them; 
often, after the fact, laws are enacted to prohibit that activity in the future. Finally, effective 
management that defines appropriate oversight and control over what information and activities 
employees can and cannot perform is critical for having strong and robust information systems 
security.
FIGURE 10.26
The UPS servers handle more than 
18 million packages per day.
Source: Alejandro Mendoza  
R/Shutterstock.

456    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
DEPLOYMENT AND TRAINING.  Once the organization has decided on the necessary controls, 
network security mechanisms such as firewalls are deployed, as are intrusion detection 
systems, antivirus software, manual and automated log examination software, and host- and 
network-based intrusion detection software. Passwords, smart cards, and smart badges are also 
disseminated and explained during this phase. The IS department is usually responsible for 
implementing these controls. At the same time, personnel throughout the organization should 
receive training about the security policies and plans for disaster recovery and be prepared to 
perform assigned tasks in that regard—both routinely on a daily basis and disaster related.
Monitoring Security
To minimize risk, organizations should continuously monitor the effectiveness of the controls. 
Any user—authorized or unauthorized—leaves electronic footprints that can be traced. Auto-
mated log examination software and host- and network-based intrusion detection software is 
used to keep track of computer activity in order to spot suspicious activity and take action. Using 
such software helps creating an audit trail, which is a record showing who has used a computer 
system and how it was used. For the software to effectively protect security, of course, auditors 
within the organization—most often someone in the IS department or information security 
department—must monitor and interpret the results. Needless to say, the level of monitoring 
should be based on an assessment of the potential impact of a certain asset being compromised; 
in other words, the most monitoring efforts should be focused on high-risk systems. In addition 
to monitoring internal events, organizations should also monitor external events in order to 
obtain a full view of threats and vulnerabilities (Figure 10.28).
MONITORING EXTERNAL EVENTS.  Several online organizations issue bulletins to alert 
organizations and individuals to possible software vulnerabilities or attacks based on reports 
from organizations that have experienced security breaches. Further, Information Sharing and 
Analysis Centers (ISAC, www.isaccouncil.org) representing various industry sectors and the 
Human Safeguards
for Information Systems
Security
Federal and State Laws
Eﬀective Management
Ethical Behavior
FIGURE 10.27
Human safeguards for IS security.
just Ahead
FIGURE 10.28
Organizations should monitor 
internal and external threats 
and vulnerabilities to ensure the 
effectiveness of their IS controls.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     457
United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (www.us-cert.gov) provide additional 
resources for organizations by publishing security alerts or conducting and publishing research 
related to IS security.
IS AUDITING.  Monitoring internal and external vulnerability information should be an ongoing 
process for organizations. However, it can also be beneficial for organizations to periodically 
have an external entity review the controls so as to uncover any potential problems. An 
information systems audit, often performed by external auditors, can help organizations assess 
the state of their IS controls to determine necessary changes and to help ensure the information 
systems’ availability, integrity, and confidentiality. The response to the strengths and weaknesses 
identified in the IS audit is often determined by the potential risks an organization faces. In other 
words, the IS audit has to assess whether the IS controls in place are sufficient to address the 
potential risks. Thus, a major component of the IS audit is a risk assessment (discussed in prior 
sections), which aims to determine what type of risks the organization’s IS infrastructure faces, 
the criticality of those risks to the infrastructure, and the level of risks the organization is willing 
to tolerate.
Once the risk has been assessed, auditors have to evaluate the organization’s internal con-
trols, trying to answer questions such as: Can the intrusion detection system detect attacks? Are 
incident response procedures effective? Can the network be penetrated? Is physical security ade-
quate? Do employees know security policies and procedures? In other words, auditors assess 
aspects such as policy adherence, the security of new projects, and whether the organization’s 
defense layers can be penetrated. During such audits, the auditor tries to gather evidence regard-
ing the effectiveness of the controls. However, testing all controls under all possible conditions 
is very inefficient and often infeasible. Thus, auditors frequently rely on computer-assisted 
audit tools to test applications and data using test data or simulations, or tools such as vulnera-
bility scanners or packet sniffers. In addition to using specific auditing tools, auditors use audit 
sampling procedures to assess the controls, enabling the audit to be conducted in the most cost-
effective manner. Further, penetration tests are conducted in-house and/or by an outside contrac-
tor to see how well the organization’s computer security measures are working. Once the audit 
has been performed and sufficient evidence has been gathered, reports are issued to the organi-
zation. Usually, such reports are followed up with a discussion of the results and potential 
courses of action.
THE SARBANES–OXLEY ACT.  Performing an IS audit can help an organization reduce costs or 
remain competitive by identifying areas where IS controls are lacking and need improvement. 
Another major factor that has contributed to a high demand for IS auditors is the need to comply 
with government regulations, most notably the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (hereafter S-OX). 
Formed as a reaction to large-scale accounting scandals that led to the downfall of corporations 
such as WorldCom and Enron and to protect investors from fraudulent practices by organizations, 
S-OX mandates companies to demonstrate compliance with accounting standards and to establish 
controls and sound corporate governance. Commonly used controls include limiting a single 
employee’s influence over transactions, such as by segregation of duties and establishing proper 
checks and balances. For example, if the employee who creates a purchase order also has the 
authority to approve the purchase order, this opens up a possibility for creating fraudulent orders; 
similarly, if the same employee is responsible for disbursing cash, recording the disbursements, 
and reconciling the related accounts, the employee can devise schemes to embezzle money. 
Implementing proper controls not only helps to reduce the potential for fraud but also helps to 
prevent unintentional errors. To demonstrate S-OX compliance, public companies are required, 
among other things, to have external auditors assess the effectiveness of their internal controls as 
well as audit their financial statements. While S-OX addresses primarily the accounting side of 
organizations, it is of major importance to include IS controls in compliance reviews, given the 
importance of an IS infrastructure and IS controls for an organization’s financial applications.
According to S-OX, companies have to demonstrate that there are controls in place to pre-
vent misuse or fraud, controls to detect any potential problems, and effective measures to correct 
any problems; S-OX goes so far that corporate executives face jail time and heavy fines if the 
appropriate controls are not in place or are ineffective. The IS architecture plays a key role in 
S-OX compliance, given that many controls are IS based, providing capabilities to detect excep-
tions and providing an audit trail for tracing these. However, S-OX itself barely addresses IS 
controls specifically; rather, it addresses general processes and practices, leaving companies 

458    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
wondering how to comply with the guidelines put forth in the act. Further, it is often cumber-
some and time-consuming for organizations to identify the relevant systems to be audited for 
S-OX compliance. Thus, many organizations find it easier to review their entire IS infrastruc-
ture, following objectives set forth in guidelines such as the control objectives for information 
and related technology (COBIT)—a set of best practices that helps organizations both maxi-
mize the benefits from their IS infrastructure and establish appropriate controls.
Another issue faced by organizations because of S-OX is the requirement to preserve evi-
dence to document compliance and for potential lawsuits. Since the inception of S-OX, e-mails 
and even instant messages have achieved the same status as regular business documents and thus 
need to be preserved for a period of time, typically up to 7 years. Failure to present such docu-
ments in the case of litigious activity can lead to severe fines being imposed on companies and 
their executives, and courts usually will not accept the argument that a message could not be 
located. For example, the investment bank Morgan Stanley faced fines up to US$15 million for 
failing to retain e-mail messages. On the surface, it seems easiest for an organization to simply 
archive all the e-mail messages sent and received. However, such a “digital landfill,” where 
everything is stored, can quickly grow to an unmanageable size, and companies cannot comply 
with the mandate to present evidence in a timely manner. Thus, many organizations turn to 
e-mail management software that archives and categorizes all incoming and outgoing e-mails 
based on key words. Even using such specialized software, finding e-mails related to a certain 
topic within the archive can pose a tremendous task: Some analysts estimate that a business with 
25,000 employees generates more than 4 billion e-mail messages over the course of 7 years (not 
counting any increase in e-mail activity), which would be hard to handle for even the most 
sophisticated programs.
RESPONDING TO SECURITY INCIDENTS.  Organizations that have developed a comprehensive IS 
security plan will have the ability to rapidly respond to any type of security breach to their IS 
resources or to a natural disaster. Typically, incident handling policies detail how the incident is 
classified in terms of severity, who has the authority to escalate the incident, and what incidents 
need to be internally or externally reported. Responses to a security breach include containing 
the security breach, restoring systems, and notifying or assisting customers (if needed). Further, 
when intruders are discovered, organizations can contact local law enforcement agencies and 
the FBI for assistance in locating and prosecuting the intruders. In addition, common responses 
to a security breach include performing a new risk audit and implementing a combination of 
additional (more secure) controls (as described previously).
COMPUTER FORENSICS.  As computer crime has gone mainstream, law enforcement has had to 
become much more sophisticated in their computer crime investigations. Computer forensics 
is the use of formal investigative techniques to evaluate digital information for judicial review. 
Most often, computer forensics experts evaluate various types of storage devices to find traces 
of illegal activity or to gain evidence in related non-computer crimes. In fact, in most missing-
person or murder cases today, investigators immediately want to examine the victim’s computer 
for clues or evidence.
Organizations and governments are increasingly utilizing honeypots to proactively gather 
intelligence to improve their defenses or to catch cybercriminals. A honeypot is a computer, 
data, or network site that is designed to be enticing to crackers so as to detect, deflect, or coun-
teract illegal activity. Many law enforcement agencies operate honeypots in the dark web as a 
way to gather intelligence and find criminals (Murdock, 2016). The dark web refers to web 
content that is used for various nefarious purposes. Content on the dark web is not indexed by 
popular search engines like Google and Bing and is typically only accessible using specialized 
browsers that anonymize the user and hide traces (the underlying infrastructure, which directs 
Internet traffic through a worldwide volunteer network of relays and virtual tunnels—rather than 
the usual direct connections to Internet sites—is often referred to as dark net). Illegal content on 
the dark web includes everything from child pornography to black markets and hacker forums 
for sharing tools and information.
Although computer forensics experts are extremely skilled in investigating prior and ongo-
ing computer crime, many computer criminals are also experts, making the forensics process 
extremely difficult in some cases. Some criminals, for example, have special “booby-trap” pro-
grams running on computers to destroy evidence if someone other than the criminal uses the 
machine. Using special software tools, computer forensics experts can often restore data that 


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     459
have been deleted from a computer’s hard drive. Additionally, given the proliferation of com-
puter crime, there is a growing backlog of cases where computer forensics experts are needed. 
Backlogs in analyzing computers, smartphones, online activities, and communications are lead-
ing to long delays in the criminal justice system, resulting in some cases being dropped and oth-
ers being inadequately investigated. Further, growing sizes of people’s hard drives, or, in the 
case of companies, databases containing tens or hundreds of terabytes of Big Data, cause addi-
tional challenges for forensic experts. Clearly, computer forensics will continue to evolve as 
criminals utilize more sophisticated computer-based methods for committing and aiding crimi-
nal activities.
As you can see, securing information systems consists of various activities, with protection 
against computer crime being the most visible—but not the only—aspect. Given the ubiquity 
and increasing complexity of information systems, securing information systems will remain a 
hot topic for organizations and individuals alike, and we need to continue to implement vigilant 
approaches to better manage information systems security in the digital world.
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS 
Cybercops Track Cybercriminals
The CSI (Crime Scene Investigation) television shows have 
made “DNA testing” a household phrase. Virtually everyone 
knows that a criminal who leaves body cells or fluids—hair and 
skin cells, saliva, blood, semen, and so on—at the scene of a 
crime can be linked to the crime through DNA analysis. (DNA, 
or deoxyribonucleic acid, is present in all living tissue—plant or 
animal.) Just as a criminal leaves DNA traces, cybercriminals are 
leaving digital footprints. However, using computer forensics 
to track down cybercriminals requires sophisticated tools and 
methods.
Because technological advancement has been rapid, law 
enforcement has lagged behind cybercriminals but is catching 
up. In the United States, the Computer Crime and Intellectual 
Property Section within the Department of Justice is devoted 
to combating computer crime. In addition, the FBI has created 
cyber-squads in 56 field offices around the country specifically 
to investigate computer crime in addition to a cyber-division at 
the FBI headquarters. Each federal judicial district has at least 
one assistant U.S. attorney who has received special training 
in how to investigate and prosecute computer crime. Every 
state now has a computer crime investigation unit available 
as a resource to local law enforcement agencies, and many 
municipal police departments have their own computer crime 
investigative units.
Software tools available to law enforcement agencies have 
improved greatly in recent years. Programs to conduct forensic 
analyses of computer hard drives or smartphones have become 
standard practice. Photo databases of known criminals, 
including any distinctive features such as scars and tattoos, 
go way beyond fingerprint identification of yesteryear. Simi-
larly, advanced tools using data mining and machine learning 
are helping detectives find patterns that can connect related 
crimes.
In addition to these advances, 3D technology is now 
widely used for re-creating crime scenes, from comparing 
footprints to testing crime theories. For example, modern 3D 
forensic ballistics technologies help to re-create a crime scene 
for understanding the shooter’s location and the path of bul-
lets. These technologies are also capable of creating a 3D 
image of a bullet that has been fired and then finding a match 
from previous criminal cases. Data can be shared across the 
country and around the world, allowing law enforcement to 
also benefit from the Internet age.
While these advances have greatly helped law enforce-
ment solve a broad range of crimes, the prevalence of sophisti-
cated tools on entertainment programs like CSI has created the 
so-called “CSI effect.” The CSI effect refers to the tendency 
of jurors to demand more forensic evidence in criminal trials 
due to advances in forensic and investigative technology that 
are learned by watching modern police shows, thereby raising 
the effective standard of proof for prosecutors. It is unfortu-
nate that criminals use the Internet and other technologies to 
their advantage. Clearly, however, law enforcement is keeping 
pace with them; officers use technological advances to track, 
arrest, and prosecute online and offline criminals.
Questions
1.	 Today, is it harder or easier to be a criminal? Why?
2.	 Provide an argument as to whether law enforcement can 
or cannot get ahead of criminals technologically.
Based on:
CSI effect. (2016, March 14). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 21, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=CSI_effect&oldid=710029554
DeGood, J. (2014, April 10). WPD uses 3D scanner to document police 
involved shooting. KWCH.com. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.kwch.com/news/local-news/wpd-uses-3d-scanner-to-document-
police-involved-shooting/25421540
FBI Cyber Crime Division. (n.d.). Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/cyber
Justice Technology Information Network. (n.d.). Retrieved March 20, 
2016, from https://www.justnet.org

460    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Key Points Review
1.	 Define computer crime and describe several types of 
computer crime. Computer crime is defined as the use 
of a computer to commit an illegal act, such as 
targeting a computer while committing an offense, 
using a computer to commit an offense, or using 
computers in the course of a criminal activity. Those 
who break into computer systems with the intention of 
doing damage or committing a crime are usually called 
crackers. Crackers are associated with creating and 
distributing computer viruses and other destructive 
codes. People are increasingly using information 
systems to aid in crimes against individuals, including 
identity theft, cyberharassment, cyberstalking, and 
cyberbullying. Finally, making illegal copies of 
software, a worldwide computer crime, is called 
software piracy.
2.	 Describe and explain differences between cyberwar 
and cyberterrorism. Cyberwar refers to an organized 
attempt by a country’s military to disrupt or destroy the 
information and communication systems of another 
country. The goal of cyberwar is to turn the balance of 
information and knowledge in one’s favor in order to 
diminish an opponent’s capabilities and also to enhance 
those of the attacker. Cyberterrorism is the use of 
computer and networking technologies by individuals 
and organized groups against persons or property to 
intimidate or coerce governments, civilians, or any 
segment of society to attain political, religious, or 
ideological goals. Now that terrorist groups are 
increasingly using the Internet for their purposes, one 
of the great fears about cyberterrorism is that an attack 
can be launched from a computer anywhere in the 
world.
3.	 Discuss the process of managing IS security and 
describe various IS controls that can help in ensuring 
IS security. Information systems security refers to 
precautions taken to keep all aspects of information 
systems (e.g., all hardware, software, network 
equipment, and data) safe from unauthorized use or 
access, to ensure availability, integrity, confidentiality, 
and accountability. IS security is an ongoing process, 
consisting of assessing risks, developing a security 
strategy, implementing controls and training, and 
monitoring security. An information systems risk 
assessment is performed to identify threats and 
vulnerabilities, determine their probabilities of being 
exploited, and assess the potential impact. An IS 
security strategy details what controls should be 
implemented as well as security-related policies and 
procedures. General categories of controls include: 
physical access restrictions, firewalls, encryption, virus 
monitoring and protection, secure data centers, systems 
development controls, and human controls. To ensure 
the effectiveness of the controls, organizations should 
continuously monitor internal and external events and 
periodically perform IS audits.
Key Terms
acceptable use policy  445
access-control software  449
adware  426
asymmetric encryption  452
authentication  448
authorization  448
backdoor  423
backup  446
backup site  446
biometrics  449
botnet  430
business continuity plan  445
CAPTCHA  429
certificate authority  452
cloud security  452
cold backup site  446
collocation facility  455
computer-assisted audit tool  457
computer crime  420
computer forensics  458
control objectives for information and 
related technology (COBIT)  458
cookie  429
copyright  433
corrective controls  444
cracker  420
cyberbullying  432
cyberharassment  432
cybersquatting  434
cyberstalking  432
cyberterrorism  437
cyberwar  436
dark web  458
denial-of-service (DoS)  
attack  426
detective controls  444
disaster recovery plan  445
doxing  432
drive-by hacking  450
dumpster diving  422
encryption  451
end-to-end encryption  452
firewall  450
hacker  420
hacktivist  420
honeypot  458
hot backup site  446
identification  447
identity theft  431
industrial espionage  421
information systems audit  457
information systems controls  444
information systems risk  
assessment  442
information systems security  441
insider threat  422
Internet hoax  427
jailbreaking  424
key generator  433
keylogger  422
logic bomb  426
malware  425
mirror  446
mobile device management 
(MDM)  455
online predator  432


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     461
packet sniffer  422
patent  432
patriot hacker  437
phishing  428
preventive controls  444
public key encryption  452
ransomware  426
recovery point objective  446
recovery time objective  446
reverse engineering  433
risk acceptance  443
risk avoidance  443
risk reduction  443
risk transference  443
Sarbanes–Oxley Act  457
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)  452
shoulder surfing  422
social engineering  422
software piracy  432
spam  427
spam filter  427
spear phishing  428
spyware  426
Stuxnet  437
symmetric encryption  452
threat  442
time bomb  426
two-factor authentication  449
Trojan horse  425
tunneling  450
unauthorized access  422
unauthorized data modification  423
virtual private network  
(VPN)  450
virus  425
virus prevention  453
vulnerability  442
vulnerability scanners  422
warez  433
web vandalism  437
WikiLeaks  423
wireless LAN control  450
worm  425
zero-day  423
zombie computer  426
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM
Review Questions
	 10-1. 	List and describe the primary threats to IS 
security.
	 10-2. 	Define computer crime and list several exam-
ples of computer crime.
	 10-3. 	Explain the purpose of the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act of 1986 and the Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act of 1986.
	 10-4. 	Contrast hackers versus crackers.
	 10-5. 	Why are insider threats particularly dangerous 
for organizations?
	 10-6. 	Define malware and give several examples.
	 10-7. 	Define and contrast cyberharassment, 
cyberstalking, and cyberbullying.
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS
	 10-8. 	Define and contrast cyberwar and 
cyberterrorism.
	 10-9. 	What are physical access restrictions, and 
how do they make an information system 
more secure?
	10-10. 	Describe several methods for preventing and/
or managing the spread of computer viruses.
	10-11. 	Describe three human-based controls for 
safeguarding information systems.
	10-12. 	Describe the process of managing IS security.
	10-13. 	Describe how the Sarbanes–Oxley Act affects 
the IS security of an organization.
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
	10-14. 	What is the common rule for deciding if an informa-
tion system faces a security risk?
A.	Only desktop computers are at risk.
B.	Only network servers are at risk.
C.	All systems connected to networks are vulnerable 
to security violations.
D.	Networks have nothing to do with computer 
security.
	10-15. 	Those individuals who break into computer systems 
with the intention of doing damage or committing a 
crime are usually called ______________.
A.	hackers
B.	crackers
C.	computer geniuses
D.	computer operatives
	10-16. 	Which of the following does not pose a threat to elec-
tronic data?
A.	unauthorized access
B.	jailbreaking one’s mobile phone
C.	unauthorized data modification
D.	all of the above can compromise data
	10-17. 	Unauthorized data modification includes 
______________.
A.	an authorized user changing a website address
B.	a website crashing
C.	an unauthorized user viewing confidential data
D.	someone who is not authorized to do so changing 
electronic data

462    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
	10-18. 	Technological controls used to protect information 
include ______________.
A.	laws
B.	effective management
C.	firewalls and physical access restrictions
D.	ethics
	10-19. 	Limiting access to electronic data can involve 
______________.
A.	something you have
B.	something you know
C.	something you are
D.	all of the above
	10-20. 	Which of the following is the process of determining 
the true, accurate identity of a user of an information 
system?
A.	identity audit
B.	authentication
C.	authorization audit
D.	authorization assessment
	10-21. 	The use of computer and networking technologies 
by individuals and organized groups against persons 
or property to intimidate or coerce governments, 
civilians, or any segment of society in order to attain 
political, religious, or ideological goals is known as 
______________.
A.	cyberwar
B.	cybercrime
C.	cyberterrorism
D.	none of the above
	10-22. 	A(n) ______________ is a system composed of 
hardware, software, or both that is designed to detect 
intrusion and prevent unauthorized access to or from a 
private network.
A.	encryption
B.	firewall
C.	alarm
D.	logic bomb
	10-23. 	______________ is the process of encoding messages 
before they enter the network or airwaves, then decod-
ing them at the receiving end of the transmission so 
that recipients can read or hear them.
A.	Encryption
B.	Transmission security
C.	Authentication
D.	Cloud security
Answers are on page 465.
Problems and Exercises
	10-24. 	Match the following terms to the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Acceptable use policy
ii.	 Authentication
iii.	 Cyberwar
iv.	 Biometrics
v.	 Firewall
vi.	 Phishing
vii.	 Information systems audit
viii.	 Spyware
ix.	 Unauthorized access
x.	 Zombie computer
a.	 Body characteristics such as fingerprints, retinal 
patterns in the eye, or facial characteristics that 
allow the unique identification of a person
b.	 Hardware or software designed to keep unauthor-
ized users out of network systems
c.	 An organized attempt by a country’s military to dis-
rupt or destroy the information and communication 
systems of another country
d.	 The process of confirming the identity of a user 
who is attempting to access a restricted system or 
website
e.	 Computer and/or Internet use policy for people 
within an organization, with clearly spelled-out 
penalties for noncompliance
f.	 An assessment of the state of an organization’s 
information systems controls to determine neces-
sary changes and to help ensure the information 
systems’ availability, integrity, and confidentiality
g.	 Attempts to trick financial account and credit 
card holders into giving away their authorization 
information
h.	 A virus-infected computer that can be used to 
launch attacks on websites without the knowledge 
of the owner
i.	 Software that covertly gathers information about 
a user through an Internet connection without the 
user’s knowledge
j.	 An IS security breach where an unauthorized indi-
vidual sees, manipulates, or otherwise handles elec-
tronically stored data
	10-25. 	Interview an IS professional about countermeasures 
taken against virus infections and other malware. How 
does the organization protect its information systems 
infrastructure against such threats? Has the organization 
encountered any breaches lately? Is the professional 
willing to talk about these breaches? Why or why not?
	10-26. 	Research on the web about three recent DoS attacks. 
Which organizations were targeted? Who were the 
perpetrators? Why were these organizations targeted? 
Prepare a one-page report comparing and contrasting 
these incidents.


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     463
	10-27. 	Survey your friends and family about the effects of 
media coverage of computer security–related incidents. 
Are people becoming more alert? Does the media cov-
erage change people’s behavior? Why or why not?
	10-28. 	Do you feel the media generate too much hype regard-
ing hackers and crackers? Since prominent compa-
nies such as Microsoft are often hacked into, are you 
concerned about your bank account or other sensitive 
information?
	10-29. 	Search the web for recent incidents of identity theft 
involving celebrities. What were the consequences for 
the celebrity? How could the celebrity have avoided 
having their identities stolen? Did the authorities man-
age to catch the identity thief? If so, how?
	10-30. 	Some say that 3D printing will give rise to IP theft and 
piracy. Search the web for information about this topic, 
and present the arguments for and against this view. 
Do you believe this will become a problem? Why or 
why not?
	10-31. 	Many social media have become an arena for circulat-
ing false information. Have you recently received or 
forwarded a hoax? What can you do to confirm the 
veracity of messages circulating online?
	10-32. 	What laws should be enacted to combat cyberterror-
ism? How could such laws be enforced?
	10-33. 	Find a recent news story about cyberwar or acts of 
cyberterrorism. What were the actions involved? Who 
was being attacked, and what was the extent of the 
damage? From the attacker’s standpoint, do you think 
the attack was effective? Why or why not?
	10-34. 	Search the web for hardware and software firewalls. 
How do they provide protection, and what does it cost 
to provide this needed protection? What are the benefits 
and drawbacks of each approach? Prepare a one-page 
report that outlines what you have learned.
	10-35. 	Search the web for further information on VPNs. 
How can you obtain a VPN connection? What are the 
different scenarios for which you could use a VPN 
connection?
	10-36. 	What levels of user authentication are used at your 
school and/or place of work? Do they seem to be effec-
tive? What if a higher level of authentication were nec-
essary? Would it be worth it, or would the added steps 
cause you to be less productive?
	10-37. 	Should the encryption issue be subject to ethical judg-
ments? For instance, if an absolutely unbreakable code 
becomes feasible, should we use it with the knowledge 
that it may help terrorists and other criminals evade 
the law? Should governments regulate which encryp-
tion technology can be used so that government law 
enforcement agents can always read material generated 
by terrorists and other criminals? Explain your answer. 
Should the government continue to regulate the expor-
tation of encryption technology to foreign countries, 
excluding those that support terrorism as it does now? 
Why or why not?
	10-38. 	Assess and compare the security of the computers you 
use regularly at home, work, and/or school. What mea-
sures do you use at home to protect your computer? 
What measures are taken at work or school to protect 
computers? (If possible, interview IT/IS personnel 
at work and/or at school to determine how systems 
are protected in the workplace and in classrooms.) 
Describe any security vulnerabilities you find and 
explain how they might be patched.
	10-39. 	Many people freely “borrow” images from blogs, com-
pany websites, or social media to re-post or for other 
uses. What are the ethical implications of such behav-
ior? Search the web for potential legal consequences 
arising from such behavior, and prepare a one-page 
report summarizing your findings. 
	10-40. 	Interview an IS professional about the effects of 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on the way the information 
systems within the organization are managed. What 
changes had to be made to systems, processes, user 
training, or other areas? Why? Prepare a one-page 
report summarizing your findings.
	10-41. 	Review your university’s password policies. How often 
do you have to change your password? What restric-
tions are placed on choosing passwords? Ask your 
friends on how they choose new passwords.
	10-42. 	Should tougher laws be passed to make spam a crime? 
If so, how should lawmakers deal with First Amend-
ment rights? How would such laws be enforced?
	10-43. 	Insider threats are not new. Use the web to find two 
examples of insider threats throughout history that 
have had a big negative impact on their organization or 
government.
	10-44. 	Search the web for ways of protecting data from 
(industrial) espionage, especially when traveling. Are 
there any areas in the world where you have to be par-
ticularly vigilant? Who seems to be most vulnerable 
to espionage? How can people prevent their data from 
being stolen or otherwise compromised?

464    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Application Exercises
Note: The existing data files referenced in these exercises are available on the 
book’s website: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/valacich.
Spreadsheet Application: Analyzing Ethical Con-
cerns at Campus Travel
	10-45. 	Because of the employees’ increased use of IS 
resources for private purposes at Campus Travel, you 
have announced that a new acceptable use policy 
will be implemented. You have set up a website for 
the employees to provide feedback to the proposed 
changes; the results of this survey are stored in the file 
EthicsSurvey.csv. Your boss wants to use the survey 
results to find out what the greatest concerns in terms 
of ethical implications are for the employees, so you 
are asked to do the following:
■
■Complete the spreadsheet to include descriptive sta-
tistics (mean, standard deviation, mode, minimum, 
maximum, and range) for each survey item. Use 
formulas to calculate all statistics for the responses 
to the individual questions.
	
	 (Hint: In Microsoft Excel, you can look up the neces-
sary formulas in the category “Statistical”; you will 
have to calculate the ranges yourself.)
■
■Format the means using color scales to highlight the 
items needing attention.
■
■Make sure to professionally format the pages before 
submitting them to your instructor.
Database Application: Tracking Software Licenses 
at Campus Travel
	10-46. 	Recently, you have taken on the position of IS manager 
at Campus Travel. In your second week at work, you 
realize that many of the software licenses are about to 
expire or have already expired. As you know about the 
legal and ethical implications of unlicensed software, 
you have decided to set up a software asset manage-
ment system that lets you keep track of the software 
licenses. You have already set up a database and stored 
some of the information, but you want to make the 
system more user friendly. Using the SWLicenses.mdb 
database, design a form to input the following informa-
tion for new software products:
■
■Software title
■
■Installation location (office)
■
■License number
■
■Expiration date
	
	 Furthermore, design a report displaying all software 
licenses and expiration dates (sorted by expiration 
dates). (Hint: In Microsoft Access, use the form and 
report wizards to create the forms and reports; you will 
find the wizards under the “Create” tab.)
Team Work Exercise
Top Cyberthreats
Robert Morris’s worm, a bug that crashed a record 6,000 com-
puters (a statistic compiled from an estimate that there were 
60,000 computers connected to the Internet at the time and the 
worm affected 10 percent of them), now seems as antiquated as 
the 1911 Stutz Bearcat automobile. In 1998, when Morris was 
a student at Cornell University, he devised a program that he 
later insisted was intended simply to gauge how many comput-
ers were connected to the Internet. Errors in Morris’s program 
turned it into a self-replicating monster that overloaded com-
puters and threatened frightened Internet users. Dubbed simply 
the Internet Worm, Morris’s program was the precursor for 
today’s multitude of malevolent codes.
According to Kaspersky Lab, a leading developer of con-
tent management security solutions, attackers are having to 
continuously change their methods in response to the growing 
competition among the IT security companies that investigate 
and protect against targeted attacks. Increased public atten-
tion to security lapses will also force the attackers to search 
for new instruments. For example, conventional methods of 
attack involving e-mail attachments will gradually become 
less effective, while browser attacks will gain in popularity. 
For 2016 and beyond, they expected to see the following:
■
■Mobile threats will continue to rise.
■
■Maintaining privacy will become increasingly difficult.
■
■Attacks on cloud storage facilities will increase.
■
■Attacks on software developers will increase.
■
■Cyber-mercenaries will be on the rise.
■
■Ransomware will continue to be a major threat.
In addition to these various trends, an old favorite, the 
Windows operating system, will continue to be a popular tar-
get. Nevertheless, many experts believe some major security 
improvements within Windows 10 were driving criminals to 
other targets.
Questions and Exercises
	10-47. 	Search the web for the most up-to-date statistics and 
events related to IS security.
	10-48. 	As a team, interpret these numbers (or stories). What is 
striking/important about these findings?


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     465
	10-49. 	As a team, discuss what these findings will look like in 
5 years and 10 years. What will the changes mean for 
cloud computing and mobility? What issues/opportuni-
ties do you see arising?
	10-50. 	Using your spreadsheet software of choice, create a 
graph/figure to visualize the findings you consider 
most important.
Based on:
Garnaeva, M., van der Wiel, J., Makrushin, D., Ivanov, A., & Namest-
nikov, Y (2015, December 15). Kaspersky security bulletin 2015. Secure­
List. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://securelist.com/files/2015/12/
KSB_2015_Statistics_FINAL_EN.pdf
Markoff, J. (1990, May 5). Computer intruder is put on probation and fined 
$10,000. The New York Times. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www 
.nytimes.com/1990/05/05/us/computer-intruder-is-put-on-probation-and-
fined-10000.html
Answers to the Self-Study Questions
	 10-14.	 C, p. 441
	 10-15.	 B, p. 420
	 10-16.	 D, p. 422
	 10-17.	 D, p. 423
	 10-18.	 C, p. 447
	 10-19.	 D, p. 448
	 10-20.	 B, p. 448
	 10-21.	 C, p. 437
	 10-22.	 B, p. 450
	 10-23.	 A, p. 451

466    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Singapore Personal Access (SingPass) is 
Singapore’s online account management 
system that gives residents access to e-gov-
ernment services. Implemented in March 
2003, SingPass provides access to hundreds 
of e-services across more than 60 govern-
ment agencies. In 2016, SingPass had over 
3.3 million users who conducted 60 million 
transactions annually.
Singpass was developed and managed 
by multiple agencies to improve and fine-
tune its security policies. SingPass was initially 
managed by the Infocomm Development 
Authority (IDA) and then transferred to the 
newly formed Government Technology 
Agency (GovTech).
Singpass’s account management 
includes a number of features to ensure 
safety.  First, SingPass accounts that have 
been unused for more than three years are 
automatically reset. Second, users are asked 
to change and enhance the strength of their 
password every two years. Third, users are 
required to enter a randomized security code 
when they fail to log in three times consecu-
tively. Lastly, users are notified via a letter 
sent to their registered address whenever 
they change their personal information.
Despite these measures, SingPass 
accounts have not been spared from cyber-
attacks. In 2011, 293 SingPass accounts 
were hacked because of weak passwords—
they were the same as the account name!  In 
June 2014, about 1,600 accounts were com-
promised, which the IDA came to know 
about only after 11 users reported getting 
suspicious password-reset letters even 
though they didn’t change their passwords.
The IDA acted quickly and urged users 
to use strong passwords, update their soft-
ware, and install anti-virus software. Exist-
ing measures were re-enforced, such as the 
use of captcha and sending letters to users’ 
residential addresses when SingPass pass-
words were changed.  
More fundamentally, in July 2015, the 
IDA put in place a stronger security measure 
in the form of 2-Factor Authentication 
(2FA), a standard feature of online banking 
for e-government transactions involving sen-
sitive data. It involves the use of one-time 
passwords sent either via SMS to the user’s 
registered mobile phone or generated 
through a security device called OneKey 
Token.  The latter operates on a “one person, 
one device” concept and offers 3 functions: 
one-time password (OTP), challenge 
response (CR), and transaction signing 
(SIGN). OTP enables users to retrieve their 
One-Time Password, CR generates a Chal-
lenge Code which users need to key into the 
relevant website, while SIGN prompts users 
for specific details such as account number 
before proceeding with any transaction.
When first implemented, users had to 
visit three different websites to register, 
­activate, and link their 2FA. However, based 
on user feedback, the sign-up process was 
simplified to one step that can be done 
directly at the Singpass site. To further 
ensure greater compliance, all Singpass users 
are now automatically enrolled for 2FA, 
which must be activated by users using a 
PIN sent by mailer. Activation that earlier 
could only be done through the official  
website of Assurity (an IDA subsidiary that 
supplied the 2FA solution) was simplified by 
using SMS activation.
As of July 2016, 1.6 million SingPass 
users have signed up for 2FA (out of 2 mil-
lion active users). But the one group that has 
proven challenging is the elderly.  To address 
this issue, SingPass sought help from the 
island-wide Citizen Connect centers. A more 
intractable problem arose from the require-
ment that a Singpass account can be linked 
to only one mobile number; many elderly 
people do not have a mobile and share that of 
someone else in their family.
Singpass’ success lies in a top-down 
design (including, for example, mandatory 
2FA enrollment) coupled with a bottom-up 
implementation (user feedback regarding 
2FA signup). It also lies in how it spurred 
other, broader benefits.  For example, 2FA 
benefits not only end-users but also helps 
companies to comply with regulatory 
requirements. In April 2016, Singapore 
announced a new Cybersecurity Act for 
2017 that requires companies to report all 
cyber security incidents. Through 2FA, com-
panies can not only keep their security sys-
tems updated, but the system will also 
automatically ensure compliance with the 
strict guidelines established by the new law.
Questions
	10-51. 	 How does beefing up SingPass security with 2FA make 
e-government transactions more secure?  What are its ben-
efits to end users?
	10-52. 	 Will the enhanced security of the SingPass system be able to 
minimize the phishing attacks on government websites that 
have been rising over the past few years? Explain.
	10-53. 	 Instead of 2FA, suppose that biometrics is proposed as an 
authentication mechanism for e-government transactions. 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of this?
Based on:
OneKey (n.d.) OneKey User Guide. Retrieved December 13, 2016 from: http://
www.onekey.sg/your-onekey/how-to-use.html
Irene Tham. (2016, January 29). IDA rolls out new ways to get people on 
SingPass two-factor authentication to meet July 4 deadline. The Straits Times. 
Retrieved December 13, 2016 from: http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/
ida-rolls-out-new-ways-to-get-people-on-singpass-2fa-to-meet-july-4-deadline
Kenneth Cheng. (2016, January 29). SingPass process simplified for users to 
adopt 2FA. Today. Retrieved December 13, 2016 from: http://www.todayonline 
.com/singapore/singpass-process-simplified-users-adopt-2fa?cx_tag=similar 
&cid=tg:recos:similar:standard#cxrecs_s
Ng Jing Yng (2014, June 5) 1,560 SingPass user accounts breached. 
Today. Retrieved December 13, 2016 from: http://www.todayonline.com/
singapore/1560-singpass-user-accounts-breached?page=1
SingPass. (2015, July 5). SingPass. Retrieved December 13, 2016 from Sing-
Pass: https://www.singpass.gov.sg/singpass/common/about
Anonymous. (2015, May 23) Man faces 868 charges for illegally access-
ing SingPass network. Today. Retrieved December 13, 2016 from: 
http://www.todayonline.com/singapore/man-who-cracked-singpass- 
accounts-charged-court?singlepage=true
Anonymous. (2016, April 11) Parliament: New cybersecurity bill to be tabled 
next year to strengthen Singapore’s online defences. The Straits Times. Retrieved 
December 13, 2016 from: http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/parliament-
new-cybersecurity-bill-to-be-tabled-next-year-to-strengthen-spores-online
CASE 1 
SingPass: E-Government Security 


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     467
Welcome to modern-day China, where the 
government blocks website access to the 
country’s 721 million Internet users on such 
subjects as democracy, Tibet, Taiwan, 
health, education, news, entertainment, reli-
gion, and revolution. Various chat rooms, 
blogs, photo- and video-sharing sites, gam-
ing and podcasting sites, and bulletin boards 
are also forbidden stops on the web, and 
don’t even think about searching for 
“Tiananmen Square massacre” or anything 
remotely considered pornographic.
Building censorship into China’s Inter-
net infrastructure is the first step for the 
country’s government in controlling access 
to politically sensitive material. To accom-
plish this, the Chinese government prevents 
Internet service providers (ISPs)—many of 
them privately held businesses, some with 
foreign investments—from hosting any 
material the government calls politically 
objectionable by holding the ISPs liable for 
content and imposing severe penalties for 
violations, including imprisonment.
In addition, the Chinese government tar-
gets Internet content providers (ICPs—orga-
nizations and individuals who have a web 
presence in China, both nonprofit and for 
profit), who are required to register for and 
post a license to operate legally and like 
ISPs are held liable for politically incorrect 
content. To keep a license, ICPs must police 
sites for objectionable content and must take 
down those sites that violate regulations 
governing content. Yahoo!, Microsoft’s 
MSN, and Google all act as ICPs in China 
and have been criticized for complying with 
China’s strict Internet censorship policy. 
Likewise, posts on various chat rooms or 
Weibo—China’s equivalent to Twitter—are 
removed if they contain terms deemed to be 
“disturbing social order,” “undermining 
social stability,” or “spreading rumors,” 
among other offenses. Certain terms are 
often blocked after notable events. For 
example, the term “Kunming Train Station” 
was blocked after a knife attack at the 
station; at times, even posts containing 
rumors about a price increase of the Beijing 
subway were blocked.
Managing ISPs and ICPs is not the only 
tool China has for controlling what content 
its citizens can access. Beginning operations 
in 2003, China instituted the Golden Shield 
Project. More popularly known as “The Great 
Firewall of China,” the system can automati-
cally filter and block content that the govern-
ment deems inappropriate. Through IP 
tracking, blocking, DNS/URL filtering, and 
redirection, the Golden Shield not only 
blocks and filters content but acts as a sur-
veillance system as well. The Great Firewall 
also creates a sluggish and congested net-
work infrastructure, though some believe this 
is intentional to discourage Internet use.
In September 2015, a reported 3,000 
popular websites were blocked in China, 
including Facebook, Twitter, Gmail, and 
YouTube. This heavy censorship made 
China’s Internet (sometimes referred to as 
“China’s Intranet”) one of the most heavily 
censored in the world, similar to countries 
such as Belarus, Iran, or North Korea.
Historically, many foreign ICPs have 
cooperated with the Chinese government 
by censoring information in order to oper-
ate in the country. Yahoo!, the only non-
Chinese company providing e-mail service 
in China, has even turned over e-mail con-
tent to the authorities, resulting in the pros-
ecution and conviction of at least four 
persons for criticizing the government. In 
2010, however, Google took a different 
course with China.
In late 2009, Google was hit with a 
sophisticated attack on its Gmail servers and 
some of its other corporate networks. 
Google believed that the attack was an 
attempt to access the Gmail accounts of 
human rights activists. Up until then, Google 
had been censoring content like other ICPs, 
tailoring results to remove topics deemed 
subversive or pornographic. However, after 
the network attack, tensions began to rise 
between Google and China, as it was widely 
believed that the attacks came from the Chi-
nese government or were at least sponsored 
by it in an effort to root out political dissi-
dents. As a result, Google threatened to end 
its practice of censoring search results or 
even completely pull its business out of 
China.
Early in 2010, Google made the decision 
to redirect all its search traffic in China to 
servers in Hong Kong, where greater civil lib-
erties remain, effectively ending its practice 
of censoring results and opening unrestricted 
searches to the Chinese public. Within days of 
the move, China began filtering and blocking 
searches directed to the Hong Kong servers 
using the Golden Shield system and even 
pulled out of lucrative agreements to use 
Google’s Android operating system on a 
number of mobile platforms. In March 2010, 
Google’s annual license to be an ICP in China 
expired. In summer 2010, China renewed 
Google’s license, but it remains to be seen 
how this standoff between the search giant 
and China will end; several Google applica-
tions including Docs, Drive, and Photos 
remain blocked, with academics even being 
unable to access Google Scholar, Google’s 
search engine dedicated to academic articles.
As is true of most attempts to censor the 
Internet, tech-savvy users in China find ways 
to circumvent the government’s firewall. One 
group of Chinese dissidents created Greatfire 
.org, which includes mirror duplicates of sev-
eral blocked websites. The group also created 
Freeweibo.com, which collects and publishes 
posts deleted from China’s popular social 
media service Sina Weibo. Another example 
is an iPhone app called FireChat, a mobile 
messaging app designed to allow anonymous 
group messaging through the iPhone’s peer-
to-peer and Bluetooth connections. The app 
was recently used as a part of a political pro-
test in Taiwan, and protesters in Taiwan and 
China were able to communicate and encour-
age each other without censorship from the 
Chinese government.
CASE 2 
China’s Great (Fire) Wall
Questions
	10-54. 	 Should foreign companies provide their technologies to 
China knowing that the technologies are used to limit the 
individual freedom of Chinese citizens? Why or why not?
	10-55. 	 Given that China has the largest number of Internet users, do 
you think it can ultimately succeed in controlling informa-
tion? Why or why not?
	10-56. 	 Should the rest of the world care if China limits information 
access within China? Why or why not? Now that Google has 
moved against censorship, do you think other companies will 
follow suit? Why or why not?
Based on:
August, O. (2007, October 23). The great firewall: China’s misguided—and 
futile—attempt to control what happens online. Wired. Retrieved March 
20, 2016, from http://www.wired.com/politics/security/magazine/15-11/
ff_chinafirewall
Chen, L. (2014, March 20). Breaking through China’s Great Firewall. Busi­
ness Week. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.businessweek.com/
articles/2014-03-20/secretive-web-activists-give-chinese-a-way-around-censorship

468    CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems  
Great Firewall. (2016, January 29). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved March 21, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Great_Firewall&oldid=702292624
Griffiths, J. (2015, October 25). Great Firewall rising: How China wages its 
war on the Internet. CNN.com. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www 
.cnn.com/2015/10/25/asia/china-war-internet-great-firewall
Horwitz, J. (2014, March 31). Unblockable? Unstoppable? FireChat messag-
ing app unites China and Taiwan in free speech… and it’s not pretty. Tech in 
Asia. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.techinasia.com/unblockable-
unstoppable-firechat-messaging-app-unites-china-and-taiwan-in-free-speech-
and-its-not-pretty
Levin, D. (2014, June 2). China escalating attack on Google. The New York 
Times. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/03/
business/chinas-battle-against-google-heats-up.html
Online Censorship in China. (2016). GreatFire.org. Retrieved March 20, 2016, 
from https://en.greatfire.org
Xuecun, M. (2015, August 17). Scaling China’s Great Firewall. The New York 
Times. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/18/
opinion/murong-xuecun-scaling-chinas-great-firewall.html
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	10-57. 	 Describe information systems risk assessment and explain four ways to approach systems security risk.
	10-58. 	 Define and contrast spyware, spam, and cookies.
References
Ackerman, S. (2012, July 17). Syrian rebels use YouTube, Face-
book for weapons training. Wired.com. Retrieved March 20, 
2016, from http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2012/07/
syria-youtube-facebook
Addison-Hewitt Associates. (2005). The Sarbanes–Oxley Act. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.soxlaw.com/ 
index.htm
Anonymous (2011, April 25). 10 most notorious acts  
of corporate espionage. Business Pundit. Retrieved  
March 20, 2016, from http://www.businesspundit 
.com/10-most-notorious-acts-of-corporate-espionage
Boyle, R. E., & Panko, R. (2015). Corporate computer security  
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Bremmer, I. (2015, June 19). These 5 facts explain the threat of cyber 
warfare. Time. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://time 
.com/3928086/these-5-facts-explain-the-threat-of-cyber-warfare
Brown, S. (2013, September 25). An introduction to malware for 
lawyers. Shannon Brown. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.shannonbrownlaw.com/archives/1981
Burgess-Proctor, A., Patchin, J. W., & Hinduja, S. (2008). Cyberbul-
lying and online harassment: Reconceptualizing the victimization 
of adolescent girls. In V. Garcia & J. Clifford (Eds.), Female 
crime victims: Reality reconsidered (pp. 162–176). Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Business Software Alliance. (2016, May). Seizing opportunity 
through license compliance: BSA Global Software Survey. 
The Software Alliance. Retrieved July 27, 2016, from http://
globalstudy.bsa.org/2016/downloads/studies/BSA_GSS_US.pdf
CAPTCHA (2016, March 18). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=CAPTCHA&oldid=710717950
Champlain, J. (2003). Auditing information systems. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley.
Chen, H., Reid, E., Sinai, J., Sike, A., & Ganor, B. (2008). Terrorism 
informatics: Knowledge management and data mining for home-
land security. Berlin: Springer.
Clapper, J. R. (2014, January 29). Worldwide threat assessment of 
the U.S. intelligence community. DNI.gov. Retrieved March 20, 
2016, from http://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Intelligence%20
Reports/2014%20WWTA%20%20SFR_SSCI_29_Jan.pdf
Cobb, M. (2012) Measuring risk: A security pro’s guide. Informa-
tionWeek. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://reports 
.informationweek.com
Cyberstalking (2016, March 5). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Cyberstalking&oldid=708494465
Deviah, M. A. (2016, January 11). Pathankot attack: Here’s why the 
operation was actually a success. F. India. Retrieved March 20, 
2016, from http://www.firstpost.com/india/the-pathankot-attack-
why-the-operation-was-actually-a-success-2577958.html
EY (2016). The Internet of Things: The risks of a revolution.  
EY.com. Retrieved April 15, 2016, from https://betterworkingworld 
.ey.com/better-questions/internet-of-things-risks-revolution
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. (2006). IT exam-
ination handbook: Information security. FFIEC.gov. Retrieved 
March 20, 2016, from http://ithandbook.ffiec.gov/ITBooklets/
FFIEC_ITBooklet_InformationSecurity.pdf
Finneran, M. (2013). 2013 state of mobile security. InformationWeek. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://reports.informationweek 
.com/abstract/18/10935/Mobility-Wireless/Research:-2013-State-Of-
Mobile-Security.html
Fisher, D. (2014, February 27). Cybersquatters rush to claim brands 
in the new GTLD territories. Forbes. Retrieved March 20, 2016, 
from http://www.forbes.com/sites/danielfisher/2014/02/27/
cybersquatters-rush-to-claim-brands-in-the-new-gtld-territories
Industrial espionage. (2016). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Industrial_espionage&oldid=709189017
Keizer, G. (2010). Botnets “the Swiss Army knife of attack 
tools”. Computerworld. Retrieved March 20, 2016, 
from http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9174560/
Botnets--the_Swiss_Army_knife_of_attack_tools
Leyden, J. (2002, March 27). Drive-by hacking linked 
to cyberterror. The Register. Retrieved March 20, 
2016, from http://www.theregister.co.uk/2002/03/27/
driveby_hacking_linked_to_cyberterror
McAfee (2014, June). Net losses: Estimating the global cost of cyber-
crime. MacAfee Labs. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/rp-economic-impact-
cybercrime2.pdf


CHAPTER 10  •  Securing Information Systems     469
McAfee (2016). 2016 threats predictions. McAfee Labs. Retrieved 
March 20, 2016, from http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/
reports/rp-threats-predictions-2016.pdf
Mlot, S. (2015, July 17). Email spam rates dip below 50 percent. PC 
Magazine. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.pcmag 
.com/article2/0,2817,2487933,00.asp
Mobile phone spam. (2015, December 5). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia 
.org/w/index.php?title=Mobile_phone_spam&oldid=693866388
Murdock, J. (2016, March 16). Hackers, hitmen and heroin: Is the 
dark web the largest honeypot ever created? International Busi­
ness Times. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www.ibtimes 
.co.uk/hackers-hitmen-heroin-dark-web-largest-honeypot-ever-
created-1549880
National Audit Office. (2004, February). Review of information sys-
tems controls. Auditnet.org. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.auditnet.org/Guides/NAOReviewofISWorkbook2004.pdf
Paganini, P. (2013, August 7). Cybercrime as a service. Infosec 
Institute. Retrieved April 14, 2016, form http://resources 
.infosecinstitute.com/cybercrime-as-a-service
Petroff, A. (2016, February 22). MasterCard launching selfie  
payments. CNN Money. Retrieved May 31, 2016, from  
http://money.cnn.com/2016/02/22/technology/mastercard- 
selfie-pay-fingerprint-payments
Phishing (2016, March 20). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Phishing&oldid=711016902
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2015, July). U.S. cybersecurity: Progress 
stalled—Key findings from the 2015 U.S. State of Cybercrime 
Survey. PWC.com. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://
www.pwc.com/us/en/increasing-it-effectiveness/publications/
assets/2015-us-cybercrime-survey.pdf
Radicati (2015, March). Email Statistics Report, 2015–2019. The 
Radicati Group, Inc. Retrieved March 20, 2016. From http://
www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Email-
Statistics-Report-2015-2019-Executive-Summary.pdf
Ragan, S. (2014, September 14). Home Depot confirms breach 
impacted 56 million customers. CSO. Retrieved March 20, 2016, 
from http://www.csoonline.com/article/2686192/data-protection/
home-depot-confirms-breach-impacted-56-million-customers.html
Ragan, S. (2016, February 14). Ransomware takes Hollywood 
hospital offline, $3.6M demanded by attackers. CSO. Retrieved 
March 20, 2016, from http://www.csoonline.com/article/3033160/
security/ransomware-takes-hollywood-hospital-offline-
36m-demanded-by-attackers.html
Regidi, A. (2016, March 18). SmeshApp: Cyberterrorism is real, but 
what is it and what can we do about it? Firstpost.com. Retrieved 
March 20, 2016, from http://tech.firstpost.com/news-analysis/
smeshapp-cyberterrorism-is-real-but-what-is-it-and-what-can-we-
do-about-it-304701.html
Riley, S. (2006, February 14). It’s me, and here’s my proof: Why 
identity and authentication must remain distinct. Microsoft Tech­
net. Retrieved April 5, 2016, from https://technet.microsoft.com/
en-us/library/cc512578.aspx
Ruggiero, P., & Foote, J. (2011). Cyber threats to mobile phones. US-
CERT. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://www.us-cert.gov/
sites/default/files/publications/cyber_threats-to_mobile_phones.pdf
Russon, M. (2014, March 27). China arrests 1,500 people for sending 
spam text messages from fake mobile base stations. International 
Business Times. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www 
.ibtimes.co.uk/china-arrests-1500-people-sending-spamtext-
messages-fake-mobile-base-stations-1442099
Schellong, A. (2016, February 4). Breaking down the threat of  
cyber terrorism. CSC Blogs. Retrieved March 20, 2016,  
from http://blogs.csc.com/2016/02/04/breaking-down 
-the-threat-of-cyber-terrorism
SearchCIO (2007). Business continuity and disaster recovery plan-
ning guide for CIOs. SearchCIO.com. Retrieved April 5, 2016, 
from http://searchcio.techtarget.com/Business-continuity-and-
disaster-recovery-planning-guide-for-CIOs
Stallings, W., & Brown, L. (2017). Cryptography and network secu­
rity: Principles and practices (7th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Statista (2016). Global gross domestic product (GDP) at current 
prices from 2010–2020 (in billion U.S. dollars). Retrieved 
March 20, 2016, from http://www.statista.com/statistics/268750/
global-gross-domestic-product-gdp
Stewart, S. (2015, October 22). The coming age of cyberterrorism. 
Stratfor. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://www.stratfor 
.com/weekly/coming-age-cyberterrorism
Storm, D. (2014, September 29). Report: Crime-as-a-service tools 
and anonymization help any idiot be a cyber-criminal. Computer­
world. Retrieved April 14, 2016, from http://www.computerworld 
.com/article/2688411/report-crime-as-a-service-tools-and-
anonymization-help-any-idiot-be-a-cyber-criminal.html
Stuxnet (2016, March 10). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index 
.php?title=Stuxnet&oldid=709445429
The Jester (hacktivist). (2016, March 19). In Wikipedia, The Free  
Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from https://en 
.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Jester_(hacktivist) 
&oldid=710821297
US-CERT. (2014). United States Computer Emergency Response 
Readiness Team. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www 
.us-cert.gov
U.S. Department of State. (2014). Chapter 3: State sponsors of 
terrorism overview. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://www 
.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2014/239410.htm
Websense (2015). Websense 2015 threat report. Retrieved March 
20, 2016, from https://www.websense.com/content/websense-
2015-threat-report.aspx
Wehner, M. (2012, July 24). Iran nuclear energy facility hit with 
malware that plays AC/DC at full volume. Yahoo! News. 
Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://news.yahoo.com/blogs/
technology-blog/iran-nuclear-energy-facility-hit-malware-
plays-ac-203806981.html
Xinhua (2014, April 12). Chinese bombed by 300 bln spam SMS 
in 2013. Globaltimes.cn. Retrieved March 20, 2016, from http://
www.globaltimes.cn/content/854142.shtml

470
After reading 
this briefing, 
you will be 
able to do the 
following
1.	 Discuss foundational information systems (IS) hardware concepts.
2.	 Describe foundational topics related to system software, programming languages, 
and application development environments.
3.	 Describe foundational networking and Internet concepts.
4.	 Explain foundational database management concepts.
In Chapter 3, “Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure and Services,” you 
learned about the key components of a comprehensive information systems (IS) infrastruc-
ture and why its careful management is necessary. This Technology Briefing will expand 
that discussion, providing you with a deeper understanding of those topics. Each of the 
major sections within this briefing provides optional material that stands alone from the 
other sections as well as the entire book. Likewise, the end-of-chapter material is pre-
sented in separate sections to facilitate this independence.
Foundations of Information 
Systems Infrastructure
TECHNOLOGY 
BRIEFING 
MyLab MIS
TM
Over 10 million students 
improved their results using the 
Pearson MyLabs. Visit mymislab.
com for simulations, tutorials, 
and end-of-chapter problems.
Preview


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    471
Foundational Topics in IS Hardware
IS hardware is an integral part of the IS infrastructure and is broadly classified into three types: 
input, processing, and output technologies. In this section, we examine foundational topics 
related to IS hardware.
Input Technologies
Input technologies are used to enter data into a computer, laptop, tablet, or smartphone (see 
Figure TB1). Well-known input devices include various types of keyboards or pointing devices 
like track pads and mice. Other, more specialized input devices include biometric fingerprint 
readers to identify or authenticate people (for access control, such as for secure laboratories, or 
for border controls; see Chapter 10, “Securing Information Systems”), radio frequency identifi-
cation (RFID) scanners to track valuable inventory in a warehouse (see Chapter 8, “Strengthen-
ing Business-to-Business Relationships via Supply Chain and Customer Relationship 
Management”), and eye-tracking devices, used primarily by the disabled for help with operating 
computers as well as for usability studies and scientific research studies.
ENTERING BATCH DATA.  Large amounts of routine data, referred to as batch data, are often 
entered into the computer using scanners that convert printed or handwritten text and images 
into digital data. Scanners range from small handheld devices to large desktop boxes that 
resemble personal photocopiers. Rather than duplicating the image on another piece of paper, 
the computer translates the image into digital data that can be stored or manipulated by the 
computer. Insurance companies, universities, and other organizations that routinely process large 
numbers of forms and documents are typically using scanner technology to increase employee 
productivity; entering a large number of separate forms or documents into a computer system 
and then manipulating these data at a single time is referred to as batch processing.
Once a document is converted into digital format, text recognition software uses optical 
character recognition to convert typed, printed, or handwritten text into the computer-based 
characters that form the original letters and words. Other special-purpose scanning technologies 
include optical mark recognition devices, bar code readers, and magnetic ink character rec-
ognition, as summarized in Table TB1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE TB1
All computing devices utilize 
input technologies.
Sources: (a) Nikolai Sorokin/Fotolia; 
(b) Aaron Amat/Fotolia; 
(c) Jan Engel/Fotolia

472    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
Other Input Technologies  Smart cards are special credit card–sized cards containing a 
microprocessor chip, memory circuits, and often a magnetic stripe. Smart cards can be used for 
various applications, including identification, providing building access, or making payments 
(e.g., at vending machines or checkout counters). Some smart cards allow for contactless 
transmission of data using RFID technology (e.g., MasterCard Contactless or Visa payWave). 
Biometric devices, discussed in more detail in Chapter 10, are being used primarily for 
identification and authentication purposes. These devices read certain body features, including 
irises, fingerprints, and hand or face geometry, and compare them with stored profiles. Biometric 
devices are now also being included in consumer products such as laptops, computer keyboards, 
or mobile devices, allowing users to log on to the device by scanning their fingerprints rather 
than typing their user names and passwords. Further, most modern smartphones use various 
sensors to obtain data about the device’s location (global positioning system [GPS] sensor), 
orientation (compass and gyroscope), acceleration (accelerometer), altitude (barometer), 
proximity to the user’s body, or ambient light. As introduced in Chapter 1, the various Internet 
of Things (IoT) devices have become another important input technology. Entrepreneurs and 
established companies around the globe are using a variety of sensors to collect diverse types 
of data to automate processes or provide innovative services to customers, from monitoring 
newborn babies, to providing reminders for taking medication, to fitness tracking, to home 
automation, and countless other uses.
ENTERING AUDIO AND VIDEO.  When entering audio (i.e., sound) or video (i.e., still and moving 
images) data into a computer, the data have to be digitized before they can be manipulated, stored, 
and played or displayed. In addition to the manipulation of music, audio input is helpful for 
operating a computer when a user’s hands need to be free to do other tasks. Video input is used for 
assisting in security-related applications, such as room monitoring and employee verification, as 
well as for videoconferencing and chatting on the Internet, using a PC and a webcam.
Voice Input  Voice data are input into a computer system using microphones. A process 
called speech recognition also makes it possible for your computer or smartphone to understand 
speech. Voice-to-text software is an application that uses a microphone to monitor a person’s 
speech and then converts the speech into text. Speech recognition technology can also be 
especially helpful for disabled computer users, physicians and other medical professionals, 
airplane pilots, factory workers whose hands get too dirty to use keyboards, mobile users who 
don’t want to type while walking or driving, and computer users who cannot type and do not 
want to learn. Increasingly, interactive voice response (IVR), based on speech recognition 
technology, is used for telephone surveys or to guide you through the various menu options 
when calling a company’s customer service line.
TABLE TB1   Specialized Scanners for Inputting Data
Scanner
Description
Optical mark 
recognition
Used to scan questionnaires and test answer forms (“bubble sheets”) 
where answer choices are marked by filling in circles using pencil or pen
Optical character 
recognition
Used to read and digitize typewritten, computer-printed, and even 
handwritten characters such as product specifications on sales tags on 
department store merchandise, patient data in hospitals, or addresses on 
postal mail
Bar code reader
Used mostly in grocery stores and other retail businesses to read bar code 
data at the checkout counter; also used by libraries, banks, hospitals, 
utility companies, and so on
Magnetic ink 
character recognition
Used by the banking industry to read data, account numbers, bank codes, 
and check numbers on preprinted checks
Biometric scanner
Used to scan human body characteristics of users to enable everything 
from access control to payment authorization


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    473
Other Forms of Audio Input  In addition to using a microphone, users can enter audio using 
electronic keyboards, or they can transfer audio from another device (such as an audio recorder, 
a digital media player, or a smartphone). The users can then analyze and manipulate the sounds 
via sound editing software, output the sounds to speakers, or store the digitized sounds to MP3 
or other file formats.
Video Input  Video data can be entered into a computer using digital cameras that record still 
images or video clips in digital form on small, removable memory cards. File size is primarily 
influenced by the resolution, compression, and file format you select for pictures or the length 
of the recording for video. As webcams (as well as cameras integrated into mobile devices) 
have become very popular with people wanting to use the Internet for chatting with friends 
and family using programs like Skype, Google Hangouts, or FaceTime, protocols to transmit 
data in a continuous fashion are used. In contrast to discrete audio or video files that have to 
be completely downloaded before they can be opened, streaming audio and streaming video 
(together referred to as streaming media) are data streams transmitted using specific protocols 
that are available for immediate playback on the recipient’s device. Similarly, the video-sharing 
site YouTube, online radio stations, and Netflix use specific protocols to stream media content.
Processing: Transforming Inputs into Outputs
In this section we provide a brief overview of computer processing. Processing technologies, 
contained inside any computing device (including smartphones, tablets, or wireless routers), 
transform inputs into outputs.
HOW A COMPUTER WORKS.  Inside any computing device, you will find the motherboard, 
a plastic or fiberglass circuit board that holds or connects to all of the computer’s electronic 
components (see Figure TB2). The motherboard holds the central processing unit (CPU) or 
microprocessor, which is the main component of a computing device, and connects it to the 
power supply and primary and secondary storage as well as to various peripherals (such as input 
and output devices or expansion cards, such as dedicated sound or video cards). The CPU is often 
called the computer’s brain, as it is responsible for performing all the operations of the computer 
(see Figure TB3). Its job includes loading the operating system (e.g., Windows 10, Mac OS X, or 
Ubuntu Linux) when the machine is first turned on and performing, coordinating, and managing 
all the calculations and instructions relayed to it while the computer is running. The CPU, a small 
device made of silicon, is composed of millions of tiny transistors arranged in complex patterns 
that allow it to interpret and manipulate data. In addition to the number of transistors on the CPU, 
three other factors greatly influence its speed—its system clock speed (the number of instructions 
FIGURE TB2
A computer’s motherboard 
holds or connects to all of the 
computer’s electronic components.
Source: Bretislav Horak/Shutterstock.

474    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
a CPU can execute in a fixed amount of time), registers, and cache memory (described later). 
The CPU consists of two main sections: the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and the control unit, 
together often referred to as its core. The ALU performs calculations and logical operations, 
which involve comparing packets of data and then executing appropriate instructions. Combined 
in various ways, these functions allow the computer to perform complicated operations rapidly. 
The control unit works closely with the ALU, fetching and decoding instructions as well as 
retrieving and storing data. Many modern CPUs have more than one set of ALU and control units 
on a single chip and are referred to as multi-core processors. Multi-core processers can divide 
processing operations into independent streams that are performed in parallel by the separate 
cores, greatly speeding up the performance of the CPU.
Inside all computers, data are represented in the form of binary digits, or bits (i.e., the 0s 
and 1s a computer understands); a sequence of 8 bits is referred to as a byte. Different binary 
codes have been developed to represent characters or numbers as strings of bits. A widely used 
standard is the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), where, for 
example, the binary digits “01100001” represent the letter a. Due to limitations in the number of 
characters that can be represented, as well as for specialized applications, various other codes 
have been developed. For example, Unicode has gained widespread acceptance, as it allows for 
representing characters and scripts beyond the Latin alphabet, including Chinese, Cyrillic, 
Hebrew, and Arabic. Any input your computer receives (say, a keystroke or mouse movement) is 
digitized, or translated into binary code, and then processed by the CPU.
Within the computer, an electronic circuit generates pulses at a rapid rate, setting the pace 
for processing events to take place, just like a metronome marks time for a musician. This circuit 
is called the system clock. A single pulse is a clock tick, and a fixed number of clock ticks is 
required to execute a single instruction. In microcomputers, the processor’s clock speed is mea-
sured in hertz (Hz) or multiples thereof. One megahertz (MHz) is 1 million clock ticks, or 
instruction cycles, per second. Personal computer speeds are most often indicated in gigahertz 
(GHz, or 1 billion hertz). Microprocessor speeds improve so quickly that faster chips are on the 
market about every 6 months. Today, most new PCs operate at more than 3 GHz. To give you an 
idea of how things have changed, the original IBM PC had a clock speed of 4.77 MHz.
As its inner workings are very complex, for most of us it is easiest to think of a CPU as 
being a “black box” where all the processing occurs. The CPU uses registers and cache memory 
(both located inside the CPU) and RAM (located outside the CPU) as primary, or temporary, 
storage space for data that are currently being processed. The CPU interacts with secondary 
storage (such as a hard drive, optical disk, or flash drive) for permanently storing data; as pri-
mary storage is considerably faster than secondary storage, the amount of primary storage 
greatly influences a computer’s performance. The different types of storage are discussed next.
STORAGE.  A computer has various different types of storage, each serving a specific purpose. 
The primary differences between different types of storage are capacity, volatility, and read/write 
speed (see Table TB2 for a comparison of different storage technologies).
FIGURE TB3
A CPU performs all operations of 
a computer.
Source: Tatiana Popova/Shutterstock.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    475
Primary Storage  Primary storage (such as random-access memory [RAM]), also called 
main memory, is located on the motherboard and is used to store the data and programs currently 
in use; primary storage uses memory chips (consisting of transistors and capacitators) to store 
data. Because instructions and data stored in RAM are lost when the power to the computer is 
turned off, it is referred to as volatile memory. Within the CPU itself, registers provide relatively 
small temporary storage locations where data must reside while being processed or manipulated. 
For example, if two numbers are to be added together, both must reside in registers, with the 
result placed in a register. Consequently, the number and size of the registers can also greatly 
influence the speed and power of a CPU.
A cache (pronounced “cash”) is a small block of memory used by processors to store those 
instructions most recently or most often used. Just as you might keep file folders that you use 
most in a handy location on your desktop, cache memory is located within the CPU. Thanks to 
cache memory, before performing an operation, the processor does not have to go directly to 
main memory, which is slower and farther away from the microprocessor and takes longer 
to reach. Instead, it can check first to see if needed data are contained in the cache. Cache mem-
ory is another way computer engineers have increased processing speed.
Modern CPUs have a hierarchy of cache memory (level 1, level 2, or even level 3); the 
lower levels of cache memory are faster but also smaller and more expensive. The more cache 
available to a CPU, the better the overall system performs because more data are readily avail-
able (although at a certain size, factors such as heat emission and power consumption become 
prohibitive to increasing the CPU cache).
Read-only memory (ROM) is used to store programs and instructions that are automati-
cally loaded when the computer is turned on (before the operating system is loaded), such as the 
basic input/output system (BIOS). In contrast to other forms of primary storage, ROM is non-
volatile memory, which means that it retains the data when the power to the computer is 
shut off.
Secondary Storage  Secondary storage refers to technologies for permanently storing data to 
a large-capacity, nonvolatile storage component, such as a hard drive (hard disk drive). Most 
of the software runing on a computer, including the operating system, is stored on the hard drive. 
Hard drives are usually installed internally, but additional hard drives may be externally located 
and connected via cables.
TABLE TB2   Different Storage Technologies
Name
Volatility
Speed
Access
Capacity
Usage
Register
Volatile
Extremely 
fast
Random
32 or 64 bits per register
Data directly used by CPU
Cache
Volatile
Extremely 
fast
Random
Typically up to 20 MB
Data and instructions used by 
CPU
RAM
Volatile
Very fast
Random
Depends on configuration; 
typically up to 128 GB
Programs and data currently used
ROM
Nonvolatile
Fast
Random
Very low
Instructions used before the 
operating system is loaded
SSD
Nonvolatile
Fast
Random
High
Storage of programs and data
Hard drive
Nonvolatile
Relatively 
slow
Random
High
Storage of programs and data
Optical disks
Nonvolatile
Slow
Random
Medium
Backup and long-term storage; 
software distribution; music and 
movies
Tape
Nonvolatile
Very slow
Sequential
High
Archiving of data

476    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
The storage capacity of the hard drives for today’s microcomputers is typically measured in 
gigabytes (GB, billions of bytes) or terabytes (TB, trillions of bytes). It is not unusual for PCs 
currently on the market to come equipped with hard drives with 1–2 TB storage capacities. Mod-
ern supercomputers can have millions of terabytes of storage. To make sure critical data are not 
lost, some computers employ redundant array of independent disks (RAID) technology to 
store redundant copies of data on two or more hard drives. RAID is not typically used on an 
individual’s computer, but it is very common for web servers and many business systems. RAID 
is sometimes called a “redundant array of inexpensive disks” because it is typically less expen-
sive to have multiple redundant disks than fewer highly reliable and expensive ones.
A traditional hard drive consists of several magnetic disks, or platters, used for data storage 
(see Figure TB4). Each disk within a disk pack has an access arm with two read/write heads—
one positioned close to the top surface of the disk and another positioned close to the bottom 
surface of the disk—to inscribe or retrieve data. When reading from or writing to the disks, the 
read/write heads are constantly repositioned to the desired storage location for the data while the 
disks are spinning at speeds of 5,400 to 15,000 revolutions per minute. The read/write heads do 
not actually touch either surface of the disks. In fact, a head crash occurs if the read/write head 
for some reason touches the disk, leading to a loss of data. Because of the mechanical action 
needed to position the read/write heads, hard drives are comparably slow; it takes a permanent 
storage device such as a hard drive about 3–10 milliseconds to access data. Within a CPU, how-
ever, a single transistor can be changed from a 0 to a 1 in about 10 picoseconds (10-trillionths of 
a second). Changes inside the CPU occur about 1 billion times faster than they do in a hard drive 
because the CPU operates only on electronic impulses, whereas the hard drives perform both 
electronic and mechanical activities, such as spinning the disk and moving the read/write head. 
Mechanical activities are extremely slow relative to electronic activities; however, modern hard 
drives use cache memory to decrease the time needed to access frequently used data. A newer 
secondary storage technology called solid-state drive (SSD) uses nonvolatile memory chips 
(i.e., flash memory) to store data; as SSDs have no moving parts, they are typically faster (with 
access times of 0.1–0.5 millisecond), quieter, and more reliable but also more expensive than 
traditional hard disk drives. Solid-state drives have become increasingly popular due to the rise 
of smartphones and tablets. Given their performance, weight, and reliability, they are also 
increasingly used for laptops and even high-performance servers and supercomputers.
Removable Storage Media  There are different types of removable storage: flash memory, 
optical disks, and tapes. Flash memory is a memory chip–based nonvolatile computer storage 
method that is used in USB flash drives, solid-state hard drives, and memory cards (such as 
FIGURE TB4
A hard drive consists of several 
disks that are stacked on top of 
one another and read/write heads 
to read and write data.
Source: Alias Studiot Oy/Shutterstock.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    477
SD cards) used for storing music and pictures in digital cameras and music players. A flash 
drive is a data storage device that includes flash memory with an integrated USB interface. Flash 
drives are relatively inexpensive storage devices typically having capacities of 16–128 GB; as of 
2016, the highest-capacity flash drive could store 1 TB of data.
Optical disks (i.e., disks that are written/read using laser beam technology) are very inex-
pensive removable nonvolatile storage media used to store data (e.g., photos and videos) and dis-
tribute software, video games, and movies. Optical disks store binary data in the form of pits and 
flat areas on the disk’s surface (where the pits and flats represent the 0s and 1s, respectively); an 
optical disk drive’s laser beam can then read the data based on the reflection of the disk’s surface. 
For many years, CD-ROMs (compact disc–read-only memory) were the standard for distributing 
data and software because of their low cost and their storage capacity of 700 MB. As CD-ROMs 
cannot be written to, most computers support other types of optical disks that data can be written 
to, such as the CD-R (compact disc–recordable). Whereas a CD-R can be written onto only 
once, a CD-RW (compact disc–rewritable) can be written onto multiple times. The DVD-ROM 
(digital versatile disc–read-only memory) has more storage space than a CD-ROM because 
DVD-ROM (or typically referred to as simply DVD) drives use a shorter-wavelength laser beam 
that allows more optical pits to be deposited on the disk. Like compact discs, there are recordable 
(DVD-R) and rewritable (DVD-RW) versions of this storage technology. DVDs used for the dis-
tribution of movies are also called digital video discs. The increasing demand for high-definition 
video content led to the creation of Blu-ray, a DVD format that provides up to 50 GB of storage.
Tapes are removable, high-capacity secondary storage media; allowing only for sequential 
access, tapes are typically only used for archiving data and long-term storage. Tapes used for 
data storage consist of narrow plastic tape coated with a magnetic substance. Storage tapes are 
typically enclosed in a cartridge, similar to a music cassette, and must be inserted into a tape 
reader. As with other forms of magnetic storage, data are stored in tiny magnetic spots. The stor-
age capacity of tapes is expressed as density, which equals the number of characters per inch 
or bytes per inch (BPI) that can be stored on the tape.
Having a life span of several decades, magnetic tape is still used for backing up or archiving 
large amounts of computer data, but it is gradually being replaced by high-capacity disk storage 
because disk storage is equally reliable. In fact, data stored on disks are easier and faster to locate 
because when using disks, computers do not have to scan an entire tape to find specific data.
PORTS AND POWER SUPPLY.  To use the full functionality of a computer, you need to be able 
to connect various types of peripheral devices, such as mice, printers, and cameras, to the 
system unit. A port provides a hardware interface for connecting devices to computers. The 
characteristics of various types of ports are summarized in Table TB3. A final key component 
of any computing device is the power supply, which converts electricity from the wall socket 
to a lower voltage. Whereas typically power supplied by the utility companies can vary from 
100 to 240 volts AC, depending on where you are in the world, a PC’s components use lower 
voltages—3.3 to 12 volts DC. The power supply converts the power accordingly and also 
regulates the voltage to eliminate spikes and surges common in most electrical systems. For 
added protection against external power surges, many PC owners opt to connect their systems to 
a separately purchased voltage surge suppressor. The power supply includes one or several fans 
for air cooling the electronic components inside the system unit—that low humming noise you 
hear while the computer is running is the fan.
Now that you understand how data are input into a computer and how data can be processed 
and stored, we can turn our attention to the third category of hardware—output technologies.
Output Technologies
Output technologies, such as a computer monitor or printer, deliver information to you in a 
usable format. A printer is an output device that produces a paper copy of alphanumeric data or 
other content from a computer. Printers vary in price, performance, and capabilities (e.g., docu-
ment size, color or black and white, technology, speed, resolution, quality). Ink-jet, LED, or 
laser technology is used in most personal printers.
Monitors are used to display information from a computer and, like printers, can vary in 
price, performance, and capabilities (e.g., screen size, color, technology, resolution, and so on). 
Monitors can be color, black and white, or monochrome (meaning all one color, usually green or 
amber). Today, monochrome monitors are used primarily in cash registers and other point-of-sale 

478    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
systems. Most modern monitors use liquid crystal display (LCD) technology because they are 
lighter and thinner than the bulky cathode ray tubes (CRT) used in old computer displays and 
televisions. Because display monitors are embedded into a broad range of products and devices, 
such as cell phones, digital cameras, and automobiles (e.g., to display route maps and other rele-
vant information), they must be sturdy, reliable, lightweight, energy efficient, and low in cost. 
Recent developments in monitor technologies have thus focused on other display technologies, 
such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), which require far less power and are much thin-
ner than traditional LCD panels. Finally, projectors are often used for presentation to an audience 
(and by many as a way to project a large video image in a home theater).
In addition to traditional monitors, touch screen displays have become extremely popular 
with the development of smartphones, tablets, high-end laptops, and a variety of technology 
gadgets. A touch screen is a display screen that is also an input device; a user interacts with the 
device by touching pictures or words on the screen with a finger or a stylus. In addition to your 
smartphone or tablet, touch screens are used in ATMs, retail point-of-sale terminals, car naviga-
tion, and industrial control computers. Touch screens provide great flexibility in how an input 
device can look and operate.
Especially for mobile computing, monitor technology is still a challenge. In addition to 
screen size and power requirements of commonly used display technologies, glare is often an 
issue, and many laptop screens are hard to read in bright sunlight. Over the past decades, there 
has been a steady stream of enhancements related to improved resolution and reduced power 
consumption. It is forecasted that the next generation will be lightweight, thin, and flexible like 
paper, as well as be inexpensive and not require external power to retain an image. Recently, 
manufacturers have introduced flexible glass for touch screens, which has allowed for new form 
factors of mobile devices.
Now that you have learned more about IS hardware, we will focus on software, another key 
component of the IS infrastructure.
Foundational Topics in IS Software
Software refers to programs, or sets of instructions, that allow all the hardware components in 
your computer system to speak to each other and to perform the desired tasks. Throughout the 
book, we have discussed a variety of application software, from large business systems (e.g., an 
TABLE TB3   Common Computer Ports, Applications, and Descriptions
Port Name
Used to Connect
Description
Serial
Modem, mouse, keyboard, terminal 
display, MIDI
■
■Transfers one bit at a time
■
■Slowest data transfer rates
USB
Printer, scanner, mouse, keyboard, 
digital camera and camcorders, 
external disk drives
■
■Extremely high-speed data transfer method
■
■Up to 10 Gbps using USB3.1
■
■Up to 127 devices simultaneously connected
IEEE 1394 (“Fire Wire”)
Digital cameras and camcorders, 
external disk drives
■
■Extremely high-speed data transfer method
■
■Up to 3.2 Gbps
■
■Up to 63 devices simultaneously connected
Thunderbolt
Simultaneous transmission of 
DisplayPort (video and audio), 
PCI Express (data), and power
■
■Extremely high-speed data transfer method
■
■Up to 40 Gbps
■
■Up to 7 devices simultaneously connected to a single port
Ethernet
Network
■
■Most common standard for local area networks
VGA (Video Graphics Array), 
DVI (Digital Visual Interface)
Monitors
■
■VGA is designed for transmission of analog video signals
■
■DVI allows for transmission of digital video signals
HDMI (High Definition Multi-
media Interface), DisplayPort
Monitors, home theater
■
■HDMI and DisplayPort allow for simultaneous transmission 
of digital audio and video signals


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    479
enterprise resource planning system) to office automation and personal productivity tools. With-
out software, the biggest, fastest, most powerful computer in the world is nothing more than a 
fancy paperweight. Software is intertwined with all types of products and services—toys, music, 
appliances, healthcare, and countless other products. Here, we provide some background on this 
critical component to all computer-based products.
System Software
In Chapter 3, you learned about one type of system software, the operating system, and its many 
different tasks. More specifically, common tasks of an operating system include the following:
■
■Booting (or starting) your computer
■
■Reading programs into memory and managing memory allocation
■
■Managing where programs and files are located in secondary storage
■
■Maintaining the structure of directories and subdirectories
■
■Formatting disks
■
■Controlling the computer monitor
■
■Sending documents to the printer
Just as there are many kinds of computers, there are many different kinds of operating sys-
tems (see Table TB4). In general, operating systems—whether for large mainframe computers, 
desktop computers, or smartphones—perform similar operations. Obviously, large multiuser 
mainframes are more complex than small desktop systems; therefore, the operating system must 
account for and manage that complexity. However, the basic purpose of all operating systems is 
the same.
A second type of system software, utilities (or utility programs), is designed to manage 
computer resources and files. Some utilities are included in operating systems, while others must 
be obtained separately and installed on your computer. Table TB5 provides a sample of a few 
utility programs that are considered essential.
Programming Languages and Development Environments
Each piece of software is developed using some programming language. A programming lan-
guage is the computer language the software developer uses to write programs. For application 
software, such as spreadsheets, web browsers, or accounting software, the underlying program-
ming language is invisible to the user. However, programmers in an organization’s IS group, and 
in some instances end users, can use programming languages to develop their own specialized 
TABLE TB4   Common Operating Systems
Operating System
Description
z/OS
A proprietary operating system developed specifically for large IBM mainframe systems.
Unix
A multiuser, multitasking operating system that is available for a wide variety of computer platforms. 
Commonly used because of its superior security.
Windows
Currently, the Windows desktop operating system is by far the most popular in the world. Variations are also 
used to operate large servers, tablets, and smartphones.
Mac OS
The first commercial graphical-based operating system, making its debut in 1984. The operating system of 
Apple computers.
Linux
An open source operating system designed in 1991 by a Finnish student. Known as a secure, low-cost, 
multiplatform operating system. Linux powers about one-third of all web servers.
Linux users can choose between different “flavors” (or distributions) depending on their needs (such as the 
novice-friendly Ubuntu).
Android
Google’s Linux-based operating system for mobile devices.
iOS
Apple’s mobile operating system.

480    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
applications. The source code (i.e., the program written in a programming language) must be 
translated into object code—called assembly or machine language—that the hardware can 
understand. Normally, the source code is translated into machine language using programs 
called compilers and interpreters.
COMPILERS AND INTERPRETERS.  A compiler takes an entire program’s source code written 
in a programming language and converts it into an executable, that is, a program in machine 
language that can be read and executed directly by the computer (see Figure TB5). Although 
the compilation process can take quite some time (especially for large programs), the resulting 
executables run very fast; thus, programs are usually compiled before they are sold as executables 
to the customers. The customers purchase only the executable but do not have access to the 
program’s source code; thus, they can run the program but not make any modifications to it.
Some programming environments do not compile the entire program into machine lan-
guage. Instead, each statement of the program is converted into machine language and executed 
“on the fly” (i.e., one statement at a time), as depicted in Figure TB6. The type of program that 
does the conversion and execution is called an interpreter. As the source code is translated each 
time the program is run, it is easy to quickly evaluate the effects of any changes made to the pro-
gram’s source code. However, this also causes interpreted programs to run much slower than 
compiled executables. Programming languages can be either compiled or interpreted.
PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES.  Over the past few decades, software has evolved. As software has 
evolved, so have the programming languages. Each programming language has been designed at 
a particular time, for a particular use, and the first generations of programming languages were 
quite crude by today’s standards. Some popular programming languages are listed in Table TB6.
Of course, programming languages continue to evolve, with object-oriented languages, 
visual programming languages, and web development languages having rapidly gained 
popularity. We discuss these next.
TABLE TB5   Common Types of Computer Software Utilities
Utility
Description
Backup
Archives files from the hard drive to tapes, flash drives, or other storage devices.
File defragmentation
Converts fragmented files (i.e., files not stored contiguously) on your hard drive into contiguous files 
that will load and be manipulated more rapidly.
Disk and data recovery
Allows the recovery of damaged or erased data from hard drives and flash drives.
Data compression
Compresses data by substituting a short code for frequently repeated patterns of data, much like the 
machine shorthand used by court reporters, allowing more data to be stored on a storage medium.
File conversion
Translates a file from one format to another so that it can be used by an application other than the one 
used to create it.
Antivirus
Scans files for viruses and removes or quarantines any virus found.
Device driver
Allows the computer to communicate with various different hardware devices.
Spyware detection and removal
Scans a computer for spyware and disables or removes any spyware found.
Media player
Allows listening to music or watching video on a computer.
Compiler
10010010
00010011
...
Machine
Language
Execute
Do Job A
While x > 500
...
Program
FIGURE TB5
A compiler translates the entire 
computer program into machine 
language, then the CPU executes 
the machine language program.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    481
Object-Oriented Languages  Object-oriented languages are the most recent in the 
progression of high-level programming languages and are extremely popular with application 
developers. Object-oriented languages use common modules (called objects), which combine 
properties and behaviors to define the relevant system components. An example of an object 
would be a specific student who has a name, an address, and a date of birth (i.e., the properties) 
but can also perform certain operations, such as register for a course (the behaviors). If an object-
oriented programming language is being used, it enables the design and implementation of the 
objects to happen quickly and simultaneously, as oftentimes preexisting objects can be reused or 
adapted. For important concepts related to object-oriented languages, see Table TB7.
Visual Programming Languages  Just as you may have found it easier to use a computer 
operating system with a graphical user interface (GUI), such as Windows 10 or Mac OS X, 
programmers using visual programming languages may also take advantage of the GUI. For 
instance, programmers can easily add a command button to a screen with a few clicks of a 
mouse (see Figure TB7) instead of programming the button pixel by pixel and using many lines 
Interpreter
10010100
Execute
Machine
Language
Statement
Program
Statement
Next program statement
Do Job A
FIGURE TB6
Interpreters read, translate, and 
execute one line of source code at 
a time.
TABLE TB6   Examples of Popular Programming Languages
Language
Application
Description
BASIC
General purpose
Beginner’s All-Purpose Symbolic Interaction Code. An easy-to-learn language, BASIC works 
on almost all PCs.
C/C++
General purpose
C++ is a newer version of C. Developed at AT&T Bell Labs. Complex languages used for a 
wide range of applications.
COBOL
Business
COmmon Business-Oriented Language. Developed in the 1960s, it was the first language for 
developing business software. COBOL is still frequently used for many business transaction 
processing applications on mainframes.
FORTRAN
Scientific
FORmula TRANslator. The first commercial high-level language developed by IBM in the 
1950s. Designed for scientific, mathematical, and engineering applications.
Java
World Wide Web
An object-oriented programming language developed by Sun Microsystems in the early 1990s. 
It is a popular programming language for the Internet because it is highly transportable from 
one computer to another. Java is also used for programing Android apps.
.NET 
Framework
World Wide Web
A variety of programming languages (e.g., ASP.NET and C#) offered by Microsoft that can 
easily be integrated into web applications.
LISP
Artificial 
Intelligence
LISt Processor. Dates from the late 1950s. One of the main languages used to develop 
applications in artificial intelligence and high-speed arcade graphics.
PERL
World Wide Web
A dynamic programming language commonly used for writing scripts for websites, as well as 
for batch processing of large amounts of data.
Python
General purpose
Popular object-oriented scripting language
Objective-C
App development
Evolved from C, Objective-C is used for developing apps for iPhones, iPads, and Apple 
computers.

482    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
of code. Visual Basic.NET and Visual C# (pronounced as “C-sharp”) are two popular examples 
of visual programming languages.
Web Development Languages  You may have thought of creating a personal web page 
or already have one. In that event, you have some experience with using a markup language. 
The markup language you used to create your web page is called Hypertext Markup Language 
(HTML). HTML is a text-based file format that uses codes (i.e., tags) to specify the content and 
structure of a document; HTML tags are used to instruct the web browser on how a document 
should be presented to the user. Because many HTML editing programs are visually oriented 
and easy to use, you do not need to memorize the language to set up a web page. Programs for 
creating web pages (such as Brackets, Microsoft Visual Studio, and Adobe Dreamweaver CC) 
are called web page builders or HTML editors.
In HTML, the tags used to identify different elements on a page are set apart from the text 
with angle brackets (<>). Specific tags are used to mark the beginning and the ending of an ele-
ment or a formatting command. For example, if you want text to appear in bold type, the HTML 
TABLE TB7   Concepts Related to Object-Oriented Languages
Concept
Description
Example
Class
A set of objects having the same properties and behaviors (but 
the values of the properties can differ for each individual object). 
Classes can be reused for different programs.
A “student” has an address and a grade-point 
average (GPA) (properties) and can enroll in 
courses (behavior).
Object
Instantiation of a class.
Student Jeff Smith has a GPA of 3.94 and 
enrolls in MIS250.
Encapsulation
Data and behavior of a class are hidden from other classes and are 
thus protected from unexpected changes.
The registrar doesn’t need to know how the 
GPA is calculated within the “student” class; 
the registrar cares only that it is updated.
Inheritance
More specific classes include the properties and behaviors of the 
more general class.
Both “distance degree student” and “on-campus 
student” inherit properties (such as address and 
GPA) and behaviors (such as enroll in a course) 
from the general class “student.”
Event-driven 
program 
execution
The programmer does not determine the sequence of execution 
for the program; the flow is determined by user input (e.g., mouse 
clicks) or messages from other applications.
A word processor reacts to your typing and 
clicking.
FIGURE TB7
Visual Basic.Net, a visual 
programming language, is used to 
create standard business forms.
Source: Visual Studio 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    483
tag to begin bolding is <b>. The tag to turn off bolding, at the end of the selected text, is </b>. 
The “a href” command sets up a hyperlink from a word or image on the page to another HTML 
document. Tags can also be used to specify meaning, such as text to be used as the page title, 
levels of headings, the ends of paragraphs, emphasis, or importance, and to specify places to 
insert images or media (see Table TB8). The current HTML version is referred to as HTML5, 
which provides advanced markup for structuring and presenting content, such as the latest multi-
media, on web pages. In addition to HTML, web developers use cascading style sheets (CSS) 
to specify the formatting and layout of elements on a web page (the current version, CSS3, pro-
vides greater flexibility for web page layouts, which allows for higher aesthetics and usability).
A good way to understand how HTML works is to find a web page you like, then use the 
“View Source” command on your browser to view the markup used to create the page (see 
Figure TB8). Once you have created your own web page and saved it to a disk, you can upload it 
to a web space you have created through your website’s host.
Markup languages such as HTML are for specifying the content and structure of web pages. 
If you want to add dynamic content or have users interact with your web page other than by 
clicking on hypertext links, then you will need to use special purpose programming languages 
such as Java or use web services, scripting languages, and so on.
Java is a programming language that was developed by Sun Microsystems in the early 
1990s to allow adding dynamic, interactive content to web pages. For example, the chat feature 
in the Blackboard learning environment uses Java. You can add Java applications to a web page 
in one of two ways: by learning Java or a similar language and programming the content you 
want or by downloading free general purpose applets from the web to provide the content you 
want on your web page. Applets are small programs that are executed within another applica-
tion, such as a web page. When a user accesses your web page, the applets you inserted are 
downloaded from the server along with your web page to the user’s browser, where they perform 
the desired action. Later, when the user leaves your web page, the web page and the applets dis-
appear from his or her computer. Java is also frequently used to build Android apps.
Microsoft.NET is a programming platform that is used to develop applications that are 
highly interoperable across a variety of platforms and devices. For example, using the .NET 
framework, developers can create an application that runs on desktop computers, mobile com-
puters, or smartphones. A suite of visual programming languages including Visual C#, ASP 
.NET, and Visual Basic.NET can be used to construct .NET applications.
Scripting languages can also be used to supply interactive components and dynamic con-
tent to a web page. These languages let you build programs or scripts directly into HTML page 
code. Web page designers frequently use them to check the accuracy of user-entered informa-
tion, such as names, addresses, and credit card numbers. Two common scripting languages are 
Microsoft’s VBScript and JavaScript.
TABLE TB8   Common HTML Tags
Tag
Description
<html>…</html>
Delineates an HTML document
<head>…</head>
Contains the title, scripts, styles, metadata and 
other elements that are not displayed on the web 
page itself
<body>…</body>
Contains the visible portion of the document
<b>…</b>
Creates bold text
<a href=“http://www.example.com”>…</a>
Creates a hyperlink
<a href=“mailto:john@doe.com”>…</a>
Creates a link creating a new e-mail message
<p>…</p>
Creates a new paragraph
<table>…</table>
Creates a table

484    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
JavaScript bears little resemblance to Java. The two are similar, however, in that both Java 
and JavaScript are useful component software tools for creating dynamic, interactive web pages. 
That is, both allow users to add dynamic content to web pages. Both are also cross-platform pro-
grams, meaning that they can typically be executed by computers running Windows, Linux, Mac 
OS, and other operating systems.
Another common way to add dynamic content to websites is Flash. Flash animation is dis-
played on your screen using the Adobe Flash player. Yet Flash content is not well suited for 
mobile devices, and in 2010, Apple announced that it would not support Flash on its iPhones and 
iPads, rather advocating the use of HTML5, which allows for rich, interactive web applications.
Along with commercial products, there are several open source tools in wide use today. The 
most common is PHP, originally designed as a high-level tool for producing dynamic web con-
tent. The development of programming languages is an ongoing process of change and innova-
tion, and these changes often result in more capable and complex systems for the user. The 
popularity of the Internet has further spurred the creation of innovative and evolving software. 
From the pace of change that is occurring, it is clear that many more innovations are on the 
horizon.
AUTOMATED DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENTS.  Over the years, the tools for developing 
information systems have increased in both variety and capabilities. In the early days of systems 
development, a developer was left using pencil and paper to sketch out design ideas and program 
code. Computers were cumbersome to use and slow to program, and most designers worked 
out on paper as much of the system design as they could before moving to the computer. Today, 
system developers have a vast array of powerful computer-based tools at their disposal. These 
tools have forever changed the ways in which systems are developed. Computer-aided software 
engineering (CASE) refers to the use of automated software tools by systems developers to 
design and implement information systems. Developers can use CASE tools to automate or 
support activities throughout the systems development process with the objective of increasing 
productivity and improving the overall quality of systems. The capabilities of CASE tools are 
FIGURE TB8
A web page and the HTML source code used to create it.
Source: Visio 2016, Windows 10, Microsoft Corporation.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    485
continually evolving and being integrated into a variety of development environments. Next we 
briefly review some of the characteristics of CASE.
Types of CASE Tools  Two of the primary activities in the development of large-scale 
information systems are the creation of design documents and the management of information. 
Over the life of a project, thousands of documents need to be created—from screen prototypes to 
database content and structure to layouts of sample forms and reports. At the heart of all CASE 
environments is a repository for managing such information.
CASE also helps developers represent business processes and information flows by using 
graphical diagramming tools. By providing standard symbols to represent business processes, 
information flows between processes, data storage, and the organizational entities that interact 
with the business processes, CASE eases a very tedious and error-prone activity (see Figure TB9). 
The tools not only ease the drawing process but also ensure that the drawings conform to devel-
opment standards and are consistent with other design documents created by other developers.
Another powerful capability of CASE is its ability to generate program source code auto-
matically. CASE tools keep pace with contemporary programming languages and can automati-
cally produce programming code directly from high-level designs in languages such as Java, 
Visual Basic.NET, and C#. In addition to diagramming tools and code generators, a broad range 
of other tools assists in the systems development process. The general types of CASE tools used 
throughout the development process are summarized in Table TB9.
Foundational Topics in Networking
Telecommunications and networking technologies have become very important as almost all 
organizations rely on computer-based information systems to support various business pro-
cesses. Understanding how the underlying networking technologies work and where these tech-
nologies are heading will help you better understand the potential of information systems. The 
discussion begins with a description of the evolution of computer networking.
Evolution of Computer Networking
Over the past decades, computer networking underwent an evolution from centralized comput-
ing to distributed computing to collaborative computing. These eras of computer networking are 
discussed next.
CENTRALIZED COMPUTING.  Centralized computing, depicted in Figure TB10, remained largely 
unchanged through the 1970s. In this model, large centralized computers, called mainframes, 
FIGURE TB9
System design diagram from 
Microsoft Visio.
Source: From Modern Systems Analysis 
and Design, 8ed, published by Pearson 
Education, Inc.

486    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
were used to process and store data. During the mainframe era (beginning in the 1940s), people 
entered data on mainframes through the use of local input devices called terminals. These 
devices were called “dumb” terminals because they did not conduct any processing, or “smart,” 
activities. The centralized computing model is not a true network because there is no sharing 
of data and capabilities. The mainframe provides all the capabilities, and the terminals are only 
input/output devices. Computer networks evolved in the 1980s when organizations needed 
separate, independent computers to communicate with each other. Centralized computing has 
seen a renaissance as businesses turn to thin clients to reduce costs for support, energy, or 
software licenses and to increase productivity and security.
DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING.  The introduction of personal computers in the late 1970s and early 
1980s gave individuals control over their own computing. Organizations also realized that 
they could use multiple small computers to achieve many of the same processing goals of a 
single large computer. Rather than using one mainframe to perform all the processing, people 
could work on independent subsets of tasks on separate computers, and combine the individual 
results. To achieve this, computer networks were needed so that data and services could be easily 
shared between these distributed computers. The 1980s were characterized by an evolution 
to a computing model called distributed computing, in which separate computers work 
independently on subsets of tasks and then the individual results are pooled by communicating 
over a network. Distributed computing has seen a reemergence in the form of grid computing 
(see Chapter 3). In grid computing architectures, large computing tasks are broken into small 
chunks, each of which can be completed by individual computers, and the individual results are 
combined to arrive at the end result, as depicted in Figure TB11.
COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING.  In the 1990s, a new computing model, called collaborative 
computing, emerged. Collaborative computing is a synergistic form of distributed computing 
TABLE TB9   General Types of CASE Tools
CASE Tool
Description
Diagramming tools
Tools for graphically representing a system’s processes, data, and control structures.
Screen and report generators
Tools that help model how systems look and feel to users. Screen and report generators 
also make it easier for the systems analyst to identify data requirements and relationships.
Analysis tools
Tools that automatically check for incomplete, inconsistent, or incorrect specifications in 
diagrams, screens, and reports.
Repositories
Tools that enable the integrated storage of specifications, diagrams, reports, and project 
management information.
Documentation generators
Tools that help produce both technical and user documentation in standard formats.
Code generators
Tools that enable the automatic generation of program and database definition code 
directly from the design documents, diagrams, screens, and reports.
Source: Valacich and George (2017).
Mainframe
Computer
Dumb Terminals
All Processing
Occurs Here
FIGURE TB10
In the centralized computing 
model, all processing occurs in 
one central mainframe.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    487
in which two or more networked computers work together to accomplish a common processing 
task. That is, in this model of computing, computers are not working independently on (more or 
less equivalent) subtasks, but are have well-defined processing capabilities and responsibilities. 
For example, one computer may be used to store a large employee database. A second computer 
may be used to process and update individual employee records retrieved from this database. 
The two computers collaborate to keep the company’s employee records current, as depicted in 
Figure TB12.
NETWORK SERVICES.  Computer networks allow for sharing various capabilities between 
devices. For example, computer networks allow for efficiently storing, retrieving, and moving 
data between computers or allow for accessing network printers and network-attached storage 
devices; similarly, e-mail, instant messaging, and the sending and receiving of pictures or video 
and audio data require the sender and recipient to be connected to a network. Finally, networks 
enable computers to share processing power, in that processing can be distributed between a 
client and a server. Clients request data or services from the servers. The servers store data and 
application programs. For example, the physical search of database records may take place on the 
server, while the user interacts with a much smaller database application that runs on the client.
When an organization decides to network its computers and devices, it must decide what 
services will be provided; typically, different services on the network are offered by different 
servers, such as print servers, e-mail servers, and so on. In addition to those servers, networks 
typically have specialized systems for managing the network, its users, and its resources. These 
include computers providing authentication services for verifying the identity of users, or 
directory services, which are repositories (or “address books”) containing information about 
users, user groups, resources on a network, access rights, and so on.
Types of Networks
Computing networks today include all three computing models: centralized, distributed, and col-
laborative. The emergence of new computing models did not mean that organizations completely 
Task
Subtask
Subtask
Subtask
Subtask
FIGURE TB11
In the distributed computing 
model, two or more networked 
computers work independently to 
accomplish subsets of a complex 
computing task.
1. Computer Requests Record to Change
4. Returns Changed Record
2. Returns Requested Record
3. Modiﬁes Record
5. Stores Changed
Record in Database
FIGURE TB12
In the collaborative computing 
model, two or more networked 
computers work together to 
accomplish a common task.

488    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
discarded older technologies. Rather, a typical organizational computer network includes main-
frames, servers, personal computers, and a variety of other devices. Computer networks are 
commonly classified by size, distance covered, and structure. The most common are described 
next.
PRIVATE BRANCH EXCHANGE.  A private branch exchange (PBX) is a telephone system that 
serves a particular location, such as a business. It connects telephone extensions within the 
system and connects internal extensions to the outside telephone network. It can also connect 
computers within the system to other PBX systems, to an outside network, or to various office 
devices, such as fax machines or photocopiers. Since they use ordinary telephone lines, PBX 
systems have limited bandwidth, preventing them from transmitting such forms of data as video, 
digital music, or high-resolution photos. Using PBX technology, a business requires fewer 
outside phone lines, but has to purchase or lease the PBX equipment. Many organizations now 
use Internet protocol–based PBX systems, which make use of the organizations’ data networks 
and allow for low-cost voice over IP calling.
LOCAL AREA NETWORK.  A local area network (LAN), shown in Figure TB13, is a computer 
network that spans a relatively small area, allowing all computer users to connect with each 
other to share data and peripheral devices, such as printers. LAN-based communications may 
involve the sharing of data, software applications, or other resources between several users. 
LANs typically do not exceed tens of kilometers in size and are typically contained within a 
single building or a limited geographical area.
WIDE AREA NETWORK.  A wide area network (WAN) is a computer network that spans 
a relatively large geographical area. WANs are typically used to connect two or more LANs. 
Different hardware and transmission media are often used in WANs because they must cover large 
distances efficiently. Used by multinational companies, WANs transmit and receive data across 
cities and countries. A discussion follows of five specific types of WANs: campus area networks, 
metropolitan area networks, enterprise WANs, value-added networks, and global networks.
Campus Area Network  A campus area network is a computer network that is used (and 
owned or leased) by a single organization to connect multiple LANs. A campus area network 
typically spans multiple buildings, such as at a corporate or university campus.
Metropolitan Area Network  A metropolitan area network is a computer network of limited 
geographic scope, typically a citywide area, which combines LAN and high-speed fiber-
optic technologies. Such networks are attractive to organizations that need high-speed data 
transmission within a limited geographic area.
Enterprise WAN  An enterprise WAN is a WAN connecting disparate local area networks of a 
single organization into a single network (see Figure TB14).
Value-Added Network  Value-added networks are private, third-party-managed WANs 
typically used for B2B communications. With much B2B data communication taking place over 
FIGURE TB13
A LAN allows multiple computers 
located near each other to 
communicate directly with each 
other and to share peripheral 
devices, such as a printer.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    489
the Internet, providers focus on offering services such as secure e-mail and translation of EDI 
standards to facilitate secure communication between businesses.
Global Networks  A global network spans multiple countries and may include the networks 
of several organizations. The Internet is an example of a global network. The Internet is the 
world’s largest computer network, consisting of thousands of individual networks connecting 
billions of computers, smartphones, and other devices in almost every country of the world.
PERSONAL AREA NETWORKS.  A final type of computer network, called a personal area network, 
uses wireless communication to exchange data between computing devices using short-range 
radio communication, typically within an area of 10 meters (30 feet). The enabling technology 
for personal area networks is Bluetooth, a specification for personal networking of desktop 
computers, peripheral devices, mobile phones, portable media players, and various other devices. 
Bluetooth is integrated into a variety of personal devices to ease interoperability and information 
sharing (see Figure TB15).
FIGURE TB14
An enterprise network allows an 
organization to connect distributed 
locations into a single network.
FIGURE TB15
Bluetooth is used by many for 
hands-free communication.
Source: Jupiterimages/Stockbyte/Getty 
Images.

490    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
Now that you have an understanding of the general types of networks, the next sections 
examine some further fundamental concepts. After discussing packet switching as a concept for 
sharing communication channels, we will delve deeper into network standards and technologies. 
Together, these sections provide a foundation for understanding various types of networks.
Packet Switching
Telecommunications advances have enabled connecting individual computer networks—
constructed with a variety of hardware and software—together in what appears to be a single 
network. To enable rapid transmission of massive amounts of data, most data networks rely on 
packet switching. Packet switching is based on the concept of turn taking and enables millions 
of users to send large and small chunks of data across the network concurrently. To minimize 
delays, network technologies limit the amount of data that any computer can transfer on each 
turn. Consider a conveyor belt as a comparison. Suppose that the conveyor belt connects a ware-
house and a retail store. When a customer places an order, it is sent from the store to the ware-
house, where a clerk assembles the items in the order. The items are placed on the conveyor belt 
and delivered to the customer in the store. In most situations, clerks finish sending items from 
one order before proceeding to send items from another order. This process works well when 
orders are small, but when a large order with many items comes in, sharing a conveyor belt can 
introduce delays for others. Consider waiting in the store for your one item while another order 
with 50 items is being filled.
Most networks, including local area networks (LANs), WANs, and the Internet use packet-
switching technologies to minimize delivery delays when users share the communication chan-
nel. Figure TB16 illustrates how computers use packet switching. Computer A wants to send a 
message to computer C; similarly, computer B wants to send a message to computer D. For 
example, computer A is trying to send an e-mail message to computer C, while computer B is 
trying to send a word processing file to computer D. The outgoing messages are divided into 
smaller packets of data, and then each sending computer (A and B) takes turns sending the pack-
ets over the transmission medium. The incoming packets are reassembled at their respective 
destinations, using previously assigned packet sequence numbers.
For packet switching to work, each computer attached to a network must have a unique net-
work address, and each packet being sent across a network must be labeled with a header con-
taining the network address of the source (sending computer) and the network address of the 
destination (receiving computer). As packets are transmitted, network hardware detects whether 
a particular packet is destined for a local machine. Packet-switching systems adapt instantly to 
changes in network traffic. If only one computer needs to use the network, it can send data con-
tinuously. As soon as another computer needs to send data, packet switching, or turn taking, 
begins. Next, we explain the importance of network standards and protocols to enable data 
communication.
Network Standards and Protocols
Standards play a key role in creating networks. The physical elements of networks—adapters, 
cables, and connectors—are defined by a set of standards that have evolved since the early 
1970s. Standards ensure the interoperability and compatibility of network devices, and each 
standard combines a media access control technique, network topology, and transmission media 
in different ways. The dominant standard for wired local area networks is 802.3, typically 
referred to as Ethernet; wireless local area networks are based on the 802.11 family of standards. 
These standards are continuously evolving, and other competing standards for local area 
C
A
B
C
C
Shared Network System
C
D
D
1st packet from A to C
1st packet from B to D
2nd packet from A to C
2nd packet from B to D
3rd packet from A to C
D
FIGURE TB16
Computers A and B use packet 
switching to send messages or 
files to computers C and D.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    491
networks have all but vanished. Software interacts with hardware to implement protocols that 
allow different types of computers and networks to communicate successfully.
PROTOCOLS.  All networks employ protocols to make sure communication between computers is 
successful. Protocols are agreed-on formats for transmitting data between connected computers. 
They specify how computers should be connected to the network, how transmission errors will 
be detected, what data compression method will be used, how a sending computer will signal 
that it has finished sending a message, and how a receiving computer will signal that it has 
received a message. Protocols allow packets to be correctly routed to and from their destinations. 
There are literally thousands of protocols to choose from, but a few are a lot more important 
than the others. In this section, we will first review the OSI model, the worldwide standard for 
implementing protocols. Then, we briefly review TCP/IP, the protocol used by the Internet, and 
Ethernet, a commonly used protocol for local area networks.
The OSI Model  The need of organizations to interconnect computers and networks that use 
different protocols has driven the industry to an open systems architecture in which different 
protocols can communicate with each other. The International Organization for Standardization 
defined a networking model called Open Systems Interconnection (OSI), which divides 
computer-to-computer communications into seven connected layers. The Open Systems 
Interconnection (OSI) model represents a group of specific tasks (represented in Figure TB17) 
as successive layers that enable computers to communicate data. Each successively higher layer 
builds on the functions of the layers below. For example, suppose you are using a PC running 
Windows and are connected to the Internet, and you want to send a message to a friend who 
uses a large workstation computer running Unix—two different computers and two different 
operating systems. When you transmit your message, it is passed down from layer to layer in the 
Windows protocol environment of your system. At each layer, special bookkeeping information 
specific to the layer, called a header, is added to the data. Eventually, the data and headers 
are transferred from the Windows layer 1 to Unix’s layer 1 over some physical pathway. On 
receipt, the message is passed up through the layers in the Unix application. At each layer, the 
corresponding header information is stripped away, the requested task is performed, and the 
remaining data package is passed on until your message arrives as you sent it, as shown in 
Figure TB18. In other words, protocols represent an agreement between different parts of the 
network about how data are to be transferred.
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP)  Because so many different 
networks are interconnected throughout the world, they must have a common language, or 
protocol, to communicate. The protocol used by the Internet is called Transmission Control 
Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP). Whereas TCP is responsible for breaking down a message 
into smaller packets, creating a connection between two computers, and ensuring that data are 
reliably transmitted and arrive in the correct sequence, IP is responsible for addressing and 
correct routing of packages from source to destination. First, TCP breaks data into small chunks 
and manages the transfer of those packets from computer to computer via packet switching. For 
example, a single document may be broken into several packets, each containing several hundred 
characters, as well as a destination address (the IP part of the protocol). The IP part defines how 
a data packet must be formed and to where a router (an intelligent device used to connect two 
Deﬁnes the way data
are formatted, converted,
and encoded.
Deﬁnes the way that application
programs such as electronic mail
interact with the network.
Coordinates communications and
maintains the session for as long as
needed––including security and log-
on functions.
Deﬁnes the protocols for data
routing to ensure that data arrive
at the correct destination.
Deﬁnes the mechanisms for
communicating with the transmission
media and interface hardware.
Deﬁnes the protocols
for structuring messages.
Validates the
integrity of the
ﬂow of data.
Application
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
FIGURE TB17
The OSI model has seven layers 
and provides a framework for 
connecting different computers 
with different operating systems to 
a network.

492    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
or more individual networks) must forward each packet. A data packet that conforms to the IP 
specification is called an IP datagram. Datagram routing and delivery are possible because, as 
previously mentioned, every computer and router connected to the Internet is assigned a unique 
address, called its IP address. When an organization connects to the Internet, it obtains a set of 
IP addresses that it can assign to its computers. Packets travel independently to their destination, 
sometimes following different paths and arriving out of sequence. The destination computer 
reassembles all the packets on the basis of their identification and sequencing information: TCP 
helps IP guarantee delivery of datagrams by performing three main tasks. First, it automatically 
checks for datagrams that may have been lost en route from their source to their destination. 
Second, TCP collects the incoming datagrams and puts them in the correct sequence to re-create 
the original message. Finally, TCP discards any duplicate copies of datagrams that may have been 
created by network hardware. Together, TCP and IP provide a reliable and efficient way to send 
data across the Internet.
Ethernet  Ethernet is a set of LAN protocols using packet switching developed by the Xerox 
Corporation in 1976. Different types of data (including IP datagrams) can travel on Ethernets 
by being enclosed in another set of headers to form packets called Ethernet frames. The original 
Ethernet protocol supports data transfer rates of 10 Mbps. A later version, called 100Base-T or 
Fast Ethernet, supports transfer rates of 100 Mbps; the latest version, called 100 Gigabit Ethernet 
(100GbE), supports transfer rates of 100 Gbps, or 100,000 Mbps, over relatively large distances. 
Most new computers have a network interface card (also known as network adapter or Ethernet 
card) installed, allowing you to use the Ethernet protocol to connect to broadband modems, 
home networks, or work networks. Each network adapter has a unique identifier (called MAC 
address, assigned by the manufacturer) that is used to identify the computer on the network. The 
PC is then connected to other network components via transmission media, such as Ethernet 
cables. Increasingly, organizations use the Ethernet protocol for wide area networks, called Wide 
Area Ethernet or Ethernet WAN.
NETWORK TOPOLOGIES.  Network topology refers to the shape of a network. The four basic 
network topologies are star, ring, bus, and mesh. A star network is configured, as you might 
expect, in the shape of a star, as shown in Figure TB19a. That is, all nodes or workstations are 
connected to a central hub through which all messages pass. The workstations represent the 
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Application
Message
Adding
Headers
H1
H2
H3
H4
H5
Windows
Message
to
Send
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Application
Unix
Message
Received
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Message
Removing
Headers
FIGURE TB18
Message passing between two different computers.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    493
points of the star. Star topologies are easy to lay out and modify. However, they are also the 
most costly because they require the largest amount of cabling. Although it is easy to diagnose 
problems at individual workstations, star networks are susceptible to a single point of failure 
at the hub that would result in all workstations losing network access. This topology is used in 
switched Ethernet local area networks, where all devices are connected to a central switch. A 
ring network is configured in the shape of a closed loop or circle with each node connecting 
to the next node, as shown in Figure TB19b. In ring networks, messages move in one direction 
around the circle. As a message moves around the circle, each workstation examines it to see 
whether the message is for that workstation. If not, the message is regenerated and passed on to 
the next node. This regeneration process enables ring networks to cover much larger distances 
than star or bus networks can. Relatively little cabling is required, but a failure of any node on 
the ring network can cause complete network failure. Self-healing ring networks avoid this by 
having two rings with data flowing in different directions; thus, the failure of a single node 
Workstation
(a)
Workstation
Network Bus
Server
(c)
(d)
Workstation
Server
(b)
FIGURE TB19
(a) The star network has several workstations connected to a central hub. (b) The ring network is configured in a closed loop, with 
each workstation connected to another workstation. (c) The bus network is configured in the shape of an open-ended line where each 
workstation receives the same message simultaneously. (d) The mesh network consists of computers and other devices that are either 
fully or partially connected to each other.

494    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
does not cause the network to fail. In either case, it is difficult to modify and reconfigure a ring 
network. Although sometimes used in WANs, ring topologies are not commonly used in LANs 
anymore. A bus network is in the shape of an open-ended line, as shown in Figure TB19c; as 
a result, it is the easiest network to extend and has the simplest wiring layout. This topology 
enables all network nodes to receive the same message through the network cable at the same 
time. However, it is difficult to diagnose and isolate network faults. Whereas early variants of 
Ethernet used bus networks, they are not commonly used any more. Finally, a mesh network 
consists of computers and other devices that are either fully or partially connected to each 
other. In a full mesh design, each computer and device is connected to every other computer 
and device. In a partial mesh design, many but not all computers and devices are connected 
(see Figure TB19d). Like a ring network, mesh networks provide relatively short routes from 
one node to another. Mesh networks also provide many possible routes through the network—a 
design that prevents one circuit or computer from becoming overloaded when traffic is heavy. 
Given these benefits, most WANs, including the Internet, use a partial mesh design.
MEDIA ACCESS CONTROL.  Media access control is the set of rules that governs how a given node 
or workstation gains access to the network to send or receive data. Without media access control, 
collisions are likely to happen if two or more workstations simultaneously transmit messages 
on the network. There are two general types of media access control: distributed and random 
access. With distributed access control, only a single workstation at a time has authorization 
to transmit its data. One method of authorization is token passing, where authorization is 
transferred sequentially from workstation to workstation. Ring networks normally use a token-
passing media access control method to regulate network traffic. Another method, polling, 
uses a master device that centrally controls access to the network by sequentially polling each 
connected device whether it needs to transmit data. Under random access control (sometimes 
referred to as contention-based), any workstation can transmit data by checking whether the 
medium is available. No specific permission is required. A commonly used method of random 
access control in wireless LANs is called carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance 
(CSMA/CA). In CSMA/CA, each connected device “listens” to traffic on the transmission 
medium to determine whether a message is being transmitted. If no traffic is detected, the device 
sends its message; otherwise, it waits. Modern Ethernet local area networks use switches to do 
away with the problem of collisions altogether: Each device is connected to a switch, which 
connects the different devices as needed for transmitting data; in other words, the switch creates 
separate point-to-point circuits between devices, such that a message is not broadcast to all 
devices but only travels between the sender and the receiver.
Network Technologies
Typically, devices in a network are not connected directly to each other; rather, computer net-
works rely on different networking hardware components to connect computers and route mes-
sages. In addition, individual devices and hardware components are connected using different 
wired or wireless media. These are discussed next.
NETWORKING HARDWARE.  Because of the complexity of current networks, a variety of 
specialized pieces of equipment have been developed for computers to connect and transfer 
data. However, not all pieces of equipment are necessary for connecting computers together, 
and the use of this equipment is dependent on the intended use and configuration of the network. 
Table TB9 presents some commonly used types of networking equipment to meet businesses’ 
networking needs. Some of these devices are also commonly used in home networks; for 
example, your DSL modem may also act as a router and wireless access point. Other networking 
devices used by telecommunications companies are beyond the scope of this discussion.
CABLE MEDIA.  Cable media physically link computers and other devices in a network. The most 
common forms of cable media are twisted pair, coaxial, and fiber-optic.
Twisted-Pair Cable  Twisted-pair (TP) cable is made of two or more pairs of insulated copper 
wires twisted together (see Figure TB20). TP cables are rated according to quality (in terms of 
the ability to transmit high frequency signals and the “crosstalk” between individual wires); 
category 3 (Cat 3), Cat 5, Cat 6, Cat 7, and Cat 8 cables are often used in network installations. 
Depending on the rating, TP cables have a capacity up to 40 gigabits per second (Gbps) at 


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    495
distances up to 100 meters (330 feet); faster speeds can be achieved over shorter distances. The 
cable may be unshielded (UTP, such as Cat 3, Cat 5, or Cat 6) or shielded (STP, such as Cat 7 or 
Cat 8). Telephone wire installations as well as many local area networks use UTP cabling, as it 
is cheap and easy to install. However, like all copper wiring, it has rapid attenuation and is very 
sensitive to electromagnetic interference (EMI) and eavesdropping—the undetected capturing 
of data transmitted over a network. STP uses wires wrapped in insulation, making it less prone 
to EMI and eavesdropping. Ethernet cables typically use RJ-45 connectors so that they can be 
plugged into a network adapter or into other network components.
Coaxial Cable  Coaxial (or coax) cable contains a solid inner copper conductor surrounded 
by plastic insulation and an outer braided copper or foil shield (see Figure TB21). Coax cable 
comes in a variety of thicknesses—thinnet coax and thicknet coax—based on resistance to 
EMI. Although less costly than TP, thinnet coax is not commonly used in networks anymore; 
thicknet coax is more expensive than TP. Coax cable is most commonly used for cable television 
installations and for networks operating at 10 to 100 megabits per second (Mbps). Its attenuation 
is lower than TP cable’s, and it is moderately susceptible to EMI and eavesdropping.
(a)
(b)
TABLE TB9   Networking Hardware
Networking Hardware
Description
Switch
A switch is used to connect multiple computers, servers, or printers 
to create a network. Switches typically inspect data packets received 
and forward them to the correct addressee.
Router
A router is an intelligent device used to connect two or more dif-
ferent networks. When a router receives a data packet, it looks at 
the network address and passes the packet on to the appropriate 
network. Routers are commonly used to connect a LAN to a WAN, 
such as the Internet.
Wireless access point
A wireless access point transmits and receives wireless (Wi-Fi) 
signals to allow wireless devices to connect to the network.
Wireless controller
A wireless controller manages multiple access points and can be 
used to manage transmission power and channel allocation to estab-
lish desired coverage throughout a building and minimize interfer-
ence between individual access points. Further, wireless controllers 
can be used to manage authentication and other security features.
FIGURE TB20
(a) A cable spliced open showing several twisted pairs. (b) A sample network installation that utilizes many TP cables at once.
Sources: (a) Georgios Alexandris/Shutterstock; (b) Inara Prusakova/Shutterstock.

496    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
Fiber-Optic Cable  Fiber-optic cable is made of a light-conducting glass or plastic core 
surrounded by more glass, called cladding, and a tough outer sheath (see Figure TB22). The 
sheath protects the fiber from changes in temperature as well as from bending or breaking. This 
technology uses pulses of light sent along the optical cable to transmit data. Fiber-optic cable 
transmits clear and secure data because it is immune to EMI and eavesdropping. Transmission 
signals do not break up because fiber-optic cable has low attenuation. It is also extremely fast. 
Practically, it can achieve over 1 Gbps at distances up to 25 kilometers (15 miles). In the lab, 
researchers have exceeded 43 terabits per second—that is the entire contents of a 1TB hard 
drive in a fifth of a second. Each year, in a manner similar to increasing CPU performance 
and Moore’s Law, researchers are discovering new ways to rapidly increase the capacity of 
fiber optic cables. Fiber-optic cable is more expensive than copper wire because the cost and 
difficulties of installation and repair are higher for fiber-optic. Fiber-optic cables are used for 
high-speed backbones—the high-speed central networks to which many smaller networks can 
FIGURE TB21
These coaxial cables are ready 
to be connected to a computer or 
other device.
Source: Kasia/Shutterstock.
FIGURE TB22
Fiber-optic cable consists of a 
light-conducting glass or plastic 
core, surrounded by more glass, 
called cladding, and a tough outer 
sheath.
Source: Goodshoot/Getty Images Plus/
Getty Images.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    497
be connected. A backbone may connect, for example, several different buildings in which other, 
smaller LANs reside. Submarine telecommunications cables (used for telephone and Internet 
traffic between continents) also use fiber-optic cable. In home environments, fiber-optic cable 
can be used to connect digital audio devices.
WIRELESS MEDIA.  With the popularity of mobile devices such as laptops, tablets, and 
smartphones, wireless media are rapidly gaining popularity. Wireless media transmit and receive 
electromagnetic signals using methods such as infrared line of sight, high-frequency radio, and 
microwave systems.
Infrared Line of Sight  Infrared line of sight uses high-frequency light waves to transmit 
signals on an unobstructed path between nodes. While commonly being used in remote 
controls for most audiovisual equipment, such as TVs, stereos, and other consumer electronics 
equipment, infrared systems are not well suited for rapidly transmitting large amounts of data; 
thus, this technology has since been surpassed by Wi-Fi and Bluetooth for data communication.
High-Frequency Radio  High-frequency radio signals can transmit data at rates of up to 
several hundred Mbps to network nodes from 12.2 up to approximately 40 kilometers (7.5 to 
25 miles) apart, depending on the nature of any obstructions between them. The flexibility of 
the signal path makes high-frequency radio ideal for mobile transmissions. For example, most 
police departments use high-frequency radio signals that enable police vehicles to communicate 
with each other as well as with the dispatch office. This medium is expensive because of the 
cost of antenna towers and high-output transceivers. Installation is complex and often dangerous 
because of the high voltages. Although attenuation is fairly low, this medium is very susceptible 
to EMI and eavesdropping.
Two common applications of high-frequency radio communication are cellular phones and 
wireless networks. A cellular phone gets its name from how the signal is distributed. In a cellu-
lar system, a coverage area is divided into cells with a low-powered radio antenna/receiver in 
each cell; these cells are monitored and controlled by a central computer (see Figure TB23). Any 
given cellular network has a fixed number of radio frequencies. When a user initiates or receives 
a call, the mobile telephone switching office assigns the caller a unique frequency for the dura-
tion of the call. As a person travels within the network, the central computer at the switching 
office monitors the quality of the signal and automatically assigns the call to the closest cellular 
antenna. Cellular phones have gone through rapid changes since their first commercial use in the 
mid-1980s (see Table TB10). Because of the costs involved in setting up fixed telephone lines, 
cellular phones have become very popular in many developing countries and are a key factor in 
bridging the digital divide.
One of the most significant advances in cellular technology was the introduction of packet 
switching for data transmission as operators moved from 2G to 2.5G. While 3G networks have 
Each “cell” can
cover as little as
one building or
an area 20 miles
wide.
Radio Transmitter/
Receiver Antenna
Mobile Telephone
Switching Oﬃce
Switching oﬃce
is connected to
public switched
telephone system.
Each antenna
is linked to
switching oﬃce.
FIGURE TB23
A cellular network divides a 
geographic region into cells.

498    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
seen widespread deployment, data rates were still limited. The introduction of 4G cellular net-
works provided mobile broadband Internet access, supporting mobile web access, IP telephony 
(e.g., Skype), game services, high-definition mobile TV, and videoconferencing. There are com-
peting standards for deploying 4G services; two notable standards are HSPA+ and LTE (long-
term evolution). Each standard supports different data rates and distances. Nevertheless, they all 
are significantly faster than existing 3G networks. HSPA+ (High Speed Packet Access) is a fam-
ily of high-speed 3G and 4G digital data services available to mobile carriers worldwide that 
helps to extend the capabilities of existing infrastructures; as an upgrade of 3G technologies, 
some do not consider it “true” 4G. LTE uses an all IP-based architecture where everything 
(including voice) is handled as data, similar to the Internet. Each standard continues to evolve 
and gain (or lose) market share and acceptance with different global carriers; given advantages 
in terms of speed, LTE is currently the predominant 4G standard in the United States. 5G is still 
evolving in the lab and test deployments, but promises to be faster, provide better coverage, and 
more efficiently utilize the increasingly limited wireless spectrum. Over the next decade, indus-
try insiders believe that standards will further advance and converge, making high-speed mobile 
connectivity a reality for much of the world.
High-frequency radio-wave technology is increasingly being used to support wireless local 
area networks (WLANs). WLANs based on a family of standards called 802.11 are also referred 
to as Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity). The 802.11 family of standards has been universally adopted and 
has transmission speeds up to 450 Mbps (using the 802.11n standard), with even faster standards 
being under development. The ease of installation has made WLANs popular for business and 
home use. For example, many homes and buildings have multiple computers or mobile devices 
and need (or want) to share Internet access, files, and peripheral devices. Unfortunately, many 
older buildings and homes do not have a wired infrastructure to easily connect computers and 
devices, making wireless networking particularly attractive. Through the use of wireless tech-
nologies, many organizations are transforming their work environments into better team collab-
oration environments.
TABLE TB10   Evolution of Cell Phone Technology
Generation
Description
Data Transfer
Advantages
0G
Preceded modern cellular mobile 
telephony and was usually mounted in 
cars or trucks; it was a closed circuit, so 
you could call only other radio telephone 
users.
Analog
Enabled communicating on the go.
1G
This technology, introduced in the 1980s, 
used circuit switching; it had poor voice 
quality, unreliable handoffs between 
towers, and nonexistent security.
Analog
Enabled users to communicate with 
other cell phones and land lines.
2G
The first all-digital signal that was divided 
into TDMA and CDMA standards. 
Allowed for SMS (text) messaging and 
e-mails to be sent/received.
Digital (up to 9.6 Kbps 
transfer)
Lower-powered radio signals allowed 
for longer battery life.
Digital format allowed for clearer 
signal and reduced signal noise.
2.5G
Allows for faster data transmission via a 
packet-switched domain in addition to the 
circuit-switched domain.
Digital (up to 115 Kbps 
transfer)
Higher data speeds allowed for more 
complex data to be transmitted 
(e.g., sports scores and news stories).
3G
Even faster. Requires a new cellular 
network, different from that already 
available in 2G systems.
Digital (minimum of 
384 Kbps when moving and 
2 Mbps when stationary)
Transfer full video and audio.
4G
Set of standards for high-speed mobile 
connectivity. Different standards on 
different networks and locations.
Digital (up to 100 Mbps when 
moving and 1 Gbps when 
stationary)
Data speeds similar to wired 
networks.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    499
Microwave Transmission  Microwave transmission uses high-frequency radio signals that are 
sent through the air using either terrestrial (earth-based) systems or satellite systems (microwaves 
are typically of shorter wavelength and thus higher frequency than radio waves used by cellular 
or Wi-Fi networks). Terrestrial microwave, shown in Figure TB24, uses antennae that require 
an unobstructed path or line of sight between nodes. The cost of a terrestrial microwave system 
depends on the distance to be covered. Typically, businesses lease access to these microwave 
systems from service providers rather than invest in antenna equipment. Data may be transmitted 
at up to 274 Mbps. Over short distances, attenuation is not a problem, but signals can be disrupted 
over longer distances by environmental conditions such as high winds and heavy rain. EMI and 
eavesdropping are significant problems with microwave communications.
Satellite microwave, shown in Figure TB25, uses satellites orbiting the earth as relay sta-
tions to transfer signals between ground stations located on earth. Satellites orbit from 400 to 
22,300 miles above the earth and have different uses and characteristics (see Table TB11). 
Because of the distance signals must travel, satellite transmissions are delayed (also known as 
propagation delay). Satellite transmission has become very viable for media such as TV and 
radio, including the digital radio stations XM and Sirius, both of which have their own satellites 
that send out scrambled signals to proprietary receivers.
Another strength of satellite communication is that it can be used to access very remote and 
undeveloped locations on the earth. Yet such systems are extremely costly because their use and 
installation depends on space technology. Companies such as AT&T sell satellite services with 
typical transmission rates ranging from less than 1 to 10 Mbps, but the rates can be as high as 
90 Mbps. Like terrestrial microwave, satellite systems are prone to attenuation and are suscepti-
ble to EMI and eavesdropping. Table TB12 compares wireless media across several criteria.
Earth
Building A
Building B
FIGURE TB24
Terrestrial microwave requires 
a line-of-sight path between a 
sender and a receiver.
Satellite
FIGURE TB25
Communications satellites are 
relay stations that receive signals 
from one earth station and 
rebroadcast them to another.

500    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
The Internet
The name Internet is derived from the concept of internetworking, which means connecting host 
computers and their networks to form even larger networks. The Internet is a large worldwide 
collection of networks that uses a common protocol to communicate. In the following sections, 
we discuss in more detail how independent networks are connected to form the Internet, who 
manages the Internet, and how home and business users can connect to the Internet.
HOW DID THE INTERNET GET STARTED?  You can trace the roots of the Internet back to the late 
1960s, when the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) began to study 
ways to interconnect networks of various kinds. This research effort produced the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET), a large wide area network (WAN) that 
linked many universities and research centers. The first two nodes on the ARPANET were the 
University of California, Los Angeles, and the Stanford Research Institute, followed by the 
University of California, Santa Barbara, and the University of Utah.
ARPANET quickly evolved and was combined with other networks. For example, in 1986, 
the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) initiated the development of the National Sci-
ence Foundation Network (NSFNET), which became a major component of the Internet. 
Other networks throughout the United States and the rest of the world were interconnected and/
or morphed into the growing “Internet.” Throughout the world, support for the Internet has come 
from a combination of federal and state governments, universities, national and international 
research organizations, and industry.
CONNECTING INDEPENDENT NETWORKS.  The Internet uses routers to interconnect independent 
networks. For example, Figure TB26 illustrates a router that connects Networks 1, 2, and 3. A 
router, like a conventional computer, has a central processor, memory, and network interfaces. 
However, routers do not use conventional software, nor are they used to run applications. Their 
TABLE TB11   Characteristics of Satellites with Different Orbits
Name
Distance from Earth
Characteristics/Common Application
Low Earth Orbit 
(LEO) Satellite
400–1,000 miles
■
■Not fixed in space in relation to the rotation of the earth; circles the earth several 
times per day.
■
■Photography for mapping and locating mineral deposits; monitoring ice caps, 
coastlines, volcanoes, and rain forests; researching plant and crop changes; 
monitoring wildlife habitats and changes; search and rescue for downed aircraft or 
ships that are in trouble; research projects in astronomy and physics.
Medium Earth 
Orbit (MEO)
1,000–22,300 miles
■
■Not fixed in space in relation to the rotation of the earth; circles the earth more than 
one time per day.
■
■Primarily used in geographical positioning systems (such as GPS) for navigation of 
ships at sea, spacecraft, airplanes, automobiles, and military weapons.
Geosynchronous 
Earth Orbit (GEO)
22,300 miles
■
■Fixed in space in relation to the rotation of the earth; circles the earth one time per day.
■
■Because it is fixed in relation to the earth, transmission is simplified.
■
■Transmission of high-speed data for television, weather information, remote Internet 
connections, digital satellite radio, and telecommunications (satellite phones).
TABLE TB12   Relative Comparison of Wireless Media
Medium
Expense
Speed
Attenuation
EMI
Eavesdropping
Infrared line of sight
Low
Up to 16 Mbps
High
High
High
High-frequency radio
Moderate
Up to 300 Mbps
Low
High
High
Terrestrial microwave
Moderate
Up to 274 Mbps
Low
High
High
Satellite microwave
High
Up to 90 Mbps
Moderate
High
High


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    501
only job is to interconnect networks and forward data packets from one network to another. 
As illustrated in Figure TB26, Computers A and F are connected to independent networks. If 
Computer A generates a data packet destined for Computer F, the packet is sent to the router 
that interconnects the two networks. The router forwards the packet on to Network 2, where it is 
delivered to its destination at Computer F.
Routers are the fundamental building blocks of the Internet because they connect thou-
sands of LANs and WANs. LANs are connected to backbone WANs, as depicted in Figure 
TB27. A backbone network manages the bulk of network traffic and typically uses a higher-
speed connection than the individual LAN segments. For example, a backbone network might 
use fiber-optic cabling, which can transfer data at a rate of 100 Gbps, whereas a LAN con-
nected to the backbone may use Ethernet with TP cabling, transferring data at a rate of 
10 Mbps to 10 Gbps. To gain access to the Internet, an organization installs a router between 
one of its own networks and the network of its Internet service provider. Business organiza-
tions typically connect to the Internet not only with personal computers but with web servers 
as well.
WHO MANAGES THE INTERNET?  Individual computers on the Internet are identified by their IP 
addresses. So who keeps track of these IP addresses on the Internet? A number of national and 
Network 1
Computers
A
B
C
Network 3
Computers
G
H
I
Router
Network 2
Computers
D
E
F
Wide Area Backbone
LAN at Site 7
LAN at Site 1
LAN at Site 4
Router
LAN at Site 2
LAN at Site 5
Router
LAN at Site 3
LAN at Site 6
Router
Router
Router
Router
Router
FIGURE TB26
Routers connect independent 
networks.
FIGURE TB27
LANs connect to wide area 
backbones.

502    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
international standing committees and task forces have been formed to manage the development 
and use of the Internet. Most notably, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority is responsible 
for managing global and country code top-level domains as well as global IP number space 
assignments. In addition, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority provides central maintenance 
of the Domain Name System (DNS) root database, which points to distributed DNS servers 
replicated throughout the Internet. This database is used to associate Internet host names with their 
IP addresses. Users can access websites using domain names or IP addresses. The functionality of 
the DNS is to provide users easy-to-remember domain names to access websites. In other words, 
it is far easier to remember www.apple.com than it is to remember 17.178.96.59 (the IP address 
of a server mirroring Apple’s content as of mid-2016), but both will work as addresses in any web 
browser, as the DNS servers will translate the domain names into the accompanying IP address.
In 1993, the NSF created InterNIC, a government–industry collaboration, to manage direc-
tory and database services, domain registration services, and other information services on the 
Internet. In the late 1990s, this Internet oversight was transitioned more fully out into industry 
when InterNIC morphed into the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, a 
nonprofit corporation that assumed responsibility for managing IP addresses, domain names, and 
root server system management. Using 32-bit addresses, IPv4 provided 232 IP addresses (about 
4.29 billion addresses). With the increase of devices connected to the Internet, the number of 
unassigned Internet addresses is running out, so new classes of addresses were being added as 
IPv6, the latest version of the IP, was adopted in June 2012. Using 128-bit addresses, IPv6 pro-
vides 2128 addresses, allowing literally trillions and trillions of devices to be connected to the 
Internet.
HOW TO CONNECT TO THE INTERNET.  Now you can see how the Internet works and how it is 
managed. How do you connect to the Internet? For personal use (i.e., from home), we typically 
connect to the Internet through an Internet service provider (ISP), also called an Internet access 
provider. ISPs provide several different ways to access the Internet from home (see Table TB13).
TABLE TB13   Methods for Connecting to the Internet
Service
Current Status and Future Outlook
Typical Bandwidth
Dial-up
Although still used in the United States, there are very few new dial-up 
customers. This market should dry up as broadband moves to rural 
areas and developing nations.
52 Kbps
Integrated Services 
Digital Network
This technology has limited market share because of its expense. 
Typically, these connections are more expensive than broadband 
connections, although they offer less bandwidth.
128 Kbps
Cable
Coaxial cable used for cable TV provides much greater bandwidth than 
telephone lines and therefore is the market leader in broadband use for 
home users. Overselling of bandwidth that causes slower-than-average 
speeds tends to be a major problem for home users.
Upload: up to 31 Mbps
Download: up to 43 Mbps
DSL
DSL technology has gained market share from cable. With many 
companies offering higher speeds at lower cost, DSL should continue to 
cut into cable’s market share.
Upload: up to 16 Mbps
Download: 1.5–50 Mbps
Satellite
Although satellite connectivity had a promising future, many users are 
moving away from this expensive technology in favor of faster and 
cheaper cable or DSL connections.
Upload: 50 Kbps
Download: 5 Mbps
Wireless broadband
Wireless broadband offers the most promise of any of the current 
technologies, as the speeds are increasing while the coverage areas 
continue to grow.
Up to 1 Gbps
Fiber to the home
Fiber to the home has been adopted by several major players in the ISP 
industry. Although the technology typically can be placed only in new 
developments, the demand for fast connections is helping make this a 
significant technology for ISPs.
At least 100 Mbps, up to 
1000 Mbps


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    503
ISPs connect to one another through Internet exchange points. Much like railway stations, 
these serve as access points for ISPs and are exchange points for Internet traffic. They determine 
how traffic is routed and are often the points of most Internet congestion. Internet exchange 
points are a key component of the Internet backbone, which is the collection of main network 
connections and telecommunications lines that make up the Internet (see Figure TB28).
The Internet follows a hierarchical structure, similar to the interstate highway system. High-
speed backbone network lines are like interstate highways, enabling traffic from midlevel net-
works to get on and off. Think of midlevel networks as city streets that, in turn, accept traffic 
from their neighborhood streets or member networks. However, you cannot get on an interstate 
or city street whenever you want to. You have to share the highway and follow traffic control 
signs to arrive safely at your destination. The same holds true for traffic on the Internet, and 
people can connect to the Internet in a number of ways. In the next section, we outline how typi-
cal home users connect to the Internet.
Dial-Up  Years ago, most people connected to the Internet through a telephone line at home or 
work. The term we use for connecting via a standard telephone lines is plain old telephone service 
(POTS) (the POTS system is also called the public switched telephone network [PSTN]). POTS 
was designed to pass sounds in the form of analog signals—signals consisting of a continuous 
wave that can take on an infinite number of values within its frequency range. However, computers 
use electrical pulses—digital signals—that consist of discrete ‘on’ and ‘off’ values. The only way 
to pass digital data over conventional voice telephone lines is to convert it to audio tones—analog 
signals—that the telephone lines can carry. A modem (MOdulator/DEModulator) converts digital 
signals from a computer into analog signals so that telephone lines may be used as a transmission 
medium to send and receive digital signals, as shown in Figure TB29. As the speed, or bandwidth, 
of POTS is generally only about 52 Kbps (52,000 bits per second), today, most people connect to 
the Internet using some form of digital, high-speed connection.
Integrated Services Digital Network  Integrated services digital network (ISDN) is a 
standard for worldwide digital communications. ISDN was designed in the 1980s to replace 
all analog systems, such as most telephone connections in the United States, with a completely 
digital transmission system. ISDN uses existing TP telephone wires to provide high-speed data 
service. ISDN systems can transmit voice, video, and data. Because ISDN is a purely digital 
network, you can connect your PC to the Internet without the use of a traditional modem. 
FIGURE TB28
The Internet backbone.

504    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
Removing the analog-to-digital conversion for sending data and the digital-to-analog conversion 
for receiving data and higher bandwidth greatly increase the data transfer rate. However, a 
small electronic box called an ISDN modem is typically required so that computers and older, 
analog-based devices such as telephones and fax machines can utilize and share the ISDN-based 
service. While ISDN has had moderate success in various parts of the world, it has largely been 
surpassed by DSL and cable modems.
Digital Subscriber Line  Digital subscriber line (DSL) is a popular way of connecting to the 
Internet. DSL is referred to as a “last-mile” solution because it is used only for connections from 
a telephone switching station to a home or office and generally is not used between telephone 
switching stations.
The abbreviation DSL is used to refer collectively to asymmetric digital subscriber line 
(ADSL), symmetric digital subscriber line (SDSL), and other forms of DSL. DSL enables 
more data to be sent over existing copper telephone lines by sending digital pulses in the high-
frequency area of telephone wires. Because these high frequencies are not used by normal voice 
communications, DSL enables your computer to operate simultaneously with voice connections 
over the same wires. ADSL speeds range from 1.5 to 50 Mbps downstream and up to 16 Mbps 
upstream. SDSL is said to be symmetric because it supports the same data rates for upstream and 
downstream traffic (up to 22 Mbps). Like ISDN, ADSL and SDSL require a special modem-like 
device. As most Internet users primarily download content, ADSL is most popular in consumer 
environments. SDSL is offered primarily to business customers.
Cable Modems  In most areas, the company that provides cable television service also 
provides Internet service. With this type of service, a special cable modem is needed to transmit 
data over cable TV lines. Coaxial cable used for cable TV provides much greater bandwidth 
than telephone lines, and millions of homes in the United States are already wired for cable TV, 
so cable modems are a fast, popular method for accessing the Internet. Cable modems offer 
download speeds up to 43 Mbps.
Satellite Connections  In many regions of the world, people can only access the Internet 
via satellite, referred to as Internet over satellite. These technologies allow users to access 
the Internet via satellites that are placed in a geostationary orbit above the earth’s surface. 
With these services, your PC is connected to a satellite dish hanging on the side of your home 
or placed on a pole (much like satellite services for your television); you are able to maintain 
a reliable connection to the satellite in the sky because the satellite orbits the earth at the exact 
speed of the earth’s rotation. Given the vast distance that signals must travel from the earth up 
Your Personal
Computer
Your Friend’s
Personal Computer
Modem
Modem
Digital Signal
Analog Signal
FIGURE TB29
Modems convert digital signals 
into analog and analog signals into 
digital.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    505
to the satellite and back again, Internet over satellites is slower than high-speed terrestrial (i.e., 
land-based) connections to the Internet over copper or fiber-optic cables. In remote regions of 
the world, however, it is the only option available because installing the cables necessary for 
an Internet connection is not economically feasible or, in many cases, is just not physically 
possible.
Wireless Broadband  Wireless broadband is a technology that is usually found in rural areas 
where other connectivity options, such as DSL and cable, are not available. A common scenario 
is that the ISP will install an antenna at a high point, such as a large building or radio tower, and 
the customer will mount a small dish to the roof and point it at the antenna. Wireless broadband 
offers speeds similar to DSL and cable and can bridge a distance of up to 50 kilometers 
(30 miles).
Mobile Wireless Access  In addition to the fixed wireless approach, there are also many 
mobile wireless approaches for connecting to the Internet. For example, with a subscription to a 
data plan, smartphones give you Internet access nearly anywhere. Also, special network adapter 
cards or USB “dongles” from a cellular service provider allow a notebook computer, tablet, or 
desktop computer to connect to cellular networks. The advantage of these systems is that as 
long as you are in the coverage area of that cell phone provider you have access to the Internet. 
Most mobile wireless service providers limit the amount of data that can be downloaded per 
month without incurring expensive fees, making this a relatively expensive option for a person’s 
exclusive method for accessing the Internet.
Fiber to the Home  Fiber to the home, also known as fiber to the premises, refers to 
connectivity technology that provides a super-speed connection to people’s homes. This 
is usually done by fiber-optic cabling running directly into new homes. Fiber to the home is 
currently available only in major metropolitan areas.
Until now, we have talked about ways that individuals typically access the Internet. In the 
following section, we talk more about ways that organizations typically access the Internet.
BUSINESS INTERNET CONNECTIVITY.  Although home users have enjoyed a consistent increase in 
bandwidth availability, the demand for corporate use has increased at a greater pace; therefore, 
the need for faster speeds has become of great importance. In addition to the home connectivity 
options, business customers also have several high-speed options, described next.
Leased Lines  To gain adequate access to the Internet, organizations are turning to long-
distance carriers to lease dedicated T1 lines for digital transmissions. The T1 line was 
developed by AT&T as a dedicated digital transmission line that can carry 1.544 Mbps of 
data. In the United States, companies such as MCI that sell long-distance services are called 
interexchange carriers because their circuits carry service between the major telephone 
exchanges. A T1 line usually traverses hundreds or thousands of miles over leased long-
distance facilities.
AT&T and other carriers charge as little as US$200 per month for a dedicated T1 circuit. If 
you need an even faster link, you might choose a T3 line. T3 provides about 45 Mbps of service 
at about 10 times the cost of leasing a T1 line. Alternatively, organizations often choose to use 
two or more T1 lines simultaneously rather than jump to the more expensive T3 line. Higher 
speeds than the T3 are also available but are not typically used for normal business activity. For 
example, fiber-optic networks offer speeds considerably faster than T3 lines. See Table TB14 for 
a summary of telecommunication line capacities, including optical carrier (OC) lines that use 
fiber-optic transmission media.
THE CURRENT STATE OF INTERNET USAGE.  The Internet is now the most prominent global 
network. Internet Live Stats (http://www.internetlivestats.com) reports that, as of May 2016, 
more than 3.4 billion people worldwide had access to the Internet. This means that more than 
46 percent of the world’s population had Internet access. Also, about 9 percent of the world’s 
Internet users were located in the United States, with an Internet penetration of nearly 89 percent.
One other way to measure the rapid growth of the Internet, in addition to the number of 
users, is to examine the growth in the number of Internet hosts—that is, computers working as 
servers on the Internet—as shown in Figure TB30.

506    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
Foundational Topics in Database Management
In Chapter 6, you were introduced to database concepts such as attributes, entities, and relation-
ships, as well as managerial aspects related to databases. In the following sections, we delve 
deeper into the topic of relational database management to give you a better idea of the intrica-
cies involved in designing a sound database.
Relational Database Design
Much of the work of creating an effective relational database is in the creation of the data model. 
If the model is not accurate, the database will not be effective. A poor data model will result in 
data that are inaccurate, redundant, or difficult to search. If the database is relatively small, the 
effects of a poor design might not be too severe. A corporate database, however, contains many 
entities, perhaps hundreds or thousands. In this case, the implications of a poor data model can 
be catastrophic. A poorly organized database is difficult to maintain and process—thus defeating 
the purpose of having a DBMS in the first place. Undoubtedly, your university maintains data-
bases with a variety of entity types—for example, students and grades—with each of these enti-
ties having numerous attributes. Attributes of a Student entity might be Student ID, Name, 
Campus Address, Major, and Phone. Attributes of a Grades entity might include Student ID, 
Course ID, Section Number, Term, and Grade (see Figure TB31).
For the DBMS to distinguish between records correctly, each instance of an entity must 
have one unique identifier. For example, each student has a unique Student ID. Note that using 
TABLE TB14   Capacity of Telecommunication Lines
Type of Line
Data Rate
T1
1.544 Mbps
T3
44.736 Mbps
OC-1
51.85 Mbps
OC-3
155.52 Mbps
OC-12
622.08 Mbps
OC-24
1.244 Gbps
OC-48
2.488 Gbps
Number of Internet Hosts
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
0
100,000,000
200,000,000
300,000,000
400,000,000
500,000,000
600,000,000
700,000,000
800,000,000
900,000,000
1,000,000,000
1,100,000,000
FIGURE TB30
Growth in Internet servers (hosts).
Source: Based on http://www.internetlivestats 
.com/total-number-of-websites.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    507
the student name (or most other attributes) would not be adequate because students may have the 
exact same name, live at the same address, or share the same phone number. Consequently, when 
designing a database, we must always create and use a unique identifier, called a primary key, 
for each type of entity in order to store and retrieve data accurately. In some instances, the pri-
mary key can also be a combination of two or more attributes, in which case it is called a combi-
nation primary key. An example of this is the Grades entity, shown in Figure TB31, where the 
combination of Student ID, Course ID, Section Number, and Term can be used to uniquely iden-
tify the grade of an individual student in a particular class (section number) in a particular term. 
Attributes not used as the primary key can be referred to as secondary keys when they are used 
to identify one or more records within a table that share a common value. For example, a sec-
ondary key in the Student entity shown in Figure TB31 would be Major when used to find all 
students who share a particular major.
ASSOCIATIONS.  To retrieve information from a relational database, it is necessary to associate 
or relate data from separate tables. The three types of relationships (or associations) among 
entities are one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many. Table TB15 summarizes each of these 
three associations and shows how they should be handled in database design for a basketball 
league.
To understand how relationships work, consider Figure TB32, which shows four tables—
Home Stadium, Team, Player, and Games—for keeping track of the information for a basketball 
league. The Home Stadium table lists the Stadium ID, Stadium Name, Capacity, and Location, 
with the primary key underlined. The Team table contains two attributes, Team ID and Team 
Name, but nothing about the stadium where the team plays. If we wanted to have such informa-
tion, we could gain it only by creating a relationship between the Home Stadium and Team 
tables. For example, if each team has only one home stadium and each home stadium has only 
one team, we have a one-to-one relationship between the Team and the Home Stadium entities. 
In situations in which we have one-to-one relationships between entities, we place the primary 
key from one table in the table for the other entity and refer to this attribute as a foreign key. In 
other words, a foreign key refers to an attribute that appears as a non–primary key attribute in 
one entity and as a primary key attribute (or part of a primary key) in another entity. By sharing 
this common—but unique—value, entities can be associated, or linked together. We can choose 
in which of these tables to place the foreign key of the other. After adding the primary key of the 
Home Stadium entity to the Team entity, we can identify which stadium is the home for a par-
ticular team and then be able to find all the details about that stadium (see section A in 
Figure TB33).
Students
Students
Grades
Student ID
Name
Campus Address
Major
Phone
Phone
Student ID
Course ID
Section No.
Term
Grade
Grade
Grades
Student ID
Course ID
Section No.
Term
D+
555-39-3232
MIS 250
2
F’15
A–
555-39-3232
MIS 250
1
F’16
B+
289-42-8776
MIS 250
3
S’17
Student ID
Name
Campus Address
Major
335-2211
555-39-3232
Joe Jones
123 Any Avenue
Finance
335-8702
289-42-8776
Sally Carter
1200 Wolf Street #12
Marketing
FIGURE TB31
The attributes for and links 
between two entities—students 
and grades.

508    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
When we find a one-to-many relationship—for example, each player plays for only one 
team, but each team has many players—we place the primary key from the entity on the “one” 
side of the relationship, the Team entity, as a foreign key in the table for the entity on the “many” 
side of the relationship, the Player entity (see section B in Figure TB33). In essence, we take 
from the one and give to the many, a Robin Hood strategy.
When we find a many-to-many relationship (e.g., each player plays in many games, and 
each game has many players), we create a third (new) entity—in this case, the Player Statistics 
entity and corresponding table. We then place the primary keys from each of the original entities 
together into the third (new) table as a combination primary key (see section C in Figure TB33).
TABLE TB15   Rules for Expressing Relationships Among Entities and Their Corresponding Data Structures
Relationship
Example
Instructions
One-to-one
Each team has only one home stadium, and 
each home stadium has only one team.
Place the primary key from one table (e.g., Stadium) into the other 
(e.g., Team) as a foreign key.
One-to-many
Each player is on only one team, but each 
team has many players.
Place the primary key from the table on the “one” side of the 
relationship (e.g., Team) as a foreign key in the table on the 
“many” side of the relationship (e.g., Player).
Many-to-many
Each player participates in many games, 
and each game has many players.
Create a third table (e.g., Player Statistics) and place the primary 
keys from each of the original tables (e.g., Player and Team) 
together in the third as a combination primary key.
Stadium ID
Home Stadium
Stadium Name
Capacity
Location
Team ID
Team
Team Name
Player ID
Player
Player Name
Position
Team ID (1)
Games
Team ID (2)
Date
Final Score
FIGURE TB32
Tables used for storing 
information about several 
basketball teams, with no foreign 
key attributes added; thus, 
associations cannot be made.
Stadium ID
Team ID
Team ID
Team
Team Name
Player ID
Player
A. One-to-one relationship: Each team has only one home stadium, and each home
 
stadium has only one team.
B. One-to-many relationship: Each player is on only one team, but each team has
 
many players.
C. Many-to-many relationship: Each player participates in many games, and each game
 
has many players.
Player Name
Position
Team 1
Player Statistics
Team 2
Date
Player ID
Points
Minutes
Fouls
FIGURE TB33
Tables used for storing 
information about several 
basketball teams, with foreign key 
attributes added in order to make 
associations.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    509
You may have noticed that by placing the primary key from one entity in the table of another 
entity, we are creating a bit of redundancy. We are repeating the data in different places. We are 
willing to live with this bit of redundancy, however, because it enables us to keep track of the 
interrelationships among the many pieces of important organizational data that are stored in dif-
ferent tables. By keeping track of these relationships, we can quickly answer questions such as 
“Which players on the Wildcats played in the game on February 16 and scored more than 10 
points?” In a business setting, the question might be “Which customers purchased a 2016 Toyota 
Prius from a salesperson named Jeff at the Desert Toyota dealership in Tucson, Arizona, during 
the first quarter of 2016, and how much did each customer pay?” This kind of question would be 
useful in calculating the bonus money Jeff should receive for that quarter or in contacting the 
owners of those specific vehicles in the event of a recall by the manufacturer.
ENTITY-RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAMMING.  A diagramming technique that creates an entity-
relationship diagram (ERD) is commonly used when designing relational databases, especially 
when showing associations between entities. To create an ERD, you draw entities as boxes 
and draw lines between entities to show relationships. Each relationship can be labeled on 
the diagram to give it additional meaning. For example, Figure TB34 shows an ERD for the 
basketball league data previously discussed. From this diagram, you can see the following 
associations:
■
■Each Home Stadium has a Team.
■
■Each Team has Players.
■
■Each Team participates in Games.
■
■For each Player and Game, there are Game Statistics.
When you are designing a complex database, with numerous entities and relationships, ERDs 
are very useful. They allow the designer to talk with people throughout the organization to make 
sure that all entities and relationships have been found.
THE RELATIONAL MODEL.  Now that we have discussed associations and data models, we need 
a mechanism for joining entities that have natural relationships with one another. For example, 
in the University database we described previously, there are several relationships among the 
four entities: students, instructors, classes, and grades. Students are enrolled in multiple classes. 
Likewise, instructors teach multiple classes and have many students in their classes in a semester. 
At the end of the semester, instructors assign a grade to each student, and each student earns grades 
in multiple classes. It is important to keep track of these relationships. We might, for example, 
want to know which courses a student is enrolled in so that we can notify her instructors that she 
will miss classes because of an illness. The primary DBMS approach, or model, for keeping track 
of these relationships among data entities is the relational model. Other models—the hierarchical, 
network, and object-oriented models—are also used to join entities within commercial DBMSs, 
but this is beyond the scope of our discussion (see Hoffer, Ramesh, & Topi, 2016).
The most common DBMS approach in use today is the relational database model. A 
DBMS package using this approach is referred to as a relational DBMS. With this approach, the 
DBMS views and presents entities as two-dimensional tables, with records as rows and attri-
butes as columns. Tables can be joined when there are common columns in the tables. The 
uniqueness of the primary key, as mentioned earlier, tells the DBMS which records should be 
joined with others in the corresponding tables. This structure supports very powerful data manip-
ulation capabilities and linking of interrelated data. Database files in the relational model are 
Home Stadium
Has
Has
Has
Participates
Has
Player
Game Statistics
Team
Games
FIGURE TB34
An entity-relationship diagram 
showing the relationships between 
entities in a basketball league 
database.

510    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
three-dimensional: a table has rows (one dimension) and columns (a second dimension) and can 
contain rows of attributes in common with another table (a third dimension). This three-dimen-
sional database is potentially much more powerful and useful than traditional, two-dimensional, 
“flat-file” databases (see Figure TB35).
A good relational database design eliminates unnecessary data duplications and is easy to 
maintain. To design a database with clear, non-redundant relationships, you perform a process 
called normalization.
NORMALIZATION.  To be effective, databases must be efficient. Developed in the 1970s, 
normalization is a technique to make complex relational databases more efficient and more 
easily handled by the DBMS (Hoffer et al., 2016). Normalization makes sure that each table 
contains only attributes that are related to the entity; hence, normalization helps to eliminate 
data duplication. To understand the normalization process, let us return to the scenario in the 
beginning of this section. Think about your report card. It looks like nearly any other report 
or invoice. Your personal data are usually at the top, and each of your classes is listed, along 
with an instructor, a class day and time, the number of credit hours, and a location. Now think 
about how these data are stored in a relational database. Imagine that this database is organized 
so that in each row of the database, the student’s identification number is listed on the far left. 
To the right of the student ID are the student’s name, local address, major, phone number, 
course and instructor information, and a final course grade (see Figure TB36). Notice that 
there are redundant data for students, courses, and instructors in each row of this database. This 
redundancy means that this database is not well organized. If, for example, we want to change 
the phone number of an instructor who has hundreds of students, we have to change this number 
hundreds of times. In addition, this redundancy wastes storage space.
Dept No
Dept A
Dept B
Dept C
Department Records
Dept Name
Location
Dean
Instructor No
Dept No
Inst 1
Inst 2
Inst 3
Inst 4
Instructor Records
Inst Name
Title
Salary
FIGURE TB35
With the relational model, we 
represent these two entities, 
department and instructor, as two 
separate tables and capture the 
relationship between them with 
a common column in each table.
FIGURE TB36
Database of students, courses, 
instructors, and grades with 
redundant data.
Source: Access 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    511
Elimination of data redundancy is a major goal and benefit of using data normalization tech-
niques. After the normalization process, the student data are organized into five separate tables 
(see Figure TB37). This reorganization helps simplify the ongoing use and maintenance of the 
database and any associated analysis programs.
Advanced Database Models
One of the problems with relational databases is that their performance degrades rapidly after 
getting very large. Relational databases are very efficient when processing highly structured 
data, but perform very poorly when processing unstructured data. Unstructured data refers to 
data that do not have an identifiable structure. Unstructured data are typically text-heavy, but 
may contain data such as dates, numbers, or even different types of media. This results in irregu-
larities that make it difficult to utilize traditional database and processing approaches. In the 
world of Big Data, the relational model has been found to be less than optimal for storing and 
processing massive amounts of unstructured data. Companies such as Amazon, Facebook, and 
Google are storing and processing many petabytes of unstructured data daily. The most preva-
lent data model for storing Big Data is NoSQL (“not only SQL, referring to nonrelational 
databases).
Large scale NoSQL databases, such as Hadoop often are processed on computer clusters. A 
computer cluster consists of a set of computers that work together as a single system. Hadoop is 
an open source programming environment for processing NoSQL databases. Thus, a Hadoop 
cluster is a computer cluster designed for storing and analyzing huge amounts of unstructured 
data that is stored in a NoSQL database. In addition to Hadoop, there are many other NoSQL 
databases, including Cassandra, Hypertable, DynamoDB, IBM Informix, and many others. 
NoSQL is the foundation of web 2.0 technologies and most social media platforms. Being able 
to process massive amounts of unstructured data is fundamental to virtually all Big Data 
applications.
FIGURE TB37
Organization of information on 
students, courses, instructors, and 
grades after normalization.
Source: Access 2016, Windows 10, 
Microsoft Corporation.
Key Points Review
1.	 Discuss foundational information systems (IS) 
hardware concepts. IS hardware is classified into three 
types: input, processing, and output technologies. Input 
hardware consists of devices used to enter data into a 
computer. Processing hardware transforms inputs into 
outputs. The CPU is the device that performs this 
transformation, with the help of several other closely 
related devices that store and recall data. Data are 
stored on primary and secondary storage devices. 
Finally, output-related hardware focuses on delivering 
information in a usable format to users.
2.	 Describe foundational topics related to system 
software, programming languages, and application 
development environments. System software, or the 
operating system, performs many different tasks, such 
as booting your computer, reading programs into 
memory, managing memory allocation to those 
programs, managing where programs and files 
are located in secondary storage, maintaining the 
structure of directories and subdirectories, and so on. 
A programming language is the computer language 
that programmers use to write application programs. In 

512    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
order to run on a computer, a programs’ source code 
must be translated into binary machine language 
through special types of programs, called compilers 
and interpreters. Object-oriented programming, visual 
programming, and web development languages 
complement traditional programming languages. 
Finally, CASE environments help systems developers 
construct large-scale systems more rapidly and with 
higher quality.
3.	 Describe foundational networking and Internet 
concepts. Networks provide for services such as 
transmitting files, sharing printers, or sending and 
receiving messages. There are several types of 
computer networks, classified according to their use 
and distance covered. To enable rapid transmission of 
massive amounts of data, most data networks rely on 
packet switching. Protocols are agreed-on formats for 
transmitting data between connected computers; the 
most prominent standards are TCP/IP and Ethernet. 
Networks exchange data by using cable or wireless 
transmission media, and media access control refers 
to the rules that govern how a given workstation gains 
access to the transmission media. The shape of a 
network can vary; the four most common topologies 
are star, ring, bus, and mesh configurations. The 
Internet is composed of networks that are developed 
and maintained by many different entities. It follows a 
hierarchical structure; high-speed central networks 
called backbones are like interstate highways, enabling 
traffic from midlevel networks to get on and off. 
Routers are used to interconnect independent networks.
4.	 Explain foundational database management 
concepts. In order to get the most of their data, 
organizations have to take care to create an accurate 
data model. Often, entity-relationship diagrams are 
used when designing relational databases. A primary 
key is used to uniquely identify records in a database. 
A foreign key is used to link entities together. A useful 
diagramming technique is entity-relationship 
diagramming, displaying entities and the associations 
between them. Normalization is used to reduce 
redundancy in a database. Nonrelational databases are 
used for handling large amounts of unstructured data.
Key Terms
Foundational Hardware Key Terms
American Standard Code for 
Information Interchange 
(ASCII)  474
arithmetic logic unit (ALU)  474
audio  472
bar code reader  471
basic input/output system 
(BIOS)  475
batch data  471
batch processing  471
binary code  474
bit  474
byte  474
bytes per inch (BPI)  477
cache  475
cathode ray tube (CRT)  478
CD-R (compact disc–recordable)  477
CD-RW (compact 
disc–rewritable)  477
central processing unit (CPU)  473
characters per inch  477
clock speed  474
clock tick  474
control unit  474
density  477
digital video disc  477
digitize  474
DVD-ROM (digital versatile disc–read-
only memory)  477
flash drive  477
flash memory  476
hard drive (hard disk drive)  475
head crash  476
input technologies  471
interactive voice response (IVR)  472
liquid crystal display (LCD)  478
magnetic ink character 
recognition  471
microprocessor  473
motherboard  473
multi-core processor  474
nonvolatile memory  475
optical character recognition  471
optical disk  477
optical mark recognition  471
organic light-emitting diode 
(OLED)  478
output technologies  477
port  477
power supply  477
primary storage  475
printer  477
processing technologies  473
random-access memory (RAM)  475
read-only memory (ROM)  475
read/write head  476
redundant array of independent disks 
(RAID)  476
register  475
secondary storage  475
smart card  472
solid-state drive (SSD)  476
speech recognition  472
streaming audio  473
streaming media  473
streaming video  473
system clock  474
tape  477
text recognition software  471
touch screen  478
Unicode  474
video  472
voice-to-text software  472
volatile memory  475
Foundational Software Key Terms
applet  483
cascading style sheets (CSS)  483
compiler  480
computer-aided software engineering 
(CASE)  484
executable  480
graphical user interface (GUI)  481
HTML editor  482
HTML tag  482
interpreter  480
Java  483
JavaScript  484
Microsoft.NET  483


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    513
object-oriented language  481
scripting language  483
source code  480
utilities  479
utility program  479
visual programming language  481
web page builder  482
Foundational Networking Key Terms
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Network (ARPANET)  500
analog signals  503
asymmetric digital subscriber line 
(ADSL)  504
authentication service  487
backbone  496
Bluetooth  489
bus network  494
cable modem  504
carrier sense multiple access/collision 
avoidance (CSMA/CA)  494
cell  497
cellular phone  497
centralized computing  485
collaborative computing  486
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA)  500
digital signals  503
digital subscriber line (DSL)  504
directory service  487
distributed computing  486
Domain Name System (DNS)  502
enterprise WAN  488
Ethernet  492
fiber to the home  505
fiber to the premises  505
global network  489
integrated services digital network 
(ISDN)  503
interexchange carrier  505
Internet backbone  503
Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers  502
Internet exchange point (IXP)  503
Internet host  505
Internet over satellite  504
Internet service provider (ISP)  502
InterNIC  502
IP  491
IP datagram  492
IPv6  502
media access control  494
mesh network  494
mobile wireless  505
modem  503
National Science Foundation 
(NSF)  500
National Science Foundation Network 
(NSFNET)  500
network interface card  492
network topology  492
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) 
model  491
packet switching  490
plain old telephone service 
(POTS)  503
propagation delay  499
public switched telephone network 
(PSTN)  503
ring network  493
router  491
star network  492
switch  495
symmetric digital subscriber line 
(SDSL)  504
T1 line  505
T3 line  505
TCP  492
terminal  486
value-added network  488
wireless access point  495
wireless broadband  505
wireless controller  495
Foundational Database Key Terms
association  507
computer cluster  511
combination primary key  507
entity-relationship diagram 
(ERD)  509
foreign key  507
normalization  510
primary key  507
relational database model  509
relationship  507
secondary key  507
Go to mymislab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon MyLab MIS.
MyLab MIS
TM
Review Questions
Foundational Hardware Review Questions
	TB-1. 	IS hardware is classified into what three 
major types?
	TB-2. 	Describe various methods for entering data 
into and interacting with a computer.
	TB-3. 	How do computers represent data internally?
	TB-4. 	Describe the role of a motherboard.
	TB-5. 	What determines the speed of a CPU?
	TB-6. 	Compare and contrast the different types of 
secondary data storage.
	TB-7. 	What are output devices? Describe various 
methods for providing computer output.
Foundational Software Review Questions
	TB-8. 	Define the term software and list several soft-
ware packages and their uses.
	TB-9. 	Describe at least four different tasks per-
formed by an operating system.
MyLab MIS
TB-10. 	 Describe the similarities and differences 
between at least two major operating sys-
tems in use today.
TB-11. 	 Name and describe four functions of utility 
programs.
TB-12. 	 Name and describe the five important con-
cepts of object-oriented programming.
TB-13. 	 What is HTML, and why is it important?
TB-14. 	 Describe various options for adding dynamic 
content to a web page.
TB-15. 	 What is CASE, and how can it help in the 
development of information systems?
Foundational Networking Review Questions
TB-16. 	 How are LANs, WANs, and global networks 
related to each other?
TB-17. 	 What are the roles of authentication services 
and directory services?
MyLab MIS
MyLab MIS

514    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
TB-18. 	 What is packet switching, and why is it 
useful?
TB-19. 	 What is the purpose of the OSI model?
TB-20. 	 What is a network topology? Describe the 
four basic topologies.
TB-21. 	 What are three common types of transmis-
sion media that use cabling?
TB-22. 	 What are four common methods of wireless 
transmission media for networking, and how 
do they differ from each other?
TB-23. 	 What is the Internet, and why was it created?
TB-24. 	 Other than dial-up, what are three alterna-
tives for connecting to the Internet at home?
Foundational Database Review Questions
TB-25. 	 Describe why database design is important 
for modern organizations.
TB-26. 	 Compare and contrast the primary key, 
combination key, and foreign key within 
an entity.
TB-27. 	 Describe the three types of relationships in a 
relational database.
TB-28. 	 What is the purpose of a secondary key?
TB-29. 	 What is an entity-relationship diagram, and 
why is it useful?
TB-30. 	 What is the relational model?
TB-31. 	 Why is redundancy undesired?
MyLab MIS
Self-Study Questions
Foundational Hardware Self-Study Questions
TB-32. 	 All of the following are considered primary storage 
except ______________.
A.	SSDs
B.	RAM
C.	registers
D.	cache
TB-33. 	 Which of the following is not an input device?
A.	biometric scanner
B.	touch screen
C.	LCD screen
D.	barcode reader
TB-34. 	 Which of the following is an output device?
A.	cathode ray tube
B.	scanner
C.	video camera
D.	keyboard
TB-35. 	 ______________ can convert handwritten text into 
computer-based characters.
A.	scanners
B.	bar code/optical character readers
C.	text recognition software
D.	audio/video
TB-36. 	 A ______________ card is a special credit card with 
a microprocessor chip and memory circuits.
A.	smart
B.	master
C.	universal
D.	proprietary
Answers are on page 517.
Foundational Software Self-Study Questions
TB-37. 	 An operating system performs which of the following 
tasks?
A.	booting the computer
B.	managing where programs and files are stored
C.	sending documents to the printer
D.	all of the above
TB-38. 	 What is the name of the programming language 
developed by Sun Microsystems in the 1990s?
A.	Latte
B.	Java
C.	Mocha
D.	none of the above
TB-39. 	 Which of the following programming languages 
would most likely not be used for building web 
applications?
A.	HTML
B.	JavaScript
C.	PHP
D.	Fortran
TB-40. 	 A utility program may provide ______________.
A.	antivirus protection
B.	file conversion capability
C.	file compression and defragmentation
D.	all of the above
TB-41. 	 CASE tools support all of the following except: 
______________.
A.	diagramming
B.	consistency checking
C.	generating code
D.	compiling code
Answers are on page 517.
Foundational Networking Self-Study Questions
TB-42. 	 Which of the following is not a type of cable 
medium?
A.	twisted pair
B.	coaxial
C.	fiber-optic
D.	shielded pair
TB-43. 	 All of the following are common applications 
of high-frequency radio communication except 
______________.
A.	police radios
B.	cellular phones
C.	microwave transmission
D.	facsimiles


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    515
TB-44. 	 Which of the following is the protocol of the Internet, 
allowing different interconnected networks to com-
municate using the same language?
A.	Ethernet
B.	C++
C.	TCP/IP
D.	router
TB-45. 	 Which is the fastest connection available for home 
users?
A.	dial-up
B.	DSL
C.	wireless broadband
D.	fiber to the home
TB-46. 	 Which of the following is a typical way large corpo-
rations connect to the Internet?
A.	satellite
B.	cable
C.	T1 lines
D.	all of the above
Answers are on page 517.
Foundational Database Self-Study Questions
TB-47. 	 A(n) ______________ is a unique identifier that can 
be a combination of one or more attributes.
A.	secondary key
B.	primary key
C.	tertiary key
D.	elementary key
TB-48. 	 Which of the following is not true in regard to the 
relational database model?
A.	Entities are viewed as tables, with records as rows 
and attributes as columns.
B.	Databases use keys and redundant data in different 
tables in order to link interrelated data.
C.	Entities are viewed as children of higher-level 
attributes.
D.	A properly designed table has a unique identifier 
that may consist of one or more attributes.
TB-49. 	 Each team has only one home stadium, and each 
home stadium has only one team. This is an example 
of which of the following relationships?
A.	one-to-one
B.	one-to-many
C.	many-to-many
D.	many-to-one
TB-50. 	 A popular diagramming technique for designing data-
bases is called ______________.
A.	flowcharting
B.	database diagramming
C.	entity-relationship diagramming
D.	none of the above
TB-51. 	 ______________ is a technique to make a complex 
database more efficient by eliminating redundancy.
A.	extraction, transformation, and loading
B.	associating
C.	normalization
D.	standardization
Answers are on page 517.
Problems and Exercises
Foundational Hardware Problems and Exercises
TB-52. 	 Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Motherboard
ii.	 Audio
iii.	 DVD-ROM
iv.	 Smart card
v.	 Streaming video
a.	 Analog or digital sound data
b.	 A special credit card–sized card containing a 
microprocessor chip, memory circuits, and often a 
magnetic stripe
c.	 An optical storage device that has more storage 
space than a CD-ROM disk and uses a shorter-
wavelength laser beam, which allows more optical 
pits to be deposited on the disk
d.	 A sequence of moving images, sent in a com-
pressed form over the Internet and displayed on 
the receiver’s screen as the images arrive
e.	 A large printed plastic or fiberglass circuit board 
that contains all the components that do the actual 
processing work of the computer and holds or con-
nects to all the computer’s electronic components
TB-53. 	 Visit a computer shop or look on the web for track-
balls or touch pads. What is new about how these 
input devices look or how they are used? What are 
some of the advantages and disadvantages of each 
device?
TB-54. 	What types of printers are most common today? 
What is the cost of a color printer versus a black-
and-white one? Compare and contrast laser and 
ink-jet printers in terms of speed, cost, and quality of 
output. What kind of printer would you buy or have 
you bought?
TB-55. 	Based on your experiences with different input 
devices, which do you like the best and least? 
Why? Are your preferences due to the devices’ 
design or usability, or are they based on the inte-
gration of the device with the entire information 
system?
TB-56. 	Choose a few of the computer hardware vendors that 
sell computers to the general public. These include 
Dell, HP, Lenovo, Apple, and many lesser-known 
brands. Using each company’s website, deter-
mine what options these vendors provide for input 
devices, processing devices, and output devices. 

516    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
Does it seem that this company has a broad range 
of choices for its customers? Is there something that 
you did not find available from this company? Pres-
ent your findings in a 10-minute presentation to the 
rest of the class.
Foundational Software Problems and Exercises
TB-57. 	 Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Applet
ii.	 Visual programming language
iii.	 Scripting language
iv.	 Interpreter
v.	 Compiler
a.	 A software program that translates an entire 
program’s source code into machine language 
that can be read and executed directly by the 
computer
b.	 Programming language that provides a graphical 
user interface and is generally easier to use than 
non-GUI languages
c.	 A program designed to be executed within another 
application (such as a web page)
d.	 A software program that translates a programming 
language into machine language one statement at 
a time
e.	 A programming language for integrating interac-
tive components into a web page
TB-58. 	 What are the implications for an organization of using 
more than one operating system? What might be the 
advantages? What are some of the disadvantages? 
Would you recommend such a situation? Prepare a 
10-minute presentation to the rest of the class on your 
findings.
TB-59. 	Visit the website of your favorite online retailer. 
Which parts of the content are created dynami-
cally? What interactive components do the dif-
ferent web pages include? Do different types 
of pages (e.g., home page or payment and ship-
ping page) need different types of interactive 
components?
TB-60. 	 Based on your own experiences with computers and 
computer systems, what do you like and dislike about 
different operating systems that you have used? Were 
these uses on a professional or a personal level or 
both? Who made the decision to purchase that par-
ticular operating system? Did you have any say in the 
purchase decision?
TB-61. 	Imagine that you and a friend are at a local ATM 
getting some cash from your account to pay for a 
movie. The ATM does not seem to be working. It is 
giving you an error message every time you press 
any button. Is this most likely a software-related 
problem, a hardware-related problem, or a net-
work-related problem? Why? Use the information 
in this and other briefings to help you make your 
decision.
Foundational Networking Problems and Exercises
TB-62. 	 Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Protocols
ii.	 Ethernet
iii.	 FTTH
iv.	 T1 line
v.	 Wireless access point
a.	 A dedicated digital transmission line that can 
carry 1.544 Mbps of information
b.	 A networking device that transmits and receives 
wireless signals to allow wireless devices to con-
nect to the network
c.	 High-speed network connectivity to homes and 
offices that is implemented using fiber-optic cable
d.	 The most widely used local area network protocol, 
supporting data rates of up to 100 gigabits per 
second
e.	 The procedures that different computers follow 
when they transmit and receive data
TB-63. 	 Discuss the difference between PBX networks and 
LANs. What are the advantages of each? What are 
possible disadvantages of each? When would you 
recommend one over the other?
TB-64. 	 Personal area networks using Bluetooth have become 
very popular. Visit www.bluetooth.com and investi-
gate the types of products that this wireless technol-
ogy is being used to enhance. Find three products that 
you find interesting and prepare a 10-minute presen-
tation on what these products are and how Bluetooth 
is enhancing their operation and usage.
TB-65. 	 Describe one of your experiences with a computer 
network. What type of topology was being used? Was 
the network connected to any other networks? How?
TB-66. 	 Working in a group, have everyone describe what 
type of network would be most appropriate for a 
small office with about 10 computers, one printer, 
and one scanner, all within one floor in one building 
and relatively close to one another. Be sure to talk 
about transmission media, network topology, and 
hardware. Did all group members come up with the 
same option? Why or why not? What else would you 
need to know to make a good recommendation?
TB-67. 	 Investigate the options for high-speed, broadband 
Internet access into your home. What options are 
available to you, and how much do they cost?
TB-68. 	 You have probably experienced several different 
types of connection—from the university T1 connec-
tions to a home DSL or even dial-up connection. If 
you had to balance between cost and speed, which 
connection would you choose?
TB-69. 	 Explain in simple language how the Internet works. 
Be sure to talk about backbones, packet switching, 
networks, routers, TCP/IP, and Internet services. 
What technologies, hardware, and software do you 
utilize when using the Internet? What would you like 
to use that isn’t available to you?


TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure    517
Foundational Database Problems and Exercises
TB-70. 	 Match the following terms with the appropriate 
definitions:
i.	 Primary key
ii.	 Foreign key
iii.	 Relational database model
iv.	 Relationship
v.	 Secondary key
a.	 Attributes not used as the primary key that can be 
used to identify one or more records within a table 
that share a common value
b.	 An attribute that appears as a nonprimary key 
attribute in one entity and as a primary key in 
another
c.	 A field included in a database table that ensures 
that each instance of an entity is stored or 
retrieved accurately
d.	 An association between entities in a database to 
enable data retrieval
e.	 A data management approach in which entities are 
presented as two-dimensional tables that can be 
joined together with common columns
TB-71. 	 You see an announcement for a job as a database 
administrator for a large corporation but are unclear 
about what this title means. Research this on the web 
and obtain a specific job announcement.
TB-72. 	 Why would it matter what data type is used for the 
attributes within a database? How does this relate to 
programming? How does this relate to queries and 
calculations? Does the size of the database matter?
TB-73. 	 Have several classmates interview database admin-
istrators within organizations with which they are 
familiar. To whom do these people report? How many 
employees report to these people? Is there a big vari-
ance in the responsibilities across organizations? Why 
or why not?
TB-74. 	 Based on your understanding of a primary key and 
the information in the following sample grades table, 
determine the best choice of attribute(s) for a primary 
key.
Student ID
Course
Grade
100013
Visual Programming
A
000117
Telecommunications
A
000117
Introduction to MIS
A
TB-75. 	 Search the web for an organization with a web page 
that utilizes a link between the web page and the 
organization’s own database. Describe the data that 
the user enters and the organization’s possible uses 
for these data. Can you retrieve company informa-
tion, or can you only send information to the com-
pany? How are the data displayed on the web page?
Answers to the Foundational Hardware Self-Study Questions
TB-32.	 A, p. 476
TB-33.	 C, p. 478
TB-34.	 A, p. 478
TB-35.	 C, p. 471
TB-36.	 A, p. 472
Answers to the Foundational Software Self-Study Questions
TB-37.	 D, p. 479
TB-38.	 B, p. 483
TB-39.	 D, p. 481
TB-40.	 D, p. 480
TB-41.	 D, p. 485
Answers to the Foundational Networking Self-Study Questions
TB-42.	 D, p. 494
TB-43.	 D, p. 497
TB-44.	 C, p. 491
TB-45.	 D, p. 505
TB-46.	 C, p. 505
Answers to the Foundational Database Self-Study Questions
TB-47.	 B, p. 507
TB-48.	 C, p. 507
TB-49.	 A, p. 507
TB-50.	 C, p. 509
TB-51.	 C, p. 510
Go to mymislab.com for the following assisted-graded writing questions:
MyLab MIS
TM
	 TB-76. 	Compare and contrast centralized, distributed, and collaborative computing.
	 TB-77. 	What is the purpose of normalization?

518    TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING  •  Foundations of Information Systems Infrastructure 
References
Stallings, W. (2017). Cryptography and network security: Principles 
and practice (7th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Te’eni, D., Carey, J. M., & Zhang, P. (2007). Human-computer inter-
action: Developing effective organizational information systems. 
New York: Wiley.
Valacich, J. S., & George, J. F. (2017). Modern systems analysis and 
design (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Comer, D. E. (2015). Computer networks and Internets (6th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson.
Evans, A., Martin, K., & Poatsy, M.A. (2017). Technology in Action 
Complete (13th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Hoffer, J., Ramesh, V., & Topi, H. (2016). Modern database man-
agement (12th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Panko, R., & Panko, J. (2015). Business data networks and security 
(10th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.

519
ADSL:  Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line
AI:  Artificial Intelligence
ALU:  Arithmetic Logic Unit
ARPANET:  Advanced Research Projects Agency Network
ASCII:  American Standard Code for Information Interchange
ATM:  Automated Teller Machine
B2B:  Business-to-Business
B2C:  Business-to-Consumer
BI:  Business Intelligence
BIOS:  Basic Input-Output System
BPI:  Bytes per Inch
BPM:  Business Process Management
BPR:  Business Process Reengineering
BYOD:  Bring Your Own Device
C2B:  Consumer-to-Business
C2C:  Consumer-to-Consumer
CAPTCHA:  Completely Automated Public Turing Test to Tell 
Computers and Humans Apart
CASE:  Computer-Aided Software Engineering
CD-R:  Compact Disc–Recordable
CD-RW:  Compact Disc–Rewritable
CDN:  Content Delivery Network
CIO:  Chief Information Officer
COBIT:  Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology
COPA:  Child Online Protection Act
CPI:  Characters per Inch
CPM:  Cost per Mille
CPU:  Central Processing Unit
CRM:  Customer Relationship Management
CRT:  Cathode Ray Tube
CSF:  Critical Success Factor
CSMA/CA:  Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision 
Avoidance
CSS:  Cascading Style Sheet
DARPA:  Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DBA:  Database Administrator
DBMS:  Database Management System
DNS:  Domain Name System
DoS:  Denial of Service
DRM:  Digital Rights Management
DSL:  Digital Subscriber Line
DSS:  Decision Support System
DVD-ROM:  Digital Versatile Disc–Read-Only Memory
DVD:  Digital Video Disc
DVI:  Digital Visual Interface
EC:  Electronic Commerce
ECPA:  Electronic Communications Privacy Act
EDI:  Electronic Data Interchange
EEPROM:  Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only 
Memory
EMI:  Electromagnetic Interference
ERD:  Entity-Relationship Diagram
ERP:  Enterprise Resource Planning
ETL:  Extraction, Transformation, and Loading
G2B:  Government-to-Business
G2C:  Government-to-Citizens
G2G:  Government-to-Government
GB:  Gigabyte
Gbps:  Gigabits per second
GEO:  Geosynchronous Earth Orbit
GHz:  Gigahertz
GIS:  Geographic Information System
GPS:  Global Positioning System
GTLD:  Generic Top-Level Domain
GUI:  Graphical User Interface
HCI:  Human–Computer Interface
HDMI:  High Definition Multimedia Interface
HIPAA:  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HTML:  Hypertext Markup Language
HTTP:  Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Hz:  Hertz
IaaS:  Infrastructure as a Service
ICANN:  Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers
IIoT:  Industrial Internet of Things
IoT:  Internet of Things
IP:  Intellectual Property
IP:  Internet Protocol
IS:  Information System
ISDN:  Integrated Services Digital Network
ISP:  Internet Service Provider
IT:  Information Technology
IVR:  Interactive Voice Response
Acronyms

520    ACRONYMS
JAD:  Joint Application Design
JIT:  Just-in-Time
KB:  Kilobyte
Kbps:  Kilobits per second
KPI:  Key Performance Indicator
LAN:  Local Area Network
LCD:  Liquid Crystal Display
LEO:  Low Earth Orbit
LTE:  Long-Term Evolution
MB:  Megabyte
Mbps:  Megabits per second
MDM:  Mobile device management
MEO:  Middle Earth Orbit
MHz:  Megahertz
MICR:  Magnetic Ink Character Recognition
MIS:  Management Information System
NAT:  Network Address Translation
NoSQL:  Not Only SQL
NPV:  Net Present Value
NSF:  National Science Foundation
NSFNET:  National Science Foundation Network
OCR:  Optical Character Recognition
OLAP:  Online Analytical Processing
OLED:  Organic Light-Emitting Diode
OLTP:  Online Transaction Processing
OMR:  Optical Mark Recognition
OSI:  Open Systems Interconnection
P2P:  Peer-to-Peer
PaaS:  Platform as a Service
PBX:  Private Branch Exchange
PC:  Personal Computer
PDA:  Personal Digital Assistant
PIN:  Personal Identification Number
POTS:  Plain Old Telephone Service
PSTN:  Public Switched Telephone Network
RAD:  Rapid Application Development
RAID:  Redundant Array of Independent Disks
RAM:  Random Access Memory
RDBMS:  Relational Database Management System
RFID:  Radio-Frequency Identification
RFP:  Request for Proposal
ROM:  Read-Only Memory
RSS:  Really Simple Syndication or Rich Site Summary
SaaS:  Software as a Service
SAD:  Systems Analysis and Design
SAM:  Software Asset Management
SCM:  Supply Chain Management
SDLC:  Systems Development Life Cycle
SDSL:  Symmetric Digital Subscriber Line
SEO:  Search Engine Optimization
SFA:  Sales Force Automation
SLA:  Service-Level Agreement
SOA:  Service-Oriented Architecture
SOX:  Sarbanes–Oxley Act
SQL:  Structured Query Language
SSD:  Solid-State Drive
SSL:  Secure Sockets Layer
STP:  Shielded Twisted Pair
TB:  Terabyte
TCO:  Total Cost of Ownership
TCP:  Transmission Control Protocol
TCP/IP:  Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
TP:  Twisted Pair
TPS:  Transaction Processing System
URL:  Uniform Resource Locator
USB:  Universal Serial Bus
UTP:  Unshielded Twisted Pair
VAN:  Value-Added Network
VGA:  Video Graphics Array
VMI:  Vendor Managed Inventory
VoIP:  Voice over IP
VPN:  Virtual Private Network
WAN:  Wide Area Network
Wi-Fi:  Wireless Fidelity
WLAN:  Wireless Local Area Network
WWW:  World Wide Web
XaaS:  X as a Service
XBRL:  Extensible Business Reporting Language
XML:  Extensible Markup Language
XP:  eXtreme Programming

521
Acceptable use policies:  Computer and/or Internet usage poli-
cies for people within an organization, with clearly spelled-
out penalties for noncompliance.
Access-control software:  Software for securing information 
systems that allows only specific users access to specific 
computers, applications, or data.
Ad hoc query:  A request for information created due to 
unplanned information needs that is typically not saved 
for later use.
Adaptive maintenance:  Making changes to an information 
system to make its functionality meet changing business 
needs or to migrate it to a different operating environment.
Advanced analytics:  Tools and techniques used to discover 
hidden patterns, trends, and relationships in large amounts 
of data and to build predictive models.
Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET):  A 
wide area network linking various universities and research 
centers; forerunner of the Internet.
Adware:  Free software paid for by advertisements appearing 
during the use of the software.
Affiliate marketing:  A type of marketing that allows indi-
vidual website owners to earn commission by posting other 
companies’ ads on their web pages.
Agile methodology:  An evolutionary systems develop-
ment approach that focuses on creating small, client-
approved parts of the system as the project progresses 
rather than delivering one large application at the end 
of the project.
Algorithm:  The step-by-step procedures used to make a cal-
culation or perform some type of computer-based process.
Alpha testing:  Testing performed by the development organi-
zation to assess whether the entire system meets the design 
requirements of the users.
“Amateurization” of journalism:  The replacement of profes-
sional journalism by amateur bloggers.
American Standard Code for Information Interchange 
(ASCII):  Character encoding method for representing char-
acters of the English alphabet that provides binary codes to 
represent symbols.
Analog signals:  Signals consisting of a continuous wave that 
can take on an infinite number of values within its fre-
quency range.
Analytical CRM:  Systems for analyzing customer behavior and 
perceptions in order to provide business intelligence.
App:  A software program that is designed to perform a particu-
lar, well-defined function, typically built for mobile devices.
Applet:  A program designed to be executed within another 
application, such as a web page.
Application software:  Software used to perform a specific 
task that the user needs to accomplish.
Arithmetic logic unit (ALU):  A part of the central process-
ing unit (CPU) that performs mathematics and logical 
operations.
Artificial intelligence (AI):  The science of enabling informa-
tion technologies to simulate human intelligence as well as 
gain sensing capabilities.
Association:  See Relationship.
Association discovery:  A data mining technique used to find 
associations or correlations among sets of items.
Asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL):  A variant of DSL 
offering faster download speeds than upload speeds.
Asymmetric encryption:  See Public-key encryption.
Asynchronous:  Not coordinated in time.
Attribute:  An individual field containing data describing an 
entity in a database.
Audio:  Analog or digital sound data.
Augmented reality:  The use of information systems to enhance 
a person’s perception of reality by providing relevant infor-
mation about the user’s surroundings.
Authentication:  The process of confirming the identity of a 
user who is attempting to access a restricted system or 
website.
Authentication service:  A service on a network verifying the 
identity of a user.
Authorization:  Granting access to resources on a system fol-
lowing successful identification and authentication.
Automating:  Using information systems to do an activity 
faster, cheaper, and perhaps with more accuracy and/or 
consistency.
Backbone:  A high-speed central network to which many 
smaller networks can be connected.
Backdoor:  A hidden access point allowing for unauthorized 
access to a system.
Backup:  A copy of critical data on a separate storage medium.
Backup site:  A facility allowing businesses to continue func-
tioning in the event a disaster strikes.
Bandwidth:  The transmission capacity of a computer or com-
munications channel.
Bar code reader:  A specialized scanner used to read bar code 
data.
Basic input-output system (BIOS):  Programs and instructions 
that are automatically loaded when the computer is turned 
on.
Batch data:  Large amounts of routine data.
Glossary

522    GLOSSARY
Batch processing:  The processing of transactions after a cer-
tain number of transactions has been collected; the transac-
tions are processed together as a “batch” at some later time.
Best-cost provider strategy:  A strategy to offer products or 
services of reasonably good quality at competitive prices.
Best practices:  Procedures and processes used by business 
organizations that are widely accepted as being among the 
most effective and/or efficient.
Beta testing:  Testing performed by actual system users with 
actual data in their work environment.
Big Data:  Extremely large and complex data sets, typically 
characterized as being of high volume, variety, and velocity.
Binary code:  The digital representation of data using sequences 
of zeroes and ones.
Biometrics:  Body characteristics such as fingerprints, retinal 
patterns in the eye, or facial characteristics that allow the 
unique identification of a person.
Bit:  A basic unit of data in computing. Short for “binary digit”; 
the individual ones and zeros that make up a byte.
Blockchain:  A decentralized public ledger that is highly resil-
ient against tampering, as transactions are added in blocks, 
serving as proof of all transactions ever made.
Blog:  noun: short for “web log.” Chronological online text 
diary that can focus on anything the user desires. verb: to 
create and maintain a blog.
Bluetooth:  A wireless specification for personal area network-
ing of desktop computers, peripheral devices (such as head-
sets, keyboards, mice, and printers), mobile phones, tablets, 
and various other devices.
Bot:  Short for “software robot”; a program that works in the 
background to provide some service when a specific event 
occurs.
Botnet:  A collection of zombie computers used for destructive 
activities or spamming.
Bounce rate:  The percentage of single-page visits; reflecting 
the percentage of users for whom a particular page is the 
only page visited on the website during a session.
Break-even analysis:  A type of cost–benefit analysis to iden-
tify at what point (if ever) tangible benefits equal tangible 
costs.
Brick-and-mortar business strategy:  A business approach 
exclusively utilizing physical locations, such as department 
stores, business offices, and manufacturing plants, without 
an online presence.
Bricks-and-clicks business strategy:  See Click-and-mortar 
business strategy.
Bullwhip effect:  Large fluctuations in suppliers’ forecasts 
caused by small fluctuations in demand for the end product 
and the need to create safety buffers.
Bus network:  A network in the shape of an open-ended line.
Business analytics:  The use of business intelligence and 
advanced analytics tools to enhance organizational deci-
sion making.
Business continuity plan:  A plan describing how a business 
continues operating after a disaster.
Business intelligence (BI):  Tools and techniques for analyzing 
data of past and current transactions to obtain an under-
standing of an organization’s performance.
Business model:  The summary of a business’s strategic direc-
tion outlining how the objectives will be achieved; a busi-
ness model specifies how a company will create, deliver, 
and capture value.
Business process:  A set of related activities an organization 
performs in order to reach its business goals.
Business process management (BPM):  A systematic, struc-
tured improvement approach by all or part of an organi-
zation, including a critical examination and redesign of 
business processes in order to achieve dramatic improve-
ments in one or more performance measures such as qual-
ity, cycle time, or cost.
Business process reengineering (BPR):  Legacy term for busi-
ness process management (BPM).
Business rules:  Policies by which a business runs.
Business/IT alignment:  The alignment of information systems 
with a business’s strategy.
Business-to-business (B2B):  Electronic commerce transac-
tions between business partners, such as suppliers, manu-
facturers, and distributors.
Business-to-business marketplace:  A trading exchange oper-
ated by a third-party vendor, not associated with a particu-
lar buyer or supplier.
Business-to-consumer (B2C):  Electronic commerce transac-
tions between businesses and end consumers.
Buyer agent:  An intelligent agent used to find the best price for 
a particular product a consumer wishes to purchase. Also 
known as a “shopping bot.”
BYOD:  Bring your own device; employees using their own 
devices for work-related purposes.
Byte:  A unit of data typically containing 8 bits, or about one 
typed character.
Bytes per inch (BPI):  The numbers of bytes that can be stored 
on 1 inch of magnetic tape.
Cable modem:  A specialized piece of equipment that enables 
a computer to access Internet service via cable TV lines.
Cache:  A small block of special high-speed memory used by 
processors to store those instructions most recently or most 
often used (pronounced “cash”).
Campus area network:  A type of network spanning multiple 
buildings, such as a university or business campus.
Capabilities:  An organization’s ability to leverage its resources.
Capital expenditure:  Money spent to acquire or improve a 
long-term asset such as a piece of equipment or a building.
CAPTCHA:  Short for “Completely Automated Public Turing 
Test to Tell Computers and Humans Apart.” A system 
designed to prevent automated mechanisms from repeat-
edly attempting to submit forms or gain access to a system. 


GLOSSARY    523
A CAPTCHA typically requires the user to enter letters or 
numbers that are presented in the form of a distorted image 
before submitting an online form.
Card security code:  A three-digit code located on the back of 
a credit card; used in transactions when the physical card 
is not present.
Carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance (CSMA/
CA):  A random access control method in which each work-
station “listens” to the traffic on the transmission medium 
to determine whether another message is being transmitted 
so as to avoid collisions.
Cascading style sheets (CSS):  Style language used to specify 
the formatting and layout of elements on a web page.
Cathode ray tube (CRT):  Display technology similar to a tele-
vision monitor.
CD-R (compact disc–recordable):  A type of optical disk that 
data can be written to.
CD-RW (compact disc–rewritable):  A type of optical disk that 
can be written onto multiple times.
Cell:  A geographic area containing a low-powered radio 
antenna/receiver for transmitting telecommunications sig-
nals within that area; monitored and controlled by a central 
computer.
Cellular phone:  Mobile phone using a communications sys-
tem that divides a geographic region into sections called 
cells.
Central processing unit (CPU):  Component responsible for 
performing all the operations of the computer. Also called 
a microprocessor, processor, or chip.
Centralized computing:  A computing model utilizing large 
centralized computers, called mainframes, to process and 
store data and local input/output devices called “termi-
nals”; no sharing of data and capabilities between main-
frames and terminals.
Certificate authority:  A trusted middleman between comput-
ers that verifies that a website is a trusted site and that 
provides large-scale public-key encryption.
Change request management:  A formal process that ensures 
that any proposed system changes are documented, 
reviewed for potential risks, appropriately authorized, pri-
oritized, and carefully managed.
Characters per inch (CPI):  The number of characters that can 
be stored on 1 inch of magnetic tape.
Chatbot:  Intelligent agent that simulates human conversations, 
such as in online help systems.
Classification:  A data mining technique used for grouping 
instances into predefined categories.
Click-and-mortar business strategy:  A business approach uti-
lizing both physical locations and virtual locations. Also 
referred to as “bricks-and-clicks.”
Clickbait:  An incomplete or tantalizing headline for a story that 
encourages users to click on it to learn a key detail or to find 
out the answer to a question.
Click fraud:  The abuse of pay-per-click advertising models by 
repeatedly clicking on a link to inflate revenue to the host 
or increase costs for the advertiser.
Click-only business strategy:  A business approach that exclu-
sively utilizes an online presence. Companies using this 
strategy are also referred to as virtual companies.
Click-through rate:  The number of visitors who click on an 
ad (i.e., clicks) divided by the number of times it was dis-
played (i.e., impressions).
Click-wrap license:  A type of software license primarily used 
for downloaded software that requires computer users to 
accept the license terms by clicking a button before install-
ing the software.
Clickstream data:  A recording of the users’ path through a 
website.
Client:  Any computer or software application that requests and 
uses services provided by a server.
Client-server network:  A network in which servers and clients 
have defined roles.
Climate change:  Large-scale and long-term regional and 
global changes in temperatures and weather patterns.
Clock speed:  The speed of the system clock, typically mea-
sured in hertz (Hz) or multiples thereof.
Clock tick:  A single pulse of the system clock.
Cloud-based collaboration tools:  Tools residing in the cloud 
that enable teams to collaborate on documents or projects.
Cloud computing:  A computing model enabling ubiquitous, 
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool 
of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, serv-
ers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort 
or service provider interaction.
Cloud security:  Security concerned with storing and process-
ing data in the cloud; the need to secure data at rest, data in 
transit, and data in use.
Clustering:  Data mining technique grouping related records on 
the basis of having similar attributes.
Cold backup site:  A backup facility consisting of an empty 
warehouse with all the necessary connections for power 
and communications but nothing else.
Collaboration:  Two or more people, teams, or organizations 
working together to achieve a common goal.
Collaborative computing:  A synergistic form of distributed 
computing in which two or more networked computers are 
used to accomplish common processing tasks.
Collaborative CRM:  Systems for providing effective and effi-
cient communication with the customer from the entire 
organization.
Collaborative economy:  See Sharing economy.
Collective intelligence:  A concept based on the notion that 
distributed groups of people with a divergent range of 
information and expertise can outperform the capabilities 
of individual experts.

524    GLOSSARY
Collocation facility:  A facility in which businesses can rent 
space for servers or other information systems equipment.
Combination primary key:  A unique identifier consisting of 
two or more attributes.
Competitive advantage:  A firm’s ability to do something bet-
ter, faster, cheaper, or uniquely as compared with rival 
firms in the market.
Competitive intelligence:  Information about competitors, 
used to enhance a business’s strategic position.
Compiler:  A software program that translates an entire pro-
gram’s source code into machine language that can be read 
and executed directly by the computer.
Computer-aided software engineering (CASE):  The use of 
software tools that provide automated support for some 
portion of the systems development process.
Computer-assisted audit tool:  Software used to test informa-
tion systems controls.
Computer cluster:  A set of computers that work together as a 
single system.
Computer crime:  The use of a computer to commit an illegal 
act.
Computer ethics:  A broad range of issues and standards of 
conduct that have emerged through the use and prolifera-
tion of information systems.
Computer fluency:  The ability to independently learn new 
technologies as they emerge and assess their impact on 
one’s work and life.
Computer forensics:  The use of formal investigative 
techniques to evaluate digital information for judicial 
review.
Computer literacy:  The knowledge of how to operate a 
computer.
Computer networking:  The sharing of data or services 
between computers using wireless or cable transmission 
media.
Consumer-to-business (C2B):  Electronic commerce trans-
actions in which consumers sell goods or services to 
businesses.
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C):  Electronic commerce transac-
tions taking place solely between consumers.
Consumerization of IT:  The trend of technological innovations 
first being introduced in the consumer marketplace before 
being used by organizations.
Content delivery network:  A network of servers in various 
geographical locations that store copies of particular web-
sites so as to reduce latency.
Content management system (CMS):  An information system 
enabling users to publish, edit, version track, and retrieve 
digital information (or content).
Continuous planning process:  A strategic business planning 
process involving continuous monitoring and adjusting of 
business processes to enable rapid reaction to changing 
business conditions.
Control objectives for information and related technology 
(COBIT):  A set of best practices that help organizations to 
both maximize the benefits from their information systems 
infrastructure and establish appropriate controls.
Control unit:  Part of the central processing unit (CPU) that 
works closely with the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) by 
fetching and decoding instructions as well as retrieving 
and storing data.
Conversion rate:  The percentage of visitors to a website who 
perform the desired action.
Cookie:  A small text file (typically containing certain data 
collected from/about a user or data related to the user’s 
browsing session) passed by a web server to a web browser 
to be stored on a user’s computer; this message is then sent 
back to the server each time the user’s browser requests a 
page from that server.
Copyright:  A form of intellectual property, referring to cre-
ations of the mind such as music, literature, or software.
Core activities:  The activities within a value chain that process 
inputs and produce outputs, including inbound logistics, 
operations and manufacturing, outbound logistics, market-
ing and sales, and customer service.
Corrective controls:  Policies and procedures used to mitigate 
the impact of any problem after it has arisen, such as restor-
ing compromised data.
Corrective maintenance:  Making changes to an infor-
mation system to repair flaws in its design, coding, or 
implementation.
Cost–benefit analysis:  Techniques that contrast the total 
expected tangible costs versus the tangible benefits of an 
investment.
Cracker:  An individual who breaks into computer systems with 
the intention of doing damage or committing a crime.
Cross-channel retailing:  Offering the customer different 
touchpoints, such that transactions take place across mul-
tiple environments.
Crowdfunding:  The securing of business financing from 
individuals in the marketplace—the “crowd”—to fund an 
initiative.
Crowdsourcing:  The use of everyday people as cheap labor 
force, enabled by information technology.
Cryptocurrency:  Virtual currency that is not issued by any 
central bank and uses encryption technologies to secure 
transactions and generate new units of the currency.
Custom software:  Software programs that are designed and 
developed for a company’s specific needs as opposed to 
being bought off the shelf.
Customer engagement center:  A part of operational CRM 
that provides a central point of contact for an organization’s 
customers, employing multiple communication channels to 
support the communication preferences of customers.
Customer portal:  An enterprise portal designed to automate 
the business processes that occur before, during, and after 
sales between a supplier and multiple customers.


GLOSSARY    525
Customer relationship management (CRM) system:  An infor-
mation system used to create and maintain lasting relation-
ships with customers by concentrating on the downstream 
information flows.
Customer service and support:  A part of operational CRM 
that automates service and information requests, com-
plaints, and product returns.
Customization:  Modifying software so that it better suits user 
needs.
Cyberbullying:  The use of a computer to deliberately cause 
emotional distress in someone, often by manipulating, dis-
crediting, or humiliating the victim.
Cyberharassment:  The use of a computer to communicate 
obscene, vulgar, or threatening content about someone with 
the intent of harming or harassing that person.
Cybersquatting:  The dubious practice of registering a domain 
name, then trying to sell the name to the person, company, 
or organization most likely to want it.
Cyberstalking:  Intentionally following, threatening, and/or 
intimidating someone using electronic means and causing 
that person to fear for his or her safety.
Cyberterrorism:  The use of computer and networking tech-
nologies against persons or property to intimidate or coerce 
governments, individuals, or any segment of society to 
attain political, religious, or ideological goals.
Cyberwar:  An organized attempt by a country’s military to 
disrupt or destroy the information and communications 
systems of another country.
Dark web:  Web content—typically used for various nefarious 
purposes (such as trading drugs, stolen credit card infor-
mation, or illegal porn)—that is not indexed by traditional 
search engines and that is typically only accessible using 
specialized browsers that anonymize the user and hide 
traces.
Data:  Raw symbols, such as characters and numbers, that have 
no meaning in and of themselves, and are of little value 
until processed.
Data cleansing:  The process of detecting, correcting (e.g., 
standardizing the format), or removing corrupt or inaccu-
rate data retrieved from different systems.
Data dictionary:  A document prepared by database designers 
to describe the characteristics of all items in a database.
Data-driven organization:  Organization that makes decisions 
that can be backed up with verifiable data.
Data flows:  Data moving through an organization or within an 
information system.
Data mart:  A data warehouse that is limited in scope and cus-
tomized for the decision support applications of a particular 
end-user group.
Data mining:  Methods used by companies to discover 
“hidden” predictive relationships in data to better 
understand their customers, products, markets, or any 
other phase of their business for which data have been 
captured.
Data mining agent:  An intelligent agent that continuously 
analyzes large data warehouses to detect changes deemed 
important by a user, sending a notification when such 
changes occur.
Data model:  A map or diagram that represents the entities of a 
database and their relationships.
Data privacy statement:  A statement on a website containing 
information about what data are gathered, what they are 
used for, who will have access to the data, whether provi-
sion of the data is required or voluntary, and how confiden-
tiality will be ensured.
Data quality:  The suitability of data for its intended use, con-
sisting of completeness, accuracy, timeliness, validity, and 
consistency.
Data reduction:  A preparatory step to running data mining algo-
rithms, performed by rolling up a data cube to the smallest 
level of aggregation needed, reducing the dimensionality, or 
dividing continuous measures into discrete intervals.
Data science:  The advanced analytics field of study and 
practice.
Data type:  The type (e.g., text, number, or date) of an attribute 
in a database.
Data warehouse:  A repository containing data from multiple 
large databases and other sources that is suitable for direct 
querying, analysis, or processing.
Database:  A collection of related data organized in a way to 
facilitate data searches.
Database management system (DBMS):  A software applica-
tion used to create, store, organize, and retrieve data from a 
single database or several databases.
Decision support system (DSS):  A special-purpose informa-
tion system designed to support organizational decision 
making.
Dedicated grid:  A grid computing architecture consisting of 
homogeneous computers that are dedicated to performing 
the grid’s computing tasks.
Deep web:  The parts of the web that cannot be indexed by 
conventional search engines.
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA):  The 
U.S. governmental agency that began to study ways to 
interconnect networks of various kinds, leading to the 
development of the ARPANET (Advanced Research Proj-
ects Agency Network).
Demographic changes:  Changes in the structure of popula-
tions, such as related to age, birth rates, and migration.
Denial-of-service (DoS) attack:  An attack by crackers—often 
using zombie computers—that makes a network resource 
(e.g., website) unavailable to users or available with only a 
poor degree of service.
Density:  The storage capacity of magnetic tape; typically 
expressed in characters per inch (CPI) or bytes per inch (BPI).
Desktop videoconferencing:  The use of integrated computer, 
telephone, video recording, and playback technologies—by 

526    GLOSSARY
two or more people—to remotely interact with each other 
using their desktop computers.
Desktop virtualization:  The practice of providing workers 
with a virtual desktop environment (hosted on a central 
computer), helping to reduce costs for software licensing 
or maintenance and to comply with stringent privacy and 
data protection laws.
Destructive agent:  A malicious agent designed by spammers 
and other Internet attackers to farm e-mail addresses off 
websites or deposit spyware on machines.
Detective controls:  Processes and procedures used to discover 
security events, such as unauthorized access attempts, and 
to limit damage.
Developmental testing:  Testing performed by programmers 
to ensure that each module of a new program is error free.
Device driver:  A computer program that allows a computer to 
communicate with various different peripherals and other 
hardware devices.
Differentiation strategy:  A strategy in which an organization 
differentiates itself by providing better products or services 
than its competitors.
Digital dashboard:  A display delivering summary information 
to managers and executives to provide warnings, action 
notices, and summaries of business conditions.
Digital divide:  The gap between those individuals in our soci-
ety who are computer literate and have access to informa-
tion resources such as the Internet and those who do not.
Digital infrastructure:  See Information systems infrastructure.
Digital rights management (DRM):  A technological solution 
that allows publishers to control their digital media (music, 
movies, and so on) to discourage, limit, or prevent illegal 
copying and distribution.
Digital signals:  Signals consisting of discrete ‘on’ and ‘off’ 
values that computers use to transmit data.
Digital subscriber line (DSL):  A high-speed data transmission 
method that uses special modulation schemes to fit more 
data onto traditional copper telephone wires.
Digital video disc:  A DVD used for storing movies.
Digitize:  To convert analog inputs into digital data.
Dimension:  A way to summarize data, such as region, time, or 
product line.
Directory service:  A repository (or “address book”) contain-
ing information about users, user groups, resources, access 
rights, and so on, on a network.
Disaster recovery plan:  An organizational plan that spells out 
detailed procedures for recovering from systems-related 
disasters, such as virus infections and other disasters that 
might strike critical information systems.
Discount rate:  The rate of return used by an organization to 
compute the present value of future cash flows.
Discussion forum:  An electronic bulletin board that allows for 
threaded discussions among participants.
Disintermediation:  The phenomenon of cutting out the “mid-
dleman” in transactions and reaching customers more 
directly and efficiently.
Disruptive innovation:  See Radical innovation.
Disruptive innovation cycle:  A model suggesting that the 
extent to which modern organizations use information 
technologies and systems in timely, innovative ways is the 
key to success.
Distinctive competency:  Any unique strength possessed by an 
organization (e.g., innovation, agility, quality, or low cost) 
that helps to pursue an organizational strategy.
Distributed computing:  Using separate computers to work 
independently on subsets of tasks and then pooling the 
individual results by communicating over a network.
Domain name:  The part of a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) 
that identifies a source or host entity on the Internet.
Domain Name System (DNS):  A collection of databases used 
to associate Internet host names with their IP addresses.
Downstream information flow:  An information flow that 
relates to the information that is produced by a company 
and sent along to another organization, such as a distributor.
Doxing:  Researching and broadcasting personally identifiable 
information about an individual.
Drill down:  To analyze data at more detailed levels of a spe-
cific dimension.
Drill-down report:  A report that provides details behind the 
summary values on a key-indicator or exception report.
Drive-by hacking:  A computer attack in which an attacker 
accesses a wireless computer network, intercepts data, 
uses network services, and/or sends attack instructions 
without entering the office or organization that owns the 
network.
Dumpster diving:  Scouring wastebaskets for potentially useful 
information.
DVD-ROM (digital versatile disc–read-only memory):  A 
DVD that can be read but not written to.
Dynamic pricing model:  Pricing model under which custom-
ers specify the product or service they are looking for and 
how much they are willing to pay for it, and the provider 
either accepts or rejects the customers’ bids.
E-auction:  An electronic auction.
E-business:  An organization that uses information tech-
nologies or systems to support nearly every part of its 
business.
Economic opportunities:  Opportunities that a firm finds for 
making more money and/or making money in new ways.
Effectiveness:  The extent to which goals or tasks are accom-
plished well.
Efficiency:  The extent to which goals are accomplished faster, 
at lower cost, or with relatively little time and effort.
E-finance:  The use of information systems to provide financial 
services and markets.


GLOSSARY    527
E-government:  The use of information systems to provide citi-
zens, organizations, and other governmental agencies with 
information about and access to public services.
Electronic bill pay:  The use of online banking for bill paying.
Electronic commerce (EC):  The exchange of goods and ser-
vices via the Internet among and between customers, firms, 
employees, business partners, suppliers, and so on.
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI):  The digital, or electronic, 
transmission of business documents and related data 
between organizations via dedicated telecommunications 
networks.
Electronic meeting system:  A collection of personal comput-
ers networked together with sophisticated software tools to 
help group members solve problems and make decisions 
through interactive electronic idea generation, evaluation, 
and voting.
Embedded system:  A microprocessor-based system optimized 
to perform a limited, well-defined set of tasks.
Employee portal:  An intranet portal used for communica-
tion and collaboration between an organization and its 
employees.
Employee self-service:  Intranet-based applications that allow 
employees to manage human-resources-related tasks.
Enabling technology:  An information technology that enables 
a firm to accomplish a task or goal or to gain or sustain a 
competitive advantage in some way.
Encryption:  The process of encoding messages or files so that 
only intended recipients can decipher and understand them.
End-to-end encryption:  A system of communication where 
only the participants of the conversation can read the 
messages.
Enterprise license:  A type of software license that is usually 
negotiated and covers all users within an organization. Also 
known as a “volume license.”
Enterprise marketing management:  CRM tools used to inte-
grate and analyze marketing campaigns.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) system:  An information 
system that integrates business activities across departmen-
tal boundaries, including planning, manufacturing, sales, 
marketing, and so on.
Enterprise system:  An information system that spans the 
entire organization and can be used to integrate business 
processes, activities, and data across all functional areas 
of a firm.
Enterprise WAN:  A WAN connecting disparate networks of a 
single organization into a single network.
Enterprise-wide information systems:  See Enterprise system.
Entity:  Something data are collected about, such as people or 
classes.
Entity-relationship diagram (ERD):  A diagram used to dis-
play the structure of data and show associations between 
entities.
ERP core components:  The components of an ERP that sup-
port the internal activities of an organization for producing 
products and services.
ERP extended components:  The components of an ERP that 
support the primary external activities of an organization 
for dealing with suppliers and customers.
E-tailing:  Electronic retailing; the online sales of goods and 
services.
Ethernet:  The most widely used local area network protocol.
Exception report:  A report providing users with information 
about situations that are out of the normal operating range.
Executable:  A program in machine language that can be read 
and executed directly by a computer.
Executive level:  The top level of the organization, where executives 
focus on long-term strategic issues facing the organization.
Exit rate:  The percentage of visitors who leave the website 
(terminate the session) after viewing a particular page.
Explicit knowledge asset:  A knowledge asset that can be doc-
umented, archived, and codified.
Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL):  An XML-
based specification for publishing financial information.
Extensible Markup Language (XML):  A data presentation 
standard that allows designers to create customized markup 
tags that enable data to be more easily shared between 
applications and organizations.
External acquisition:  The process of purchasing an existing 
information system from an external organization or vendor.
Externally focused system:  An information system that 
coordinates business activities with customers, suppliers, 
business partners, and others who operate outside an orga-
nization’s boundaries.
Extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL):  The process 
of consolidating, cleansing, and manipulating data before 
loading the data into a data warehouse.
Extranet:  A private part of the Internet—cordoned off from 
ordinary users—that enables two or more firms to use the 
Internet to do business together.
eXtreme programming (XP):  A software development meth-
odology that utilizes fast software releases to customers, 
small development teams (usually pairs), and extensive 
code reviews and testing.
Fact:  See Measure.
Fiber to the home:  See Fiber to the premises.
Fiber to the premises:  High-speed network connectivity to 
homes and offices that is implemented using fiber-optic 
cable. Also known as “fiber to the home.”
Financial flow:  The movement of financial assets throughout 
the supply chain.
Fintech:  Technologies that support activities in the financial 
sector.
Firewall:  Hardware or software designed to keep unauthorized 
users out of network systems.

528    GLOSSARY
First-call resolution:  Addressing the customers’ issues during 
the first call.
First-mover advantage:  Temporary competitive advantage 
derived from being the first to enter a market.
Flash drive:  A portable, removable data storage device using 
flash memory.
Flash memory:  A memory-chip-based nonvolatile computer 
storage technology.
Folksonomy:  A categorization system created by Internet users 
(as opposed to experts).
Foreign key:  An attribute that appears as a non–primary key 
attribute in one entity and as a primary key attribute (or part 
of a primary key) in another entity.
Form:  A business document that contains some predefined data 
and may include some areas where additional data are to be 
filled in, typically for adding or modifying data related to 
a single record.
Freemium:  Revenue model where limited versions of digital 
products or services are offered for free, but a premium is 
charged for special features.
Functional area information system:  A cross-organizational-
level information system designed to support a specific 
functional area.
Functional convenience:  A web page’s characteristics that 
make the interaction with the site easier or more convenient.
Fuzzy logic:  A type of logic used in intelligent systems that 
allows rules to be represented using approximations or 
subjective values in order to handle situations where infor-
mation about a problem is incomplete.
Geographic information system (GIS):  A system for creat-
ing, storing, analyzing, and managing geographically ref-
erenced data.
Geotag:  noun: geospatial metadata (such as latitude, longi-
tude, or altitude), typically assigned to digital media. verb: 
to add geotags to digital media.
Gig economy:  An economy in which workers are not employed 
by a company, but are only hired for short-term, temporary 
jobs.
Global network:  A network spanning multiple countries that 
may include the networks of several organizations. The 
Internet is an example of a global network.
Globalization:  The integration of economies throughout the 
world, enabled by innovation and technological progress.
Government-to-business (G2B):  Electronic commerce that 
involves a country’s government and businesses.
Government-to-citizen (G2C):  Online interactions between 
federal, state, and local governments and their constituents.
Government-to-government (G2G):  Electronic interactions 
that take place between countries or between different lev-
els of government within a country.
Graphical user interface (GUI):  A computer interface that 
enables the user to select or manipulate pictures, icons, and 
menus to send instructions to the computer.
Green computing:  Attempts to use computing resources more 
efficiently to reduce environmental impacts, as well as the 
use of information systems to reduce negative environmen-
tal impacts.
Grid computing:  A computing architecture that combines the 
computing power of a large number of smaller, indepen-
dent, networked computers (often regular desktop PCs) 
into a cohesive system in order to solve large-scale comput-
ing problems.
Group buying:  Special volume discounts negotiated with local 
businesses and offered to people in the form of “daily deals”; 
if enough people agree to purchase the product or service, 
everyone can purchase the product at the discounted price.
Groupware:  Software that enables people to collaborate more 
effectively.
Hacker:  An individual who gains unauthorized access to com-
puter systems.
Hacktivist:  A cybercriminal pursuing political, religious, or 
ideological goals.
Hard drive (hard disk drive):  A magnetic storage device used 
for secondary storage.
Hardware:  Physical computer equipment, such as the com-
puter monitor, central processing unit, or keyboard.
Hashtag:  A tag preceded by a pound sign added to messages to 
indicate the topic and relate the message to other messages 
about the same topic.
Head crash:  A hard drive failure occurring when the read/write 
head touches the disk, resulting in the loss of the data and/
or irreparable damage to the disk.
Healthcare IS:  The use of IS to support everything from patient 
diagnosis and treatment to analyzing patient and disease 
data to running doctors’ offices and hospitals.
Home automation:  See Smart home technologies.
Honeypot:  A computer, piece of data, or network site that is 
designed to be enticing to crackers so as to detect, deflect, 
or counteract illegal activity.
Hot backup site:  A fully equipped backup facility, having 
everything from hardware, software, and current data to 
office equipment.
HTML editor:  See Web page builder.
HTML tag:  Markup that is inserted into the source document of a 
web page to specify the content and structure of a document.
Human–computer interface (HCI):  The point of contact 
between an information system and its users.
Hyperlink:  A reference or link on a web page to another docu-
ment that contains related information.
Hypertext:  Text in a web document that is linked to other text 
or content.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML):  The standard method 
of specifying the structure and content of web pages.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP):  The standard regulating 
how servers process user requests for web pages.


GLOSSARY    529
Identification:  A user’s claim or declaration of being someone.
Identity theft:  Stealing another person’s Social Security num-
ber, credit card number, and other personal information for 
the purpose of using the victim’s credit rating to borrow 
money, buy merchandise, or run up debts that are never 
repaid.
Impression based model:  Pricing model under which pricing 
is based on the number of times the page containing an ad is 
displayed, typically expressed in cost per thousand impres-
sions (i.e., cost per mille, or CPM).
In-app purchases:  Extra features or content users can buy 
within an app.
Industrial espionage:  A company’s (or country’s) covert 
activities, such as the theft of trade secrets, bribery, black-
mail, and technological surveillance to gain an advantage 
over rivals.
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT):  The use of IoT technolo-
gies in manufacturing.
Information:  Data that have been formatted and/or organized 
in some way so as to be useful to people.
Information flow:  The movement of information along the 
supply chain.
Information privacy:  An ethical issue that is concerned with 
what information an individual should have to reveal to 
others through the course of employment or through other 
transactions such as online shopping.
Information system (IS):  The combination of people and infor-
mation technology that create, collect, process, store, and 
distribute useful data.
Information systems architecture:  The formal definition of 
an organization’s technologies, systems, and processes that 
support the organization’s specific business processes and 
strategy.
Information systems audit:  An assessment of the state of an 
organization’s information systems controls to determine 
necessary changes and to help ensure the information sys-
tems’ availability, confidentiality, and integrity.
Information systems controls:  Processes and procedures help-
ing to ensure the availability, integrity, and confidentiality 
of data and information systems.
Information systems infrastructure:  The hardware, software, 
networks, data, facilities, human resources, and services 
used by organizations to support their decision making, 
business processes, and competitive strategy.
Information systems planning:  A formal process for identify-
ing and assessing all possible information systems develop-
ment projects of an organization.
Information systems risk assessment:  Assessment performed 
to obtain an understanding of the risks to the confidential-
ity, integrity, and availability of data and systems.
Information systems security:  Precautions taken to keep 
all aspects of information systems safe from destruction, 
manipulation, or unauthorized use or access.
Information technology (IT):  The hardware, software, and 
networking components of an information system.
Informational system:  A system designed to support decision 
making based on stable point-in-time or historical data.
Infrastructure:  The interconnection of various structural ele-
ments to support an overall entity, such as an organization, 
city, or country.
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS):  A cloud computing model 
in which only the basic capabilities of processing, storage, 
and networking are provided.
In-memory computing:  Processing of analytical and transac-
tional tasks where the data are stored in a computer’s main 
memory, rather than on a comparatively slow hard drive, 
removing the bottlenecks associated with reading and writ-
ing data.
Innovation:  The creation of new products, processes, or ser-
vices that return value to the organization.
Input technologies:  Hardware that is used to enter data into a 
computer.
Insider threat:  A trusted adversary or malicious insider who 
operates within an organization’s boundaries.
Instant messaging:  Online chat emulating real-time written 
conversations.
Intangible benefit:  A benefit of using a particular system or 
technology that is difficult to quantify.
Intangible cost:  A cost of using a particular system or technol-
ogy that is difficult to quantify.
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN):  A standard for 
worldwide digital telecommunications that uses existing 
twisted-pair telephone wires to provide high-speed data 
service.
Intellectual property (IP):  Creations of the mind that have 
commercial value.
Intelligent agent:  A program that works in the background to 
provide some service when a specific event occurs.
Intelligent system:  A system comprised of sensors, software, 
and computers embedded in machines and devices that 
emulates and enhances human capabilities.
Interactive voice response (IVR):  A system using speech rec-
ognition technology to guide callers through online surveys 
or menu options.
Interexchange carrier (IXC):  A company selling long-distance 
services with circuits that carry signals between the major 
telephone exchanges.
Internally focused system:  An information system that sup-
ports functional areas, business processes, and decision 
making within an organization.
Internet:  A large worldwide collection of networks that use a 
common protocol to communicate with each other.
Internet backbone:  The collection of primary network con-
nections and telecommunications lines making up the 
Internet.

530    GLOSSARY
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN):  A nonprofit corporation that is responsible for 
managing IP addresses, domain names, and the root server 
system.
Internet exchange point:  An access point for ISPs and an 
exchange point for Internet traffic.
Internet hoax:  A false message circulated online about any 
topic of public interest, typically asking the recipient to 
perform a certain action.
Internet host:  A computer working as a server on the Internet.
Internet of Things (IoT):  A network of a broad range of 
physical objects that can automatically share data over 
the Internet.
Internet over satellite:  A technology that allows users to 
access the Internet via satellites that are placed in a geo-
stationary orbit.
Internet service provider (ISP):  An organization that enables 
individuals and organizations to connect to the Internet.
Internet Tax Freedom Act:  An act mandating a moratorium 
on electronic commerce taxation in order to stimulate elec-
tronic commerce.
Internet troll:  A person who creates discord on the Internet by 
starting arguments or upsetting people by posting inflam-
matory content on social media sites with the deliberate 
intent of provoking readers into an emotional response, 
often for the troll’s own amusement.
Internetworking:  Connecting host computers and their net-
works to form even larger networks.
InterNIC:  A government–industry collaboration that manages 
directory and database services, domain registration ser-
vices, and other information services on the Internet.
Interorganizational system:  An information system that com-
municates across organizational boundaries.
Interpreter:  A software program that translates a program’s 
source code into machine language one statement at a 
time.
Intranet:  An internal, private network using web technologies 
to facilitate the secured transmission of proprietary infor-
mation within an organization, thereby restricting access to 
authorized users within the organization.
IP:  The part of TCP/IP that is responsible for addressing and 
correct routing of packages from source to destination.
IP address:  A numerical address assigned to every computer 
and router connected to the Internet that serves as the des-
tination address of that computer or device and enables the 
network to route messages to the proper destination.
IP convergence:  The use of the Internet protocol for transport-
ing voice, video, fax, and data traffic.
IP datagram:  A data packet that conforms to the Internet pro-
tocol specification.
IPv6:  The latest version of the Internet protocol.
Jailbreaking:  Modifying a mobile phone’s operating system to 
remove manufacturer or carrier restrictions.
Java:  An object-oriented programming language that is used 
for developing applications that can run on multiple com-
puting platforms.
JavaScript:  A scripting language that allows developers to add 
dynamic content to websites.
Joint application design (JAD):  A special type of a group 
meeting in which all (or most) users meet with a systems 
analyst to jointly define and agree on system requirements 
or designs.
Just-in-time (JIT):  A method to optimize ordering quantities so 
that parts or raw materials arrive just when they are needed 
for production.
Key generator:  Software used to generate fake license or 
registration keys to circumvent a program’s protection 
mechanism.
Key-indicator report:  A report that provides a summary of 
critical information on a recurring schedule.
Key performance indicator (KPI):  A metric deemed critical 
to assessing progress toward a certain organizational goal.
Keylogger:  Software programs used to capture users’ 
keystrokes.
Knowledge:  A body of governing procedures such as guide-
lines or rules that are used to organize or manipulate data 
to make the data suitable for a given task.
Knowledge assets:  The set of skills, routines, practices, prin-
ciples, formulas, methods, heuristics, and intuitions (both 
explicit and tacit) used by organizations to improve effi-
ciency, effectiveness, and profitability.
Knowledge management:  The processes an organization uses 
to gain the greatest value from its knowledge assets.
Knowledge management system:  A collection of technology-
based tools that includes communications technologies and 
information storage and retrieval systems to enable the 
generation, storage, sharing, and management of tacit and 
explicit knowledge assets.
Knowledge portal:  A specific portal used to share knowl-
edge collected in a repository with employees (often 
using an intranet), with customers and suppliers (often 
using an extranet), or the general public (often using the 
Internet).
Knowledge society:  A society in which education is the cor-
nerstone of society and there is an increase in the impor-
tance of knowledge workers.
Knowledge worker:  A professional who is relatively well 
educated and who creates, modifies, and/or synthesizes 
knowledge as a fundamental part of his or her job.
Layer:  A transparent sheet that can be made visible or invis-
ible and provides specific information or content. In a GIS, 
layers contain information about roads, utilities, ZIP code 
boundaries, floodplains, and so on.
Legacy system:  Older standalone computer systems within an 
organization with older versions of applications that are 
either fast approaching or beyond the end of their useful 
life within the organization.


GLOSSARY    531
Liquid crystal display (LCD):  A technology used for thin and 
lightweight displays in many modern notebook and desk-
top computers.
Local area network (LAN):  A computer network that spans a 
relatively small area, allowing all computer users to con-
nect with each other to exchange data and share peripheral 
devices, such as printers.
Location analytics:  The combination of geospatial data with 
business intelligence and advanced analytics tools to 
enhance organizational decision making
Location-based services:  Highly personalized mobile services 
based on a user’s location.
Logic bomb:  A type of computer virus that lies in wait for 
unsuspecting computer users to perform a triggering opera-
tion before executing its instructions.
Long tail:  The large parts of consumer demand that are outside 
the relatively small number of mainstream tastes.
Low-cost leadership strategy:  A strategy to offer the best 
prices in the industry on goods or services.
Machine learning:  The branch of artificial intelligence that 
allows systems to learn by identifying meaningful patterns 
when processing massive amounts of data.
Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR):  Scanning tech-
nology used by the banking industry to read data, account 
numbers, bank codes, and check numbers on preprinted 
checks.
Mainframe:  A very large computer typically used as the main, 
central computing system by major corporations and gov-
ernmental agencies.
Make-to-order process:  The set of processes associated with 
producing goods based on customers’ orders.
Make-to-stock process:  The set of processes associated with 
producing goods based on demand forecasts.
Making the business case:  The process of identifying, quanti-
fying, and presenting the value provided by an information 
system.
Malware:  Malicious software, such as viruses, worms, or Tro-
jan horses.
Management information system (MIS):  An information sys-
tem designed to support the management of organizational 
functions at the managerial level of the organization.
Managerial level:  The middle level of the organization, where 
functional managers focus on monitoring and controlling 
operational-level activities and providing information to 
higher levels of the organization.
Mashup:  A new application or website that uses data from one 
or more service providers.
Mass customization:  Tailoring products and services to meet 
the particular needs of individual customers on a large 
scale.
Master data:  The data that are deemed most important in the 
operation of a business; typically the “actors” in an organi-
zation’s transactions.
Master data management:  Consolidating master data so as to 
facilitate arriving at a single version of the truth.
M-commerce (mobile commerce):  Any electronic transac-
tion or information interaction conducted using a wireless, 
mobile device and mobile networks that leads to a transfer 
of real or perceived value in exchange for information, 
services, or goods.
Measure:  The values and numbers a user wants to analyze. 
Also referred to as “facts.”
Measured service:  A pricing model in a utility computing model 
where providers monitor usage and customers pay only for 
what they use, and the metering depends on type of resource.
Media access control:  The rules that govern how a given node or 
workstation gains access to a network to send or receive data.
Menu-driven pricing model:  Pricing model under which com-
panies set and present non-negotiable prices for products 
to consumers.
Mesh network:  A network that consists of computers and 
other devices that are either fully or partially connected to 
each other.
Metadata:  Data about data, describing data in terms of who, 
where, when, why, and so on.
Metropolitan area network:  A computer network of limited 
geographic scope—typically a citywide area—that com-
bines LAN and high-speed fiber-optic technologies.
Microblog:  noun: social networking service (such as Twitter), 
allowing to post relatively short “status updates.” verb: to 
post short status updates on a microblog.
Microprocessor:  See Central processing unit.
Microsoft.NET:  A programming platform that is used to 
develop applications that are highly interoperable across a 
variety of platforms and devices.
Mirror:  To store data synchronously on independent systems 
to achieve redundancy for purposes of reliability and/or 
performance.
Mobile banking:  Conducting financial transactions using 
mobile devices.
Mobile device management (MDM):  Administration of 
an organization’s mobile devices to enforce authoriza-
tion policies, prevent the downloading or installing 
of non-approved apps, or remotely lock the phones or 
wipe data.
Mobile wireless:  The transfer of data to a moving computer or 
handheld device.
Model:  A conceptual, mathematical, logical, or analytical for-
mula used to represent or project business events or trends.
Modem:  Short for “modulator-demodulator”; a device or pro-
gram that enables a computer to transmit data over tele-
phone or cable television lines.
Module:  A component of a software application that can be 
selected and implemented as needed.
Monitoring and sensing agent:  An intelligent agent that 
keeps track of key data, such as data provided by various 

532    GLOSSARY
sensors, meters, cameras, and the like, and notifies the user 
when conditions change.
Moore’s law:  The prediction that computer processing perfor-
mance would double every 24 months.
Motherboard:  A large printed plastic or fiberglass circuit 
board that holds or connects to all the computer’s electronic 
components.
Multichannel retailing:  Offering the customer different 
(independent) touchpoints, such as a retail store and a 
catalogue.
Multi-core processor:  A single chip central processing unit 
(CPU) that has more than one set of arithmetic logic units 
(ALU) and control units.
National Science Foundation (NSF):  A U.S. government 
agency responsible for promoting science and engineering; 
the NSF initiated the development of the National Science 
Foundation Network (NSFNET), which became a major 
component of the Internet.
National Science Foundation Network (NSFNET):  A network 
developed by the United States in 1986 that became a major 
component of the Internet.
Net neutrality:  The principle that all Internet traffic should be 
treated the same.
Net-present-value analysis:  A type of cost–benefit analysis of 
the cash flow streams associated with an investment.
Network:  A group of computers and associated peripheral 
devices connected by a communication channel capable of 
sharing data and other resources among users.
Network effect:  The notion that the value of a network (or 
tool or application based on a network) is dependent on the 
number of other users.
Network interface card:  An expansion board that plugs into 
a computer so that it can be connected to a network; also 
called network adapter.
Network topology:  The shape of a network; the four common 
network topologies are star, ring, bus, and mesh.
Neural network:  An information system that attempts to 
approximate the functioning of the human brain.
Non-capital expenditure:  Money spent on repairs, supplies, 
payroll, and other operating expenses.
Non-recurring cost:  A one-time cost that is not expected to 
continue after a system is implemented.
Nonvolatile memory:  Memory that does not lose its data after 
power is shut off.
Normalization:  A technique for making complex relational 
databases more efficient and more easily handled by a 
database management system.
NoSQL:  “Not only SQL”; a variety of database technologies 
enabling highly scalable databases that do not conform to 
RDBMS schemas.
Object-oriented language:  A programming language that 
groups together data and their corresponding instructions 
into manipulable objects.
Off-the-shelf software:  Software designed and used to sup-
port general business processes that does not require any 
specific tailoring to meet an organization’s needs.
Office automation system:  A collection of software and hard-
ware for developing documents, scheduling resources, and 
communicating.
OLAP cube:  A data structure allowing for multiple dimen-
sions to be added to a traditional two-dimensional table for 
detailed analysis.
OLAP server:  The chief component of an OLAP system that 
understands how data are organized in the database and has 
special functions for analyzing the data.
Omni-channel retailing:  Providing seamless, simultaneous 
retail interactions using different channels, such that a cus-
tomer does not interact with a single channel but with the 
brand as a whole.
Online analytical processing (OLAP):  The process of quickly 
conducting complex analyses of data stored in a database, 
typically using graphical software tools.
Online banking:  The use of the Internet to conduct financial 
transactions.
Online brokerage:  The use of the Internet to obtain informa-
tion about stock quotes and manage financial portfolios.
Online predator:  A cybercriminal using the Internet to target 
vulnerable people, usually the young or old, for sexual or 
financial purposes.
Online transaction processing (OLTP):  Immediate automated 
responses to the requests from multiple concurrent transac-
tions of customers.
Open innovation:  The process of integrating external stake-
holders into an organization’s innovation process.
Open source software:  Software for which the source code is 
freely available for use and/or modification.
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model:  A networking 
model that represents a group of specific communication 
tasks as successive layers.
Operating system:  Software that coordinates the interaction 
between hardware devices, peripherals, application soft-
ware, and users.
Operational CRM:  Systems for automating the fundamental 
business processes—marketing, sales, and support—for 
interacting with the customer.
Operational expenditure:  See Non-capital expenditure.
Operational level:  The bottom level of an organization, where 
the routine, day-to-day business processes and interactions 
with customers occur.
Operational system:  A system that is used to interact with 
customers and run a business in real time.
Opt in:  To signal agreement to the collection/further use of 
one’s data (e.g., by checking a box).
Opt out:  To signal that data cannot be collected/used in other 
ways (e.g., by checking a box).


GLOSSARY    533
Optical character recognition (OCR):  Scanning technology 
used to read and digitize typewritten, computer-printed, or 
handwritten characters.
Optical disk:  A storage disk coated with a metallic substance 
that is written to (or read from) when a laser beam passes 
over the surface of the disk.
Optical mark recognition (OMR):  Scanning technology used 
to scan questionnaires and test answer forms (“bubble 
sheets”) where answer choices are marked by filling in 
circles using a pencil or pen.
Order-to-cash process:  The set of processes associated with 
selling a product or service.
Organic light-emitting diode (OLED):  A display technology 
using less power than LCD technology.
Organizational learning:  The ability of an organization 
to learn from past behavior and data, improving as a 
result.
Organizational strategy:  A firm’s plan to accomplish its mis-
sion and goals as well as to gain or sustain competitive 
advantage over rivals.
Output technologies:  Hardware devices that deliver informa-
tion in a usable form.
Outsourcing:  The moving of routine jobs and/or tasks to peo-
ple in another firm.
Packaged software:  A software program written by a third-
party vendor for the needs of many different users and 
organizations.
Packet sniffer:  Software program to capture and analyze net-
work traffic.
Packet switching:  The process of breaking information into 
small chunks called data packets and then transferring 
those packets from computer to computer via the Internet, 
based on the concept of turn taking.
Paid inclusion:  The inclusion of a website in a search engine’s 
listing after payment of a fee.
Patch management system:  An online system that utilizes 
web services to automatically check for software updates, 
downloading and installing these “patches” as they are 
made available.
Patent:  A type of intellectual property typically referring to 
process, machine, or material inventions.
Patriot hacker:  Independent citizens or supporters of a coun-
try that perpetrate computer attacks on perceived or real 
enemies.
Pay-per-click model:  A payment model used in online adver-
tising where the advertiser pays the website owner a fee for 
visitors clicking on a certain link.
Peer:  Any computer that may both request and provide services.
Peer production:  The creation of goods or services by self-
organizing communities.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) networks:  Networks that enable any com-
puter or device on the network to provide and request 
services.
Perfective maintenance:  Making enhancements to improve 
processing performance, to improve usability, or to add 
desired but not necessarily required system features.
Peripheral:  An auxiliary device, such as mouse or keyboard, 
that is connected to a computer.
Personal area network:  A wireless network used to exchange 
data between computing devices using short-range radio 
communication, typically within an area of 10 meters.
Personal computer (PC):  A stationary computer used for per-
sonal computing and small business computing.
Phishing:  Attempts to trick financial account and credit card 
holders into giving away their login credentials, usually 
by sending spam messages to literally millions of e-mail 
accounts. Also known as “spoofing.”
Plain old telephone service (POTS):  Standard analog tele-
phone lines; also called “public switched telephone net-
work (PSTN).”
Planned obsolescence:  The design of a product so that it lasts 
for only a certain predetermined life span.
Platform:  A business model that enables others—both other 
businesses and users—to co-create value, such that some 
users create value and other users consume.
Platform as a service (PaaS):  A cloud computing model in 
which the customer can run his or her own applications that 
are typically designed using tools provided by the service 
provider; the customer has limited or no control over the 
underlying infrastructure.
Podcast:  See Webcast.
Port:  A hardware interface by which a computer communicates 
with a peripheral device or another system.
Portal:  An access point (or front door) through which a busi-
ness partner accesses secured, proprietary information 
from an organization (typically using extranets).
Power supply:  A device that converts electricity from the wall 
socket to a lower voltage appropriate for computer compo-
nents and regulates the voltage to eliminate surges common 
in most electrical systems.
Predictive modelling:  Analytics techniques focusing on iden-
tifying trends or predicting business outcomes.
Preventive controls:  Processes and procedures used to prevent 
any potentially negative event from occurring, such as by 
preventing outside intruders from accessing a facility.
Preventive maintenance:  Making changes to a system to 
reduce the chance of future system failure.
Primary key:  A field included in a database table that contains 
a unique value for each instance of an entity to ensure that 
it is stored or retrieved accurately.
Primary storage:  Temporary storage for data used in current 
calculations.
Printer:  An output device that produces a paper copy of alpha-
numeric data or other content from a computer.
Private cloud:  Cloud infrastructure that is internal to an 
organization.

534    GLOSSARY
Processing logic:  The steps by which data are transformed or 
moved, as well as a description of the events that trigger 
these steps.
Processing technologies:  Computer hardware that transforms 
inputs into outputs.
Procure-to-pay process:  The set of processes associated with 
procuring goods from external vendors.
Product flow:  The movement of goods from the supplier to 
production, from production to distribution, and from dis-
tribution to the consumer.
Productivity paradox:  The observation that productivity 
increases at a rate that is lower than expected when new 
technologies are introduced.
Project manager:  The person most responsible for ensuring 
that a project is successfully completed.
Propagation delay:  The delay in the transmission of a satellite 
signal because of the distance the signal must travel.
Protocols:  Procedures that different computers follow when 
they transmit and receive data.
Prototyping:  An iterative systems development process in which 
requirements are converted into a working system that is con-
tinually revised through close interaction between analysts and 
users.
Proxy variable:  An alternative measurement of outcomes; used 
when it is difficult to determine and measure direct effects.
Pseudocode:  A way to express processing logic independent 
of the actual programming language being used.
Public cloud:  Cloud infrastructure offered on a commercial 
basis by a cloud service provider.
Public key encryption:  A symmetric encryption method that 
uses a pair of keys—a public and a private key—such that 
a message is encoded using the recipient’s public key and 
can only be decoded using the recipient’s private key.
Public switched telephone network (PSTN):  See Plain old 
telephone service (POTS).
QR code:  A two-dimensional barcode with a high storage capacity.
Quantified self:  The logging of all aspects of one’s daily life to 
improve overall health and performance.
Query:  A method used to retrieve data from a database.
Radical innovation:  An innovation that uses markedly new 
or different technology to access new customer segments 
and/or provide significantly greater benefits to existing 
customers, and eventually marginalizes or replaces existing 
products or services.
Radio frequency identification (RFID):  The use of electro-
magnetic energy to transmit information between a reader 
(transceiver) and a processing device; used to replace bar 
codes and bar code readers.
Random-access memory (RAM):  A type of volatile primary 
storage that can be accessed randomly by the CPU.
Ransomware:  Malicious software that holds a user’s computer 
hostage by locking or taking control of the user’s computer, 
or encrypting files or documents.
Read-only memory (ROM):  A type of nonvolatile primary 
storage that is used to store programs and instructions 
that are automatically loaded when the computer is 
turned on.
Read/write head:  A device that inscribes data to or retrieves 
data from a hard drive or tape.
Record:  A collection of related attributes about a single entity.
Recovery point objective:  An objective specifying how timely 
backup data should be preserved.
Recovery time objective:  An objective specifying the 
maximum time allowed to recover from a catastrophic 
event.
Recurring cost:  An ongoing cost that occurs throughout the 
life cycle of systems development, implementation, and 
maintenance.
Redundant array of independent disks (RAID):  A secondary 
storage technology that makes redundant copies of data on 
two or more hard drives.
Register:  Relatively small temporary storage location where 
data must reside while being processed or manipulated.
Reintermediation:  The design of a business model that rein-
troduces middlemen in order to reduce the chaos brought 
on by disintermediation.
Relational database management system (RDBMS):  A data-
base management system based on the relational database 
model.
Relational database model:  The most common DBMS 
approach; entities are presented as two-dimensional tables, 
with records as rows and attributes as columns.
Relationship:  An association between entities in a database to 
enable data retrieval.
Report:  A compilation of data from a database that is organized 
and displayed to the user.
Report generator:  A software tool that helps users build 
reports quickly and describe the data in a useful format.
Representational delight:  A web page’s characteristics that 
stimulate a user’s senses.
Request for proposal (RFP):  A communication tool indicating 
buyer requirements for a proposed system and requesting 
information or soliciting bids from potential vendors.
Requirements collection:  The process of gathering and orga-
nizing information from users, managers, customers, 
business processes, and documents to understand how a 
proposed information system should function.
Resource scarcity:  Limited availability of fossil fuels and other 
natural resources.
Resources:  An organization’s specific assets that are utilized to 
create cost or product differentiation from its competitors.
Revenue model:  Part of a business model that describes how 
the organization will earn revenue, generate profits, and 
produce a superior return on invested capital.
Reverse engineering:  Disassembling a piece of software in 
order to understand its functioning.


GLOSSARY    535
Reverse logistics:  Processes in place to efficiently receive 
products from the point of consumption, so that valuable 
materials can be recycled or hazardous materials can be 
properly disposed of.
RFID tag:  The processing device used in an RFID system that 
uniquely identifies an object.
Ring network:  A network that is configured in the shape of 
a closed loop or circle, with each node connecting to the 
next node.
Risk acceptance:  A computer system security policy in which 
no countermeasures are adopted and any damages that 
occur are simply absorbed.
Risk avoidance:  A computer system security policy in which 
alternate means are used to perform a task that would cause 
risk, or the task is not performed at all.
Risk reduction:  The process of taking active countermeasures 
to protect information systems.
Risk transference:  A computer system security policy in which 
someone else absorbs the risk, as with insurance.
Robotics:  The use of robots to perform manual tasks.
Roll up:  To analyze data at less detailed levels of a certain 
dimension.
Router:  An intelligent device used to connect and route data 
traffic across two or more individual networks.
RSS:  Really Simple Syndication (or Rich Site Summary). A set 
of standards for sharing updated web content, such as news 
and sports scores, across sites.
Sales beacon:  Bluetooth device that can detect proximate 
smartphones and send marketing messages or personalized 
coupons.
Sales force automation (SFA):  CRM systems to support the 
day-to-day sales activities of an organization.
Sarbanes–Oxley Act:  A U.S. government regulation mandat-
ing companies to demonstrate compliance with account-
ing standards and establishing controls and corporate 
governance.
Scalability:  The ability to adapt to increases or decreases in 
demand for processing or data storage.
Scheduled report:  A report produced at predefined intervals—
daily, weekly, or monthly—to support the routine informa-
tional needs of managerial-level decision making.
Scripting language:  A programming language for integrating 
interactive components into a web page.
Search advertising:  Advertising that is listed in the sponsored 
search results for a specific search term.
Search engine optimization (SEO):  Methods for improving a 
site’s ranking in search engine results.
Secondary key:  An attribute that can be used to identify 
two or more records within a table that share a common 
value.
Secondary storage:  Large-capacity storage devices, such as 
hard drives, solid-state drives, or magnetic tapes, for per-
manently storing data.
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL):  A popular public-key encryption 
method used on the Internet.
Semantic web:  A set of design principles that will enable 
computers to index websites, topics, and subjects, enabling 
computers to understand the content of web pages and 
search engines to provide richer and more accurate results.
Semistructured data:  Data (such as clickstreams and sensor 
data) that do not fit neatly into relational database structures.
Semistructured decision:  A decision where problems and 
solutions are not clear-cut and often require judgment and 
expertise.
Sensor:  Device that can detect, record, and report changes in 
the physical environment.
Sentiment analysis:  The analysis of semistructured and 
unstructured data to learn about people’s thoughts, feel-
ings, and emotions.
Sequence discovery:  A data mining technique used to discover 
associations over time.
Server:  Any computer on the network that enables access to 
files, databases, communications, and other services avail-
able to users of the network.
Service:  An individual software component designed to per-
form a specific task.
Service-level agreement (SLA):  A contract specifying the level 
of service provided in terms of performance (e.g., as mea-
sured by uptime), warranties, disaster recovery, and so on.
Service-oriented architecture (SOA):  A software architecture 
in which business processes are broken down into individ-
ual components (or services) that are designed to achieve 
the desired results for the service consumer (which can be 
either an application, another service, or a person).
Sharing economy:  An economic system in which assets or 
services are shared between private individuals, either free 
or for a fee, typically by means of the Internet.
Shifts in global economic power:  Changes in countries’ pur-
chasing power and control over natural resources.
Shopping bot:  See Buyer agent.
Shoulder surfing:  Looking over one’s shoulder while the per-
son is keying in login credentials.
Showrooming:  Shoppers coming into a store to evaluate the 
look and feel of a product and then purchasing it online or 
at a competitor’s store.
Shrink-wrap license:  A type of software license that is used 
primarily for consumer products; the contract is activated 
when the shrink wrap on the packaging has been removed.
Slicing and dicing:  Analyzing data on subsets of certain 
dimensions.
Smart card:  A special credit card-sized card containing a 
microprocessor chip, memory circuits, and often a mag-
netic stripe.
Smart home technologies:  Technologies enabling the remote 
monitoring and controlling of lighting, heating, or home 
appliances.

536    GLOSSARY
Social bookmarking:  The sharing and categorization of Inter-
net content by Internet users.
Social cataloging:  The creation of categorizations by Internet 
users.
Social commerce:  Leveraging visitors’ social networks in 
e-commerce interactions to build lasting relationships, 
advertise products, or otherwise create value.
Social CRM:  The use of social media for customer relationship 
management.
Social engineering:  Misrepresenting oneself to trick others 
into revealing information.
Social intranet:  A type of intranet that incorporates social 
components, allowing every user to create content and to 
easily connect with other content creators.
Social media:  Web-based applications embodying core 
web 2.0 values such as collaboration and social sharing, 
allowing people to communicate, interact, and collaborate 
in various ways.
Social media monitoring:  The process of identifying and 
assessing the volume and sentiment of what is being said 
in social media about a company, individual, product, or 
brand.
Social network analysis:  A technique that maps people’s con-
tacts to discover connections or missing links (sometimes 
called structural holes) within the organization.
Social networking:  Connecting to colleagues, family mem-
bers, or friends for business or entertainment purposes.
Social online community:  A community within a social 
network.
Social search:  A search functionality that attempts to increase 
the relevance of search results by including content from 
social networks, blogs, or microblogging services.
Social software:  See Social media.
Software:  A program (or set of programs) that instructs the 
computer to perform certain processing functions.
Software as a service (SaaS):  A cloud computing model in 
which a service provider offers applications via a cloud 
infrastructure.
Software asset management (SAM):  A set of activities 
performed to better manage an organization’s software 
infrastructure by helping to consolidate and standardize 
software titles, decide when to retire unused software, or 
decide when to upgrade or replace software.
Software bug:  An error or flaw in a computer program or 
system that causes it to produce an incorrect or unexpected 
result or to behave in unintended ways.
Software piracy:  A type of computer crime where individu-
als make illegal copies of software protected by copyright 
laws.
Solid-state drive (SSD):  A secondary storage technology using 
flash memory to store data.
SoLoMo:  The integration of social, local, and mobile services.
Source code:  A computer program’s code written in a pro-
gramming language.
Spam:  Electronic junk mail.
Spam filter:  A hardware or software device used to fight spam 
and other e-mail threats, such as directory harvest attacks, 
phishing attacks, viruses, and more.
Spear phishing:  A sophisticated fraudulent e-mail attack that 
targets a specific person or organization by personalizing the 
message in order to make the message appear as if it is from 
a trusted source, such as an individual within the recipient’s 
company, a government entity, or a well-known company.
Speech recognition:  The process of converting spoken words 
into commands and data.
Sponsored search:  See Search advertising.
Spyware:  Software that covertly gathers information about 
a user through an Internet connection without the user’s 
knowledge.
Standalone application:  A system that focuses on the specific 
needs of an individual department and is not designed to 
communicate with other systems in the organization.
Star network:  A network with several workstations connected 
to a central hub.
Startup:  Technology-based new venture with high potential 
for scalability and growth.
Stickiness:  A website’s ability to attract and keep visitors.
Strategic:  A way of thinking in which plans are made to 
accomplish specific long-term goals.
Strategic necessity:  Something an organization must do in 
order to survive.
Strategic planning:  The process of forming a vision of where 
the organization needs to head, converting that vision into 
measurable objectives and performance targets, and craft-
ing a plan to achieve the desired results.
Streaming audio:  Audio data streams, transmitted via specific 
protocols, that are available for immediate playback on the 
recipient’s computer.
Streaming media:  An umbrella term for streaming audio and 
streaming video.
Streaming video:  Video data streams, transmitted via specific 
protocols, that are available for immediate playback on the 
recipient’s computer.
Structural firmness:  A web page’s characteristics related to 
security and performance.
Structured data:  Data (such as transaction data) that fit neatly 
into spreadsheets or databases.
Structured decision:  A decision where the procedures to fol-
low for a given situation can be specified in advance.
Structured Query Language (SQL):  The most common lan-
guage used to interface with databases.
Stuxnet:  A computer worm designed to find and infect a 
particular piece of industrial hardware; used in an attack 
against Iranian nuclear plants.


GLOSSARY    537
Supercomputer:  The most expensive and most powerful cat-
egory of computers. It is primarily used to assist in solving 
massive research and scientific problems.
Supplier portal:  A subset of an organization’s extranet 
designed to automate the business processes that occur 
before, during, and after sales transactions between a single 
buyer and multiple suppliers. Also referred to as a “sourc-
ing portal” or “procurement portal.”
Supply chain:  The collection of companies and processes 
involved in moving a product from the suppliers of raw 
materials, to the suppliers of intermediate components, to 
final production, and ultimately to the customer.
Supply chain analytics:  The use of key performance indicators 
to monitor performance of the entire supply chain, includ-
ing sourcing, planning, production, and distribution.
Supply chain effectiveness:  The extent to which a company’s 
supply chain activities meet the requirements of the part-
ners, customers, suppliers, or vendors involved.
Supply chain efficiency:  The extent to which a company opti-
mizes the use of resources in its supply chain activities.
Supply chain execution:  The execution of supply chain plan-
ning, involving the management of product flows, informa-
tion flows, and financial flows.
Supply chain management (SCM) system:  Information sys-
tem focusing on improving upstream information flows 
with two main objectives—to accelerate product develop-
ment and to reduce costs associated with procuring raw 
materials, components, and services from suppliers.
Supply chain planning:  The process of developing various 
resource plans to support the efficient and effective produc-
tion of goods and services.
Supply chain visibility:  The ability to track products as they 
move through the supply chain and to foresee external 
events.
Supply network:  The network of multiple (sometimes inter-
related) producers of supplies that a company uses.
Support activities:  Business activities that enable the primary 
activities to take place. Support activities include adminis-
trative activities, infrastructure, human resources, technol-
ogy development, and procurement.
Sustainable development:  Development that meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs.
Switch:  A device used to connect multiple computers, servers, 
or printers to create a network.
Symmetric digital subscriber line (SDSL):  A variant of DSL 
that supports the same data rates for upstream and down-
stream traffic.
Symmetric encryption:  An encryption method that uses the 
same key to encode and decode a message, thus requiring 
a secure channel to share the key between the sending and 
receiving party.
Synchronous:  Coordinated in time.
System clock:  An electronic circuit inside a computer that 
generates pulses at a rapid rate for setting the pace of pro-
cessing events.
System conversion:  The process of decommissioning the cur-
rent system and installing a new system in an organization.
System software:  The collection of programs that controls the 
basic operations of computer hardware.
Systems analysis:  The second phase of the systems develop-
ment life cycle, in which the current ways of doing busi-
ness are studied and alternative replacement systems are 
proposed.
Systems analysis and design:  The process of designing, build-
ing, and maintaining information systems.
Systems analyst:  The primary person responsible for perform-
ing systems analysis and design activities.
Systems benchmarking:  The use of standardized performance 
tests to compare different systems.
Systems design:  The third phase of the systems development life 
cycle, in which details of the chosen approach are developed.
Systems development controls:  Systems development pro-
cesses and procedures used to ensure that necessary secu-
rity features are implemented and enabled and that proper 
change management processes are followed.
Systems development life cycle (SDLC):  A model describ-
ing the life of an information system from conception to 
retirement.
Systems implementation:  The fourth phase of the systems 
development life cycle in which the information system is 
programmed, tested, installed, and supported.
Systems integration:  Linking together different computing 
systems and software applications physically or function-
ally to act as a coordinated whole.
Systems maintenance:  The process of systematically repair-
ing and/or improving an information system.
Systems planning and selection:  The first phase of the sys-
tems development life cycle, in which potential projects are 
identified, selected, and planned.
T1 line:  A dedicated digital transmission line that can carry 
1.544 Mbps of data.
T3 line:  A dedicated digital transmission line that can carry 
about 45 Mbps of data.
Table:  A collection of related records in a database where each 
row is a record and each column is an attribute.
Tacit knowledge assets:  Knowledge assets that reflect the pro-
cesses and procedures located in employees’ minds.
Tag:  noun: metadata assigned to digital media or other content. 
verb: to add metadata to digital content.
Tag cloud:  A way to visualize user-generated tags or content on 
a site, where the size of a word represents its importance 
or frequency.
Tangible benefit:  A benefit of using a particular system or 
technology that is quantifiable.

538    GLOSSARY
Tangible cost:  A cost of using a particular system of technol-
ogy that is quantifiable.
Tape:  A removable, high-capacity, secondary storage medium 
allowing only for sequential access; typically used for 
archiving data.
TCP:  Part of TCP/IP that is responsible for breaking down 
a message into smaller packets, creating a connection 
between two computers, and ensuring that data are reliably 
transmitted and arrive in the correct sequence.
Telecommunications network:  A group of two or more 
computer systems linked together with communications 
equipment.
Terminal:  A local input device used to enter data into main-
frames in centralized computing systems.
Text mining:  Analytical techniques for extracting information 
from textual documents.
Text recognition software:  Software designed to convert 
handwritten text into computer-based characters.
Thin client:  A microcomputer with minimal memory, storage, 
and processing capabilities, used for remotely accessing 
virtual desktops.
Threat:  An undesirable event that can cause harm.
3D printing:  Technology for creating physical three-dimen-
sional objects from digital models.
Time bomb:  A type of computer virus that lies in wait for a 
specific date before executing its instructions.
Top-level domain:  A URL’s suffix (i.e., .com, .edu, or .org) 
representing the highest level of Internet domain names in 
the domain name system.
Total cost of ownership (TCO):  The cost of owning and 
operating a system, including the total cost of acquisition, 
as well as all costs associated with its ongoing use and 
maintenance.
Touch screen:  A touch-sensitive computer display used as an 
input device.
Transaction:  Any event, such as the exchange of goods or 
services for money, that occurs as part of daily business of 
which an organization must keep a record.
Transaction processing system (TPS):  An information system 
designed to process day-to-day business-event data at the 
operational level of the organization.
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/
IP):  The protocol of the Internet, which allows different 
interconnected networks to communicate using the same 
language.
Transmission media:  The physical pathways to send data 
and information between two or more entities on a 
network.
Trending:  A word phrase or topic that is tagged at a greater rate 
than others.
Trojan horse:  A program that appears to be a legitimate, benign 
program, but carries a destructive payload. Trojan horses 
typically do not replicate themselves.
Tunneling:  A technology used by VPNs to encapsulate, 
encrypt, and securely transmit data over the public Inter-
net infrastructure, enabling business partners to exchange 
confidential data in a secured, private manner between 
organizational networks.
Two-factor authentication:  The use of two types of creden-
tials to confirm one’s identity.
Unauthorized access:  An information systems security breach 
where an unauthorized individual sees, manipulates, or 
otherwise handles data.
Unauthorized data modification:  The intentional change of 
electronic data by unauthorized users.
Unicode:  Character encoding method for representing char-
acters and scripts beyond the Latin alphabet, including 
Chinese, Cyrillic, Hebrew, and Arabic.
Uniform Resource Locator (URL):  The unique Internet address 
for a website and specific web pages within sites.
Unstructured data:  Data (such as audio and video data, com-
ments on social networks, and so on) that do not have any 
identifiable structure.
Unstructured decision:  A decision where few or no procedures 
to follow for a given situation can be specified in advance.
Upstream information flow:  An information flow consisting 
of information received from another organization, such as 
from a supplier.
Urbanization:  The movement of rural populations to urban 
areas.
Usability:  A system’s quality of being easy to use and aestheti-
cally pleasing.
User agent:  An intelligent agent that automatically performs 
specific tasks for a user, such as automatically sending a 
report at the first of the month, assembling customized 
news, or filling out a web form with routine information.
User-generated content:  Content (such as text or media) that 
is generated by users (typically on social media sites).
Utilities:  See Utility programs.
Utility computing:  A form of on-demand computing where 
resources in terms of processing, data storage, or network-
ing are rented on an as-needed basis. The organization only 
pays for the services used.
Utility program:  Software designed to manage computer 
resources and files.
Value-added network:  Private, third-party-managed WANs 
typically used for B2B communications, offering services 
such as secure e-mail and translation of EDI standards to 
facilitate secure communication between a business and its 
suppliers and/or customers.
Value chain:  The set of primary and support activities in an 
organization where value is added to a product or service.
Value chain analysis:  The process of analyzing an organi-
zation’s activities to determine where value is added to 
products and/or services and the costs that are incurred for 
doing so.


GLOSSARY    539
Value creation:  The outcome of an organization’s activities 
that increase the worth of products or services for the 
customer.
Value proposition:  The utility that the product/service has to 
offer to customers.
Value system:  A collection of interlocking company value 
chains.
Vanilla version:  The features and modules that a packaged 
software system comes with out of the box.
Vendor-managed inventory (VMI):  A business model in 
which the suppliers to a manufacturer (or retailer) manage 
the manufacturer’s (or retailer’s) inventory levels based on 
negotiated service levels.
Vertical market:  A market comprised of firms within a specific 
industry sector.
Video:  Still and moving images that can be recorded, manipu-
lated, and displayed on a computer.
Videoconferencing over IP:  The use of Internet technologies 
for videoconferences.
Viral marketing:  A type of marketing that resembles offline 
word-of-mouth communication in which advertising mes-
sages are spread similar to how real viruses are transmitted 
through offline social networks.
Virtual company:  See Click-only business strategy.
Virtual meeting:  A meeting taking place using an online 
environment.
Virtual private network (VPN):  A network connection 
that is constructed dynamically within an existing 
network—often called a “secure tunnel”—in order to 
securely connect remote users or nodes to an organiza-
tion’s network.
Virtual team:  A work team that is composed of members who 
may be from different organizations and different locations 
that forms and disbands as needed.
Virtual reality (VR) headset:  Head-mounted device enabling 
immersive three-dimensional experiences.
Virus:  A destructive program that disrupts the normal function-
ing of computer systems.
Virus prevention:  A set of activities designed to detect and 
prevent computer viruses.
Visual analytics:  The combination of various analysis tech-
niques and interactive visualizations to solve complex 
problems.
Visual data discovery:  See Visual analytics.
Visual programming language:  A programming language 
that has a graphical user interface (GUI) for the program-
mer and is designed for programming applications that will 
have a GUI.
Visualization:  The display of complex data relationships using 
a variety of graphical methods.
Voice over IP (VoIP):  The use of Internet technologies for plac-
ing telephone calls.
Voice-to-text software:  An application that uses a microphone 
to monitor a person’s speech and then converts the speech 
into text.
Volatile memory:  Memory that loses its contents when the 
power is turned off.
Volume license:  See Enterprise license.
Vulnerability:  A weaknesses in an organization’s systems or 
security policies that can be exploited to cause damage.
Vulnerability scanners:  Software programs that automatically 
test targeted systems for weaknesses.
Warez:  A slang term for stolen proprietary software that is sold 
or shared for free over the Internet.
Watermark:  A digital or physical mark that is difficult to 
reproduce; used to prevent counterfeiting or to trace illegal 
copies to the original purchaser.
Wearable technologies:  Clothing or accessories, such as 
smart watches or fitness trackers, that incorporate informa-
tion technologies.
Web 2.0:  A term used to describe dynamic web applications 
that allow people to collaborate and share information 
online.
Web analytics:  The analysis of web use’s behavior in order to 
improve a site’s performance.
Web browser:  A software application that can be used to 
access and display web pages including text, graphics, and 
multimedia content.
Web content mining:  Extracting textual information from web 
documents.
Web crawler:  An intelligent agent that continuously browses 
the web for specific content (e.g., used by search engines). 
Also known as a “web spider.”
Web page:  A hypertext document stored on a web server that 
contains not only content, but also references or links to 
other documents that contain related content.
Web page builder:  A program for assisting in the creation and 
maintenance of web pages.
Web server:  A computer used to host websites.
Website:  A collection of interlinked web pages typically 
belonging to the same person or business organization.
Web spider:  See Web crawler.
Web usage mining:  An analysis of a website’s usage patterns, 
such as navigational paths or time spent.
Web vandalism:  The act of defacing websites.
Webcam:  A small camera that is used to transmit real-time 
video images within desktop videoconferencing systems.
Webcast:  noun: a digital media stream that can be distributed 
to and played by digital media players. verb: to create and 
publish webcasts.
Weighted multicriteria analysis:  A method for deciding 
among different information systems investments or alter-
native designs for a given system in which requirements and 
constraints are weighted on the basis of their importance.

540    GLOSSARY
What-if analysis:  An analysis of the effects hypothetical 
changes to data have on the results.
Wide area network (WAN):  A computer network that spans a 
relatively large geographic area; typically used to connect 
two or more LANs.
Wi-Fi network (wireless fidelity):  Wireless LAN, based on the 
802.11 family of standards.
Wiki:  A website allowing people to create, edit, or delete con-
tent, as well as discuss article content or suggested changes 
with other members of the community. A wiki is linked 
to a database keeping a history of all prior versions and 
changes; therefore, a wiki allows viewing prior versions 
of the pages as well as reverting any changes made to the 
content.
WikiLeaks:  An information disclosure portal where volunteers 
submit and analyze classified and restricted material pro-
vided by whistleblowers.
Wireless access point:  A networking device that transmits and 
receives wireless (Wi-Fi) signals to allow wireless devices 
to connect to the network.
Wireless broadband:  Wireless transmission technology with 
speeds similar to DSL and cable that requires line of sight 
between the sender and receiver.
Wireless controller:  A networking device that manages mul-
tiple access points and can be used to manage transmission 
power and channel allocation to establish desired coverage 
throughout a building and minimize interference between 
individual access points.
Wireless LAN control:  Methods of configuring a WLAN so 
that only authorized users can gain access.
Wireless local area network (WLAN):  A local area network 
that uses a wireless transmission protocol.
Workstation:  A high-performance computer that is designed 
for medical, engineering, or animation and graphics design 
uses, and is optimized for visualization and rendering of 
three-dimensional models.
World Wide Web (WWW):  A system of Internet servers that sup-
port documents formatted in HTML, which supports links to 
other documents as well as graphics, audio, and video files.
Worm:  A destructive computer code that is designed to copy 
and send itself throughout networked computers.
XaaS:  “X as a service”; type of business model centered around 
not selling products, but providing these as services.
XML tag:  Markup that is inserted into a document in order to 
specify how data contained in the document or a portion of 
the document should be interpreted and used.
Zero-day:  An undisclosed hardware or software vulnerability 
that crackers can exploit to adversely affect computer pro-
grams, data, other computers, or networks.
Zombie computer:  A virus-infected computer that can be used 
to launch attacks on websites.

541
A
Anderson, Chris, 174
B
Baekdal, Thomas, 236
Berners-Lee, Tim, 222
Bezos, Jeff, 163, 298, 369
Brin, Sergey, 119, 235
Buffett, Warren, 211
C
Carr, David, 261
Carr, Nicholas, 223
Chambers, John, 97
Christensen, C. M., 104
Clapper, James, 275, 422
Cook, Tim, 59
Cruise, Tom, 350
D
Dotcom, Kim, 418
Drucker, Peter, 33
F
Farook, Syed Rizwan, 436
G
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 34
Gray, Vincent, 414
H
Harding, David, 172
Henson, Stephen, 430
J
James, Josh, 205
Jobs, Steve, 72, 106
K
Kazansky, Peter, 35
Keeley, L., 97
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 293
L
Levick, Richard, 240
M
Maddox, John, 99
Malik, Tashfeen, 436
Marakas, G. M., 376
Mason, Richard O., 60
McAfee, John, 227
McFarlan, F. W., 407
Moore, Gordon, 141
Musk, Elon, 145, 343
N
Nakamoto, Satoshi (pseudonym), 193
Nolan, R. L., 407
O
Obama, Barack, 240
Orwell, George, 275
P
Page, Larry, 119, 235, 388
Parboteeah, D. V., 180
Pestana, John, 205
Porter, M. E., 84
Prince, 261
R
Raynor, M. E., 104
Rayport, Jeffrey, 236
S
Samwer, Alexander, 206
Samwer, Marc, 206
Samwer, Oliver, 206
Sanders, Bernie, 240
Smith, Jada, 261
Smith, Will, 261
Snowden, Edward, 164, 293–294, 
423, 466
T
Torvalds, Linus, 386
Truman, Harry S., 293
Trump, Donald, 419
V
Valacich, J. S., 180, 181
Van Damme, Jean-Claude, 236
W
Wells, J. D., 180
Wheeler, B. C., 104, 376
Winfrey, Oprah, 261
Wozniak, Steve, 72
Name Index

542
A
ABC television, 218
Accenture, 221, 406–407
AccuWeather, 220
Acumatica, 332
Adidas, 166
Adobe Systems, 205, 232, 386, 390
Affectiva, 267
Airbnb, 32, 43, 76, 94–97, 146–147, 
190, 206, 219, 241
Alaska Airlines, 266
Alcoa, 137
Aldi, 99
Alibaba, 93, 166, 339
AllBookstores.com, 178
Alphabet, 118–119, 137
Amazon.com, 59, 60, 93, 100, 114, 
123–125, 137, 143–147, 149–151, 
166–167, 172, 174–179, 181–182, 
189, 193, 198, 205, 219, 233, 239, 
253, 258, 261, 263, 277, 280, 
298–303, 305, 335, 348, 363, 369, 
385, 395, 433, 449, 451, 453
American National Standards Institute, 337
Apache Software Foundation, 261, 386, 
387, 415
Apple, 32, 59, 72, 73, 85, 97, 99, 102, 
106, 114, 118, 120, 125, 137, 141, 
145, 187, 189, 191, 198, 211, 215, 
225, 231, 246, 258, 326, 337, 339, 
342, 344, 363, 378, 379, 390, 407, 
433, 436
Ashley Madison, 164, 281, 402
Associated Press, 239
Audi, 326
Avis Rent a Car, 176
Avon, 434
B
Baidu, 326
Bank of America, 137
The Banker and Euromoney, 163
Barnes & Noble, 172, 175
Behalf, 171
Berkshire Hathaway, 211
Best Buy, 173, 199, 287
Bing, 458
Binghamton University, 453
Bitcoin, 193–194, 431
Blockbuster, 114
BMW, 241, 326
Boeing Company, 217, 338
Booking.com, 178, 220
Booz Allen Hamilton, 423
Bosch, 326
Boston Dynamics, 118
Bridgestone, 43
British Royal Society, 102
British Standards Institute (BSI), 368
Broadcom, 339
Bundamedik Healthcare System, 294
Business Software Alliance (BSA), 433
C
Cadillac, 241
Capital One, 171, 276
Car2go, 94
Carnival Cruise Lines, 230
Casper, 76
Caterpillar, 39
Center for Innovation, Testing, and 
Evaluation (CITE), 103
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 421, 
423
Changi General Hospital (CGH), 294
Charles Schwab, 171
Chase, 171
Chase Card Services, 351
Chevron, 386
Chicago Tribune, 239
Citibank, 121, 171
CNN, 198, 227
Coca Cola, 99, 118, 137, 185, 224
Comcast, 205
Computer Ethics Institute, 65
Continental, 326
Corning, 99
Craigslist, 94, 190
D
Daimler, 94
DBS Bank Limited (DBS), 163
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 164, 252
Dell Computers, 31, 97, 121, 144, 175, 
240, 285, 302, 304, 338, 340–341, 
351, 356, 361
Department of Commerce, 168
Department of Defense, 216
Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS), 414
DHL, 192, 369
Didi Chuxing, 93
Digital Equipment Corporation, 102
Disneyland, 216
DMSPro, 332
Dollar Shave Club, 77
Domino’s Pizza, 240, 369
Dreamworks, 158
Dropbox, 92, 99, 169, 229
Duke Energy, 137
DuPont, 421
Dyson, 97, 99
E
eBay, 94, 166–167, 174, 177, 181, 190, 
192, 198, 399, 428
Eddie Bauer, 169
Eli Lilly, 101, 285, 338
eMarketer, 168
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 219
Enron, 457
EPiServer, 189
ESET, 399
Etsy, 177, 190
Expedia, 193, 220, 241, 277
Exxon Mobil, 211
F
Facebook, 32, 45, 59–62, 64, 113, 120, 
123, 125, 137, 145, 164, 177,  
185–186, 210–211, 220–221, 224, 
226, 228, 233–235, 237, 239,  
246–247, 276, 294–295, 304, 
350–351, 357, 359–361, 375, 378, 
384, 387, 394, 429, 432, 453, 467
Fakespot.com, 239
Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), 369
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
414, 426, 436, 439, 459
Federal Trade Commission, 178
FedEx, 32, 57–58, 143, 369
Flickr, 92, 93, 220, 225, 226, 361
Forbes, 222, 430
Ford Motor Company, 175, 285, 326
Forrester Research, 169, 182, 
183–184, 187
Fox, 225
Foxconn, 59, 340
Organization Index

G
Gap, 166
Gartner, 374
GE, 95, 99
General Motors (GM), 153, 326
Gillette, 421
GitHub, 387
GlaxoSmithKline, 99
Gnewt Cargo, 192
GoDaddy, 181
Google, 60, 93, 98, 99, 114, 118–120, 
123, 125, 130, 135–136, 144, 145, 
150, 156, 164, 178, 183, 184, 
191–192, 198, 206, 215, 217, 219, 
222, 223, 227, 229, 235, 246, 261, 
277, 285, 287, 326, 362, 369, 378, 
388, 390, 415, 458, 467
Government Technology Agency 
(GovTech), 466
Green Design Institute, 192
Groupon, 176, 206
GrubHub, 206
H
Heineken, 31, 101
Hertz, 434
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 32, 338, 340, 
342, 407
Hollywood Presbyterian Medical 
Center, 52, 420
Hollywood Video, 114
Home Depot, 420
Honda, 340
Hotmail.com, 236
HTC, 199
Humai, 130
Hyatt, 205
I
IBM, 85, 102, 141, 194, 223, 234, 305, 
387, 401, 407, 421
IHS iSuppli, 339
Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
Agency (ICE), 414
Impact Team, 281
Indiegogo, 107
Infineon, 339
Infocomm Development Authority 
(IDA), 466
Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centers (ISAC), 456
Information Week, 37
Infosys, 36, 406–407
InnoCentive, 101
Instagram, 64, 177, 186, 225, 226
Intel, 101, 141, 142
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 53
Internet Crime Complaint Center, 190
Intuit, 181
J
JD.com, 166–167
Juhuasuan, 166
Juno, 190
JVC, 100
K
Khoo Teck Puat Hospital (KTPH), 
293-294
Kickstarter, 107–108, 171, 238
Kodak, 421
L
Lands End, 179
Lear, 326
LEGO, 101, 388
Lending Club, 171
Levick Strategic Communications, 240
Levi Strauss, 166, 285
LG, 339
LinkedIn, 113, 234, 360, 361
Linq, 190
Linux, 386, 387
LivingSocial, 176
Lynda.com, 113
M
Magna, 326
Marriott International, 98, 99, 101, 276
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), 380, 420
MasterCard, 449
Mazda, 326
McAfee, 428
McAfee Labs, 426
Men’s Wearhouse, 387
Mercedes Benz, 241
Michelin, 43
Microsoft, 57, 92, 98, 99, 100, 102, 113, 
124, 137, 141, 142, 145, 148, 150, 
211, 217, 229–231, 233, 234, 236, 
257, 259, 280, 281, 288, 317, 320, 
348, 352, 378, 385, 387, 399, 421, 
426, 467
Military Air Transport Service, 168
Money, 47
Morgan Stanley, 458
Motion Picture Association of America, 
418
Motorola, 199
M-Pesa, 122
Myspace, 221, 233, 237
N
NASA, 136, 343
National Association of Colleges and 
Employers, 47
National Foundation for the 
Investigation of Lost and 
Kidnapped Children, 310
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 145
National Security Agency (NSA), 423
NATO, 436
Nature, 99
NBC Television, 222
NBC Universal, 205
Nespresso, 99
Nest Labs, 119
Nestlé, 217
Netflix, 36, 77, 99, 114, 143, 145, 148, 
175, 278, 385
NewEgg.com, 193
Newton Systems Group, 72
New York Police Department (NYPD), 
239
The New York Times, 223, 239, 430
Nike, 79, 175, 345, 363
Niketown, 99
Nissan, 424
Nokia, 199
Nordstrom, 85
Norwegian Postal Service, 192
O
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 153
OfficeMax, 338
Omniture, 205
Opel, 153
Opentable.com, 220
Oracle, 305, 319, 352, 401
Orbitz.com, 174, 241
Outback Steakhouse, 148
Outlook.com, 429
Overstock.com, 193
P
Panasonic, 434
Pandora, 225, 408
Paramount Studies, 158
Patent and Trade Office, 136
PayPal, 191–192, 193, 348, 399, 428
PC Magazine, 404
Pearson Prentice Hall, 190

ORGANIZATION INDEX    543

544    ORGANIZATION INDEX
Pinterest, 146, 177, 384
Polyvore, 177
Popular Mechanics, 102
Porsche, 85
Prentice Hall, 102
PriceGrabber, 178
Priceline.com, 176, 241
Price Waterhouse, 101
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 101, 338, 421
Prosper, 171
R
Range International Information Hub, 
378
Recording Industry Association of 
America, 418
Reddit, 227
Rocket Internet, 206
Rolls Royce, 95
Rottentomatoes.com, 178
RSIA Bunda Jakarta, 294
Ryanair, 240
S
Salesforce.com, 218, 352
Samsung Electronics, 98, 118, 155, 187, 
199, 339, 379, 386
San Francisco Chronicle, 223
SAP, 316, 319, 323, 352, 401
Scientific American, 99
Securities and Exchange Commission, 
348
Shopify, 181
Shopping.com, 178
Shutterstock, 190–191
Singapore Personal Access (SingPass), 466
Skarp, 238
Skype, 36, 123, 156, 215, 399
SlideShare, 225
Snopes, 428
Society of Worldwide Interbank 
Financial Telecommunication 
(SWIFT), 106
Sony, 58, 100, 340
Southwest Airlines, 99, 357, 385
Space Exploration Technologies 
Corporation (SpaceX), 343
Spotify, 77, 408
Square, 107, 171, 191
Starbucks, 31, 101, 186, 239, 351
Starwood, 421
StumbleUpon, 227
SugarCRM, 352
Swarm, 99
Switch, 123
Symantec, 52, 428
T
Taobao, 166
Target, 199
Temple University, 48
Tencent, 93
Tesla Motors, 145, 326, 343
Texas Instruments, 339
TH Milk Vietnam, 332
Tmall.com, 166
Toshiba, 100
Toyota, 99, 118, 153, 340–341
Trader Joe’s, 99
Travelocity.com, 174, 176, 241, 277, 453
Tripadvisor.com, 178, 239, 277
Tumblr, 224, 226
Turkish Airlines, 236
Twitter, 32, 177, 185–186, 223–224, 
226, 228, 240, 261, 276, 304, 350, 
360–361, 375, 394, 467
U
Uber, 32, 43, 77, 93–97, 190, 206, 219, 
241, 279
Ubuntu, 128
UN Economic Commission, 337
United Airlines, 176, 276
Universal Music, 418
Universal Studios, 158
University of Aberdeen, 253
University of Arizona, 136, 450
University of Delaware, 192
University of Minnesota, 230
University of Pennsylvania, 252
University of Southampton, 35
UPS, 32, 137, 139, 192, 266, 369, 408, 455
USAA, 171
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 47, 50
U.S. Computer Emergency Response 
Team (US-CERT), 318, 457
U.S. Department of Justice, 418, 459 
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, 63
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 284
U.S. military, 216
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, 136
U.S. Navy, 87
U.S. News, 47, 385
U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), 420
U.S. Postal Service (USPS), 369, 435
V
VeriChip, 310
Verily, 118
Verizon Wireless, 387
Viadeo, 113
Vimeo, 225
Volvo, 236
VTech, 353
W
Walgreens, 32
Walmart, 32, 85, 137, 197, 205, 266, 
276, 280, 285, 287, 334–335, 344
Wanelo, 177
Warby Parker, 76
Warner Brothers, 102, 158
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit 
Authority, 96
Washington Post, 203
Washington Times, 223
Weibo, 467
Wells Fargo Bank, 194, 430
Western Union, 102, 348
Wharton School of Business, 108
WhatsApp, 399, 427, 451
WikiLeaks, 419, 423, 440
Wikipedia, 93, 136, 219, 220, 232, 
237
Winton Capital Management, 172
Wipro, 36
WorldCom, 457
X
XING, 113
Y
Yahoo!, 181, 386, 429, 467
Yelp, 188, 231
YouTube, 32, 65, 72, 94, 119, 136, 143, 
145, 185, 218, 219, 221, 225, 228, 
237, 240, 359, 361, 439, 467
Z
Zappos, 99, 139, 205, 206
Zara, 99
Zed-Sales, 332
Zynga, 151

545
A
Acceptable use policy, 445
Access-control software, 449–450
AccuWeather, 220
Active tags, 128
Activity trackers, 73
Adaptive maintenance, 397
Ad hoc queries, 263–264
Administrative activities, 305
Adobe Marketing Cloud, 205
ADSL. See Asymmetric digital subscriber 
line
Advanced analytics, 254, 257–258, 
267–268, 273
association discovery in, 274
business intelligence and, 254
clustering and classification in, 275–276
core concepts in, 289
data mining in, 274, 275
intelligent agent systems in, 280–282
intelligent systems in, 279–280
machine learning in, 277–278
predictive modeling in, 278–279
text mining in, 276
unstructured data analysis in, 276
web content mining in, 276–277
web usage mining in, 277
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Network (ARPANET), 500
Advertising, 184, 408
Adware, 426–427
Affiliate marketing, 90
Ageing-in-Place Programme (AIP), 293
Agile methodology, 400–401
AI. See Artificial intelligence
Algorithms, 274, 362
Alpha testing, 396
ALU. See Arithmetic logic unit
Amateurization of journalism, 223
Amazon FireTV, 114
Amazon Kindle, 55
Amazon Prime Air (APA), 369
Amazon Prime Now, 369
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 146–147, 
163, 299
American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange (ASCII), 474
Analog, 425, 447
Analog signals, 503
Analytical CRM, 354–355, 359–360
Android, 52, 128, 147, 189, 287, 386, 467
Anonymous (hacktivists), 418–419, 424
Anonymous behaviors, 235
Anti-Cybersquatting Consumer Protection 
Act, 434
APA. See Amazon Prime Air
Apache OpenOffice, 232, 348, 386
Apache Pig, 415
Apple iPad, 339
Apple iPhone, 59, 155, 187, 280, 339–
340, 342, 436
Apple iPods, 225
Apple iTunes, 133, 198, 225
Apple Pay, 187, 191–192
Apple Siri, 280
Applets, 483
AppleTV, 114
Apple Watch, 38
Application software, 124
cloud computing advances of, 152–157
code of conduct for, 384
for CRM, 352
databases and, 257–258
standalone, 308
Apps, 40
Arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 474
AroundMe, 220
Artificial intelligence (AI), 43, 172, 277, 
279–280
Ashley Madison, 281
Association discovery, 274
Associations, 507–509
Asymmetric digital subscriber line 
(ADSL), 504
Asymmetric encryption, 452
Asynchronous, 212
Asynchronous communications, 213
Attribute, 259
Audio, 472
Auditing, of IS, 457
Augmented reality, 98, 350
Authentication, 399, 448, 487
Authentication service, 487
Automated Biometric Identification 
System (IDENT), 414
Automatic call distribution systems, 357
Automating, 81
Automobile industry, 326
AWS. See Amazon Web Services
B
B2B. See Business-to-business
B2C. See Business-to-consumer
Babbel, 66
Backbone, 496, 503
Backdoors, 423, 436
BackRub (algorithm), 235
Backup policy, 445
Backups, 446
Backup sites, 446
Backward looking budgets, 256
Balance of power, 436
Bandwidth, 133
Bar code readers, 471
Basic input/output system (BIOS), 
475
Batch data, 471
Batch processing, 471
Benefits
analysis of costs and, 380–382
of CRM, 352
of enterprise systems, 315–316
of e-tailing, 177–179
of extranets, 138–139
identifying, 379–380, 383
intangible and tangible, 379
of SCM, 340–342
Best-cost provider strategy, 85
Best practices, 283
Best practices software, 313–314
Beta testing, 396
BI. See Business intelligence
Big Data, 42–44
healthcare using, 288
IoT and, 257
open source projects and, 386
size measurements of, 415
social media generating, 220
storage needs from, 143
Binary codes, 474
Biodegradable materials, 219
Biofuel, 87
Biometrics, 449
BIOS. See Basic input/output system
Bitcoin, 193–194
Bits, 474
Blackboard, 32
Blockchain, 194
Blog, 223
Bluetooth, 154, 173, 187, 489
Blu-ray, 100–101
Booby-trap programs, 458
Booking.com, 220
Bot, 280
Botnets, 430–431
Bounce rate, 186
BPI. See Bytes per inch
BPM. See Business process management
BPR. See Business process reengineering
Brainprint, 453
Break-even analysis, 380
Brick-and-mortar business strategy, 
171, 192, 199
Bricks-and-clicks business strategy 
172
Bring your own device (BYOD), 40
British Standards Institute (BSI), 368
Subject Index

546    SUBJECT INDEX
Broadcasting, 408
Brokerage, online, 171
BSI. See British Standards Institute
Budgets, backward looking, 256
Bullwhip effect, 341
Business analytics, 254
Business case. See Making the business 
case
Business competency, 50
Business continuity plan, 445, 454
Businesses
ERP requirements of, 318, 327
internet connectivity of, 505
IS value to, 81, 335
mobile device dependence of, 97
outsourcing used by, 36
technology changing, 51
Business intelligence (BI), 143, 294
advanced analytics and, 254
core concepts in, 289
database inputs to, 257–258, 289
digital dashboards, 270–271
DSSs and, 268
information visualization in, 270–272
mobile, 272
OLAP, 269
visual analytics in, 271–272
Business/IT alignment, 89
Business models, 89, 113
cloning, 206
components of, 91
in digital world, 89–97
platform-based, 93–95
service-based, 95–96
service-oriented, 43
technology-enabled, 76–77 
Business processes, 78, 353
conditions for improvement of, 315
core, 300–302
databases supporting, 124–126
enterprise systems in, 312–316
ERP core components in, 318–320
of organizations, 327
streamlining of, 314–315
supporting, 309–316
sustainable, 342
Business process management (BPM), 
89, 314–315
Business process reengineering (BPR), 
314
Business rules, 262
Business-to-business (B2B), 169, 338
EC, 336–337, 348–349
financial transactions in, 348–349
SCM improving processes of, 364
Business-to-business marketplaces, 338
Business-to-consumer (B2C), 166, 169, 
171–179, 194–196, 200, 349
Bus network, 494
Buyer agents, 280
BYOD. See Bring your own device
Bytes, 415, 474
Bytes per inch (BPI), 477
C
C2B. See Consumer-to-business
C2C. See Consumer-to-consumer
Cable modems, 504
Cables, networking, 494–497
Cache, 474, 475
CAD. See Computer-aided design
Call centers, 357
Campus area network (CAN), 134, 488
CAN. See Campus area network
Canvas, 32
Capabilities, 86
Capital expenditure, 379
CAPTCHA, 429
Carbon footprint, 342, 345
Cardiac monitors, 41
Card security code, 195
Careers
computer-related, 43–44
IS used by, 34
opportunities for, 47–53, 66
Carrier sense multiple access/collision 
avoidance (CSMA/CA), 494
Cascading style sheets (CSS), 483
CASE. See Computer-aided software 
engineering
Cathode ray tubes (CRT), 478
CCTV. See Closed-circuit television 
systems
CD-R (compact disc-recordable), 
477
CD-RW (compact disc-rewritable), 
477
Cells, 497
Cellular phones, 122, 497–498
Center for Innovation, Testing, and 
Evaluation (CITE), 103
Centralized computing, 485–486
Central processing unit (CPU), 141–142, 
473–474
Certificate authority, 452
CGI. See Computer-generated imagery
Change request management, 398
Character recognition, 471
Characters per inch, 477
Chargeback rates, 195
Chatbots, 224, 280, 281
China, 166–167, 187, 340, 467
CITE. See Center for Innovation, Testing, 
and Evaluation
Classification, 275–276
Click-and-mortar business strategy, 
172–173, 179
Clickbait, 234, 247
Click fraud, 185
Click-only business strategy, 172–174
Clickstream data, 277
Click-through rate, 186, 408
Click-wrap licenses, 405
Clients, 133–134
Client-server networks, 133
Climate change, 38, 216
Clock speed, 473, 474
Clock tick, 474
Cloning, business models, 206
Closed-circuit television (CCTV) systems, 
454
Cloud-based architectures, 305
Cloud-based collaboration tools, 229
Cloud computing, 33, 41–42, 163, 332
application advances in, 152–157
characteristics of, 147–148
costs of, 151
data warehouses and, 267
defining, 145–147
external acquisition through, 406
freemium approach in, 92
grid computing in, 153–155
managing, 149–151
openness in, 151
overview of, 144–145
security and privacy in, 150–151
telecommunications in, 155–156
types of, 149
Cloud security, 452
Clustering, 275–276
CMS. See Content management system
Coaxial cable, 495
COBIT. See Control objectives for 
information and related technology
Code of conduct, 65–66, 384
Cold backup site, 446
Collaboration, 212, 231, 336
cloud-based, 229
defining, 212
employee portals for, 137, 216–218
groupware for, 214–215
intranet for, 216–218
social media enhancing, 229–230, 242
tools for, 213
videoconferencing for, 215–216
virtual teams for, 212–213
web-based, 230
Collaborative computing, 486–487
Collaborative CRM, 354–355, 361–363
Collaborative economy, 94
Collaborative computing, 486
Collective intelligence, 230
Collector, 431
College education, 33
Collocation facilities, 455
Combination primary key, 507
Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) 
software, 386, 387
Commercial software, 318
Communications
asynchronous and synchronous, 213
collaborative CRM enhancing, 
361–363
human, 131–132
internal, 212
near-field, 193, 199
outsourcing and costs of, 36
personalized, 363
protocols for, 132


SUBJECT INDEX    547
social media enhancing, 222–224, 242
telecommunications and, 44–45, 155–156
Competitive advantage, 58, 87
from databases, 124–126
enterprise-wide information systems for, 
298–299
through innovation, 102
with IS, 58–59
resources and capabilities in, 86
Competitive forces, 84–85
Competitive intelligence, 276
Compilers, 480
Compliance, 317
Computer Abuse Amendments Act, 435
Computer-aided design (CAD), 363
Computer-aided software engineering 
(CASE), 484–485
Computer-assisted audit tools, 457
Computer cluster, 511
Computer crime, 194–196, 418–419, 420
criminal types committing, 421–422
cyberbullying, 419, 432
cybercriminals, 180, 399, 402, 459
cyberharassment, 235, 432
cybersquatting, 434
cyberstalking, 432
DoS attacks, 426
federal laws against, 434–435
hackers and crackers as, 420
malware and, 425–431
software piracy, 432–434
types of, 460
unauthorized access and, 422–423
unauthorized data modification and, 423
Computer ethics, 60, 65–66
Computer fluency, 44
Computer forensics, 458–459
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, 434, 435
Computer-generated imagery (CGI), 158
Computer literacy, 43
Computer networking, 132, 133
Computers
brief history of, 141
centralized, 485–486
classes of, 126–127
functioning of, 473–478
grid computing using, 153
occupations related to, 43–44
personal, 127
responsible use of, 65–66
software utilities for, 480
super, 126, 153
zombie, 426–427, 430
Computer viruses, 425–431
Computing, green, 157–158
Computing, serverless, 149
Confidential information policy, 445
Connections, 233–236
Consumerization of IT, 40, 142
Consumers
hierarchy of needs of, 181
privacy of, 63–64
websites meeting needs of, 180–182
Consumer-to-business (C2B), 169, 
190–191
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C), 166, 
169, 189–190
Content delivery networks, 152, 155
Content management system (CMS), 
230
Continuous planning process, 256, 257, 
258
Continuous process improvement, 315
Control objectives for information and 
related technology (COBIT), 458
Control unit, 474
Conversion rate, 186
Conversion strategies, 396–397
Cookies, 64, 429–430
Cooperation, 225–228
Coordination, 336
Copyright, 197, 433
Core activities, 303–304
Core business processes, 300–302
Core competencies, 49
Corporate social responsibility, 341–342
Corporations. See Businesses; 
Organizations
Corrections industry, 325
Corrective controls, 444
Corrective maintenance, 397
Cost-benefit analysis, 380–382
Costs
of cloud computing, 151
of education, 108
of enterprise systems, 315–316
intangible and tangible, 379
leadership strategy, 85
marginal, 92
non-recurring and recurring, 379
outsourcing and communications, 36
outsourcing savings of, 37
technology and environmental, 59
technology and social, 59
types of, 379
COTS. See Commercial off-the-shelf
Counterfeit goods, 167
Countries, developing, 122
CPU. See Central processing unit
Crackers, 420, 430, 460
Criminal types, 421–422
Critical mass, 237–238
CRM. See Customer relationship 
management
CRM systems, 362
Cross-channel retailing, 173
Cross docking, 334
Crowdfunding, 107–108
Crowdsourcing, 233
CRT. See Cathode ray tubes
Cryptocurrencies, 171, 193–194
Cryptography, 451
CSI effect, 459
CSMA/CA. See Carrier sense multiple 
access/collision avoidance
CSS. See Cascading style sheets
Culture, 237
Customer engagement centers, 357
Customer-focused organizations, 360
Customer portal, 338
Customer relationship management 
(CRM) system, 124, 312, 349–351, 
352
analytical, 354–355
applications for, 352
architecture of, 354–358
benefits of, 352
collaborative, 354–355
customer mobile, 358
developing strategy for, 353–354
ethical concerns in, 363
longterm relationships from, 364
operational, 354–359
social, 360
Customers
information, 263
mobile CRM for, 358
portals, 338–339
Customer service, 304–305, 353
Customer service and support, 356–358
Customization, 312–313
Custom software, 312, 385–386
Cyberattacks, 418–419, 430–431
Cyberbullying, 419, 432
Cybercriminals, 180, 399, 402, 459
Cyber-espionage, 420
Cyberharassment, 235, 432
Cyberspace, 438
Cybersquatting, 434
Cyberstalking, 432
Cyberterrorism, 421, 435, 437–440,  
460
Cybertheft, 106
Cyberwar, 435, 436, 437–438, 460
D
Dark net, 458
Dark web, 136, 164, 458
Data. See also Information
clickstream, 277
collection of, 354
in Information Age, 43
IoT expanding, 275, 415
in IS, 46
master data management, 262
mirrored, 446
mobile devices generating, 271
modeling, 392
OLAP cube of, 269
organizations driven by, 254–255
semistructured, 256
slicing and dicing of, 269
structured, 256
types of, 130
unauthorized modification of, 423
unstructured, 256
unstructured analysis of, 276
Data analytics, in healthcare, 293–294

548    SUBJECT INDEX
Database management systems 
(DBMSs), 125, 259–260
Database of Intentions, 61–62
Databases, 124
ad hoc queries and reports of, 263–264
advanced models of, 511
advantages of, 260
application software and, 257–258
as BI application inputs, 257–258, 289
business processes supported  
by, 124–126
competitive advantage from, 124–126
data marts, 267
data warehouses, 266
designing, 394
electronic commerce and, 125, 257–258
entering and querying, 262–263
foundation concepts of, 259
informational systems and, 265
interactive websites using, 258–259
IoT and, 260–262
management of, 262, 506–511
master data management, 262
MySQL, 387
NoSQL, 261–262, 511
online transaction processing, 
264–265
operational systems of, 265
organizations using, 125–126
privacy and, 61–62
sample table of, 259
types of, 260–262
Data centers, 139–140, 144, 299, 378
Data center security, 453
Data cleansing, 266
Data dictionary, 262
Data-driven organization, 264
Data entry form, 395
Data flows, 392
Data marts, 267
Data mining, 274, 275, 289
Data mining agent, 280
Data models, 262
Data packet, 492
Data privacy statements, 63
Data quality, 46
Data reduction, 274
Data redundancy, 511
Data science, 273
Data structures, 508
Data type, 262
Data warehouses, 53, 266, 267
DBMSs. See Database management 
systems
Deceptive business practices, 281
Decision making
GIS used in, 285–287
IT investment, 382–383
managerial level, 79–80
organizational level, 78
Decision support systems (DSSs), 268
Dedicated grid, 155
Deep web, 136, 164 
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 500
Demand fluctuations, 143–144
Demographic changes, 37
Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, 426
Density, 477
Desktop videoconferencing, 215
Desktop virtualization, 133
Destructive agents, 280
Detective controls, 444
Developing countries, 122
Developmental testing, 396
Device drivers, 128
Dial-up, 503
Differentiation strategy, 85
Digital dashboards, 79, 270–271, 359
Digital divide, 34–35
Digital infrastructure, 121
Digital media, 64
Digital nomads, 90
Digital products, 169
Digital rights management (DRM), 
197–198
Digital signals, 503
Digital subscriber line (DSL), 504
Digital video discs, 477
Digital watermark, 198
Digital world
business models in, 89–97
payments secured in, 191–196
radical innovations in, 38–44
revenue models in, 90–93
social commerce in, 176–177
societal issues in, 35–38
technological changes in, 32–35, 65
Digitized, 474
Dimensions, 269
Directory services, 487
Disaster planning, 445–446
Disaster recovery plan, 445
Discount rate, 380
Discriminating algorithms, 362
Discussion forums, 214–215
Disintermediation, 94, 171, 174, 200
Disk-based storage media, 131
Display advertising, 184
Disruptive growth engine, 104
Disruptive innovation cycle, 104–105
Disruptive innovations, 97
Distinctive competency, 86
Distributed computing, 486–487
Distribution planning, 346
DIWO. See Do-it-with-others
DIY. See Do-it-yourself
DNA testing, 459
DNS. See Domain Name System
Document analysis, 391
Documentation, 396
Do-it-with-others (DIWO), 372
Do-it-yourself (DIY), 372
Domain names, 135–136
Domain Name System (DNS), 502
DoS. See Denial-of-service attacks
Downstream information flow, 307, 
311, 364
Doxing, 432
Drill-down, 264, 269
Drill-down report, 264
Drive-by hacking, 450
Driverless cars, 326
DRM. See Digital rights management
Drone technology, 252–253, 298, 369
DSL. See Digital subscriber line
DSSs. See Decision support systems
Dumb terminals, 486
Dumpster diving, 422
DVD-ROM (digital versatile disc-read-
only memory), 477
Dynamic pricing models, 176
E
e-auctions, 190, 200
e-business, 34
EC. See Electronic commerce
EC2. See Elastic Compute Cloud
e-commerce, 125, 171–179
Economic opportunities, 105
Economics, 37
ECPA. See Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act
EDI. See Electronic Data Interchange
Education, 108
EEG. See Electroencephalogram
Effectiveness, 79
Efficiency, 78
e-finance, 170–171
e-government security, 466
EFT. See Electronic funds transfer
e-government, 169–170
EHR. See Electronic health record
EKG. See Electrocardiogram
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), 146
Electric cars, 326
Electric delivery vans, 192
Electrocardiogram (EKG), 288
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 288
Electromagnetic interference (EMI), 495
Electronic bill pay, 171
Electronic commerce (EC), 168
B2B, 336–337, 348–349
C2B, 190–191
C2C, 189–190
click-and-mortar business strategy in, 
172–173
database technology and, 125, 257–258
legal issues in, 196–199, 200
with mobile devices, 168–169
online, 181–182
payments secured in, 191–196
systems for, 55
taxation in, 196–197
types of, 168–169


SUBJECT INDEX    549
Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
(ECPA), 62, 434
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), 337
Electronic devices, 59
Electronic funds transfer (EFT), 193
Electronic health record (EHR), 73
Electronic meeting system, 214–215
Electronics, dissolvable, 219
e-mail, 90, 428–429
addresses, 196
confirmation, 64
marketing, 184–185
privacy, 62–63
productivity loss from, 374–375
Sarbanes-Oxley Act and, 458
Embedded systems, 127
EMI. See Electromagnetic interference
Employee portals, 137, 216–218
Employee self-service, 218
Enabling technologies, 105
Encryption, 451–452
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 219
End-to-end encryption, 452
Energy, 144
Energy consumption, 216
Enterprise-level systems, 305
Enterprise license, 405
Enterprise marketing management, 
358–359
Enterprise resource planning  
(ERP), 316, 332
business requirements in, 318, 327
choosing, 317
compliance and regulatory demands in, 
317
core components of, 318–320
extended components in, 319
installation of, 322
limitations of, 322
make-to-stock/order process in, 321
mobile devices and, 323
order-to-cash process in, 320
procure-to-pay process in, 320–321
Enterprise search, 217
Enterprise software, 313
Enterprise systems, 54, 309, 327
achieving success in, 322–323
benefits and costs of, 315–316
in business processes, 312–316
executive sponsorship of, 323–324
implementing, 323, 324–326
information integration from, 309
outside experts assisting, 324
rise of, 308–309
user training of, 324
Enterprise WAN, 488
Enterprise-wide information systems, 
298–299, 309
Entertainment industry, 198
Entity, 259
Entity-relationship diagram (ERD), 
392, 509
Environment, 454
green computing and, 157–158, 305
green supply chain and, 345
online shopping influencing, 192
renewable energy and, 216
sustainable business practices  
and, 342
technological costs to, 59
technologies impact on, 44
underwater data center and, 378
U.S. Navy and, 87
ERD. See Entity-relationship diagram
ERP. See Enterprise resource planning
ERP core components, 318
ERP extended components, 319
e-tailing, 172, 200
benefits of, 177–179
disintermediation in, 174
drawbacks of, 179
group buying in, 176
long tail in, 174–175
mass customization in, 175–176
revenue and pricing models in, 176
social commerce in, 176–177
Ethernet, 492
Ethernet card, 492
Ethics
AI, 280
app development, 384
code of conduct, 65–66
computer, 60, 65–66
CRM with concerns of, 363
cyberwar and, 438
digital divide and, 34
of discriminating algorithms, 362
electronic device use, 59
in IS, 60–66
online product reviews and, 239
reputation management and, 178
in sharing economy, 96
of software piracy, 433–434
of sustainable business practices, 342
of text mining, 276
of unauthorized IT use, 455
Evaluation criteria, 405
Evernote, 229
Exception reports, 264
Executable, 480
Executive level, 80
Executive sponsorship, 323–324
Exit rate, 186
Expedia, 220
Expenditures, non-capital, 379
Explicit knowledge assets, 282
Extensible Business Reporting 
Language (XBRL), 348
Extensible Markup Language (XML), 
347–348
External acquisition, 401–406, 409
Externally focused systems, 311
Extraction, transformation, and 
loading, 266
Extranet, 137–139
eXtreme Programming (XP), 401
F
Facebook Live, 226
Facility security, 454–455
Fact, 269
Facts, arguments based on, 379
Fair Information Practice Principles, 63
Faith, arguments based on, 377–378
Fear, arguments based on, 378–379
Federal laws, 434–435
Fiber-optic cable, 496–497
Fiber to the home (FTTH), 505
Fiber to the premises, 505
Filter bubble, 234
Financial flow, 348
Financial management, 318–319
Financial services, 171
Financial transactions, 348–349
Fingerprint readers, 449
Fintech, 171
FireChat, 467
Firefox browser, 164, 185, 232, 386,  
430
Firewall, 136, 450
First-call resolution, 351
First-mover advantage, 84
Five dimensions (5D), 35
Flappy Bird, 390
Flash animation, 484
Flash drive, 477
Flash memory, 476
Flat-file databases, 510
Flickr, 220
Folksonomy, 227
Ford Model T, 175
Forecasting, 345
Foreign key, 507
Forms, 263
Foursquare, 220
Foxconn, 340
Fraud, 196
Freecycling, 190
Freemium models, 90, 92–93
FTTH. See Fiber to the home
Fulfillment centers, 299
Functional area information system, 80–81
Functional convenience, 180–181
Fuzzy logic, 278
G
G2B. See Government-to-business
G2C. See Government-to-citizen
G2G. See Government-to-government
Gamergate, 235
Gaming, 57
GB. See Gigabytes
Generation gap, 238
Generic top-level domains (gTLDs), 135

550    SUBJECT INDEX
Geneva Conventions, 438
Geographical information system 
(GIS), 285–287
Geographic information, 285
Geospatial metadata, 226, 286
Geotag, 226–227
GFS. See Google File System
Ghz. See Gigahertz
Gigabytes (GB), 476
Gigahertz (Ghz), 474
Gig economy, 94
GIS. See Geographical information 
system
Global culture, 66
Globalization
challenges to, 36–37
education, 108
organizational challenges of, 37, 255
skills needed in, 66
societal issues in, 35–38
software piracy and, 433–434
terrorism and, 368
Global network, 489
Global positioning system (GPS), 34, 187, 
231, 339
Global supply chain, 368
Gmail, 42, 119, 149, 169, 218, 467
Google Adwords, 184, 206
Google Alerts, 361
Google Apps, 55, 229
Google Calendar, 42
Google Docs, 42, 119
Google File System (GFS), 415
Google Glass, 98
Google Gmail, 119
Google Hangouts, 36, 156–157
Google Maps, 125, 220, 227, 285, 287
Google Play, 114
Google Scholar, 467
Google Chromecast, 114
Google Street View, 125
Google Wallet, 191
Government-to-business (G2B), 170
Government-to-citizen (G2C), 170
Government-to-government (G2G),  
170
GPS. See Global positioning system
Graphical user interface (GUI), 264, 
271, 481
Green computing, 157–158, 424
Green IT, 44, 144, 305, 342, 378
Green shopping, 192
Green supply chain, 345
Grid computing, 134, 153–155, 486
Group buying, 176
Groupware, 213, 214–215
gTLDs. See Generic top-level domains
GUI. See Graphical user interface
H
Hackers, 106, 154, 180, 281, 420, 437, 450
Hacktivist, 418–420
Hadoop cluster, 511
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), 
386, 415
Hard drives, 131, 475–476
Hardware, 44, 47
in information systems, 126–128
obsolescence and, 140–143
software cycle with, 142
Hashtag, 224
HCI. See Human-computer interface
HD. See High-definition
HDFS. See Hadoop Distributed File 
System
Head crash, 476
Healthcare, 44, 73, 212, 288, 293–294
Healthcare IS, 44
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 150
Heartbleed security bug, 430
Hedge funds, 172
Help desks, 357
High-definition (HD), 100–101
High-frequency radio signals, 497–498
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act
HITs. See Human intelligence tasks
Home automation, 41
Honeypot, 458
Hootsuite, 361
Hot backup site, 446
Hot-button issues, 384–385
HP Supplier portal, 338
HSPA+ (High Speed Packet Access), 498
HTML. See Hypertext Markup Language
HTML editors, 482
HTML tags, 482–483
HTTP. See Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Human-based computing, 233
Human body movement, 380
Human communication, 131–132
Human-computer interface (HCI), 
394–395
Human controls, 455
Human intelligence tasks (HITs), 233
Human resource activities, 306
Human resource management, 318
Hurricanes, 272
Hyper-stimulation, 56
Hyperlink, 134
Hypertext, 134
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), 
134, 347, 482
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), 
134–135
I
IaaS. See Infrastructure as a Service
IAFIS. See Integrated Automated 
Fingerprint Identification System
IBM Connections, 223
ICANN. See Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers
ICPs. See Internet content providers
IDENT. See Automated Biometric 
Identification System
Identification, 447
Identity theft, 191, 431
IIoT. See Industrial Internet of Things
Impact Team, 281
Impression-based models, 185
In-app purchases, 93
Inbound logistics activities, 304
Incident handling procedures, 445
Incident response, 458
Indiegogo, 107
Industrial espionage, 421
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), 
41, 97
Industrial Revolution, 34
Industry
automobile, 326
corrections, 325
entertainment, 198
GIS used in, 286
movie, 158
pharmaceutical, 219
using data warehouses, 266
Influencers, on social media, 361
Information, 41
customer, 263
digital dashboards representing, 
270–271
downstream flow of, 307
enterprise systems integrating, 309
integrated, 254
from mobile devices, 188–189
organization flow of, 311
real-time access to, 217
scanners inputting, 472
from social media, 294
standalone systems with flow of, 308
upstream flow of, 307, 311
visualization of, 270–272, 289
Information Age
data in, 43
privacy in, 60
responsible computer use in, 65–66
Informational systems, 265
Information flow, 307, 311, 347, 348
Information privacy, 60–64
Information property, 61–62
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers 
(ISAC), 456
Information system audit, 457
Information system risk assessment, 
442
Information systems (IS), 32, 44
acquiring, 401–408
approaches to building, 399–401
auditing of, 457
automation with, 81
business case arguments for, 377–382
business value from, 81, 335
career opportunities in, 47–53
competitive advantage with, 58–59


SUBJECT INDEX    551
components of, 46–47
core competencies in, 49
data in, 46
defining, 44–45
development in, 387–389, 393
dual nature of, 57–59
enterprise-wide, 298–299, 309
ethics in, 60–66
geographical, 285–287
hardware in, 126–128
healthcare, 44
job titles and descriptions in, 49
maintenance of, 397–399
measuring productivity of, 375–376
mobile devices and, 127
networking in, 131–139
occupations using, 34
organizational functions, 82
organizational strategy with, 84
organizations using, 54, 83–84
organizing functions of, 55–56
personnel value in, 48
quantifying productivity gains from, 
374–376
risk assessment of, 442–444
touchpoints in, 173
types of, 53–55
users in, 51–53
value chain analysis, 88–89
Information systems architecture, 123
Information systems controls, 444
Information systems infrastructure, 121
analog for securing, 425, 447
components of, 159
data centers, 139–140
demand fluctuations in, 143–144
energy needs in, 144
facility security of, 454–455
hardware in, 126–128
influence of, 121–123
issues managing, 140–144, 159
networking, 131–139
overview, 120–124
storage in, 130–131
system software in, 128–130
Information systems planning, 390
Information systems risk assessment, 
442
Information systems security, 441
access-control software in, 449–450
biometrics in, 449
cloud computing and, 150–151
controls for, 446–456
data center security for, 453
disaster planning for, 445–446
encryption in, 451–452
firewalls for, 450
human controls for, 455
incident response in, 458
MDM and, 455
monitoring, 456–459
physical access restrictions in, 447–448
strategy for, 444–446
systems development control in, 455
threats to, 424–425, 440–442
training for, 456
two-factor authentication in, 449
VPNs in, 450
WLANs and, 450
Information technology (IT), 45
businesses alignment with, 89
consumerization of, 40, 142
ethics of unauthorized use of, 455
green, 44, 144, 305, 342, 378
investment decision making in, 382–383
Infrared line of sight, 497
Infrastructure, 120
Infrastructure activities, 305–306
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 148, 
159
Initial public offering (IPO), 205
In-memory computing, 269, 325
Innovations, 97
competitive advantage through, 102
difficult choices in, 101
in digital world, 38–44
disruptive, 97, 104–105
investments in radical, 97, 105–106
open, 101
organizational requirements for, 99, 
102–103
process of, 103–105
riskiness of, 100–101
risk tolerance in, 103
value of, 97–99
The Innovator’s Solution (Christensen and 
Raynor), 104
Input technologies, 471
Insider threats, 422
Instant messaging, 224
Intangible benefits, 379
Intangible costs, 379
Integrated Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (IAFIS), 414
Integrated information, 254
Integrated services digital network 
(ISDN), 503–504
Intel Core i7 Extreme CPU, 142
Intellectual property (IP), 64–65, 197
Intelligent agent, 280–282
Intelligent systems, 279–280
Interactive voice response (IVR), 472
Interexchange carriers, 505
Internal communications, 212
Internally focused systems, 309
International Space Station (ISS), 343
Internet, 134
anonymous behaviors on, 235
backbone, 496, 503
broad access to, 147
businesses connecting to, 505
characteristics of, 139
competitive forces influenced by, 85
connecting to, 502–505
domain names on, 135–136
as global network, 134
Heartbleed bug on, 430
management of, 501–502
marketing, 182–187
marketing performance on, 185–187
mobile device traffic on, 145
net neutrality on, 198–199
network connections in, 500–501
networking and, 131
payment models on, 185
renewable energy and, 145
roots of, 500
TCP/IP used for, 491–492
terrorism changed by, 438–439
text mining of, 276–277
Web 2.0 and, 218–219
Internet backbone, 496
Internet content providers (ICPs), 467
Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers (ICANN), 
135
Internet exchange points (IXPs), 503
Internet hoax, 427
Internet hosts, 505–506
Internet of Everything (IoE), 41
Internet of Things (IoT), 40, 81, 127, 
169, 256, 287
Big Data and, 257
databases and, 260–262
data expanding in, 275, 415
enterprise software and, 313
green IT and, 44
maker movement and, 372–373
physical objects networked in, 40–41
service-based model in, 95–96
servitization through, 43
supply chain indicators in, 349
wearable technology, 38
Internet over satellite (IoS), 504–505
Internet protocol (IP)
addresses, 135–136
convergence, 152, 156
Internet service providers (ISP), 467
Internet Tax Freedom Act, 197
Internet troll, 235
Internetworking, 54
InterNIC, 502
Interorganizational systems, 311
Interpreters, 480
Interviews, 391
Intranet, 136–137, 139, 216–218
Inventory management systems, 78
Investments
comparing competing, 381–382
for competitive advantage, 97–98
IT decision making for, 382–383
in radical innovations, 97, 105–106
IoE. See Internet of Everything
iOS, 128, 189, 231
IoS. See Internet over satellite
IoT. See Internet of Things
IP, 491. See also Intellectual property; 
Internet protocol
IP address, 135

552    SUBJECT INDEX
IP convergence, 156
IP datagram, 492
IPO. See Initial public offering
IPv6, 502
IS. See Information systems
ISAC. See Information Sharing and 
Analysis Centers
ISDN. See Integrated services digital 
network
ISS. See International Space Station
IVR. See Interactive voice response
IXPs. See Internet exchange points
J
JAD. See Joint Application Design
Jailbreaking, 424, 455
Java, 483
JavaScript, 484
JD Edwards EnterpriseOne, 319
JIT. See Just in time
Job titles and descriptions, 49
Joint Application Design (JAD), 391
Journalism, 223
Just-in-time (JIT), 340–341
K
Kbps. See Kilobits per second
Key generator, 433
Key-indicator reports, 264
Keyloggers, 422
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 
79–80
Kickstarter, 107–108
Kilobits per second (Kbps), 133
Knowledge, 46
Knowledge assets, 282
Knowledge economy, 34
Knowledge management, 282–285
Knowledge management systems, 
283–285
Knowledge portals, 284
Knowledge society, 33–34
Knowledge workers, 33–34
KPIs. See Key performance indicators
Kunming Train Station, 467
L
LAN. See Local area network
Languages, 66, 479–485
HTML, 134, 347, 482
SQL, 263
XBRL, 348
XML, 347–348
Law of unintended consequences, 103
Layers, 285
LCD. See Liquid crystal display
Learning, organizational, 83–84
Learning management systems, 230
Leased lines, 505
Least permissions, 444
Least privileges, 444
Legacy systems, 308
Legal issues, 196–199, 200
Licensing, of software, 405–406
Like farming, 247
Linux operating system, 128, 232, 386
Liquid crystal display (LCD), 478
Loading, 266
Loan application process, 82–83
Local area network (LAN), 133, 134, 
488, 490
Location analytics, 285
Location-aware, 231
Location-based services, 187–188
Logic bombs, 426
Long tail, 174–175
Lotus Notes, 55, 214
Low-cost leadership strategy, 85
M
Machine language, 480
Machine learning, 276, 277–278
Magnetic ink character recognition, 471
Maharajas, 51
Mahout, 415
Mainframes, 126
Mainstream wants, 174–175
Maintenance, 397–399
Maker movement, 372–373
Make-to-order process, 302, 321
Make-to-stock process, 302, 321
Making the business case, 374
arguments for, 376–382
objectives in, 374
productivity paradox in, 374–376
Malicious software, 52, 399, 402
Malware, 425
analog equipment not influenced by, 
425, 447
attackers using, 106
car hacking using, 154
clickbait, 247
computer crime and, 425–431
mobile devices infected by, 399
phishing, 428–431
ransomware as, 426
zombie computers spreading, 426
Management. See also Customer 
relationship management
business process, 89, 314–315
change request, 398
of cloud computing, 149–151
of databases, 262, 506–511
digital rights, 197–198
enterprise marketing, 358–359
financial, 318–319
hot-button issues of, 384–385
human resource, 318
of internet, 501–502
of IS infrastructure issues, 140–144, 159
knowledge, 282–285
master data, 262
mobile device, 455
operations, 318
reputation, 178
software asset, 405
supply chain, 311, 336–338, 340–345, 
364
Total Quality, 315
Management Information Systems 
(MIS), 53, 306
Managerial level, 79–80
Managers, 79, 388–389
Manufacturing activities, 304
Manufacturing process, 363
MapReduce, 415
Marginal costs, 92
Marketing
activities, 204
affiliate, 90
e-mail, 184–185
enterprise, 358–359
internet, 182–187
Internet and performance of, 185–187
mobile, 185
search, 183
social media, 185
viral, 236, 240
Marketplace Fairness Act, 197
Marketplaces, 166–167, 191, 197, 338
Markets, 174, 339
Mashups, 219–220
Mass customization, 175–176, 200
Massively open online courses (MOOCs), 
108
Mass market, 174
Master data, 262
Master data management, 262
Mbps. See Megabit per second
McAfee Labs, 426
MDM. See Mobile device management
measured service, 148
Measures, 269
metropolitan area network, 134
Media access control, 494
Media sharing, 225–226
Megabit per second (Mbps), 133
Megatrends, 35, 38–39
Megaupload.com, 418
Memory, 475
Memory, non-volatile, 475
Memory crystals, 35
Menu-driven pricing models, 176
Mesh network, 494
Metadata, 226
Metropolitan area network, 134, 488
Microblogging, 223–224, 239
Microprocessor, 473
Microsoft Access, 264, 394
Microsoft Cortana, 280
Microsoft Dynamics, 317, 320, 361
Microsoft Exchange, 55
Microsoft HoloLens, 98
Microsoft.NET, 483
Microsoft Office, 55, 124, 317, 348, 385


SUBJECT INDEX    553
Microsoft Office 365, 229
Microsoft OneNote, 229
Microsoft Outlook, 55, 133
Microsoft SharePoint, 230, 231
Microsoft web service, 399
Microsoft Xbox, 57
Micro-task marketplaces, 191, 233
Microwave transmission, 499
Midlevel managers, 79
Mirror, 446
MIS. See Management Information 
Systems
Mobile apps, creating, 390
Mobile banking, 171, 193
Mobile business intelligence, 272
Mobile commerce (m-commerce), 169, 
187–188, 200
Mobile CRM, 358
Mobile device management (MDM), 
455
Mobile devices, 210
app development ethics for, 384
backdoors to, 436
businesses depending on, 97
in China, 187
click-and-mortar approach, 172–173
CRM on, 358
cybercrime on, 399, 432
data generation of, 271
EC with, 168–169
e-finance on, 170–171
ERP systems embracing, 323
geographic information and, 285
growth in, 32
information from, 188–189
internet traffic from, 145
IS infrastructure and, 127
malicious software infecting, 399
management of, 455
in networking, 131, 134
payments using, 193
product sales on, 189
QR codes, 182
security threats on, 424–425
social networking on, 233–236
supply networks on, 339–340
trends in, 39–40
video calls on, 215
webcasts on, 225
wireless media for, 497–499
Yelp on, 231
Mobile marketing, 185
Mobile operating system, 52, 128
Mobile payments, 122
Mobile technology, 90
Mobile wireless, 505
Modeling, predictive, 278–279, 359
Modeling data, 392
Models, 268
cloning business, 206
data, 262
dynamic pricing, 176
freemium, 90, 92–93
impression based, 185
internet payment, 185
menu-driven pricing, 176
payment, 185
pay-per-click, 184, 185
platform-based business, 93–95
pricing, 176, 279, 408
revenue, 90–93
revenue and pricing, 176, 408
service, 148
service-based business, 95–96
service-oriented business, 43
technology-enabled business, 76–77
utility computing, 146
Modem (MOdulator/DEModulator), 
503–504
Modules, 312
Monitoring and sensing agent, 280
Monitoring security, 456–459
Monitors, 477–478
MOOCs. See Massively open online 
courses
Moodle, 32
Moore’s law, 101, 141–142, 341, 438,  
496
Motherboard, 473
Movie industry, 158
Mule herder, 431
Multichannel retailing, 173
Multi-core processor, 474
MyBoeingFleet, 338
MyDoom, 426
MySQL database, 387
N
Nanoscale laser, 35
National Science Foundation (NSF)  
500
National Science Foundation Network 
(NSFNET), 500
Nation primary key, 507
Near-field communication (NFC), 193, 
199
Nest Learning Thermostat, 41
Netflix, 36
Net neutrality, 198–199
Net-present-value analysis, 380
Netscape browser, 452
Network, 133
Network adapter, 492
Network effect, 40
Networking
cables, 494–497
computer, 132
evolution of, 485–487
hardware, 495
human communication in, 131–132
in information systems, 131–139
internet and, 131
mobile devices in, 131, 134
physical objects in, 40–41
servers, clients and peers in, 133–134
Network interface card (NIC), 492
Networks
bus, 494
client-server, 133
computer, 133
content delivery, 152, 155
global, 489
Internet as global, 134
internet connecting independent, 500–
501
local area, 133–134
mesh, 494
neural, 278–279
P2P, 133–134
personal area, 134
ring, 493–494
social, 224, 233–234, 239–240
standards and protocols of, 490–494
star, 492–493
technology, 494–499
telecommunications, 44–45
types of, 134, 487–490
virtual private, 137, 217, 450
wide area, 134
Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity), 134, 187
wireless local area, 134, 450
Network services, 487
Network topology, 492–494
Neural networks, 278–279
Next Generation Identification (NGI), 
414
NFC. See Near-field communication
NGI. See Next Generation Identification
NIC. See Network interface card
Niche market, 174
Nintendo Wii, 57
Non-capital expenditure, 379
Non-recurring costs, 379
Nonvolatile memory, 475
Normalization, 510–511
NoSQL, 261, 511
NoSQL databases, 261–262, 511
NSA. See National Security Agency
O
Object-oriented language, 480–481
Observations, 391
Obsolescence, 140–143
Occupational Outlook Handbook, 47
Oculus Rift, 98
Office automation systems, 55
Off-the-shelf software, 312, 385–386
OLAP. See Online analytical processing
OLAP cube, 269
OLAP server, 269
OLED. See Organic light-emitting diodes
Omni-channel retailing, 173
Onboard systems, 154
On-demand services, 77
Online advertising, 408
Online analytical processing  
(OLAP), 269

554    SUBJECT INDEX
Online banking, 171
Online brokerage, 171
Online classifieds, 190
Online community, 219
Online conversations, 360
Online predators, 432
Online privacy, 63–64
Online product reviews, 239
Online shopping, 192, 195
Online transaction processing, 264–265
Online travel, 241
Open innovation, 31, 101
Open source software, 232, 386–387
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) 
model, 491
Opentable, 220
Operating systems, 128, 473
Android, 52, 128, 147, 189, 287, 386, 467
functions of, 129–130
iOS, 128, 189, 231, 484
Linux, 128, 232, 386, 484
mobile, 52, 128
OS X, 128
types of, 479
Ubuntu, 128
Windows 10, 52, 128, 142
Windows XP, 142
Operational CRM, 354–359
Operational expenditure, 379
Operational level, 78
Operational systems, 264, 265
Operation Darknet, 419
Operations and manufacturing activities, 
304
Operations management, 318
Optical character recognition, 471
Optical disks, 477
Optical mark recognition, 471
Opt in, 63
Opt out, 63
OpWhales campaign, 424
Order-to-cash process, 300–301, 303, 320
Organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), 
478
Organizational activities, 302–306
Organizational context, 237
Organizational learning, 83–84
Organizational level decision making, 78
Organizational strategy, 84, 86
Organizations
Big Data available to, 255–256
business processes of, 327
continuous planning of, 256–258
customer-focused, 360
databases used by, 125–126
data-driven, 254–255
decision making of, 78
executive level, 80
extranets benefiting, 138–139
functional areas in, 80–81
globalization challenges to, 37, 255
information flows of, 311
innovation requirements of, 99, 102–103
IS functions in, 82
IS strategy of, 84
IS used in, 54, 83–84
social media issues of, 236–239
social networks used by, 234
technology in, 56–57, 89
using knowledge portals, 284
value chain activities of, 88, 302–306
value chain connecting, 307
OSI. See Open Systems Interconnection 
model
Outbound logistics activities, 304
Output technologies, 477–478
Outsourcing, 36, 409
communication costs influencing, 36
companies, 36
cost savings from, 37
in systems development, 406–408
Ownership, 95
P
P2P. See Peer-to-peer networks
Paas. See Platform as a Service
Package delivery system, 298
Packaged software, 312
Packet sniffers, 422
Packet switching, 490
Paid inclusion, 184
Paid search, 184
PAN. See Personal area network
Pandora, 32
PAPA. See Privacy, accuracy, property, 
and accessibility
Parental Intelligence System, 384
Passive tags, 128
Passwords, 448
Patch management systems, 398
Patents, 432–433
Patriot hackers, 437
Pay by fingerprint system, 199
Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard, 150
Payment models, 185
Payments
digital world securing, 191–196
internet models for, 185
mobile, 122
ransom, 180
systems for, 199
using mobile devices, 193
PayPal, 399
Pay-per-click models, 184, 185
PBX. See Private branch exchange
PCs. See Personal computers
Peer, 133
Peer production, 230
Peers, 133–134
Peer-to-peer (P2P) networks, 133–134
PEP. See Priority Enforcement Program
Perfective maintenance, 397
Peripherals, 128
Personal area network (PAN), 134, 489
Personal computers (PCs), 127
Personalization, of websites, 60
Personalized communications, 363
Personnel, qualified, 51
Pharmaceutical industry, 219
Phishing, 428–431
PHP, 484
Physical access restrictions, 447–448
Physical objects, IoT networking, 40–41
Physician’s Desk Reference, 288
PIN numbers, 448
Piracy, 167, 418
Pivotal Cloud Foundry, 163
Plain old telephone service (POTS), 503
Planned obsolescence, 142
Platform, 93
Platform as a Service (PaaS), 148–149, 159
Platform-based business models, 93–95
Playstation, 57, 58
PLCs. See Programmable logic controllers
Podcast, 225
Point-of-sale inventory system, 199
Policies, 199, 445
Porn bot, 261
Port, 477
Portals, 337
customer, 338–339
employee, 137, 216–218
HP Supplier, 338
knowledge, 284
supplier, 338
in supply chain management, 337–338
POTS. See Plain old telephone service
Power supply, 477
Predictive modeling, 278–279, 359
Preventive controls, 444
Preventive maintenance, 397
Price-matching policy, 199
Pricing models, 176, 279, 408
Primary key, 507
Primary storage, 475
Printers, 477
Priority Enforcement Program (PEP), 414
Privacy
cloud computing and, 150–151
of consumers, 63–64
databases and, 61–62
e-mail, 62–63
information, 60–64
in Information Age, 60
online, 63–64
security debate versus, 436
tracking devices and, 310
Privacy, accuracy, property, and 
accessibility (PAPA), 60
Private branch exchange (PBX), 488
Private cloud, 149
Problem decomposition, 388
Processing logic, 392–393
Processing technologies, 473
Procurement activities, 306
Procure-to-pay process, 301, 320–321
Product flow, 346–347


SUBJECT INDEX    555
Production scheduling, 346
Productivity loss, 374–375
Productivity paradox, 374, 375, 376
Product recalls, 341–342
Products
delivery and return of, 179
digital, 169
mobile devices sales of, 189
websites offering, 177–178
Programmable logic controllers (PLCs), 
127
Programmers, 260, 395–396, 401, 430, 
458, 479–480
Programming languages, 479–485
Project manager, 388–389
Project Natick, 378
Propagation delay, 499
Proprietary software systems, 308
Propulsion systems, 87
Protocols, 132, 490–491
Prototyping, 400
Proxy variables, 383–384
Pseudocode, 392
PSTN. See Public switched telephone 
network
Public cloud, 149
Public key encryption, 452
Public switched telephone network 
(PSTN), 503
Pulling sequence, 302
Pushing sequence, 302
Q
QR codes, 182, 189
Quadcopters, 252
Quantified self, 38
Query, 263
Questionnaires, 391
R
RAD. See Rapid Application 
Development
Radical innovations, 97, 105–106
Radio frequency identification (RFID), 
127 199, 310
overview of, 127–128
tags, 128
Radio stations, 408
RAID. See Redundant array of 
independent disks
Random-access memory (RAM), 475
Range International Information Hub, 378
Ransom payments, 180
Ransomware, 52, 402, 426
Rapid Application Development (RAD), 
401
Raspberry Pi, 372
RDBMSs. See Relational database 
management systems
Read-only memory (ROM), 475
Read/write heads, 476
Record, 259
Recovery point objectives, 446
Recovery time objectives, 446
Recurring costs, 379
Redistribution, 376
Redundant array of independent disks 
(RAID), 476
Registers, 475
Regulatory demands, 317
Reintermediation, 174
Relational database design, 506–509
Relational database management 
systems (RDBMSs), 260, 263
Relational database model, 509–510
Relationships, 507–508
Reliability, 150
Removable storage media, 476–477
Renewable energy, 87, 137, 145, 216
Report generators, 263
Reports, 263–264
Representational delight, 180–182
Reputation management, 178
Request for proposal (RFP), 403–404
Requirements collection, 391
Research and development, 30–31
Resources, 86, 147–148
Resource scarcity, 38
Responsible computer use, 65–66
Retailing, 199
Revenue and pricing models, 176, 408
Revenue models, 90–93
Reverse engineering, 433
Reverse logistics, 346, 347
RFID tag, 128
RFP. See Request for proposal
Ride-sharing platforms, 190
Ring network, 493–494
Riot Games, 139
Risk
B2C transaction, 194–196
innovation and tolerance of, 103
of innovations, 100–101
IS and assessment of, 442–444
Risk acceptance, 443
Risk avoidance, 443
Risk reduction, 443
Risk transference, 443
Robotics, 43
Roll up, 269
ROM. See Read-only memory
Router, 491, 500
RSS (Real Simple Syndication), 225
S
S3. See Simple Storage Service
SaaS. See Software as a Service
Safety stock planning, 346
Sakai, 32
Sales activities, 304
Sales beacons, 173
Sales force automation (SFA), 355–356
Samsung Galaxy, 155, 187
Samsung Galaxy Gear, 38
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 130, 150, 239, 317, 
457–458
Satellite transmission, 499–500, 504–505
Scalability, 149–150, 261
Scammers, 247
Scanners, 422, 472
Scheduled reports, 264
Schengen Agreement, 368
SCM. See Supply chain management
Scripting languages, 483
SDLC. See Systems development life cycle
SDSL. See Symmetric digital subscriber 
line
Search advertising, 184
Search engine optimization (SEO), 
183–184
Search engines, 120–121, 234–235
Search marketing, 183
Secondary keys, 507
Secondary storage, 475–476
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), 452
Secure tunnel, 450
Security
cloud, 452
cloud computing with privacy and, 
150–151
data center, 453
e-government, 466
facility, 454–455
IS and analog, 425, 447
mobile devices threats of, 424–425
monitoring, 456–459
privacy debate versus, 436
social media, 239
Security policy, 445
Security strategy, 444–446
Security threats, 402
Self-driving cars, 277
Semantic web, 221–222
Semistructured data, 256
Semistructured decisions, 79
Sensitivity analysis, 268
Sensors, 40
Sentiment analysis, 276
SEO. See Search engine optimization
Sequence discovery, 274
Serverless computing, 149
Servers, 126, 133–134
Service, 152
Service-based business models, 95–96
Service industries, 306
Service-level agreements (SLAs), 151
Service models, 148
Service-oriented architecture (SOA), 
152–153
Service-oriented business models, 43
SFA. See Sales force automation
Sharing economy, 43, 94–95, 96
Shifts in economic power, 37
Shopping bot, 280
Shopping, tax-free, 197
Shoulder surfing, 422

556    SUBJECT INDEX
Showrooming, 189, 199
Shrink-wrap licenses, 405
Simple Storage Service (S3), 146, 163
Sina Weibo, 467
Skype, 36, 399
SLAs. See Service-level agreements
Slicing and dicing, 269
Smart cards, 472
Smart home technology, 41
Smartphones. See Mobile devices
Smart technology, 103
Smartwatches, 38
SnapChat, 224
SOA. See Service-oriented architecture
Social bookmarking, 227
Social cataloging, 227
Social commerce, 176–177
Social CRM, 360
Social engineering, 422
Social intelligence, 294–295
Social intranets, 218
Social media, 40, 176, 186, 233, 384
algorithms prioritization on,  
246–247
Big Data generated by, 220
bookmarking on, 227
cataloging on, 227
collaboration enhanced on, 229–230, 
242
communications enhanced using, 
222–224, 242
connections enhanced by, 233–236, 
242
cooperation enhanced by, 225–228, 242
critical mass on, 237–238
dangers of, 239–241
generation gap on, 238
geotagging on, 226–227
impact of, 240–241
influencers on, 361
information from, 294
marketing, 185
media sharing on, 225–226
organizational issues, 236–239
security, 239
tagging on, 226
terrorism battle on, 228
web 2.0 and, 220, 242
workspace using, 221
Social Media Listening Command Center, 
361
Social media monitoring, 360–361
Social network analysis, 283–284
Social networking, 224, 233–234, 
239–240
Social online communities, 233
Social search, 234, 235, 236
Social Security number, 422, 431
Social Software, 220
Societal issues, in digital world, 35–38
Society for Worldwide Interbank 
Financial Telecommunication 
(SWIFT), 106
Software, 44, 47, 159, 478
access-control, 449–450
application, 124, 152–157, 257–258, 
308, 352, 384
best practices, 313–314
commercial, 318
commercial off-the-shelf, 386, 387
conversion strategies for, 396–397
corrections industry error of, 325
custom, 312, 385–386
custom compared to off-the-shelf, 
385–386
customization of, 312–313
customized or vanilla version of, 312–
313
enterprise, 313
hardware cycle with, 142
licensing of, 405–406
malicious, 52, 399, 402
obsolescence of, 142–143
off-the-shelf, 312, 385–386
open source, 232, 386–387
packaged, 312
programming and testing, 395–396
proprietary systems of, 308
system, 128–130, 479
in systems development process, 385–
387
text recognition, 471
third-party, 455
upgrading, 318
voice-to-text, 472
Software as a Service (SaaS), 149
Software asset management, 405
Software bug, 389
Software piracy, 432–434
Solar energy, 121
Solid-state drive (SSD), 476
SoLoMo, 231
Source code, 480
Sourcing plan, 346
Space Exploration Technologies 
Corporation (SpaceX), 343
Spam, 427–429
Spam filters, 427
Spear phishing, 428–429
Speech recognition, 472
Spiral development approach, 400
Sponsored search, 184
Spotify, 32
Sprints, 400
Spyware, 426–427
SQL. See Structured Query  
Language
Square Reader, 107, 191–192
SSD. See Solid-state drive
SSL. See Secure Sockets Layer
Standalone applications, 308
Star network, 492–493
Startups, 106–107
Stickiness, 277
Storage, 35, 130–131, 143, 146, 163
types of, 474–477
Strategic, 58
Strategic necessity, 89, 376
Strategic planning, 84
Streaming audio, 473
Streaming media, 473
Streaming video, 114, 473
Structural firmness, 180
Structured data, 256
Structured decisions, 78
Structured Query Language (SQL), 263
Stuxnet, 437
Subscription-based services, 76–77
Supercomputers, 126, 153
Supplier portals, 338
Supply chain, 303, 336, 344, 430–431
augmented reality and, 350
defining, 336
global, 368
green, 345
IoT indicators of, 349
terrorism influencing, 368
Supply chain analytics, 349
Supply chain effectiveness, 344
Supply chain efficiency, 344
Supply chain execution, 346–349
Supply chain management (SCM) 
system, 311, 336, 342
B2B processes improved by, 364
benefits of, 340–342
developing strategies in, 344–345
optimizing, 342–344
portals in, 337–338
Supply chain planning, 345–346
Supply chain visibility, 349
Supply network, 336–339
managing, 339–340
on mobile devices, 339–340
optimizing, 343
Support activities, 303, 305
Surface web, 136, 164
Surge pricing mechanism, 279
Sustainable business practices, 342
Sustainable development, 38
SWIFT. See Society for Worldwide 
Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication
Switch, 495
Symmetric digital subscriber line 
(SDSL), 504
Symmetric encryption, 452
Synchronous, 212
Synchronous communications, 213
System clock, 474
System conversion, 396
Systems analysis, 388, 391
Systems analysis and design, 385
Systems analyst, 385
Systems benchmarking, 404
Systems competency, 50–51
Systems design, 394–395
Systems development controls, 389, 455
Systems development life cycle (SDLC), 
389, 409


SUBJECT INDEX    557
Systems development process, 385–387
outsourcing in, 406–408
project managers in, 388–389
steps in, 389–397
users in, 389
Systems implementation, 395–397
Systems integration, 54–55, 387
Systems maintenance, 397–399
System software, 128–130, 479
Systems planning and selection, 390–391
T
T1 lines, 505
T3 lines, 505
Tables, 259, 508–509
Tablets, 187
Tacit knowledge assets, 282
Tag, 226
Tag cloud, 226
Tangible benefits, 379
Tangible costs, 379
Taobao Marketplace, 166–167
Tapes, 477
Taxation, 196–197
Tax-free shopping, 197
TB. See Terabytes
TCO. See Total cost of ownership
TCP, 492. See Transmission Control 
Protocol/Internet Protocol
Technical competency, 50
Technological integration, 238–239
Technology, 87. See also Information 
technology
algorithms prioritization and, 246–247
businesses changing through, 51
competitive advantage and investments 
in, 97–98
digital world changes in, 32–35, 65
drone, 252–253, 298, 369
enabling, 105
environmental and social costs of, 59
environmental impact of, 44
input, 471
memory crystals, 35
mobile, 90
networks, 494–499
new, 100
in organizations, 56–57, 89
output, 477–478
processing, 473
RFID, 127–128, 199, 310
smart, 103
smart home, 41
streaming video, 114
3D, 459
virtual hold, 357
wearable, 38
Technology development activities, 306
Technology-enabled business models, 
76–77
Telecommunication lines, 506
Telecommunications, 155–156
Telecommunications networks, 44–45
Telegram, 224
Television stations, 408
Ten Types of Innovation (Keeley), 97
Terabytes (TB), 476
Terminals, 486
Terrorism, 228, 368, 438–439
Text mining, 276–277
Text recognition software, 471
Thin clients, 133
Third-party software, 455
Threats, 442
3D printing, 65, 363, 373
3D technology, 459
Time bomb, 426
Time lags, 376
Token passing, 494
Top-level domain, 135
Tor (The Onion Router), 164
Total cost of ownership (TCO), 379
Total Quality Management, 315
Touchpoints, IS, 173
Touch screen, 478
TPS. See Transaction processing systems
Tracking devices, 310
Trademarks, 197
Training
employee, 354
of enterprise systems, 324
for information system security, 456
of users, 396–397
Transaction patterns, 196
Transaction processing systems (TPS), 53
Transactions, 78
Transformation, 266
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol (TCP/IP), 136, 491–492
Transmission media, 132
Transportation planning, 346
Travel, online, 241
Treasury and Markets (T&M) business, 163
Trending, 224
Trojan horses, 425–426
Trolling, 235
Trust, 179
Tumblr, 224
Tunneling, 450
Twisted-pair cable, 494–495
Twitter, 223–224
Twitterbots, 261
Two-factor authentication, 449, 466
U
UAVs. See Unmanned aerial vehicles
Ubuntu Linux, 128
Unauthorized access, 422–423
Unauthorized data modification, 423
Underwater data center, 378
Unicode, 474
Uniform Resource Locator (URL), 135
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), 369
Unstructured data, 256, 276
Unstructured decisions, 80
Upstream information flow, 307, 311
Urbanization, 37
URL. See Uniform Resource Locator
Usability, 395
User agents, 280
User-generated content, 218
User policy, 445
Users, IS, 51–53
User training, 396–397
Use tax, 197
Utilities, 479
Utility computing, 146
Utility programs, 479, 480
V
Value-added networks (VANs), 488
Value chain, 88
core activities in, 303–304
multiple organizations connected in, 307
organizational activities along, 88, 
302–306
in service industries, 306
Value chain analysis, 88
Value creation, 86
Value proposition, 89
Value system, 307
Vanilla version, 312–313
VANs. See Value-added networks
Vendor-managed inventory (VMI), 341
Vendor selection, 405
Vertical markets, 339
Viber, 224
Video, 472
Videoconferencing, 215–216
Videoconferencing over IP, 156–157
Video data, 473
Vine, 224
Viral marketing, 236, 240
Viral meeting, 212
Virtual companies, 172
Virtual hold technology, 357
Virtualization, 133, 157
Virtual meetings, 213
Virtual private networks (VPNs), 137, 
217, 450
Virtual reality (VR) headsets, 97, 98, 326
Virtual teams, 212–213
Virus, 425
Virus prevention, 453
Visual analytics, 271–272
Visual Basic.NET, 482
Visual data discovery, 272
Visualization, 270–272, 289
Visual programming languages, 480, 
481, 482
VMI. See Vendor-managed inventory
Voice over IP (VoIP), 156
Voice recognition, 172
Voice-to-text software, 472
VoIP. See Voice over IP
Volatile memory, 475

558    SUBJECT INDEX
Volume license, 405
VPNs. See Virtual private networks
VR. See Virtual reality headsets
Vulnerability, 442
Vulnerability scanners, 422
W
WAN. See Wide area network
Warez, 433
Watermark, 198
Wearable technology, 38
Web 2.0, 218–219
capabilities of, 219–220
social media and, 220, 242
Web 3.0, 222
Web analytics, 187, 205
Web-based collaboration, 230
Web browsers, 134
Webcam, 215
Webcasts, 225
Web content mining, 276–277
Web crawler, 276, 280
Web development languages, 480
WebMD, 288
Web page builders, 482
Web pages, 134
Websites, 53, 134, 219
consumer needs met by, 180–182
databases used by interactive, 258–259
EC on, 181–182
monitoring of, 64
personalization of, 60
products offered by, 177–178
representational delight of, 180–182
SEO of, 183–184
Web server, 134
Web spiders, 280
Web usage mining, 277
Web vandalism, 437
WeChat, 192, 224
Weighted multicriteria analysis, 381
What-if analysis, 268
WhatsApp, 36, 40, 224, 399, 451
White-collar productivity, 374
Wide area network (WAN), 488
Wide area networks, 134
Wi-Fi hotspots, 154, 273, 455
Wi-Fi networks, 187
Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) networks, 134
Wiki, 232
WikiLeaks, 419, 423
Wikipedia, 220
Windows 10, 52, 128, 142
Windows Azure, 148–149
Windows XP, 142
Wireless access point, 495
Wireless broadband, 505
Wireless controller, 495
Wireless LAN control, 450
Wireless local area networks (WLANs), 
134, 450, 498
Wireless media, 497–499, 500
WLANs. See Wireless local area networks
Workspace, 221
Workstations, 127
World Wide Web (WWW), 134–135, 
136
Worm, 425
Wunderlist, 229
WWW. See World Wide Web
X
XaaS, 95
XBRL. See Extensible Business Reporting 
Language
XML. See Extensible Markup Language
XML tag, 347
XP. See eXtreme Programming
Y
Yammer, 234
Yelp, 231
Z
Zero-day, 423
Zettabytes, 42
Zombie computers, 426–427, 430
Zotero, 227–228
Zuse Z1 Computer, 141

Information systems have become pervasive. Mobile devices, social media, 
and cloud computing have transformed organizations and society. The Internet 
of Things can generate a wealth of potentially useful Big Data. The rapid 
development of transportation and telecommunication technologies, national 
and global infrastructures, and information systems as well as a host of other 
factors has created a number of pressing societal issues that tremendously 
inﬂuence the world we live in. These issues include demographic changes, 
urbanization, shifts in economic power, resource scarcity, and climate change. 
As a consequence, sustainable development will become an ever increasingly 
important aspect for organizations. Throughout this revision, we discuss 
how organizations can harness radical innovations and other technological 
developments, as well as the role of information systems in inﬂuencing and 
addressing pressing societal issues; further, we added a new chapter element 
about the role of Green IT. We designed the book’s cover to emphasize how 
IT resides within and inﬂuences various societal issues. 

This is a special edition of an established title widely 
used by colleges and universities throughout the world. 
Pearson published this exclusive edition for the benefit 
of students outside the United States and Canada. If you 
purchased this book within the United States or Canada, 
you should be aware that it has been imported without 
the approval of the Publisher or Author.
Pearson Global Edition
GLOBAL 
EDITION
For these Global Editions, the editorial team at Pearson has 
collaborated with educators across the world to address a wide range 
of subjects and requirements, equipping students with the best possible 
learning tools. This Global Edition preserves the cutting-edge approach 
and pedagogy of the original, but also features alterations, customization, 
and adaptation from the North American version.

