Information Gathering  
in Classical Greece


Information Gathering 
in Classical Greece
Frank Santi Russell
Ann Arbor

Copyright © by the University of Michigan 1999
All rights reserved
Published in the United States of America by
The University of Michigan Press
Manufactured in the United States of America
c Printed on acid-free paper
2002
2001
2000
1999
4
3
2
1
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, or otherwise, without the written 
permission of the publisher.
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Russell, Frank Santi, 1965–
Information gathering in classical Greece / Frank Santi Russell.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-472-11064-0 (cl. : alk. paper)
1. Military intelligence—Greece. 2. Greece—History—To 146 B.C. 
3. Greece—History, Military. I. Title.
UB251.G8R87
1999
327.1238—dc21
99-047317

Without fail, a man harms his foes thus: those things
that they most dread he discovers, carefully investigates,
then in›icts on them.
—Thucydides 6.91.6
It hasn’t changed
—Milt Beardon, Director, U.S. covert action 
in Afghanistan from 1986 to 1989


Acknowledgments
It is ‹tting and just that my ‹rst thanks should go to Prof. Steven Latti-
more, Dept. of Classics, UCLA, and Mr. Paul Naiditch, Publications Edi-
tor, Dept. of Special Collections, and Classics Bibliographer, University
Research Library, UCLA, who have been invaluable and instrumental to
the development of this work from idea to dissertation and ‹nally to
book.
For practical instruction, suggestions and material that I have included
in the book, thanks to Mr. Milton Beardon, CIA (retired); Prof. Mor-
timer Chambers, UCLA; Dr. Christopher S. Connor, Dartmouth Hitch-
cock Hospital; M.Sgt. Terry Damm, U.S. Army; Prof. Bernard Frischer,
UCLA; Prof. Janice Gabbert, Wright State University; Prof. Michael
Haslam, UCLA; Prof. Richard Janko, University College, London; Capt.
Paul Lehto, U.S. Army; Prof. Emeritus Philip Levine, UCLA; Prof. Emer-
itus Bengt Löfstedt, UCLA; Lt.Col. Michael Richardson, U.S. Army; and
Capt. John Tellier, U.S. Army.
For responding to queries and proffering advice, thanks to Dr. Ellen
Bauerle, University of Michigan Press; Prof. Matthew Dillon, Loyola
Marymount University; Prof. P.M. Fraser, All Souls College, Oxford;
Prof. Kevin Hula, Loyola University of Chicago; Prof. Peter Krentz,
Davidson College; Prof. Ronald Mellor, UCLA; Prof. Robert Moysey,
University of Mississippi; Prof. Hayden Peake, Defense Intelligence Col-
lege; Dr. Rob Rice; Dr. Scott Rusch; Dr. Michael Seaman; Prof. Rose
Mary Sheldon, Virginia Military Institute; Prof. Larry Trittle, Loyola
Marymount University; Prof. Everett Wheeler, Duke University; and Ms.
Jill Wilson, University of Michigan Press.
A son’s debt to his parents de‹es reckoning. Although their efforts in
reading and reviewing manuscripts are minuscule in comparison to the
labor and love they invested in the task of raising me, I wish to thank my
parents, Profs. Dale and Janice Russell, for once again encouraging and
aiding me to meet new challenges.

Last and most of all, I am indebted to my son, Alexander, for putting
things into perspective and to my wife, Lisa, for buying me time, for giv-
ing her own time to read and critique my work, and for her steadfast love
and faith that something good might come of all this.
viii
Acknowledgments

Contents
Notes on Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 1. Beyond the Hill: Tactical Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Chapter 2. Beyond the Border: Strategic Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Chapter 3. Beyond the Pale: Spies (Kataskopoi, Otakoustai) . . . . . . 103
Chapter 4. Conveying the Message  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
Chapter 5. Counterintelligence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226
Appendixes
Appendix A. Objects of Verbs of Learning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
Appendix B. Types of Kataskopoi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
Selected Bibliography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259


Notes on Conventions
All dates are B.C. unless otherwise stated. 
The familiar anglicized Latinate forms of Greek names are given,
rather than transliterations of the Greek (e.g., Thucydides, rather than
Thoukudides, for YoukudÛdh!). Titles, of‹ces, and specialized vocabulary
are transliterated and italicized (e.g., kataskopos, rather than katascopus,
for kat‹!kopo!).
When the attribution of authorship to a work is suspect or spurious,
the author’s name appears between brackets (e.g., [Lysias] Against Alci-
biades I).
Translations of Greek and Latin are my own unless otherwise stated.


Introduction
About this I was quite at a loss what to do. For to write in detail
and with precision about matters which the kings managed
between themselves and secretly, seemed to me to be open to criti-
cism and exceedingly hazardous; but to pass over in complete
silence matters which seem to have had more practical effect than
any others in the war, matters which enable us to detect the causes
of much that was afterwards dif‹cult to explain, appeared to me to
be decidedly indicative of indolence and entire lack of enterprise.
(Polybius 29.5.1)1
Polybius is by no means alone in his dilemma. His near contemporaries
might have occasionally slipped into sensationalism and the allures of the
secret world, but for the most part they avoided that treacherous path
and trod by the familiar markers of virtue, vice, and chance en route to
explaining the causes of history. His modern heirs have added new mark-
ers along the way and looked out on wider vistas, but their analyses must
inevitably become conjecture when they attempt to explain the decisions
that led to the actions of the ancients. For while competent contemporary
historians do look to explain why something happened in a particular
case, few have looked beyond the particular to the general: to a context
into which one can set and thereby interpret individual decisions, a con-
text that must include a consideration of how the ancients obtained the
information on the basis of which they acted.
It would be the height of folly to allege that a study of information
gathering would in itself illuminate the motives behind decisions
obscured by two and a half millennia, but it can at least establish param-
eters for the knowledge people would have or would not have possessed
when they made the decisions. That is the ambition of this book: to
1. Loeb translation.

de‹ne terms, to describe mechanisms, and, in effect, to produce an intel-
ligence resource of use for speci‹c studies.
The contributions of this book are more or less limited to the Hellenic
world in the ‹fth and fourth centuries B.C. Information before that time
is sparse and shrouded in myth but is nevertheless included to illustrate
development and continuity, not so much by actual events as by percep-
tions of how events might have occurred. In other words, while Odysseus
never really donned rags and snuck into the citadel of Troy, the story of
his adventure was told and retold from the time the Odyssey was ‹rst
sung, so that we know such espionage was conceivable in the eighth cen-
tury; thus we can contrast the portrayal of Odysseus’ adventures with
those of his heirs in the fourth. With the advent of Herodotus and Thucy-
dides in the ‹fth century, we begin to enjoy real historical examples of
collection, especially at the tactical level (e.g., battle‹elds), but also at the
strategic (e.g., foreign relations). Covert collection remains somewhat
dif‹cult, however, since spy stories tend to be just that, and since demo-
cratic Athens—from which most of our information about the ancient
world is derived—had the same ambivalence between fascination and
fear of the secret world that democratic states do today. While inscrip-
tions, which begin to be more numerous in this period, grant us informa-
tion concerning strategic, and occasionally tactical, intelligence, they are
mute on covert aspects. The real gold mines for collection of every sort
are the theoretical treatises of Xenophon (especially the Education of
Cyrus and the Cavalry Commander) and Aeneas Tacticus (How to Sur-
vive under Siege) in the early and middle part of the fourth century. Valu-
able, if highly biased, information on political intelligence can be culled
from orators (Andocides, Lysias, Demosthenes, Aeschines, Dinarchus,
Isocrates, and the like) and some from philosophers (especially Aristotle)
and playwrights (especially the author of the Rhesus). Much evidence
comes from later writers—chie›y Diodorus, Quintus Curtius, Plutarch,
and Arrian—who lived centuries after the events they described yet had
sources (such as Ephorus, Theopompus, and Ptolemy) since lost. Isolated
gems hide in odd places—from Linear B records to Athenaeus,
Eustathius, Harpocration, Lucian, and Strabo. Later collections of strat-
agems, especially those of Polyaenus, provide tenuous but exciting evi-
dence. Herein the task of the historian of intelligence bears some resem-
blance to the tasks of the intelligence analyst—to extract from a mass of
data, most of it irrelevant, pertinent and useful items.
After Alexander’s ›ame had burned out, the political stage in the
2
Information Gathering in Classical Greece

Mediterranean had changed substantially. While continuity in collection
methods was strong, especially on the tactical level, there emerged a sense
of professionalism lacking in the classical age. While there were proto-
typical intelligence organizations as early as the fourth century, the clas-
sical poleis lacked either the centralization or the continuity of govern-
ment (in many cases both) that would have allowed evolution into
professional services. The Hellenistic kingdoms had both these qualities,
and the uses to which they put the opportunities so afforded are another
story. 
Culturally, the focus of this work is on public life, rather than private.
The methods of the two spheres scarcely intersect, and the realms really
belong to separate works.2 The goals also are different in form, if not in
essence, and hence we come to the consideration of the very nature of
information gathering in ancient Greece: what were its goals? This ques-
tion can be answered in at least two ways: one can look at what infor-
mation was sought and hence determine the goals, or one can try to dis-
cover the fundamental reasons for seeking information in the few
passages on intelligence left to us by the ancients. 
Intelligence Goals Inferred from Practice 
A survey of about one thousand examples of verbs of learning (see app.
A for details) yielded a wide range of objects. About half pertain directly
to military operations.3 Of this group, about a third concern movements
of forces; the other two-thirds include information on orders of battle
(especially origin, type, numbers, and dispositions of contingents), capa-
bilities, morale, circumstances, states of preparation and alertness, results
of engagements, and plans. Another 5 percent are inquiries into geogra-
Introduction
3
2. For private life and social interaction, the interested reader may pro‹t from the
recently published work of S. Lewis, News and Society in the Greek Polis (Chapel Hill,
1996).
3. The large proportion of examples found in the context of open hostilities could be
taken to mean that the need for information gathering was more widely recognized, and
hence that action was more often taken, during war than in peace. Such a characterization
is plausible, especially in light of the practice of later eras, and is probably accurate. The dis-
tribution of the data, however, cannot be expected to show otherwise, since the historians
tended to treat events occurring during war at greater length and detail than those occur-
ring during occasional times of peace. Thus the sources have an intrinsic bias. Yet one
should realize that the subject matter of the histories in turn re›ected what their Greek
authors thought to be worth researching and recording; hence the bias itself can serve to
justify the data.

phy, especially routes, most of which have immediate military
signi‹cance. Such goals belong to the realm of tactical or operational
intelligence.4 Intelligence of this type was typically derived from military
agents (e.g., scouts, patrols) and sources (e.g., deserters, captives) who
are frequently identi‹ed by type (but rarely by name) in our texts. Col-
lection of information was usually supervised by military commanders.
The value of tactical intelligence was (and is) ephemeral but highly visi-
ble, and immediate response was required (or else, e.g., an enemy force
might have moved from its reported position). Consequently, it was most
liable to manipulation or inaccuracy, since a commitment usually had to
be made before reports could be investigated.5
Only 10 percent of the catalogued examples are overtly political (e.g.,
diplomatic activity or policy). The bulk of the remaining third are varied
enough to defy meaningful categorization, and many are found in con-
texts of anecdotes concerning private lives. Still, it may perhaps be said
that a substantial number contain information of a social nature that
could today be included under the general rubric of strategic intelligence.
Different types of agents and sources were involved in gathering strategic
information: envoys and oracles, for example, were not uncommon. Indi-
viduals are occasionally named and at times are people of note and
stature, but sometimes sources specify no further identity than the state
of origin (e.g., the Corinthians informed the Spartans). Supervision
4
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
4. “Operational intelligence” can be variously de‹ned according to context; here I fol-
low Handel’s description (Intelligence, 2–3, cf. 28), which encompasses such matters as an
enemy’s resources, ability, and plans for waging a given campaign (e.g., the potential of
Peloponnesian naval forces in the Aegean campaign). Its value was less ephemeral than tac-
tical intelligence: compare “operational” intelligence on the order of battle of the Athenian
expedition to Sicily, which would be a consistent factor in Syracusan planning, with the
“tactical” intelligence on Nicias’ plans for the second battle in the Syracusan harbor, which
was of great value but only for that one encounter.
The term “operational intelligence” has elsewhere been used for intelligence acquired to
put together a plan of operation for further (especially clandestine) collection of informa-
tion; it is not used in that sense here.
5. For example, Alexander extracted from Persian captives news that Darius’ army was
at the Tigris (an instance detailed in chapter 1). Alexander wished to force an immediate
encounter and marched his army to the Tigris, only to discover there that the information
was inaccurate. Yet good tactical intelligence could make a great difference in a battle: wit-
ness, for instance, the victory of Dionysius I over Heloris by the Eleporus River, which was
in large part owed both to careful attention paid to tactical intelligence by the former and
to its neglect by the latter (Diod. Sic. 14.104.1–105.1). Dionysius made good use of scouts
(kataskopoi) and watchers; Heloris was unapprised of his presence, although only forty sta-
dia (about ‹ve miles) separated Dionysius’ camp from his own.

tended to be the province of civil authorities (insofar as civil authority
could be separated from military in ancient Greece). Strategic intelligence
was fairly accurate and accessible and had long-term value (there were
strategic surprises, but they were far fewer than surprises on the tactical
level).
Information pertaining to future, and sometimes secret, events is also
represented in the examples. About 9 percent are of plans, intentions, or
preparations; an additional 3 percent concern plots. Developments in
weapons technology were a concern then even as now.6 The agents who
gathered such sorts of information were varied but included spies, provo-
cateurs, and traitors in their number. Their ‹elds of operation are gener-
ally situated amid military campaigns, revolts, and tyrannies.
Certainly this exercise offers only a partial picture of Greek intelli-
gence goals. Projecting back modern needs can be a fruitful, if risky, sup-
plement. There is little detailed information, for instance, of a logistical
nature, yet one now and again ‹nds accounts of sophisticated intelligence
applications, such as projecting an army’s planned route through infor-
mation on supplies. Hence one can fairly conjecture additional items that
would have been of interest to the people setting intelligence goals, as
Introduction
5
6. A prevalent fallacy in the academic and professional worlds holds that the Greeks had
little inclination to preserve or penetrate secrecy, since they were democratic, and had no
interest in technological innovation, since their technology was relatively primitive. So
argues, for example, Dulles (15): “Athens in the days of democracy and Rome in the days
of the republic were not climates that bred espionage. . .  Except for the size and placement
of enemy forces at key moments before the engagement in battle there was little need felt
for speci‹c information.” First, many Greek states during the classical period were not
democracies but were climates entirely conducive to espionage. Second, even the democra-
cies perceived the need for information beyond the immediate demands of battle.
Starr (2) and Gerolymatos (Espionage, 15) maintained that technology was not of con-
cern to Greeks and was thus neglected in information gathering. But examples indicating
the contrary may be found at Thuc. 7.62.3, 7.65.1 (reinforced rams, grappling hooks);
Arrian Anab. 3.8.6 (Diod. Sic. 17.53.1: scythed chariots; but in Q. Curtius 4.9.3–4 and
4.15.4 Alexander’s men were unprepared), 3.9.4 (Q. Curtius 4.13.36; Polyaenus 4.3.17:
traps and caltrops). One would expect the warring parties in the Lelantine War, in which
an agreement had been reached banning the use of missile weapons, to have had an interest
in discovering whether their foes intended to abide by the treaty. 
See also Aristotle Politics 1330b–1331a, regarding the effects of new inventions in types
of missiles and siege artillery, and Arrian Anab. 5.18.5, regarding Porus’ armor (although
the knowledge was obtained only after he was taken captive). Plutarch would have us
believe that Epaminondas despised news that his opponents had new weapons at their dis-
posal, since he considered skill and virtue more important than technical innovations (Plut.
Mor. 193f.). Yet this sentiment seems more in keeping with Plutarch, the philosopher, than
Epaminondas, the strategos.

Engels did with regard to Alexander, (e.g., harvest dates, arms manufac-
tories, the availability of transport facilities and pack animals).7 Similar
details are needed to ›esh out other categories. They are not forthcoming
from the ancients, who do, however, afford us some indication of why
the Greeks sought the types of information they did. 
Intelligence Goals Expressed in Ancient Sources
While early writers at times contained accounts of information gathering
and intelligence, no extant work written before the fourth century con-
tains a theoretical treatment of the subject. Honorable mention must be
given to Herodotus and especially Thucydides for beginning to formulate
criteria and methods for historiography, which bear close kinship with
the intelligence process.8 But the distinction of being the ‹rst—and
only—Greek practical theorist on the subject of intelligence must be
awarded to Xenophon, who alone went so far as to study the gathering
and evaluating of information as a ‹eld in its own right. His instruction
is contained in discourses on reconnaissance, surveillance, and espionage
in the Cavalry Commander, in detailed models of various elements of
intelligence in the Education of Cyrus, and in dialogues in the Memora-
bilia. These texts are theoretical, not historical. They are particularly
valuable, even though—or, perhaps, because—his descriptions and
analyses of intelligence are based on examples contrived for the purpose
of illustrating his points, rather than historical events. It might be added
in passing that his ‹ctitious accounts are in no way incompatible with
historical accounts in the Hellenica and Anabasis (or, for that matter,
with those of other historians); rather they tend to be more detailed, no
doubt so as to better serve as models of instruction.
These texts reveal Xenophon’s understanding that the basis of the
need for information lies in con›ict and competition—especially military
(and thence political) and economic. Xenophon’s primary strategic con-
6
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
7. Engels 328–31. However, the Spartan invasion of Attica in 425 was deleteriously
affected by a failure to ascertain harvest dates (Thuc. 4.6.1). 
8. Thucydides’ doctrinal statements of method are, of course, quite familiar to any clas-
sical historian. More subtle are his apparent distinctions between information and intelli-
gence (for which the Greeks lacked speci‹c terms), whereby he tended to use aÞ!y‹nomai in
instances of the former and punyanñmai combined with an adverb (e.g., kribÇ!, !afÇ!) in
instances of the latter. 

cern was the absolute and relative capabilities of states to wage war.9 His
terminology is rather broad and vague. In two instances he used as the
object of inquiry the word dunamis, a word that is quite general and
abstract and that implies concerns beyond a reckoning of the strengths of
armies.10 On another occasion the object was simply “the enemy’s
affairs.”11 On tactical levels, Xenophon perceived intelligence as a means
to security and advantage. Efforts were to be directed toward the pre-
vention of surprise and toward gaining a sound knowledge of terrain.12
Xenophon saw a connection between good intelligence and success in
attaining and ful‹lling political and military of‹ces, and he maintained
that intelligence enhanced one’s capabilities.13 Those who lacked it were
unlikely to advance in rank; if, by chance, they did, they would be at best
Introduction
7
9. Xen. Mem. 3.6.7–8: “It is necessary, is it not, to know the power [dunamis] of both
our polis and the enemy’s, should one advise us with whom we should wage war, so that if
the power of our city be greater, one would counsel taking up a war, but if the enemy’s is
greater, one may persuade us to refrain.” Cf. Mem. 4.2.29. For the importance of knowl-
edge of one’s own situation, see Xen. Cyr. 1.6.9 and Sun Tzu (the famed Chinese strategist)
3.31–33.
10. LSJ s.v. I.1–3.
11. Xenophon (Cyr. 1.6.43) included in topics for consideration by a military comman-
der “how one might best learn the affairs of one’s enemies [tŒ tÇn polemÛvn], and how
they might have least knowledge of your own.”
12. E.g., Xen. Cav. Com. 4.6.
13. Isocrates also noted the value of intelligence to generals and leaders of states: a gen-
eral must know against whom and with whom he ought to make war (XV [Antidosis] 117);
a ruler should spend most of his time making inquiries into, re›ecting on, and taking coun-
sel about events (IX [Evag.] 41, 42). Isocrates also praised Evagoras for his knowledge of
public affairs and citizens, whereby no plots escaped his notice. Cf. his Letters 1.4 (to
Dionysius) and 6.9–10 (to the Sons of Jason). Cf. also Plutarch (Mor. 187d), who attributed
to Chabrias the saying that the best strategoi were those who best knew their enemies’
affairs (tŒ tÇn polemÛvn).
Not surprisingly, this idea is implicit in Herodotus and Thucydides. Curiously, in other
instances, Thucydides concentrated more on the psychological effects of “intelligence fail-
ures” than on the positive effects of its successes. His most striking discourse is set in a por-
trayal of the effects of stasis in Corcyra, wherein he described the fall of those of greater
intellect to their inferiors, since “they, assuming in their arrogance that they would be
alerted in advance and that there was no need for them to accomplish by deed that which
they might gain by intellect, were caught off guard and perished all the more” (3.83.4). Sim-
ilarly, he described the Athenians as con‹dent that the Peloponnesians would not be able to
attack the Piraeus without the Athenians learning of their enemies’ plans in advance. Yet
they were surprised by a Peloponnesian force, and disaster was narrowly averted (2.93.3).
This emphasis on the failure of intelligence may be a result of his interest in dramatic rever-
sal caused by hubris, rather than a re›ection of contemporary perception, since many ex-
amples of effective use of intelligence are present in his work.

of little use to their compatriots, at worst a danger to their own state. A
passage in the Memorabilia illustrates this quite clearly: Socrates is
depicted questioning Glaucon, who had aspirations to political power,
about his knowledge of matters on which he proposed to guide Athens.
Socrates’ questions focused on the military disposition of the state and of
its enemies, of which Glaucon knew nothing. Yet Glaucon still wanted to
do away with the Athenian garrisons as super›uous. Socrates questioned
him as to the consequences of this and asked him whether he had himself
gone out and investigated the matter or learned in some other way that
they were badly maintained. Glaucon admitted that he had come to his
conclusion through conjecture. At this he was gently rebuked and told to
get information on the matter before he acted rashly.14
For all its apparent worth, intelligence for Xenophon—and for the
Greeks in general—was valuable only insofar as it enabled a person to
accomplish a goal, primarily one de‹ned by military or political con›ict.
It was not desired for its own sake. Therefore a curious and lasting pat-
tern developed: when con›icts occurred and the security of an individual
or state was threatened, intelligence goals were set and met. But when a
person or populace was con‹dent in its power, wealth, or virtue and saw
no probable outcome of circumstances save success, intelligence might be
neglected. Consequently one may ‹nd in oratory, such as the speeches of
Isocrates and Demosthenes, a certain condescension toward information
gathering. Demosthenes on occasion alluded to it as the concern of the
threatened party: “[if you use your strength] perhaps, just as now you
make inquiries about what Philip is doing and where he is going, so he
may wonder whither the might of your city is bound and where it might
appear.”15
Indeed, it is demonstrable that success has often been achieved with
little or no intelligence, given the right mixture of luck and strength.16
And so the Greek states have often been characterized—unfairly, one
8
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
14. Xen. Mem. 3.6.9–11.
15. Demosth. X (4 Phil.) 23; cf. 19 (On the embassy) 288. Cf. also Isoc. Epist. V (To
Philip) 70. One must, however, note the rhetorical motive present in all these cases. This
philosophy is by no means peculiar to the ancients. Handel (Intelligence and Military Oper-
ations, 39; cf. 69) noted: “There is no stronger incentive to encourage the appreciation of
intelligence than fear and weakness (whether real or perceived); conversely, victory and
power reduce one’s motivations to learn about the enemy, thus bringing about the condi-
tions that eventually cause defeat.” This characterization would explain the attention given
by the tyrants and Spartans to internal espionage. 
16. Cf. Handel, Intelligence and Military Operations, 32ff., 65ff.

must add—in part because of modern perceptions of democratic virtue
and vice. The remainder of this book is dedicated to illustrating how the
Greeks achieved their intelligence goals, in hope that the account will
serve as a piece of intelligence applicable to the animated, if bloodless,
con›icts of historians. 
Introduction
9

Chapter 1 
Beyond the Hill: Tactical Assets
The people who collected or supplied information are the subject of this
and the next two chapters. Most are faceless, their individuality lost by
the scale of history and the passage of time. Yet however anonymous
they may be singly, their experience and in›uence can be recalled in out-
line from a collection of scraps compiled from varied sources. To this
end, reports of their activities have been categorized according to context
and type, and this information has been drawn into a more or less coher-
ent picture.
Reconnaissance and Surveillance
Into modern texts and manuals has descended from the Greeks a con-
ception of tactical intelligence that encompasses two distinct but related
modes: reconnaissance and surveillance. The distinction rests primarily
on method and to some extent on aims. The relationship is indicated by
terminology.
Reconnaissance entailed agents entering and exploring a hostile or
unknown area to acquire tactical information—the location and disposi-
tion of the enemy, the terrain and roads by land, the coast and anchor-
ages by sea.1 Strategic information was not generally available to them,
except insofar as they might capture of‹cers or couriers while scouting.2
Surveillance involved regular, protracted observation of an area or a mil-
itary force to note changes, such as the advent or withdrawal of men or
10
1. E.g., location and disposition of the enemy: Xen. Hell. 6.5.52; Aen. Tact. 27.15, 28.4;
Q. Curtius 4.10.9; Diod. Sic. 17.33.1; Arrian Anab. 1.13.2, 2.7.2, 3.7.7; Plut. Eum. 9.5.
Topography and geography: Hdt. 7.177; Thuc. 6.50.4; Arrian Anab. 1.20.5, 2.8.1, 3.9.4,
4.30.5–6, 6.19.3, 6.23.2, 6.26.5; Arrian Ind. 32.11, 42.5; Plut. Nicias 14. 
2. Diodorus Siculus (19.25.1), however, mentions plans learned by Eumenes’ and
Antigonus’ kataskopoi before Gabene. For capture by reconnaissance parties, see Xen.
Anab. 4.4.16–18, 6.3.10; Arrian Anab. 4.30.5–6; Q. Curtius 3.13.2; Plut. Lys. 28.2; Plut.
Nic. 14.5. Cf. Diod. Sic. 11.21.4–5. Cf. also [Nicephorus] 2 on Greeks of the Byzantine era. 

ships. While reconnaissance normally involved movement and explo-
ration, surveillance was often sedentary, although it could also be con-
ducted along ‹xed patrol routes on the periphery of a friendly area.
Nomenclature is somewhat confused and evolves over time.3 The fol-
lowing identi‹cations can, however, be made. All reconnaissance and
some surveillance agents can be called skopoi. Reconnaissance agents can
also be called kataskopoi—a word with a range of meanings, encom-
passing those serving in a vanguard (also called prodromoi), those recon-
noitering with a small team or alone, an of‹cial investigator, and spies
(usually—but not always—in‹ltration agents, rather than “agents in
place” or “provocateurs”). Surveillance agents who are active during
daylight may be called skopoi or hemeroskopoi (day-observers); those
active during the night are called not skopoi but phulakes (watchmen or
guards). Unlike hemeroskopoi, phulakes are less concerned with long-
distance surveillance than security; like them, they are typically station-
ary. A peripolos is similar to a kataskopos in that he is mobile but, like a
phulax or hemeroskopos, he is bound to protect and keep an eye on an
area and operates out of established bases. 
Reconnaissance Agents (Skopoi, Kataskopoi)
Before proceeding to a general discussion of reconnaissance in antiquity,
a case must be made for its very existence, especially in the earlier years.
It has been argued that military intelligence was generally neglected by
the Greeks; indeed, one prominent scholar, W.K. Pritchett, has gone so
far as to say that there are no examples of the use of scouts with a march-
ing army before the age of Xenophon (i.e., the early fourth century).4 His
Beyond the Hill
11
3. The word episkopos, for instance, has a wide range of meanings in Homer, from
“spy” to “overseer”; in later times the latter meaning eclipsed the former, and the term
eventually acquired the primary meaning of “bishop.” It is noteworthy that Aristarchus
(citing Od. 8.163 and 22.396; cf. also 10.324 and 342) remarked on Homer’s failure to dif-
ferentiate between compounded and uncompounded forms of skopos; also, the scholia to
the Iliad (e.g., 10.38d [Hrd.]) used kataskopos in reference to Odysseus, Diomedes, and
Dolon, who are called skopoi and episkopoi by Homer; the author of the Rhesus did like-
wise (125–29, 140, 523, 591).
4. Pritchett 1:132 (see, generally, 127–33). Spence follows him (Cavalry, 145 and n. 87;
but see 149–50 and 149 n. 109) and, in an otherwise admirable treatment of the role of cav-
alry in reconnaissance, unfortunately falls into the error of thinking that if cavalry were not
used for this role in earlier times, no one was (cf. 134), attributing the cause to “the nature
of hoplite warfare” (147). 

statement has two foundations: an absence of successful candidates for
his quali‹cations for a scout, and a number of examples of intelligence
failures, which ought never to have happened had scouts or observers
been in use. It in turn provides a basis for his more general theory: that
the Greeks neglected both reconnaissance and surveillance.5
In one respect, he is quite right: if one de‹nes a scout as he does, there
are no examples. But is his de‹nition suitable? It demands the following
quali‹cations: “(1) The whereabouts of the enemy is not known. (2) The
scout merely acts as an advance eye for the army. (3) It is not the express
purpose of the scout to ‹nd the enemy. (4) The armies are not static. (5)
The scout functions separately from the army.”6
This de‹nition is in accord with neither ancient nor modern practice
and terminology; it resembles most the concept of the “Indian scout.”7
As will be seen shortly, kataskopoi, like their twentieth-century heirs,
operated jointly more often than separately, with a variety of purposes
and degrees of reluctance to use arms. Clear parallels exist between their
practices and those recommended for those termed “scouts” in modern
military histories and manuals. In any case, scouting was (and is) a sub-
set, rather than the whole, of reconnaissance operations, and to deny the
latter on the basis of an absence of the former is not logical. 
With regard to surveillance, there is epigraphic testimony going back
to the Mycenaean era, and there are examples in historical narrative in
the text of the Father of History; these are treated later in this chapter.
Speci‹c historical examples of the successful use of reconnaissance teams
on land before the late ‹fth century are less forthcoming, but the Ho-
meric poems leave no doubt as to their existence. Reconnaissance is
found in the Iliad and Odyssey—the most lengthy example being the so-
called Nuktegersia of Odysseus and Diomedes, those most comparable to
later Greek practice being the men sent forth by Odysseus upon landing
on the shores of strange and exotic islands.8 It would be rash to believe
that Homer’s contemporaries did not send out men to explore newfound
lands and peoples in the age of colonization or that they never tried to
12
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
5. This point of view is also found in Adcock’s Greek and Macedonian Art of War
(40–41) and is echoed by S. Lewis (esp. 175 n. 10).
6. Pritchett 1:128.
7. As Spence (Cavalry, 149–50 and 149 n. 109) has also noted, most modern recon-
naissance operations do not meet Pritchett’s criteria. 
8. Iliad 10.206–10; Od. 9.88–90, 9.147ff., 10.100–102. While the exact date of the
tenth book of the Iliad is open to question, it is generally accepted to have been in existence
by the time of Pisistratus.

reconnoiter the positions of their foes. The ‹rst unequivocally historical
examples of land-based reconnaissance by Greeks are found in Thucy-
dides. In one instance, in 422 b.c., the Athenian strategos Cleon recon-
noitered the territory around Amphipolis. Pritchett cited this very exam-
ple as evidence for a lack of scouts, since a large portion of the army was
involved; but in any case this is an example of a reconnaissance in force.9
A few years later, the Syracusans, on their ill-advised march on Catana,
were preceded by cavalry who discovered the Athenian ruse.10 It may be
that the Skiritai and “fore-traveling cavalry,” who preceded the Spartan
king on the march, were used in reconnaissance roles in yet earlier peri-
ods, but this cannot be positively ascertained.11 It can, however, be
demonstrated that ›eets under sail were preceded by scouting detach-
ments of ships at least as early as the second decade of the ‹fth century.12
A potentially more serious objection is Pritchett’s list of intelligence
failures. It is worth noting, however, that many of his citations are
instances of movement under cover of night and re›ect more on the noc-
turnal phulakes than on skopoi.13 Even still, must these be taken as evi-
dence for absence rather than imperfection? An intelligence failure does
not necessarily indicate a lack of intelligence resources. Should one oper-
ate on this assumption, one must conclude that Lee neglected reconnais-
Beyond the Hill
13
9. The passage at issue is Thuc. 5.7.3–4. The problem with gathering early examples can
be exempli‹ed by Thucydides’ depiction (at 5.8.1) of Brasidas, the Spartan general, who
learned that Cleon and his men were on the march and took measures to ambush them.
How did he learn this? His source is unspeci‹ed—indeed Thucydides merely used the word
eäde (which is translated in the Loeb edition as “saw,” but which can here equally be
“learned” unless he kept the Athenians under personal observation). Such a lack of
speci‹cation cannot be interpreted to mean a lack of information gatherers—indeed, one
can only conclude the opposite.
10. Thuc. 6.65.3; see also Plut. Alc. 34.5.
11. See Xen. Lac. Pol. 13.6. The Skiritai ‹rst appear in Thucydides (e.g., Thuc. 5.67.1,
71.2–3, 72.1—at Mantinea, drawn up on the left wing, as was customary) but were not dis-
tinguished as a vanguard, nor are the functions of the hippeis securely established. Cf. chap.
3, Covert Agents in Laconia; and also Lazenby 10–12, and Anderson 245–49.
Herodotus (7.208) portrayed a mounted Persian scout at Thermopylae in his tale of the
Spartans preparing for death. I strongly suspect that such a use, if historical, was not lim-
ited to the Persians; if ‹ctional, re›ected Greek expectations at the time of Herodotus’ com-
position in the mid–‹fth century.
12. Hdt. 7.179; Thuc. 6.50.
13. Pritchett 1:127 (i.e., Hdt. 8.76.3; Thuc. 7.81, 7.73.3, and possibly 5.66.1). In the
last instance, Pritchett’s protest (citing Thuc. 7.44.1) against Gomme’s proposal of a night
move (4:99–102) is irrelevant, since the battle of Mantineia was fought by day; more dam-
aging to Gomme’s case is the T» d' ê!teraÛ& opening 5.66.1. In any event, the exceptional
nature of the Lacedaemonian surprise is explicitly mentioned by Thucydides at 5.66.2. 

sance because of his misjudgments prior to and at Gettysburg in July
1863—instead, one must ask why Stuart failed to apprise him of Meade’s
advance. Equally, one would posit that reconnaissance patrols were not
employed by the American army during World War II, since the Germans
achieved tactical surprise at the opening of the Battle of the Bulge—
rather, one must look to weather and miscalculation. To return to the
Greeks, Alexander was obviously ignorant of Darius’ movements before
Issus yet was not by any means heedless of reconnaissance.14 Therefore,
failure cannot be taken to mean absence or neglect; further, it may not
even mean utter incompetence, since counterintelligence and deception
measures were prevalent among the Greeks.
In conclusion, the theory that the Greeks did not use reconnaissance
before the ‹nal years of the ‹fth century is not tenable. Yet Pritchett’s
argument has merit, if adapted. It may be more accurate to say that the
age of Xenophon appears to herald a marked increase in emphasis on
reconnaissance. Whether this appearance re›ects reality or is merely a
result of the accident of the survival and extinction of sources is debat-
able. On the one hand, it was not until the fourth century that Xenophon
emerged to write descriptive and critical commentary on the subject, and
this suggests an increased interest in the subject.15 On the other hand, to
argue, as Spence does, that the fourth century brought about conditions
unknown in these earlier years, when the hoplite ruled supreme in battles
on familiar ground, is reasonable, if perhaps Athenocentric, in outlook.
Yet the perimeters of the Greek world were expanding throughout the
eighth and following centuries, and con›ict with other peoples at these
frontiers was all but perpetual. A need for information on terrain and
14
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
To the failures described by Pritchett (1:127–28), Spence (Cavalry, 145–46) adds (1)
Xen. Hell. 4.8.18–19, the surprise of Thibron by Struthas (here one must ask how Struthas
knew Thibron was overcon‹dent and susceptible to attack) and (2) Xen. Hell. 3.2.14–20,
Dercylidas all but running into a Persian army drawn up for battle. Spence (148 and n. 104)
also adds the battle of Tegyra (375), in which he proposes that the report of the enemy came
via a member of the front rank rather than a scout—in any event, little warning was given.
Spence does, rightly, mention the use of cavalry for reconnaissance from the late ‹fth and
early fourth centuries (149).
14. See Delbrück 206, contesting Koepp’s criticism of Alexander’s generalship: “There
he [Koepp] underestimates the dif‹culty of conducting a reconnaissance 2 days march
away, over mountain passes, in enemy country . . . . Such uncertainties and surprises are
inevitable in war and very frequent, and they do not necessarily indicate any laxness.”
15. Yet while the Anabasis, Cavalry Commander, and Cyropaedia are rich in detailed
information, the Hellenica, a more general history, gives no greater emphasis to reconnais-
sance than the analogous works of Thucydides and Herodotus.

enemy forces (a need historically met by reconnaissance units) was cer-
tainly present, and since the Homeric poems testify that the idea of recon-
naissance existed, one can maintain that reconnaissance was employed at
this time, and attribute a lack of examples to the utter paucity of histori-
cal sources.
The apologia concluded, let us turn to the details. While reconnais-
sance units by de‹nition sought to collect information, the relative
emphasis on collection versus combat varied, and this affected the size of
the units. These varied in size from a few men to about a thousand. On
the smaller scale, reconnaissance tended to blend with espionage—as
Dulles’ ghostwriters put it: “At its simplest, espionage is nothing more
than a kind of well-concealed reconnaissance.”16 There is almost cer-
tainly a link in Greek practice, with the cavalry class effecting the join—
this is discussed in the section on in‹ltration agents in chapter 3.17 Large
forces, generally composed of cavalry (sometimes mixed with light-
armed troops), operated in advance (and sometimes on the ›anks) of an
army, as prodromoi—in effect a vanguard. These could, but did not
always, conduct skirmishes or engagements, and there is some debate as
to the relative importance of combat and information gathering—it is
perhaps most accurate, if least de‹nite, to say that the relative emphasis
varied according to commander and circumstance.18 On his southward
march along the Aegean coast, Alexander was preceded by skopoi—who
amounted to no less than an ilé of Companion cavalry and four ilai of
prodromoi, over a thousand men. Just before the battle at the Granicus
River, the sarissa-bearing cavalry (sarissophoroi) and ‹ve hundred light
troops (psiloi) reconnoitered and reported the presence of the Persians;
they did not, however, engage in advance of the main force.19 In the ini-
Beyond the Hill
15
16. Dulles 58.
17. To which category, for instance, do the nocturnal adventures of Odysseus and
Diomedes belong? An interesting con›ation of the categories, from the last years of the
fourth century, occurred during the siege of Rhodes by Demetrius (Diod. Sic. 19.17.3–5; cf.
37.22b [= Const. Exc. 3.209–10]). There being communication between the warring sides
because of mines opened up beneath the walls, Demetrius’ men undertook to bribe
Athenagoras, a Milesian mercenary who had been entrusted by the Rhodians with the com-
mand of their guard. This man promised to turn traitor and admit by night a Macedonian
of‹cer to conduct a reconnaissance of the area under his charge, where Macedonian troops
might assemble. A Macedonian philos (in this context meaning more than “friend,” it
denotes also the idea of “of‹cer” or “henchman” of a Hellenistic king) was sent to do this,
but Athenagoras was playing a double game and turned him over to the Rhodians.
18. Cf. A. Pauli, “Prñdromow,” RE 23, no. 1 (1957): 102–4.
19. Arrian Anab. 1.12.7, 13.1.

tial contacts before Gaugamela, the prodromoi maintained a covering
screen, without engaging, and sent riders back to Alexander—‹rst with
preliminary reports of Persian presence, then with an estimate of num-
bers. No attack was made until Alexander so commanded, and then only
when reinforced with two ilai of Royal and Companion cavalry. The Per-
sians, said to number “no more than a thousand,” were also referred to
as a reconnaissance force.20 One might note that Alexander’s vanguard
served to some extent as a screening force, preventing the Persian cavalry
from getting close enough to his main body to get a good look. Yet in this
instance we see a complementary and deleterious aspect of large recon-
naissance forces—their very presence indicated the proximity of a large
army. The ancients recognized both positive and negative aspects and
attempted various solutions. Xenophon portrayed Cyrus disguising his
preceding psiloi as brigands—these men would attempt to capture any
who saw them, but even those who escaped would be led by the disguise
to misinterpret their presence.21
The use of very large vanguards seems more of a Macedonian and Per-
sian than Greek phenomenon. The difference in practice should not be
surprising—a survey of different reconnaissance methods of the belliger-
ents in World War II indicates that even within a brief period there can
be considerable variation.22 One tries with dif‹culty to apply Clause-
witz’s axiom that the size of the vanguard is determined by the amount
of time needed by the commander to effectively deploy his main body
(i.e., the larger the vanguard, the more time that could be bought). There
seems no such correlation in the classical world. Rather, the critical fac-
tor may have been availability of cavalry, since non-Macedonian Greeks
did on occasion send cavalry ahead of their forces when it was available,
and these could offer battle with varying degrees of success—one of the
more memorable incidents being the stand of the Athenian cavalry
against Epaminondas before Second Mantinea (362), which bought the
16
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
20. Arrian Anab. 3.7.6–8.2; the Persians are called kataskopoi at 3.9.1.
21. Xen. Cyr. 2.4.23. For reconnaissance forces evading, capturing, or killing all they
encounter, see Xen. Cyr. 5.3.1–2; Polyb. 8.26.4, 27.2. For the danger of reconnaissance
activity giving away intent, see also Simonyan and Grishin 4.
22. Cf. Applegate 73–83. During World War II, the Russians in particular but also to a
lesser extent the Germans and Japanese gave emphasis to reconnaissance in force by large
(battalion-sized) forces (see also Simonyan and Grishin 140). One may ‹nd Carthaginian
and Roman reconnaissance forces large enough to sustain losses of 200 and 140, respec-
tively (Polyb. 3.45.1ff.); cf. 220 casualties at Livy 27.26.11, and 80 at Polyb. 8.26.4.

Mantineans time to seek the shelter of their city’s walls.23 A more typical
action for a cavalry vanguard, perhaps, was a skirmish between Agesi-
laus’ and Tissaphernes’ cavalry during the course of a reconnaissance in
advance of their respective armies—numbers are not given, but
Xenophon tells us that the Greek and Persian formations were roughly
equal but drawn up differently: the Greeks in a wide phalanx four deep,
the Persians in a formation twelve men wide but very deep—hence the
numbers involved on each side must have been considerably more than
forty-eight, perhaps as many as two hundred.24
Xenophon recommended the use of two separate contingents, one
preceding the other, in especially dangerous country. There are no
recorded examples of such practice, but the suggestion indicates at least
one mind alive to the consideration of reconnaissance doctrine and may
perhaps originate in his own experience. Certainly there were successive
layers of surveillance; it may be that a similar principle was applied to
reconnaissance. However, we may have here an example of a divergence
between doctrine and practice, not unlike that found in the Italian army
in World War II.25
More generally, reconnaissance units involved in interpolis warfare
were relatively small and did not engage the enemy. They typically num-
bered two or three for covert operations, around thirty for general
Beyond the Hill
17
23. The Athenian cavalry were not explicitly acting as a reconnaissance force. Cf.
Buford at Gettysburg. Other examples of forces preceded by cavalry include Thuc. 6.63.3;
Xen. Anab. 6.3.22, 7.3.41; Xen. Lac. Pol. 13.6. Cf. Polyaenus 3.9.24; Onas. 6.7.
24. Xen. Hell. 3.4.12–13. It seems Agesilaus’ entire cavalry force preceded him. He was
not given cavalry by his own state (3.4.2), but Spithridates, a Persian noble who defected to
his cause, had two hundred horsemen whom he might have brought into the combined
force. There are two complications with identifying this contingent as the combatants here:
(1) Agesilaus’ cavalry are speci‹ed as Greek (3.4.13); (2) Spithridates had left his cavalry
behind (3.4.10) when he came to Agesilaus. Hence one must presume (1) that the cavalry
were identi‹ed not by ethnicity but by alliance, or that these were Greek mercenaries; or (2)
that the cavalry had since joined Spithridates and Agesilaus. Such presumptions do not
strain credibility; still, I hesitate to declare ex cathedra that these two hundred must be the
ones shown here, as Agesilaus may have done recruiting prior to the scene at 3.4.15.
25. The recommendation is at Xen. Cav. Com. 4.5. In critiques of reconnaissance meth-
ods of the belligerents of World War II, Applegate (76) mentions that the Wehrmacht
employed three separate contingents in a reconnaissance in force: the lead unit was highly
mobile and lightly armed, the second retained an emphasis on mobility but gave more atten-
tion to ‹repower, and the rear unit was less mobile but heavily armed. The second and espe-
cially the third were support groups, providing a solid, if moving, base for the advance unit.
For an assessment of the disparity between theory and practice in Italian reconnaissance,
see Applegate 75.

duties.26 Such groups were employed primarily to collect information,
rather than ‹ght: Xenophon recommended fear as the appropriate ally to
such a force, as they would be more likely to avoid contact than provoke
it; consequently mobility and speed were more important than arms.27
Xenophon further admonished, “a few are no less able to look out as
many,” and censured Iphicrates for sending out his whole cavalry force
as skopoi to reconnoiter the Thebans’ position, since they hindered each
other with their numbers and not only failed in their mission but suffered
losses.28 On the other hand, fear could impede reconnaissance: Menidas,
when sent ahead by Alexander to ‹nd Darius’ camp, heard the noise of
men and horses from Mazaeus’ troops camped nearby and feared to go
further; hence he returned with only vague information.29
Reconnaissance teams were drawn from the cavalry or light-armed
troops (psiloi), the former being attested more frequently in Sicily and
Asia Minor than in the more rugged areas of mainland Greece. The two
were often used in conjunction, particularly as screening forces ahead of
a moving army, but also as complementary bodies, the cavalry breaking
the path of the army, the psiloi on more dif‹cult terrain along the ›anks.
Xenophon also suggested that when a force passed through dif‹cult
18
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
26. For two or three, see Iliad 10.206–10; Od. 9.88–90, 9.147ff., 10.100–102; Plut.
Aratus 5.4, Arrian Against the Alans 1. For the number thirty, see Xen. Cyr. 6.3.12; Xen.
Anab. 3.3.1; and perhaps Thuc. 6.43. Bugh proposed (99 and n. 63 ad loc.), quite sensibly,
that the thirty horsemen sent by the Athenians to Sicily were to be used as kataskopoi. Cf.
also Theophylactus 4.10.7 of peripoloi.
27. Xen. Cav. Com. 7.7–8. Hence the Greeks relied on cavalry for this purpose when
terrain permitted (cf. Q. Curtius 9.9.23).
28. Xen. Cav. Com. 7.6; Hell. 6.5.52. Some twenty of Iphicrates’ men were killed. It is
to be assumed that a smaller troop would have been better able to evade the enemy. 
In critiquing the moves of the contestants at Hydaspes, Arrian did not believe that Porus
sent his son with sixty chariots against the Macedonians when Alexander crossed the
Hydaspes, since he considered such a force too large for reconnaissance but too small to
give battle (Arrian Anab. 5.14.5–6). Whether or not his argument is correct is peripheral to
the issue; it is important that he perceived this number to be unsuitable. His thoughts are
echoed by modern writers, such as Simonyan and Grishin (93): “Under no circumstances
should a large number of men be chosen to conduct a [reconnaissance] raid unless there is
a special need for this. The more personnel in the party (subunit) allocated to a raid, the
more quickly it may be detected by the enemy and the more dif‹culty it will have in achiev-
ing covertness of action.” The U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps advise that the size of a
reconnaissance force should be proportionate to the expected opposition, and they note
that reconnaissance in force can bring about an unwanted general engagement (U.S.
Department of the Army, FM 35 art. 4–48a; U.S. Marine Corps FM 2–1 art. 1003a2b,
1003b1c, 1003b2a). Cf. Plut. Flam. 8.1–2.
29. Q. Curtius 4.12.4–5. 

ground (whether in hostile or friendly country), some of the attendants
(huperetai) of the hoplites were to ‹nd paths in close areas, while cavalry
did so in open areas.30 Psiloi were used alone when cavalry was unavail-
able or impractical—on rough ground, when stealth was wanted, and by
night. Even though he had a large and skilled cavalry force, Alexander
used Thracian peltasts to explore the mountain paths around the Persian
Gates.31 Xenophon portrayed Cyrus’ army marching by night preceded
by light-armed troops who scouted with ears as well as eyes; the Ten
Thousand sent Democrates son of Temnus with a body of foot soldiers
into the mountains to verify sightings of ‹res.32 Reconnaissance by night
tended to be the prerogative of smaller units. Individuals or small teams
could hope to approach and even enter camps and cities under cover of
darkness, and hence pickets and night patrols were posted to counter this
type of threat. Night and especially inclement weather are generally
agreed to be an asset to scouts, for while they hinder the agent’s vision,
they provide security against detection. Reconnaissance by day was
undertaken by units of all sizes, the numbers determined by the assign-
ment and the potential for contact with an enemy. A small group of war-
ships might serve for reconnaissance by sea; a single lighter vessel suf‹ced
Beyond the Hill
19
30. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.4. Cavalry and archers: Arrian Anab. 2.8.1. Cavalry and psiloi:
Xen. Lac. Pol. 13.6; Aen. Tact. 15.5; Arrian Anab. 1.13.1–2, 3.9.5. Cavalry ahead, psiloi
on ›anks and heights: Xen. Anab. 6.3.14. Cf. Vegetius 3.6. Arrian noted the utility of light
troops armed with missile weapons (javelins and slings) for scouting (Tactica 15.5). The
Egyptians used mounted archers as scouts, according to Worley (12; cf. also 180 n. 19),
who described a picture of a mounted archer with the caption “The scout of the army of the
pharaoh.” 
31. Q. Curtius 3.4.13 (Thracas . . . leviter armatos). Cf. Aelian Tactica 17.7; Xen. Anab.
4.4.15. Similarly, Antiochus III (in 218) took euzonoi to reconnoiter the Plane Tree Pass
(described as rocky, narrow, and dif‹cult at 69.1) held by Ptolemy IV’s general Nicolaus
(Polyb. 5.68.10–11).
32. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.56ff.; Xen. Anab. 4.4.15–18. See also Q. Curtius 8.11.22. Vegetius
(3.6) pointed out that it was safer to operate by night, but the dif‹culty of navigation in
unfamiliar territory without a compass must have been considerable—it is hard enough
with one! Scouts by night (and day) must therefore have relied on landmarks for their bear-
ings, which would have some effect on their routes.
A high proportion of modern reconnaissance by small units is done after dark. How-
ever, Simonyan and Grishin (88–89) point out that daylight reconnaissance-oriented raids
for the purposes of capturing prisoners have better chances for success and a better ratio of
capture to loss than those by night. While this observation may apply to Greek practice, one
nevertheless can ‹nd a similar (and successful, from the point of the Greeks) mission by
night in ‹ction (the Doloneia, where capture is an important component of the instructions)
and history (Xen. Anab. 4.4.15–18, where it may have been incidental).

when contact with the enemy was not expected or when hostilities were
not yet open.33
While reconnaissance forces were often drawn from particular types
of troops, there is no evidence of units organized for the speci‹c and sole
purpose of gathering information, although the Lacedaemonians fre-
quently relied on the Skiritai for this role.34 Yet the repeated employment
of the same men and leaders contributed to a degree of specialization and
development of expertise. Commanders of reconnaissance forces deter-
mined what was and was not necessary to report back to the commander
and they consequently needed a combination of experience and an abil-
ity to distinguish reality from appearance and to realize what was or was
not important.35 The aforementioned Democrates was described by
20
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
33. Examples: (1) the Megarians sent a ship to verify reports of an Athenian landing on
Salamis (Plut. Solon 9.4.4); (2) the Athenians used ten ships to reconnoiter the harbor of
Syracuse in the 415–413 expedition (Thuc. 6.50.4; Plut. Nic. 14.5); (3) Alcibiades sailed
with twenty ships to Gythium to take a look at the triremes that he had learned the
Lacedaemonians were preparing (Xen. Hell. 1.4.11); (4) Antiochus, Alcibiades’ lieutenant,
may have used two or ten ships for reconnaissance at Notium (Russell passim, citing Xen.
Hell. 1.5.11–14; Hell. Oxy. 8.1–4; Plut. Alc. 35.5–6; Plut. Lys. 5.1–2; Diod. Sic.
13.71.2–4); (5) Lysander sent ahead two or three triremes to report back on Athenian
movements at Aegospotami (Xen. Hell. 2.1.24; Plut. Lys. 10.3, 11.1–2; Front. Strat. 2.1.18;
Polyaenus 1.45.2. Cf. Diod. Sic. 13.106); and (6) Chabrias waylaid a force of twelve Laco-
nian scout ships (Polyaenus 3.11.3). Cf. the exploratory presbeia of Phaeax with two ships
(Thuc. 5.4.1). See also Hdt. 3.136, 7.179; Xen. Hell. 1.4.11. 
Smaller ships used for reconnaissance included ‹fty-oared (Hdt.1.152), thirty-oared
(Hdt. 8.21; Arrian Anab. 2.7.2, 7.20.7; Diod. Sic. 17.33.1), and heralds’ boats (Arrian
Anab. 6.19.3). Cf. the use of light ships (lemboi) preceding Roman ›eets (e.g., Polyb.
1.53.9; Plut. Cato Minor 54.5), and cf. the forty-oar ships (variously given as pictae, picati,
and pecati in the manuscripts) described by Vegetius (4.37), these latter with sails dyed blue
and hulls waxed for silent running.
34. For the Skiritai, see n. 11 and Gomme 4:103–4 on Thuc. 5.67.1. Cf. Xen. Cyr. 4.2.1.
It is curious that the Spartans seem to have had a tendency to use non-Spartiate Laconians
(perioikoi) for intelligence operations. The Skiritai were from a northern district of Laconia
(Skiritis), bordering Mantinea—an area that was the stage for numerous battles, marches,
and raids—and life in such a milieu could have encouraged the evolution of a breed trained
by hard necessity. A parallel might be the Moroccan Ghoums employed by the British dur-
ing World War II—perceived as being particularly adept at stealth and reconnaissance, the
Ghoums were used frequently but not exclusively, and after all, they were not British (or
Spartiates!). Alternately, there is the practice of recruiting poachers as gamekeepers: the
British in Egypt used patrols of tribal militias recruited from the very people against whom
the security was directed (Keegan 143).
35. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.56ff., describing the role of the arkhon of the scouts. Cf. Anon. Byz.
(s. VI) 20, who called for intelligent, observant, and experienced men (therein called phu-
lakes, but the context clearly indicates reconnaissance). One would expect the rank and ‹le 

Xenophon as just such an individual and ful‹lled his role as commander
of scouts admirably. Xenophon recorded a few occasions when generals
(Seuthes, Timasion, and himself) went in person to reconnoiter, and in
his Cavalry Commander he advised the commander to take a look for
himself whenever he could do so with minimal risk.36 Alexander some-
times accompanied a reconnaissance in force, and at times he went him-
self accompanied by only a few men. When he delegated the command of
a reconnaissance force to others, they were usually men of note and
stature.37
Skopoi relied primarily on their eyes when collecting information, at
least by day.38 To obtain an accurate observation, they might approach
quite near to an enemy force—there are examples of mounted Syracusan
scouts coming close enough to shout insults at encamped Athenians, for
instance, and of traps set by commanders for unwary scouts who
approached their camps.39 Direct contact was avoided by small teams,
except to capture a straggler, or accost a native, who might be ques-
tioned. Larger forces used their inherent threat to force the enemy to dis-
close his own power.
The distances at which land reconnaissance teams operated varied
from the immediate locale to two days’ journey; seaborne forays could
Beyond the Hill
21
to be selected for their merits also, since Aeneas Tacticus set forth requirements for
observers; see also Vegetius 3.6, who insisted that only the most trustworthy and cleverest
(‹delissimi argutissimique) should be chosen, and cf. contemporary criteria, e.g., those of
Applegate (ix): “An intelligent man of good physique, who is con‹dent, aggressive, and self-
reliant, is the best raw material from which scouts and patrol members are made.” 
36. Seuthes: Xen. Anab. 7.3.41. Timasion: Xen. Anab. 6.3.22. Cf. Xen. Cav. Com.
4.16. One might infer from parallels that this practice was in fact hazardous—M. Claudius
Marcellus and an accompanying force of about 220 cavalry and thirty light-armed troops
were ambushed by Hannibal’s Numidians (who, says Polybius, were accustomed to lie in
ambush for skirmishers and outriders [proporeumenoi]); the consul met his death in the
ensuing ‹ght (Polyb. 10.32.1–12; Livy 27.26.1–27). Polybius censured Marcellus for
exposing himself to danger: according to the historian’s opinion, a commander ought not
to take such risks. Cf. the close call of Scipio in similar circumstances (Livy 24.41.6).
37. Alexander: Arrian Anab. 1.20.5, 3.9.4, 4.30.5–6, 6.26.5. Amyntas: Arrian Anab.
1.12.7. Hegelochus: Arrian Anab. 1.13.1–2. Ptolemy son of Lagus: Arrian Anab. 4.24.8.
Thoas: Arrian Anab. 6.23.2–3. Parmenio: Arrian Anab. 3.9.4; Q. Curtius 3.7.6.
38. The word !kopñ! is derived from the same root as !k¡comai (I see); cf. English spy.
In contrast, Ètakou!t®! (“eavesdropper,” hence spy—usually in the context of domestic
espionage) is from oï!, Ètñ! (ear) and koæv (I hear).
39. Pace Starr (9), who said scouts relied on distant observation; he may have had sur-
veillance in mind. For Syracusans, see Thuc. 6.63.3. Xenophon (Cyr. 3.3.25) advocated sta-
tioning prophulakai well before watch ‹res for this end (cf. Anab. 7.2.18). 

extend still further.40 Among the aforementioned examples, Democrates
and his team advanced no more than a few miles, while before
Gaugamela, the contact between Persian and Macedonian vanguards
occurred when the two armies were separated by perhaps 150 stadia.41
According to Diodorus Siculus, a source not always given to accuracy,
Eumenes learned from kataskopoi that Antigonus was crossing the
Coprates River, eighty stadia distant from his camp.42 Information on
the area covered by a patrol can only be guessed at through comparisons.
Apparently British cavalry units in World War I could not be expected to
cover an area wider than ten miles, no depth being speci‹ed—although
even this sounds like the ideal rather than the norm.43 A World War II
Soviet independent reconnaissance patrol, traveling on foot, typically
penetrated to a depth of about eight kilometers, with squads sent out two
to three kilometers from the main axis of movement.44
Surveillance Agents
The employment of surveillance agents was a general, but not universal,
practice, as Xenophon noted: “All know that it is better to place both day
and night watchers before the camp, but even this duty is heeded by some
22
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
40. For a day’s march, cf. Diod. Sic. 19.25.1 (of Eumenes and Antigonus One-Eyed in
317); for two days, see n. 30. Numidian cavalry leading Hannibal’s march on Tarentum
preceded the main force by a bit less than four miles (thirty stadia). Napoleon Maxims 7
(Philips 1:409) merely says “at suf‹cient distances to allow the main body of the arm to
deploy and take up its position.”
41. I.e., Democrates advanced a distance less than that which an army of ten thousand
was able to traverse and return in a single day despite snow and dif‹cult terrain (Xen. Anab.
4.4.15–22). Arrian (Anab. 3.9.2) gives 60 stadia (ca. seven and a half miles) as the distance
between the two armies; Curtius (4.10.15) says 150 stadia (about eighteen and a half miles).
It is likely Arrian is giving the distance at the end of Alexander’s march after the contact,
Curtius the distance before it (ten or eleven miles being a reasonable distance in these cir-
cumstances). Curtius says that the Persians with whom the Macedonians fell in were strag-
glers, not scouts, but his own statement that Mazaeus had sent ahead a thousand cavalry
(4.9.24), and the relative positions of the armies, suggests that Arrian is in fact correct. 
42. Diod. Sic. 19.18.4 (about ten miles).
43. “As to the front of the possible reconnaissance, it should be clearly understood that
the maximum width of a zone that can be effectively reconnoitered by a reconnaissance
detachment regardless of strength—whether a squadron or a troop—is approximately ten
miles. The anticipated dif‹culty in obtaining the information will determine whether the
reconnaissance detachment should be a squadron or a troop” (Schwein 36). A British
squadron in World War I contained about 150 men.
44. Simonyan and Grishin 156.

and neglected by others.”45 In fact, emphasis on surveillance was a func-
tion of perceived security.46 In time of war commanders normally
assumed that their opponents had placed watchers and, when planning
to surprise or elude their foes, took precautions accordingly. When they
perceived that their opponents either failed to post watchers or did so
carelessly, they were often able to exploit the omission.47 An attack dur-
ing peace promised surprise, as when the Thebans marched on Plataea
before war was declared.48
Surveillance was generally distinguished according to day (hemerinai
phulakai) and night watches (nukterinai phulakai), which began and
Beyond the Hill
23
45. Xen. Oecon. 20.8. This neglect is not necessarily indicative of contempt for tactical
intelligence. The Apaches and Sioux were widely admired for their abilities in this ‹eld yet,
according to Wagner (203), “they post no sentinels after dark, but are on the alert at the
‹rst sight of dawn.”
46. Xenophon, in his address to the Greek camp (Anab. 5.1.9), proposed posting guards
about the camp. This might imply that up to this point the camp had not been guarded, but
he was probably warning his troops not to cease such precautions now that they had
reached the sea. As may be expected, a general would pay more attention to posting watch-
ers when the proximity of the enemy demanded: the Syracusans did not mount watches in
the Sicel cities until they learned the Athenians were at Rhegium (Thuc. 6.45.1); Arrian
remarked that Alexander posted forward watches with care when Darius’ army was near
(Anab. 2.8.2; cf. Diod. Sic. 14.105.1 of Dionysius, 14.108.4 of the Rhegians).
General statements of practice reinforce individual examples. Consider, e.g., Xen. Hiero
6.9: “whenever we are on expedition we post sentinels and take dinner and rest in
con‹dence”; Cav. Com. 4.8: “do not neglect to post guards even if you have con‹dence in
your spies.”
47. Some examples follow. (1) Thuc. 2.93–94; Diod. 12.49.2: In 428, the Lacedaemon-
ian navarch Cnemus learned through unspeci‹ed but obviously effective channels that the
Athenians, in overcon‹dence, had neglected to post guards at the Piraeus docks. He
attacked by night and took Salamis by surprise, but the Salaminians were able to ›ash sig-
nal ‹res to the Athenians, which discouraged him from attacking Athens. After this, the
Athenians were rather more careful about guarding Salamis and the Piraeus for a while, but
the lesson was not properly learned. In 388, Teleutias sailed into the Piraeus, which he
rightly expected to be poorly guarded, and caused havoc (Xen. Hell. 5.1.19ff.). (2) Thuc.
6.100.1: the Athenians besieging Syracuse noted a relaxation of the guard and were able to
exploit this negligence. (3) Arrian Anab. 5.12.4: Alexander, when making a river crossing,
tried not to be seen by Porus’ scouts. (4) Arrian Anab. 1.6.9: when Alexander noted that
Clitus son of Bardylis and Glaucias, king of the Taulantians, had failed to post sentries, he
moved into position unobserved and he attacked. (5) Q. Curtius 9.7.2: the citadel of Bactra
was carelessly guarded when Alexander was in India, since it was thought safe; rebels took
it with relative ease. 
48. Regarding Plataea, see esp. Thuc. 2.2.3. In the Agamemnon (line 337), the Greeks
no longer posted sentries when their victory was complete; the Syracusan demos was often
careless of their security after a successful battle, to its grief (Diod. Sic. 16.18; Plut. Timo-
leon 18.3; cf. Thuc. 7.72–73). Cf. Diod. Sic. 30.10.1 of Perseus. 

ended at dinner and dawn, and according to relatively stationary (phu-
lakes) and roving (peripoloi) parties.49 Since the verbal division is
re›ected in practice, they are treated separately here.
Observers (Skopoi, Hemeroskopoi)
Agents involved in surveillance by day engaged in protracted observation
of an area or force to learn of any signi‹cant changes or activities.50 They
were relatively static and obtained their information chie›y through
visual means. They should, according to Aeneas Tacticus, be competent
to report on the “enemy’s preparations, his numbers, his line of march,
and the other movements of his army.”51 He also required that they be
swift, trustworthy men, experienced in war.52
Records in Linear B indicate that the use of observers dates back to the
Mycenaean era. Tablets found at Pylos contain a list of ten captains and
their men stationed in small detachments along the Peloponnesian coast
under the heading “Thus the watchers are guarding the coast.”53 Among
the records are what appear to be various ethnic names. Chadwick was
inclined to believe that these represented indigenous peoples who would
24
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
49. Dinner marks the posting of sentries in Xen. Hell. 4.6.7; Xen. Anab. 7.3.34; Xen.
Cyr. 3.3.33, 7.2.1; Xen. Hiero 6.9; Aen. Tact. 18.1 (upon a signal). Aeneas Tacticus (27.15)
advised that the watch be maintained until the nearby terrain was searched in the morning.
The division between night and day watchers is embodied in Xenophon’s verbal distinction
(Cyr. 1.6.43; cf. Xen. Lac. Pol. 12.2–3) and in Aeneas Tacticus’ separate treatment of day
and night watches (hemeroskopoi in his chap. 6, phulakes in chap. 22). A similar division
existed among the Romans of Polybius’ day (Polyb. 6.33.7–37.6).
50. So U.S. Marine Corps art. 1001b; see also 1001a1 and a2.
51. Aen. Tact. 6.3, Whitehead’s translation. A sampling: Hdt. 7.192; Thuc. 4.26.5–9;
Xen. Hell. 5.1.27, 7.2.5; Diod. Sic. 11.21.5, 14.10.1; Arrian Anab. 5.10.4; Onas. 22.2.
52. The exclusion of those who did not meet these standards implies that some degree
of specialization did exist, at least by the fourth century. On a less historical note, the
watcher (skopos) of Aegisthus was hired for the express purpose of looking out for
Agamemnon’s return (Od. 4.524); the watchman in the Agamemnon kept his post contin-
ually over a long period (Aeschylus Ag. 2). 
53. Ventris and Chadwick nos. 56–60; their translation of no. 56, line 1 (o-u-ru-to o-pi-
a2-ra e-pi-ko-wo). They, quite reasonably, considered the 780 men spread along the coast
to be an early warning system rather than a defense (indeed, some units mentioned were as
small as ten men). The watchers were in most cases accompanied by “Followers” (e-qu-ta,
whom Ventris and Chadwick compared to the hetairoi [companions] of a king), who pos-
sessed chariots and might have served as swift couriers (429). In his later work (The Myce-
naean World, 176–77), Chadwick thought that since the Followers tended to be distributed
in places most at risk, they would likely be present with their troops.

not be trusted in the army but could be trusted as lookouts.54 If his
notion is right, this would imply that surveillance was perceived by the
Mycenaeans as either relatively unimportant or relatively free from
manipulation—curious attitudes that have reigned in some times and
places, but odd in light of the effort that went into the dispositions. To be
sure, the watch failed to avert disaster—after all, the clay tablets are pre-
served only because they were ‹red into brick when the palace was
burned—but was this a failure in the vigilance of the watchers or in the
arms of the soldiers?
After the gap in the written record following the fall of the Myce-
naeans, observers reappear in the Iliad, in which lookouts are found on
the shield of Achilles and again at the funeral of Hector. Their presence
continues and extends throughout the period under discussion.55
Poets and tacticians alike were inclined to situate one to three men in
an elevated observation post (sometimes called a skopié), a practice that
continues to the present.56 Homer depicts the Trojan Polites atop the
burial mound of Aesyetes to keep an eye on the Greeks,57 and parallels
range from the eastern to the western frontiers of the Greek world. The
Greeks in Asia Minor encountered and made use of skopoi atop heights
and burial mounds; hemeroskopoi were stationed on the heights of
Euboea near Artemisium; Gelon posted skopoi on high ground over-
looking Himera, in Sicily.58 Archebius of Heraclea sent a trumpeter to a
treetop for want of higher ground—and such was the vantage of the ill-
fated Pentheus in the Bacchae.59
Beyond the Hill
25
54. Chadwick 175–76.
55. Iliad 18.523, 24.799 (cf. schol. 799); night watchmen are also found in 10.97–101,
180ff., etc. 
56. Aen. Tact. 6.2, 6.5; cf. Simonyan and Grishin 54, 66. The contingents on the Pylos
tablets were all divisible by ten, but it may be rash to speculate that this was the size of units
assigned to individual observation posts.
57. Iliad 2.792; his post was criticized by Strabo (13.1.37), who observed that he could
have watched from the acropolis of Ilium as effectively and in greater security—quite right,
but perhaps less poetic. Aegisthus’ anonymous lookout watched for the return of Agamem-
non from a skopie (Od. 4.524); the suitors watched continually for Telemachus from
heights (Od. 16.365); in his tale to Antinoos, Odysseus speaks of sending out watchers
(opteres) to heights while in Egypt (Od. 17.430). Cf. Paus. 4.19.2 of Aristomenes’ watchers
in the hills (set in the eighth century, but no doubt an anachronistic detail supplied by Pau-
sanias or Rhianus [s. III], his source).
58. Respectively, (1) Xen. Hell. 3.2.14; (2) Hdt. 7.183, 192. Cf. Hdt. 7.219; Plut. Alc.
34.6; Bosworth, Commentary 1:114, on Arrian Anab. 1.13.2; (3) Diod. Sic. 11.21.5.
59. Polyaenus 5.39.1; Eur. Bacchae 1061–62. Cf. Simonyan and Girishin 76–77.

Obviously, heights afforded a wide ‹eld of vision; less obviously, they
often offered a direct line of sight to a main camp or base, thus facilitat-
ing signaling.60 In the Cyropaedia, Xenophon mentioned an of‹cer in
charge of watchers, the skoparkhes, who maintained contact with his
superior through messengers.61 The title is found only in this work; 
otherwise watchers seem to have operated independently, sending back
word to their strategoi through runners or signals.62 Since a strategos
would not normally have leisure to look out for signals himself, arrange-
ments must have been made for their messages to be relayed to him.
While on Corcyra, Iphicrates posted watchers at a predetermined point
visible from the city and “established with them how they ought to signal
when the enemy ships were approaching and when they anchored.” The
news was then relayed to his ship captains via a herald.63
Observation posts were at times established in such a way as to pro-
vide relay points for communication. Alexander, for example, set his
watchers in a line along the Hydaspes, within sight and earshot of each
other, so as to pass on messages.64 Eumenes, awaiting the approach of
Antigonus, was said to have stationed pickets along the entire length of
the Pastigris River, a distance of almost ninety miles (seven hundred sta-
dia), with a similar line of posts extending back into Persia, by which
shouted messages could be passed.65 More permanent arrangements,
26
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
60. Iphicrates at Corcyra went in person to look over the ground for good vantages,
where those approaching could be seen by the watchers, and where the watchers themselves
could be seen from the city (Xen. Hell. 6.2.34). Aeneas Tacticus (6.1) advised posting
hemeroskopoi before the city on high vantage points. Xenophon attributed to Lycurgus the
origin of the Spartan practice of having the daytime guard posts (phulakai methemerinai)
look inward toward the weapons stores and friendly troops, while the enemy was watched
by cavalry from high ground (Xen. Lac. Pol. 12.2). Cf. Lysias Against Simon 11; Polyb.
4.70.5; Front. Strat. 2.5.15; Diod. Sic. 19.96.3, 19.97.1. When heights were unavailable,
Iphicrates made use of mast tops (Xen. Hell. 6.2.29). 
61. Xen. Cyr. 6.3.6: !kop‹rxh! MSS; !kñparxo! Dindorff. Cf. 6.3.12. See also Xen.
Cyr. 5.3.56; Arrian Anab. 1.13.1–2; and Mycenaean practices mentioned in n. 53.
62. Hdt. 7.192 and Aen. Tact. 6.5 (runner); Arrian Anab. 5.13.1 (horseman). Cf. Shep-
herd 216, 76 n. 231. Aeneas Tacticus (6.7) deemed it necessary for day watchers to raise
their signals at periodic intervals to con‹rm their presence and safety; in case of there being
no line of sight, relays were advocated (Aen. Tact. 6.4).
63. Xen. Hell. 6.2.33–34. His arrangements worked well and to his advantage. Other
examples of signaling by watchers: Thuc. 8.102.1; Xen. Hell. 1.1.2, 5.1.27, 7.2.5.
64. Arrian Anab. 5.10.4ff.
65. Diod. Sic. 19.17.3. Antigonus the One-Eyed is said to have established (or reestab-
lished) a net of couriers and ‹re signals throughout the part of Asia under his control (Diod.
Sic. 19.57.5; ca. 315). Cf. Herodotus 8.98; [Aristotle] De mundo 398b30–35 for Persian
precedents. 

consisting of towers and forts, were erected in strategic sites: passes,
straits, and borders. It has been proposed that interlocking systems of
forti‹ed observation posts and strongholds were conceived and con-
structed in such states as Attica; it has equally been argued that what
appear now to be coherent systems were products of accretion not neces-
sarily driven by any sort of plan.66 In any event, it has been demonstrated
that towers and forts served to keep strategic locales under scrutiny and
that those wishing to escape their eyes felt compelled to avoid them.67
If not behind hard stone, the observation posts ought to have been
concealed—and so say Xenophon and Aeneas Tacticus. Xenophon
argued that hidden outposts cause the enemy to feel insecure, since they
know they are watched but not from where. Conversely, the watchers are
secure.68 Aeneas Tacticus mandated that hemeroskopoi be sent to their
posts before ‹rst light, lest they be observed.69 Both men knew that, for
all their precautions, observers were likely to fall into enemy hands—
hence Xenophon’s recommendations to capture them and Aeneas’ moni-
tion that these men be given passwords different from those used by the
rest of an army. 
Pickets and Guards (Phulakes, Prophulakes)
Surveillance by night was particularly concerned with security—the
detection of enemy reconnaissance elements and the prevention of
betrayal from within and tactical surprise from without. Night watch-
men were (and are still) usually ordinary soldiers assigned to duty in
rotating shifts rather than a specialized corps.70 We ‹nd in the Iliad that
the duty was given to the younger men, who were posted outside the
walls in seven contingents of one hundred.71 The proportion of seven
Beyond the Hill
27
66. For the ‹rst position, see Ober; for the second, see Munn. It is worth noting that
Agis could see the grain ships in the Piraeus from Deceleia (Xen. Hell. 1.1.35). Byzantine
military treatises attach considerable importance to these lookouts (then called biglai, cor-
rupted from the Latin vigiles); see, e.g., Anon. Byz. (s. VI) Peri Strat. 9. Cf. Steph. Byz. s.v.
“Metachoeon” for a Boeotian example.
67. Cf. Papalas on Dracanium Icaria.
68. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.10–12. 
69. Aen. Tact. 6.6. As Simonyan and Grishin note (57; cf. 54–56), most observation
posts are compromised when ‹rst occupied or when subsequently moved.
70. Xen. Anab. 5.1.9; cf. Aen. Tact. 22.5a, 22.26. 
71. Iliad 9.66–68, 80–88. Cf. MSG T. Damm on modern practice (letter to author, 8 Feb.
1996): “The guards are normally the lowest ranking soldier of the unit and are probably also
the least experienced and knowledgeable soldiers. They are controlled by a corporal or a
sergeant of the guard, whose job it is to enforce the guards remaining at their job.” 

hundred pickets to one hundred thousand men (i.e., 1 man in every 143),
by the way, is of some interest, since it is not so far from Frederick the
Great’s recommendation of three hundred men for an army of forty
thousand: 1 man for every 133.72 However, Aeneas Tacticus advises: “At
times of less immediate danger, the number of men on watch and patrol
should be half those enlisted. . . . And during peacetime, when there is no
danger, guard-duty ought to represent the least possible inconvenience to
the smallest number of people.”73 Naturally a smaller force, more typical
of that ‹elded by a smaller polis, would have a much higher proportion,
yet this still seems immense, if it represents half the entire population
under arms. The solution may lie in Aeneas’ rating of recruits according
to their ‹tness for duty. He assigns the third of four classes of troops to
guard duty, youth once again being a criterion.74 If he is speaking of half
this body, his proportion makes a bit more sense. 
While one could argue that Aeneas is here making some effort to spe-
cialize his men, it is apparent that—as is and was typical—night watch-
men were usually the most junior and least experienced soldiers. Only
exceptional circumstances (e.g., imminent treachery or attack) seem to
have called for senior or wealthier men to undertake this burdensome
duty. The Lacedaemonians typically assigned night watches to the Skiri-
tai or, later, to xenoi (probably mercenaries) when the latter were pres-
ent.75 Once again, this custom may re›ect an interest in having a special-
ized corps, yet one must still note that the Spartiates were not the ones
wiping sleep from bleary eyes. 
In the Cyropaedia, Xenophon states that the night was divided into
watches to enable sentinels not only to be alert for their duty but also to
be rested and ready to move with the army or ‹ght during the day (it
appears that even in his model army, the task was widely shared).76 The
shifts numbered between three and ‹ve, the variation possibly re›ecting
the change in the length of the night during the course of the year (i.e.,
28
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
72. Iliad 9.66–68, 80–88; Frederick the Great 336.
73. Aen. Tact. 22.26, Whitehead’s translation. 
74. Aen. Tact. 1.8; see 1.4–1.9 generally. The fourth class is the general population, so
the distinction is hardly an elevated one.
75. Xen. Lac. Pol. 12.3. LSJ (s.v. j¡no! IV) and Marchant’s Loeb edition read “allies”
for j¡nvn; but, as noted in LSJ (citing Xen. Anab. 1.1.10), the word may also be used for
mercenaries in Xenophon’s works. This particular example is curious, since one would
expect summakhoi for “allies” who had been regularly campaigning with the Lacedaemo-
nians for some time. Xenophon’s remark that this was a recent innovation might in fact
indicate that mercenaries were being used; Parke (89) also thought this was the case. 
76. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.44; Aeneas Tacticus (22.5–6) also recommended frequent changes to
prevent treachery and to keep watchers alert.

perhaps ‹ve watches in winter, three in summer) or differing practices in
various times and peoples.77 The duration of the watches were measured
by the stars or by a water clock.78
While hemeroskopoi were stationed on skopai at a distance from the
camp, night watchers were posted around the camp, before the gates, or
on the side of the camp facing the enemy.79 Prophulakes, as their name
implies, were employed outside the camp, in the area between the phu-
lakes and the enemy, to give advance warning.80 In the Cyropaedia men
were sent into the dark around the camp in squads of ‹ve and ten, with
the double intent of catching anyone who might leave and watching for
anyone who might approach.81 Aeneas Tacticus proposed that dogs be
tethered outside the walls of a besieged city for the same purpose, and his
recommendation appears to have been followed.82 The barking of dogs
was supposed to have alerted the Messenians at Eira to the in‹ltration of
the Laconian army into their fortress by night and to have marked
Alexander’s approach to an Indian town.83 It is probable that in these
two accounts the animals were not deliberately posted to aid the sentries,
but inscriptions indicate that by the third century, at latest, dogs were
enlisted to supplement men.84 Certainly dogs are notorious among mod-
Beyond the Hill
29
77. LSJ (s.v. fulak® I.4) noted three watches, citing the scholia on [Eur.] Rhesus 5, or
‹ve watches, citing Stesichorus 55, Simonides 219A, and [Eur.] Rhesus 543. Aeneas and
Curtius mentioned at least four (Aen. Tact. 18.21; Q. Curtius 7.2.19). In the Cyropaedia
(5.3.44), Xenophon advocated making watches numerous and short.
78. Aeneas Tacticus (22.24–25) proposed using a water clock, reset every ten days, to
ensure that shifts were divided equally as the nights grew longer or shorter. Xenophon
(Mem. 4.7.4) portrayed Socrates recommending that his pupils learn just enough astron-
omy for practical purposes, among them setting the watch—his method would be more
suitable to an army on the move. Polybius (9.14.4–15.15) treated at some length the impor-
tance to a general of telling time by the stars and sun. Curtius (3.8.23) noted that the
changes in watch were marked in Alexander’s army by the blowing of a tuba; this is not
otherwise attested and may re›ect Roman, rather than Greek, practice (cf. Polyb. 6.35.12).
79. Xenophon proposed the placement of sentinels around the camp (Anab. 5.1.9,
6.3.10); sentries in the Iliad (10.126–27) were placed before the gates of the Achaean camp.
80. Thuc. 3.112.4; Xen. Hell. 4.1.24; Xen. Anab. 2.4.15. See also Xen. Lac. Pol. 12.3;
of phulakes, [Eur.] Rhesus 523.
81. Xen. Cyr. 4.5.5.
82. Aen. Tact. 22.14.
83. Paus. 4.21.1.
84. E.g., SEG 24 no. 154 (dated post-265/4): Epichares, the man honored in this decree,
had established additional phrukteria and increased the number of dogs assigned to them.
See also SEG 26 no. 1306: a provision in a treaty between Teos and Cyrtisus mandated that
twenty men and three dogs be assigned to a phrourarkhos. Aratus was said to have posted
‹fty dogs (each with a keeper) at Acrocorinth, knowing well the strategic value of that place
and its vulnerability to a stealthy assault (Plut. Aratus 24.1). Cf. Hesiod Theog. 769 (of Cer-
berus); Plato Repub. 375a, 375d–e, 376a–b; Polyaenus 2.25.1, 4.2.16.

ern soldiers for compromising reconnaissance patrols. So, incidentally,
are goats (and their accompanying herders) in the Mediterranean and
Near East.85 Unfortunately (or fortunately, from the scout’s point of
view), dogs were not always heeded—perhaps a phenomenon akin to
that of the boy who too often cried “Wolf!” is involved. An illustrative
example in Plutarch follows.
Aratus was setting out to overthrow Nicocles, the tyrant of Sicyon.
Like any able general, he sent three men on a preliminary reconnaissance,
to verify the report of an escapee that the walls of Sicyon were vulnerable
at a certain point. These men (a fellow exile named Xenocrates, brother
to the escapee, and two servants of Aratus) con‹rmed the report and
measured the wall, but they noted that a gardener living near the spot
kept a number of small but vicious and vociferous dogs. Therefore, on
the eve of Aratus’ attack, he sent a team of ‹ve light-armed men disguised
as travelers, to seek lodging from the gardener and, once admitted, lock
up him and his dogs. These men succeeded in securing the gardener, but
the dogs evaded them; this they reported to Aratus when he drew near.
Aratus’ men were disheartened and wished to call off the attack, but Ara-
tus decided to take a risk, although promising to withdraw if the dogs
proved troublesome.86
At the same time [Aratus] sent ahead the men carrying scaling lad-
ders, whom Ecdelus and Mnasitheus led, while he himself followed
slowly, the little dogs already barking loudly and running alongside
of Ecdelus and his men. Nevertheless they reached the wall and set
the ladders without mishap. But while the ‹rst men were climbing
the ladders, the man who set the dawn watch was patrolling with
the kodon [a bell], and there were many lights and the sound of
men approaching. But [Aratus’] men, just as they were, cowering
there on their ladders, escaped notice without dif‹culty; but since
another patrol was coming up to the ‹rst, they came into the
gravest peril. Yet when they escaped this patrol also as it passed, at
once the leaders, Mnasitheus and Ecdelus, climbed up and, taking
the parapets to either sides, sent Technon to Aratus, telling him to
hurry up.
There was not much distance from the garden to the wall and the
30
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
85. See, e.g., the misfortunes of a British SAS team in Iraq, as described by McNab
103–4, 153–57, 186 (a near miss), 352–53, and 395 (another near miss).
86. This paragraph is a paraphrase of Plut. Aratus 4.3–5.5, 6.3, 7.3–4.

tower, in which a large hunting dog kept guard. The dog himself
did not sense their approach, either because he was by nature lazy
or because he had been worn out after the day. But when the gar-
dener’s little dogs were calling on him from below, he growled—
faintly and indistinctly at ‹rst, then he waxed louder when they
passed by. And already a great baying pervaded the area, so that the
guard opposite inquired of the dog’s master with a loud shout why
the dog was barking so savagely and if something strange was hap-
pening. But he called back to him from the tower that there was
nothing to fear and that the dog was set off by the light of the wall
guards and the sound of the bell. This greatly encouraged Aratus’
soldiers, since they thought that the dog’s master covered for them
as one sharing their plan and that there were many other accom-
plices in the city.87
This passage in Plutarch shows, if at some length, how things could and
did go wrong for both sides. Even at best, the ef‹cacy of night watchers
was rather poor—they seem to have served more as a trip line than an
early warning system. When the Athenians landed their troops on Sphac-
teria, for instance, they were able to take the ‹rst guard post of thirty by
surprise, as the Laconians apparently supposed that the ships they had
seen were sailing as usual to their own watch stations.88 There are a
number of causes for the frequent failures of the night watch, some of
them visible from the Aratus anecdote: the practices of (1) sitting by ‹res,
(2) carrying lights and bells, (3) singing while on duty; to these must be
added (4) an inclination to treachery and (5) the failings of human nature
in the face of inclement weather, fatigue, and discomfort.
The ‹rst category—the practice of posting sentinels by ‹res—illumi-
nates unequivocally defective doctrine.89 Anyone who has sat by a
Beyond the Hill
31
87. Plut. Aratus 7.4–8.3.
88. Thuc. 4.31.2–32.1. These watchers were probably not Skiritai, who were not men-
tioned by Thucydides in his account of Sphacteria; the watchers were called hoplites at
Thuc. 4.31.2. See also Delbrück 128ff. on this incident. The Persian sentries facing Alexan-
der fared even worse: when Alexander was making a ›anking movement about the Persian
Gates, the sentries at the ‹rst two posts were killed, and the survivors of the third ›ed into
the hills rather than back into camp, so that Ariobarzanes had no warning of the imminent
Macedonian attack (Arrian Anab. 3.18.6–7; see also 2.4.3–4). Cf. also Hdt. 7.27; Thuc.
4.110.1, 2. 
89. So schol. vet. on Aristoph. Birds 841: “—To always bank (¦gkrupt') the ‹re (so that
one may have it, if there would be need of a watch). For they used to burn ‹res during their
watches.” 

camp‹re is familiar with the mesmerizing quality of ›ames and has expe-
rienced ‹re’s deleterious effect on vision outside a limited radius of
light.90 Further, the crackle and hiss of burning wood obscures noises.
Some of the ancients realized that hearing was essential for nocturnal sur-
veillance: Xenophon stated that it was superior to vision at night; Aeneas
Tacticus would have craftsmen prohibited to work at night, lest the noise
of their work impair the hearing of the sentries.91 Yet, from the time of
32
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
90. On this subject, it is instructive to compare the man in the ‹eld with the physician.
McNab writes (88–89): 
Eyes take a long time to adjust in darkness. The cones in your eyes enable you to see
in the daytime, giving color and perception. But they’re no good at night. What takes
over then are the rods on the edge of your irises. They are angled at 45 degrees
because of the convex shape of the eye, so if you look straight at something at night
you don’t really see it: it’s a haze. You have to look above it or around it so you can
line up these rods, which then will give you a picture. It takes forty minutes or so for
them to become fully effective, but you start to see better after ‹ve. And what you
see when you land and what you see ‹ve minutes later are two very different things.
. . . Mark got out the Magellan and took a ‹x. He squinted at it with one eye. Even
small amounts of light can wreck your night vision, and the process must start all
over again. If you have to look at something [bright], you close the eye that you aim
with, the “master eye,” and look with the other.
Dr. Christopher S. Connor, of Dartmouth Hitchcock Hospital, was kind enough to com-
ment on this passage (letter to the author 20 Feb. 1996).
The eye starts to dark adapt at 6 minutes and reaches its max[imum ability] at 20
minutes. The rods do take over. They are not at the edge of the iris as stated but have
a higher ratio outside the macula (the center of the retina and the vision). The dilata-
tion of the pupil at night permits the more peripheral retina, where the rod concen-
tration is higher, to partake in the visual process while allowing more light to enter.
There is still some color vision at night. . . i.e. that greenish gray hue on some nights
and the aurora borealis are 2 examples.
The rods come off the back of the eye perpendicular and not at a 45 degree angle.
. . . they are quite capable of quality vision . . . i.e. reading by moonlight but their
concentration drops off the more peripheral one goes and that contributes to the less
than sharp peripheral vision mentioned earlier.
91. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.43; Aen. Tact. 22.24. Cf. Thuc. 3.23.3–4. Simonyan and Grishin (73
and 83) have the following to say about auditory monitoring: (1) effective range depends on
the amplitude of the sound, time of year, time of day, weather, and the acuteness of the lis-
tener’s hearing; the optimal times are quiet summer and autumn nights; sound carries fur-
ther at night, but echoes make its origin more dif‹cult to locate; (2) a motor vehicle horn
can typically be heard at a distance of 2–3 km, a pick or shovel striking a stone at 1 km,
commands at 0.5–1 km, movement of infantry subunits on foot at 0.3–0.6 km, soft speech
or a cough at 0.3–1 km.

Homer, phulakes stationed near the camp habitually sat by ‹res.92
Xenophon remarked on, and commended, the fact that Seuthes had no
nuktophulakes stationed near the watch ‹res but that instead the ‹res
burned some distance in front of them, so that the watchers might be hid-
den in the dark, while those approaching would be shown up in the
light.93 Xenophon also advocated shifting the disposition of the sentries
and watch ‹res relative to their camp, so that enemy kataskopoi might be
disoriented and thus captured.94
Many a kataskopos haunting the shadows must have given thanks to
Hermes that sentries carried lights and bells as they made the rounds. The
life of Aratus provides further testimony: four men were patrolling with
a light during Aratus’ covert assault on the citadel of Corinth. Aratus’
men saw them coming and hid in shadows cast by the moon, where they
were invisible to the light-blinded eyes of the guards. Instead of letting
the patrol pass unharmed, Aratus’ men attacked. It is possible that the
phulakes spotted one of the intruders—after all, there were about one
hundred within the walls at that point. One of the four guards survived a
sword slash to his head in the initial attack and ›ed shouting; at this
point a general alarm arose.
In addition to lights, patrols carried bells. These, we are told, were to
ensure that guards were vigilant. The scholiasts note that the guards
would hear the ringing of the kodon carried by their inspector and chal-
lenge him.95 But if an inspector really wanted to test the vigilance of the
Beyond the Hill
33
92. Iliad 10.188–89; the lines describing the ‹res of the Trojans at the end of Iliad 8
(553–65) are followed by the line: “So the Trojans held their watches” (Iliad 9.1). Cf. Xen.
Cyr. 7.5.27, where the (‹ctional) Babylonian guards are portrayed drinking by a ‹re—these
are surprised and fail in their task of protecting their king, although their resistance even-
tually is heard.
93. Xen. Anab. 7.2.18; the practice is found again in the Cyropaedia (3.3.25).
94. Xen. Cyr. 3.3.25. In the Cavalry Commander (4.10) he advised setting concealed
lookouts and sentinels both to enhance the security of the watchers and friendly forces and
to set ambushes for enemy scouts. Watchers therefore must have a different watchword
(sunthema) from that used in the city, in case they are captured (Aen. Tact. 6.7; at Xen.
Anab. 7.3.34, the sentinels were posted and given a sunthema, but it is not speci‹ed
whether it was the same as that used in the camp).
95. Schol. vet. on Aristoph. Birds 842 (mentioning a parallel in the lost Palamedes of
Euripides). Cf. Aristoph. Birds 842, 1160; schol. vet. on Aristoph. Lysist. 485; Harpocra-
tion Lexicon on the Ten Attic Orators 96 (also citing Euripides Palamedes); Suda s.vv.
ƒAkvdÅniston, DiekvdÅnisen, and KvdvnoforÇn.
In a different context (having guards throw stones over the wall and call out a challenge
at the sound), Aeneas Tacticus (22.12–13) realized that such noises give away the position
of the guards and could warn intruders away toward quieter areas, but he preferred that
both guards and enemy know that the watch was to be vigilant. 

guards, why would he warn them of his advent? For he would equally
warn intruders of his position and, incidentally, the positions of the
guards. The Athenians at Potidaea passed the kodon from guard to
guard, so that each would be compelled to leave his post to convey it to
the next man. Brasidas came close enough to the walls of Potidaea to
plant a ladder against them, since he could judge the location of the
guard from the noise.96 Aratus, as seen in the passage from Plutarch
quoted earlier, was luckier still. 
There is a decidedly odd aside in Aristophanes’ Clouds, when Strepsi-
ades, sent to lie down on a ›ea-ridden bed to contrive sophistries, tells
Socrates that he is “singing [a song characteristic] of guard-duty” to pass
the unpleasant time.97 In commenting on this curious phrase (apparently
a proverb), the scholiasts explain that while on duty, guards were accus-
tomed to sing to keep themselves and their comrades awake.98 While the
guards may have remained awake, their attention would be diverted, and
any approaching enemy would be alerted to their presence.
Fear of betrayal by guards was endemic. Party faction was a con-
tributing factor, and we ‹nd Aeneas Tacticus recommending that only
well-off men with a wife and children be appointed gatekeepers. Further,
guards were not to know where they would be posted until the last
moment, and their companies and postings ought to be constantly
changed; only the wealthiest and most respectable men should be placed
at the more approachable points.99 As is typical with Aeneas, one won-
ders how much of his theory existed in practice. 
Despite other cautions against mercenaries, Aeneas thought their pres-
ence might check the designs of would-be traitors among the phulakes.100
And indeed when the Spartan Ischolaus learned that some of his guards
planned to hand over Drys to the besieging Athenians, he quietly sta-
tioned a mercenary at each post.101
Aeneas Tacticus records that the night watch of some cities was con-
tracted out, and we must infer that this practice had its problems, for he
34
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
96. Thuc. 4.135.
97. Aristoph. Clouds 721: frour1w ›dvn—I here am guided by K.J. Dover’s gram-
matical reconstruction in his commentary ad loc.
98. Schol. vet. on Aristoph. Clouds 721a, 721b.
99. Aen. Tact. 5.1, 22.15; see also 5.2, 18.1–22, 22 passim. According to Livy (24.2.9),
among the Italian Greeks the “plebian” Locrian guard posts could be counted on to admit
the Bruttians (and so they did), while those manned by the “senatorial” class could not.
100. Aen. Tact. 13.3.
101. Polyaenus 2.22.4 (ca. 376–374).

suggests that anyone who failed to meet his obligation should be imme-
diately replaced and ‹ned.102 The night watch of the town of Cranon in
Thessaly was contracted to a certain Dianias who, after performing his
service admirably for three years, used his position as a stepping-stone to
tyranny.
Inclement weather favors the stealthy by obscuring sight and hearing.
When the Plataeans wished to break out of their besieged city, “they kept
watch for a night stormy with rain and wind, and at the same time moon-
less.” The night came, and they stole down from their own walls and
climbed those of their foes, eluding the notice of the guards since these
“could not see ahead because of the darkness nor discern the sound of
their approach because of the deafening clatter of the wind.” Not until
some had surmounted the battlements of the besiegers’ wall, and a man
grasped at a tile that clattered down to the ground, were the guards
alerted. Even then the storm bewildered their senses and delayed their
reaction long enough for the fugitives to disappear into the night.103 Sim-
ilar stories are told of Brasidas, taking advantage of rough weather and
snow in his advance on Amphipolis, and of Lysimachus’ furtive with-
drawal from Dorylaeum.104 We hear of guards abandoning their posts
because of rain.105 “Pity the tired soldier who must be vigilant through
these conditions,” remarked one veteran.106
Beyond the Hill
35
102. Aen. Tact. 22.29.
103. Thuc. 3.22.1–5.
104. Thuc. 4.103.1–2; Diod. Sic. 20.109.2. 
105. E.g., Paus. 4.20.7: the Messenians at Eira were said to have fallen victim to the
Lacedaemonians because storms had driven the pickets from their posts. While the story is
not historical, it is indicative of a real problem.
106. MSG T. Damm, as a commentary on his letter of 8 Feb. 1996: 
The sentry is waiting for his shift to end, bored with inactivity, and lulled to a false
sense of security [by a lack of continuous stimuli] to put personal comfort over
ef‹ciency. The sentry is likely to retreat to shelter, from which his vision and hearing
is limited. Even if he does not, rain on his metal helmet dulls his sense of hearing.
Rain limits the guard’s vision, causes him to become wet and tired quickly, cov-
ers the sounds of an approaching enemy, and lulls the guard into a state of relaxation
because of its repetitive sounds. Sleet and wind only intensify these effects.
Falling snow provides the guard with all of the disadvantages of rain. His vision
is obscured and it is even more dif‹cult to remain alert with the snow ›akes slowly
›oating to the ground. Falling snow protects the advancing enemy from view and
can quickly cover up the evidence of his travel. It also causes the guard to exert him-
self while traveling his route and may in›uence him to shorten the distance covered
or the frequency that he travels on it. [However,] fallen snow is dangerous for an
approaching enemy for he knows that his passage or presence will quickly be
detected.

Even in the best of conditions, eyelids grew heavy. Had not coinci-
dence intervened to wreck a plan based on a wayward signal, the guards
of the gates of Cynaetha would have been slaughtered in their sleep—at
midday!107 At least some generals (Iphicrates, Epaminondas, and
Alexander among them) personally inspected the watch, with a view to
keeping sentries awake and alert.108 Even still, the order of discipline evi-
denced by Roman organization of night security was not equaled in clas-
sical Greece.109
The time between two and four in the morning is considered the most
vulnerable for guards torn from their regular sleeping cycle. Therefore, it
should not surprise us that the Greeks embarked on secret moves and
stratagems not during the ‹rst watch (when sentries would presumably be
most vigilant) but instead during the second or third and sometimes dur-
ing the fourth. The end of the night watch and beginning of the day was
also dangerous, since day watchers were not always posted immediately.
This practice—like any routine—could be noted and taken advantage of
by the enemy: when the Lacedaemonian and Pellenean night watchmen
were withdrawn at dawn, the Thebans attacked and took Oneum (in
369).110 Aeneas Tacticus advised that the hemeroskopoi be sent out while
36
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
107. Polyb. 9.17.1–10. Cf. Polyb. 4.57.3ff.: an Aetolian who had deserted to Aegeira
and spent time there noted that the guards at his host city were often drunk and neglectful
of their watch. He reconsidered his allegiance, returned to his general Dorimachus in Aeto-
lia (at considerable risk, one might add), and urged him to attack. Evidently Dorimachus
(whom Polybius characterized as rash—one would hardly expect him to praise an Aetolian)
decided to trust the twice-turned traitor, although the act of taking him along as a guide
suggests that he wanted him in his power to deter further betrayal. Dorimachus attacked by
night, slew the guards in their sleep, and met with success.
108. For devices to keep sentries awake, see Aen. Tact. 22.14, 27; Front. Strat. 3.12.1.
Cf. Q. Curtius 4.13.21; Paus. 4.20.8. 
Those sleeping on duty risked severe punishments. Iphicrates is said to have killed a
sleeping guard (Front. Strat. 3.12.2); Epaminondas is said to have done the same (3.12.3),
but Anderson (304 n. 38) doubted the latter story. In any case, there is no evidence that cap-
ital punishment was commonly meted out for this offense (but cf. Polybius 6.34.7–37.6 on
Roman practice and punishments). The concern lest sentries sleep at their posts dates at
least as far back as the Iliad (10.181–82).
109. Cf. Polyb. 35.1–37.6 and F.W. Walbank 1:717–19 ad loc.; although it must be
admitted that Aeneas Tacticus does have an impressive (theoretical?) prototype in his
twenty-second chapter. 
110. Xen. Hell. 7.1.16 (cf. Polyb. 3.50.7). Note also that the Plataeans met success
because they had studied and knew well the Theban guard routine (Thuc. 3.22.3). Cf.
Polyb. 8.27.7ff.: Tarentine traitors kept watch on the house of Livius, the captain of the
Roman guard at Tarentum, since they knew that if anyone became suspicious they would
report to him and that any countermeasures would originate with him.

it was yet night, both to prevent such a risk and to ensure that they would
not be seen by enemy skopoi en route to their post.111 He further sug-
gested that cavalry patrol the area around the city at dawn, before the
gates were held open, lest a foe set a nearby ambush under cover of night. 
It would seem from the practices described in Aeneas that guard duty
bore no relation to the ideals fostered in the modern world, when you are
constantly warned that the strike of a match can be lethal, and when
emphasis is on seeing and not being seen. Greek guards, as Ovid
described women attending the circus, go to see and to be seen. In the
context of a city under siege, this can make some sense, even as do the
“armed response” signs tidily but obtrusively growing in the lawns all
over Beverly Hills. Aeneas has created a system with two essential objec-
tives: to discourage any attempt at in‹ltration from without and to allow
no opportunity for betrayal from within. He intends his watchmen not to
actually collect information for exploitation but instead to communicate
to the enemy that they are alert. His methods do not, however, belong to
the context of a military camp, when revolt is much less a concern than
an enemy attack. And perhaps his—alas, lost—work on Encampments
featured very different methods. So one might hope, given that some of
Xenophon’s comments are quite sound. But be that as it may, while there
are some examples of alert phulakes saving the day, all too often sentries
gave the alert with death cries or perished failing at even that.112
Beyond the Hill
37
111. Aen. Tact. 6.6; their post is here called a hemeroskopeia.
112. Some examples of the latter phenomenon follow. (1) Bithynians attacked the pro-
phulakes of the Ten Thousand, killed some, and drove others into camp (Xen. Anab.
6.4.26). (2) When Agis marched by night up to the walls of Athens, he escaped the notice
of the prophulakai posted outside and managed to capture some men, while the others ›ed
within the walls. However, the Athenians learned of his attack at once and responded
promptly (Diod. Sic. 13.72.4). (3) Aratus and a few men scaled the walls of Argos by night
and killed the sentries stationed on it, but they were dislodged after a struggle the following
day. (4) Rhodian prophulakes stationed by the moat were killed during the second night
watch by picked men sent by Demetrius (Diod. Sic. 20.98.6). (5) Quintus Naevius learned
through his scouts that the people of Apollonia were keeping a negligent watch, not expect-
ing a Roman attack; with the help of traitors from within the city, he was able to in‹ltrate
a thousand men into the city under cover of night, before a massacre began in earnest, the
noise of which alerted the citizens (Livy 24.40.11). 
See also Thuc. 2.2.3, 4.110.2; Plut. Arat. 21.3. Small forces set to watch over a particu-
lar point were similarly vulnerable: of three Greek ships keeping watch off Sciathus in 480,
two were captured, crew and all, by a larger Persian force; the crew of the third escaped
only by abandoning their ship (Hdt. 7.179). See also Hdt. 7.27; Thuc. 8.35.

Patrols (Peripoloi)
Peripoloi were, in essence, roaming phulakes, operating out of bases
(variously called peripolia, phulakteria, and phrouroi) situated on inter-
polis borders.113 Their use can be securely traced back only as far as the
late ‹fth century, although Orthagoras’ rise to power (traditionally dated
to 655) is supposed to have been marked by a progression in authority
from peripolos to peripolarkhos to polemarch.114 Peripoloi are men-
tioned in Thucydides but not in Herodotus; the earliest inscription dates
to 415.115 These early references suggest that disaffection with the insti-
tution festered and perhaps that those serving within it were a potential
instrument of instability. In the famous inscription pertaining to the Sicil-
ian expedition, we ‹nd a regulation establishing penalties for those not
ful‹lling their obligation to serve in the peripoloi. One can only assume
that there was an unwillingness to assume this duty. In Thucydides, we
‹nd the peripoloi involved in the assassination of Phrynichus, and in this
crime their commander (peripolarkhos) is also implicated. By the
mid–fourth century there were at least two peripolarkhoi in Attica, one
of whom may have been stationed in the area near Eleusis.116
Most of our evidence, typically, pertains to Athens. In that city,
ephebes—young men of eighteen to twenty years—were enrolled into
their ranks, at least from the fourth century. According to a scholiast
(perhaps Ulpian), in their second year as ephebes these youths received a
light shield (aspis) and spear from the demos in a public ceremony and
were dispatched to the frontier to undertake their duties for one or two
years.117 The peripoloi were not expected to let their weapons lay idle.
38
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
113. A scholiast (on Ael. Arist. Panathenaecus 152.16) tells us: “Let it be known that
those guarding something are not only situated in one place but also move about, scouting
up and down; they call those doing this peripoloi. This class is different from phulakes; for
while phulakes are situated at a certain spot, peripoloi go about everywhere.” Cf. the dis-
tinction drawn by the scholiast on Thuc. 4.67.2 (peripoloi). Yet the two classes are close
enough in nature that the scholiast on Thuc. 8.92.2 can intelligibly—if less than precisely—
gloss peripoloi as phulakes.
114. Anon. FGrHist 105F2. 
115. Thuc. 8.92.2–5; IG I3 93, stele II, frag. g, line 42 (= Meiggs and Lewis no. 78;
Fornara no. 146; Tod no. 77). Cf. SEG 19 no. 42.
116. The plural is used in IG II2 204 (dated 352/1). The Eleusinians honor a peripo-
larkhos in IG II2 1193 (late s. IV).
117. Aeschines II (On the embassy) 167–68 and the schol. vet. thereon. There is some
disagreement in the sources of the time and length of service: cf. with Aeschines the scho-
liast (perhaps Ulpian) on Demosth. III (3 Olynth.) 36; the scholia on [Plato] 1 Alc. 105a;
and the Suda s.v. PerÛpolow. Such equipment is typical of psiloi, whom we have already
seen used in reconnaissance roles. 

We ‹nd them involved in skirmishing and ambushes, although not in the
more set-piece battles.118 In addition to their arms, their pay was fur-
nished by the state, at least in Athens and Syracuse.119 In Athens, pay was
apparently irregular, since Xenophon recommended that this be cor-
rected in his Poroi. In Syracuse, the expense was a burden to the state.
Patrolling of the Athenian frontier was apparently continuous, but
Thucydides mentions that the Syracusans sent men into the peripolia
after learning that the Athenians were at Rhegium.120 It is not clear
whether the peripolia were previously ungarrisoned or were reinforced
when the threat of war was imminent.
There are two indications that the peripoloi were active by night: (1)
an ambush of the guards at the gates of Megara was set by Plataean
peripoloi by night and sprung just before dawn; (2) a scholiast notes that
their patrolling was nocturnal, describing them “going about the terri-
tory [khora] by night because of this guard duty and their martial train-
ing.”121
Diviners (Manteis)
While it is dif‹cult to conceive of a twentieth-century intelligence organi-
zation seeking enlightenment from supernatural agencies, one must not
project modern prejudices back in time onto the Greeks. In any case, even
rather pragmatic denizens of the twentieth century occasionally ‹nd
“psychics” and “mediums” cooperating with police when conventional
resources fail. As one might expect, Greek attitudes toward supernatural
knowledge varied according to individuals. There are a few cases, partic-
ularly among the Lacedaemonians, in which divine instruction appar-
ently took precedence over human opinions and ambitions.122 There are
others in which divine sources of information were despised or
ignored.123 Most examples seem to fall in the middle area between these
extremes, and their spirit can be generally characterized by Xenophon’s
advice: “Those things that the gods enable us to learn, we must learn;
Beyond the Hill
39
118. E.g., Thuc. 4.67.2; Photius 74a. Cf. Xen. Poroi 4.47. According to the Suda (s.v.
TeryreÛa), the ephebic peripoloi were only used in the less dangerous elements of a battle.
119. Thuc. 7.48.5; Xen. Poroi 4.52. Cf. IG I3 376, face A, line 36 (ca. 409 b.c.).
120. Thuc. 6.45.
121. Schol. on [Plato] 1 Alc. 105a.
122. Pritchett 3:70, who provides examples; see also Arrian Anab. 4.4.2–3.
123. These are frequently found among storytellers who wished to drive home the
virtues of piety, but also at Thuc. 5.103.1.

those that are obscure, we can try to inquire of from the gods through the
mantic art.”124
Manteis125 were interpreters of signs of divine activity in the physical
world, rather than mediums or prophets.126 Their art was thought to be
based on techne (skill) rather than inspiration. Consequently it could be
learned, and books, records, and devices were kept and prized.127 Vari-
ous individuals or peoples specialized in different types of divination; the
Egyptians, for example, were recruited by Alexander since he believed
Egyptian manteis superior at reading the heavens.128 The craft of all
aimed at deriving speci‹c information from divine indicators—such
information included prospects of success in endeavors (especially those
of military nature) and revelations of plots and dangers.129 Manteis were
generally held in high esteem for such accomplishments.130
Manteis frequently served military leaders and occasionally were
engaged by political ‹gures as well (particularly when the two realms
overlapped). They served for long periods of time—for the duration of
campaigns, if not on more permanent bases. Nicias, son of Niceratus,
retained a mantis in his household; curiously, Nicias let it be known that
the mantis was engaged for guidance on public matters, while in fact he
advised Nicias on his private interests.131 Nicias’ apparent duplicity sug-
gests that involvement of manteis in public affairs was more acceptable
than a reputation for private superstition. More generally, an inscription
indicates that manteis in Athens were supported by strategoi.132 In
40
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
124. Xen. Mem. 1.1.9. See also Xen. Mem. 4.3.12; Xen. Cyr. 1.6.46. Cf. Plut. Alex.
75.2.
125. There are a number of other terms for diviners (not a few poetic), and the class is
subdivided further. As manteis are the most relevant to the secular world of decision mak-
ing, these are the focus of the following summary.
126. Pritchett 3:138.
127. Pritchett 3:73, who provides examples. See also Plut. Aristides 27.3, in which pas-
sage a tablet (pinakion) for interpreting dreams was referred to as a tool of some value.
128. Q. Curtius 4.10.4 (the Latin vates was here used for manteis); cf. 5.1.22. Telmis-
sians seem to have been particularly valued for interpreting omens (see, e.g., Hdt. 1.78;
Arrian Anab. 2.3.3), as were the Galeotae (Philistius FGrHist 190F47).
129. Some examples: Hdt. 7.219; Xen. Hell. 3.3.4; Xen. Anab. 6.5.2, 6.6.8; Arrian
Anab. 1.25.6, 7.16.5–17.5. There are also a fair number of odds and ends, e.g., Arrian
Anab. 2.18.1, 4.15.8. In legend, a mantis served as a guide: Peripoltas guided king Opheltas
from Thessaly to Boeotia (Plut. Cimon 1.1).
130. Pritchett (3:50–56) argued that they were accorded considerable status; see also
Xen. Anab. 1.7.18.
131. Plut. Nicias 4.2, 5.2–3, 23.5 (Hiero and Stilbides). Cf. Philochorus FGrHist
328F135; schol. vet. on Aristoph. Peace 1031; Plut. Dion 22.6.
132. IG II2 17, line 39; cf. Pritchett 3:71.

Sparta, the of‹ce of mantis was an institutional part of the military: the
“general staff” of the Lacedaemonian kings contained at least two.133
Given these opportunities to develop long-standing relationships with
commanders, manteis could be expected to have some experience and
knowledge of temporal, as well as supernatural, matters.134 Thus manteis
are among the few professional intelligence agents with a long-term spe-
cialization in their trade.
As manteis gained experience in the conduct of campaigns, and hence
were better able to relate supernatural data to practical considerations,
so commanders often realized the necessity of having at least a cursory
knowledge of the mantic art. This realization was based not only on the
prospect that a mantis might not be available or that a commander might
better understand the bases for a mantis’ reading of a particular omen
but also on a healthy suspicion that manteis might manipulate their inter-
pretations of divine will to coincide with personal ambition. Xenophon
made this quite clear in his Cyropaedia, and his advice was probably
based on personal experience.135 He had a falling out with a mantis
accompanying the Ten Thousand, an Ambraciot by the name of Silanus,
who leaked to the troops (maliciously, he would have us believe) that
Xenophon was consulting him about settling them far from home.
Xenophon, called to task by his men, defended himself on the grounds
that the omens had been favorable for putting the matter before an
assembly and that Silanus was not able to misrepresent them because
Xenophon witnessed the sacri‹ce (as was his custom) and was recognized
by all as well versed in the skills of divination.136
Beyond the Hill
41
133. Xen. Lac. Pol. 13.7. When Lysander was killed at Haliartus, a mantis perished at
his side (Plut. Lys. 28.5); cf. Megistias at Thermopylae (Hdt. 7.219, 21, 28).
134. Cf. Pritchett 3:56–57, 62ff. See also Hdt. 9.37 of Hegesistratus of Elis, who had
escaped from a Spartan prison and hired himself out to Mardonius; thus he might have had
some knowledge of affairs in Sparta.
135. Xen. Cyr. 1.6.2: “For I [= Cyrus’ father] have taught you this, so that you would
not learn of the counsels of the gods through other interpreters, but rather, by both seeing
what is to be seen and hearing what is to be heard, you would yourself understand, and not
be dependant on manteis, if they should wish to deceive you by speaking otherwise than
revealed by the gods. Further, if you should ever be without a mantis, you would not be at
a loss how to discern what the gods reveal.” Cf. Arrian Anab. 7.16.5–17.5; Onas. 10.25ff.
136. At least this is Xenophon’s version (Xen. Anab. 5.6.16, 27–30). In any event, the
problem did not begin with Xenophon; such situations existed from the days of Homer.
Mantis of evils, never have you told me good news;
Always evils are a delight to your heart to divine,
But never have you spoken or accomplished anything good.
(Homer Iliad 1.106–8, Agamemnon to Calchas)

Given the potential instability latent in the mantis’ in›uence, it is no
surprise that a commander might retain the same individual over a long
period of time on those occasions when a stable and compatible relation-
ship existed. Elemental to such a relationship was con‹dentiality. In the
story of the taking of Ithome, the mantis Theocles is portrayed commu-
nicating the signi‹cance of a baleful omen privately to Aristomenes,
enabling the commander to reach a decision while he was yet undis-
turbed by a general panic.137 Quintus Curtius noted that Alexander
rebuked Aristander for giving Erigyius, a subordinate of‹cer, news of
omens before him.138
Conversely, manteis sometimes had the problem of upholding their
interpretations despite the will of some rather forceful individuals.
Alexander, wanting to attack Scythians jeering at him from across a
river, was angered with Aristomenes, who, insisting that the omens were
unfavorable, would not alter his reading to please his king.139 Some com-
manders rigged or misrepresented omens to accomplish their will or prof-
fered their own interpretations.140 Even when there was mutual trust
between commander and mantis, the dictates of military expediency and
divine authority were not always reconcilable. At these times, a com-
mander had to make rather dif‹cult decisions and was obliged to face the
consequences in any outcome.
Captives (Aikhmalotoi)
When a soldier surrendered his spear and shield to a Greek, he was tak-
ing a bit of a risk. There was no convention for the treatment of prison-
ers, just a rather inde‹nite set of customs.141 True, the suppliant was sup-
posed to be sacred; but sometimes the gods were distant and wrath was
all too near. Prisoners therefore had every motive to try to please their
captors—who might otherwise abuse, enslave, brand, maim, torture, or
42
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
137. Paus. 4.20.3.
138. Q. Curtius 7.7.24.
139. Arrian Anab. 4.4.2–3.
140. E.g., Front. Strat. 1.11.14; Arrian Anab. 1.18.6–9; Polyaenus 2.3.3, 4.3.14, 4.20.1;
Paus. 9.13.8. The problem was further complicated by the fact that different manteis might
give different interpretations to an omen (see, e.g., Plut. Alex. 2.5). Cf. Pritchett 3:48–49 for
further details on the relationship between manteis and strategoi.
141. TinŒw ÞdÛouw kayapereÜ nñmouw, which Pritchett aptly translated as “quasi laws”
(Pritchett 5:203), in reference to Diod. Sic. 30.18.2; cf. Diodorus’ speeches on the Athenian
prisoners at 13.20.1–27.6 (for clemency) and 28.2–32.6 (for execution).

kill them—in hope that they would survive to be ransomed.142 Providing
information was one of the few means of doing this that was at their dis-
posal. 
Even today, when many belligerent nations are bound by the Geneva
convention, prisoners often provide—even volunteer—a good deal more
information than the proverbial name, rank, and serial number. Fear and
insecurity are effective motivating forces, especially in the hours immedi-
ately after capture, when dislocation is still strong. These conditions are
exacerbated in wounded prisoners, who have been found “more respon-
sive to interrogation” than their unwounded counterparts.143 There is
every reason to believe that their ancient counterparts were subject to the
same pressures.
Positive motivations or rewards seem hardly to have been necessary,
although Xenophon did depict Cyrus promising captives that they would
gain the status of benefactor and friend, rather than slave, if they pro-
vided information.144 Torture or death threats were ready alternatives
for obtaining information from reticent prisoners. The latter are found in
the Iliad and Xenophon’s Anabasis, and they were not idle. Homer por-
trayed Dolon being slaughtered even after trying to buy his life with
information; the usually rather righteous Xenophon did not shudder to
mention that he had his men cut the throat of a prisoner who denied
knowing alternate routes through mountainous terrain.145 This murder
was performed in front of a second captive, who quickly became most
eager to tell of another track. The ‹rst man’s resistance, it might be
noted, was due to the fact that his daughter lived by that track; he pre-
ferred death to endangering her. One can only hope she somehow
escaped, for Xenophon did not subsequently mention her.
Evidence for torture of aikhmalotoi is circumstantial, but the case is
strong. Thucydides maintained that Nicias’ secret correspondents in
Syracuse wanted him dead lest he reveal them under torture.146 Likewise,
Cooper argued that Thucydides’ choice of the word nazht®!ante! sug-
Beyond the Hill
43
142. As Lonis (46) so nicely put it, “Le principe de la clémence envers les prisonniers
nous semble donc encore mal assuré.” He treats the killing (41–47) and maltreatment
(47–50) of prisoners by Greeks and Barbarians, noting that clemency was a still rarer qual-
ity between Carthaginians and Sicilian Greeks. See also, in more detail, Pritchett
5:203–309. 
143. U.S. Marine Corps art. 502e3, 601a3. 
144. Xen. Cyr. 4.4.12.
145. Iliad 10.454–56; Xen. Anab. 4.1.23.
146. Thuc. 7.86.4.

gests the use of torture by Astyochus and Pedaritus when interrogating
captured Erythraeans.147 Further, prisoners of war were often sold as
slaves, and slaves could be tortured for evidence in legal proceedings—at
least in Athens, where the practice was a required element in obtaining a
slave’s testimony.148
Cooperation was further encouraged by keeping prisoners in bonds, so
that they could not hope to escape retribution for false information. When
possible, their reports were checked against other sources, but more often
than not aikhmalotoi themselves served to con‹rm earlier reports brought
in by skopoi or deserters, for they were not available as sources until after
contact with the enemy was made.149 Corroboration was necessary, for
prisoners could be misinformed (due either to their own ignorance or to
disinformation on the part of their leaders) or deceitful. When some of
Darius’ scouts were captured by Alexander’s men, they reported that Dar-
ius was near the Tigris, that he was determined to prevent Alexander from
crossing, and that he had a greater force with him than he had possessed
in Cilicia.150 Alexander hastened to confront him but did not ‹nd him
there. We cannot be certain whether the Persian kataskopoi were ordered
to mislead Alexander if they were captured, as Engels suggested; had con-
trived to mislead him on their own; or had inaccurate or outdated infor-
44
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
147. Cooper 223–29. These men were, however, suspected of being a ‹fth column. For
released prisoners as a ‹fth column (or released with the intention of causing mistrust), see
Thuc. 1.55.1–2, 3.70.1 (of the Corinthians); Polyaenus 2.29.1 (of Cleonymus); Aen. Tact.
24.3f. and Polyaenus 3.14.1 (of Charidemus). Xenophon used the word ba!anÛzvn when
speaking of the interrogation of captives by Gadatas; as these were Cyrus’ men captured by
secret arrangement, I am not sure that the word should be taken to indicate torture in this
context.
148. Pritchett (2:38–39) noted that the public slaves accompanying tamiai at Athens
were chosen from captives and were liable to torture in investigation of strategoi and
tamiai. He cited a scholiast to Demosthenes (2 Olynth. 19, my translation): “The Atheni-
ans had public slaves whom they had chosen from the captives, and taught them letters, and
sent them out to war with the tamiai and strategoi in order to record the booty. They did
not do this without reason, but so that they could beat them, as slaves, and be able to learn
the truth; for among the Athenians it was thought shameful to beat free men. If a strategos
or tamias were proven by these beatings to have lied, they themselves thereafter suffered
even as the slaves.” Note also Demosth. VIII (On the Cherson.) 47; X (4 Phil.) 22.
149. E.g., at Xen. Anab. 1.7.13 the reports of prisoners after the battle were in harmony
with those of deserters who had abandoned the king earlier. Cf. Xen. Cyr. 6.1.25: captives
corroborated (taët‹ ¦legon Bothe; taèt‹ MSS) earlier reports of deserters and those of
the Indian ambassadors/spies. 
150. Arrian Anab. 3.7.4–5.

mation.151 In any event, Xenophon wrote of prefabricated stories being
circulated among troops who, unbeknownst to themselves, were intended
by their general to be captured.152
But disinformation was generally the product of fake deserters, rather
than captives. The real problem with the latter, as Napoleon noted, was
the limited perspective of the run-of-the-mill prisoner—a problem exac-
erbated in antiquity by the lack of an effective collating process that
might have afforded a clearer view of the operational and strategic pic-
ture by piecing together the collected data.153 There were, however, two
mitigating factors. First, Greek soldiers were often members of the delib-
erative bodies of their states, especially in the democratic poleis, rather
than subjects distant from active participation in the rule of large states.
As such, they would at least have some ideas of larger issues and perhaps
even operational policy. Even men serving in less egalitarian societies
could furnish signi‹cant information. A Persian captured by Democrates’
reconnaissance team was able to reveal that the force shadowing the
Greeks was commanded by Tiribazus, that it consisted of Tiribazus’ own
forces supplemented by Chalybian and Taochian mercenaries, and that
he had prepared so as to take the pass through which ran the only road
offering escape to the Ten Thousand.154 For all we know, these state-
ments represent only a fraction of the captive’s news, since Xenophon
would only include detail necessary to explain the subsequent Greek
reaction. Second, interrogation of the prisoners was undertaken by gen-
erals themselves (as in the example just mentioned) or was delegated to
an of‹cer specially appointed to the task (such as Laomedon, a bilingual
Macedonian serving Alexander).155 Such men would know which ques-
tions to ask, and their minds would serve as collating mechanisms. 
Beyond the Hill
45
151. Engels 337; he raised an interesting possibility: did generals give their men consis-
tent stories to feed the enemy if captured? It seems that they deliberately misled their troops
at times, which would accomplish the same end. It is probable, however, that commanders
withheld information from their troops lest they be captured, just as they did fearing lest
they desert (cf. Semmett 127).
In contrast, when German soldiers were captured and interrogated by American per-
sonnel during World War II, those who were disinclined to cooperate usually showed their
resistance by refusing to provide answers, rather than giving false ones.
152. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.1–2, 15.
153. Napoleon Maxims 63 (Philips 1:426).
154. Xen. Anab. 4.4.16–18. Cf. the opportune information from a prisoner at Polyb.
5.71.9. 
155. Arrian Anab. 3.6.6: “. . . since he was bilingual [speaking the barbaric language] 

In the hapless Persian captured by Democrates, we see the result of one
of a signi‹cant number of concerted efforts to procure prisoners for the
sole purpose of obtaining information.156 This captive claimed to be a
forager, and certainly foragers frequently came into the hands of their
enemies, since they were at some remove from the security of their camp.
Skopoi also operated in small groups, traveling or posted in advance of a
more secure base, and hence we ‹nd them also captured and interro-
gated.157 Indeed they were probably speci‹cally sought for interrogation,
since such men would have a broader base of understanding than most,
because they had to know what to look for and could therefore reveal
what their commanders were seeking to know. Captured of‹cers would
be of still greater value, although they were rarely taken until after battle
had been joined and won. Although there are few examples of them
being interrogated against their will, it is signi‹cant that Thucydides felt
it necessary to explain the failure of the Syracusans to question Nicias.158
If World War II is any guide, of‹cers were less likely than other ranks to
disclose information to their captors.
Deliberate efforts to capture prisoners for the purpose of questioning
seem to have arisen from a need for more detailed information than that
provided by other sources, particularly scouts.159 Xenophon and Alexan-
der in particular made plans to take prisoners who might be questioned
or employed as guides.160
Although one would expect to gain information from captives only
46
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
. . .” Laomedon’s (Berve no. 464) appointment is found among the of‹ces of bodyguard,
treasurer, commander of allied cavalry, and satrap of Lydia, implying a position of some
importance. He is also mentioned at Arrian Anab. 3.6.5 as having been banished by Philip
on account of his partisanship for Alexander. For men appointed to the task of overseeing
prisoners, see also Onas. 14.3. Cf. [Xen.] Ath. Pol. 3.4; Demosth. XXIV (Against Timoc-
rates) 20.9.
156. Examples begin with a literary precedent, in which Odysseus and Diomedes set out
by night to capture “an enemy straggler or perhaps even learn some report among the Tro-
jans” (Iliad 10.206–7). 
157. Iliad 10.340ff.; Arrian Anab. 3.8.2.
158. Thuc. 7.86.4. Cf. Iliad 10.208–10, 409–11; Xen. Anab. 4.4.17; Plut. Phocion
14.1; Arrian Anab. 1.25.5.
159. Xenophon’s model general, Cyrus, always looked to take captives so that he might
learn something from those he had captured (Xen. Cyr. 6.2.9). In one instance, he sent cav-
alry ahead to capture men when scouts reported possible enemy activity (Xen. Cyr. 6.3.6).
Cf. [Nicephorus] Campaign Organization 18.
160. Xen. Anab. 4.6.17; Xen. Cyr. 6.3.6; Arrian Anab. 4.30.6–7. Cf. Engels 332 and n.
31.

during open war, there are examples of kidnapping for the sake of infor-
mation in time of ostensible peace. We learn from Demosthenes that Her-
meias of Artarneus, a man deeply involved in Philip II’s policies, was
seized by the Rhodian Mentor and carried captive to the king of Persia.
The context assumes that this kidnapping was carried out for the sake of
learning of Philip’s machinations, with the implication that such a source
was of particular value.161 Philip again fell victim to a similar misfortune
when Nicias, his herald, was taken while yet in his own territory. The
herald was brought to Athens and incarcerated, and the letters of Philip
that he carried were taken and read before the boulé.162
The capture of enemy couriers and their accompanying documents
was not uncommon in the ancient world, the Athenians being particu-
larly adept in this endeavor during the Peloponnesian War.163 Scouts or
cavalry, appearing swiftly in unexpected quarters, were often able to cap-
ture couriers and pass on the information for immediate use, as in the
cases of the Thebans at Haliartus and Gelon at Selinus.164 Captured doc-
uments that were not of immediate tactical value might nevertheless be
useful for planning a campaign: the Athenians were gifted by fortune
with the lists of the Syracusan muster role when their scout ships cap-
tured a vessel in the Syracusan harbor.165
Reconstructions of the processing of prisoners can be sketchy at best.
Obviously there was a preliminary stage, during which a soldier decided
‹rst whether or not to take a prisoner, then whether or not he wished to
reveal the capture to his commander. Captives could be sold as slaves,
Beyond the Hill
47
161. Demosth. X (4 Phil.) 32. Hermeias was described as “õ pr‹ttvn kaÜ !uneidÆ!
‘pany' “ FÛlippo! katŒ basil¡v! para!keu‹zetai.” Demosthenes (expediently) portrays
him as a source more valuable than the charges of the Athenian embassies, which were
expected to be biased. Cf. Xen. Mem. 4.2.3.
162. Epist. Phil. (purportedly a letter from Philip II to the Athenians) 2. This charge
appeared ‹rst in a list of grievances Philip leveled against Athens. 
163. In two cases the strategoi sent to collect tribute were credited with the capture. Was
this coincidence or a function of their of‹ce? It is likely that these strategoi afforded an ad
hoc but of‹cial and secure channel to route captives back to Athens and that the garrisons,
at the behest of informers or proxenoi, did the actual seizure.
164. Plut. Lys. 28.2; Diod. Sic. 11.21.4–5. Cf. a similar story at Polyaenus 6.27.2.
Polyaenus attributed to generals the imagination to plant false information among the let-
ters carried by messengers: 3.9.57 (Iphicrates), 4.2.8 (Philip II), 4.11.3 (Cassander), 5.2.19
(Dionysius I). His examples are not to be found in extant works from earlier authors
(although a parallel exists in Polyb. 5.28.4). 
165. Plut. Nicias 14.5. Another example can be found in Arrian Anab. 3.11.3: Arrian
attributed to Aristobulus a document giving Darius’ order of battle, which was later cap-
tured.

and a soldier bene‹ted ‹nancially if he could hide one away and sell him
on the sly, as did the Syracusans who took Athenians into private custody
after the disastrous retreat in 413.166 If the capture was a product of a
raid or ambush to capture a potential informant, the victim would likely
be immediately turned over to of‹cers or a general. More commonly,
after battles some of the better generals made inquiries of captives to bet-
ter understand the consequences of the outcome. No mention is made,
however, of why or how a particular individual would be selected for the
general’s attention. There was some rudimentary categorization of pris-
oners as early as Cimon’s recapture of Sestus and Byzantium in the 470s,
when men of higher birth or position were separated from the common
herd; this was done regularly by Alexander.167 In the ‹rst case, the
ascribed motive was monetary (ransoms); in the second, chivalry (for
want of a better word). Such a division has consequences for intelli-
gence—one separates men from their commanders to achieve better
chances of extracting information from both.168 Onasander, a much later
source, alluded to categorizing types of prisoners according to their
potential impact on morale.169 Those arrested on suspicion of espionage
or participation in plots were treated differently from those captured in
battle—the formers’ torture and death were inevitable, barring excep-
tional intervention.
In the twentieth century, prisoners are typically questioned separately,
their stories cross-checked, and their admissions (or alleged admissions)
used to manipulate other captives. We ‹nd this method also in antiquity,
in the aforementioned story of the two men questioned about routes by
Xenophon. But on another occasion, we ‹nd him and the other strategoi
of the Ten Thousand conducting interviews with a number of captives at
once.170 Prisoners were dismissed before options based on their informa-
48
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
166. Thuc. 7.85.2.
167. Plut. Cimon 9.2–4; Q. Curtius 6.2.9.
168. Information on categorization can be found in some detail in U.S. Department of
the Army, FM 30–96c Interrogator, 2.35–42.
169. Onas. 14.3: “the general, if he is able, should take prisoners [en route] either by
ambush or skirmishing or should capture those deserting their own camp. If he should ‹nd
them admirable in mind and body, he should kill them at once or bind them and hand them
over to those appointed to these duties, ordering them to guard the men lest many see them;
but if he ‹nd them weak and despicable and fainthearted, he should ‹rst threaten them in
the privacy of his own tent and enslave their spirits to fear, then lead them, bound and
weeping, before his troops.” 
170. Xen. Anab. 3.5.14–15: “And the generals came together again, and when they had
gathered the captives, they interrogated them about the nature of the entire surrounding ter-
ritory.” The prisoners were sent away without the generals revealing which way they
intended to march. Cf. Xen. Cyr. 6.3.6ff. 

tion were discussed—the Greeks were hardly stupid and realized that
escaped or released prisoners could supply information about their cap-
tors. Agesilaus and his men, for example, learned of the doings of the
people of Lampsacus from prisoners escaped from nearby mines.171 Curi-
ously, prisoners were sometimes used as messengers to the hostile force
from which they were captured.172
Deserters (Automoloi)
The list of deserters and traitors in Greek history is a long one,173 in
which the great and noble are found beside the anonymous and
obscure.174 The types of information they provided were rich and varied,
depending on their former rank and degree of access to information.
While it has been observed that the information conveyed by a common
soldier would normally extend only to what he had seen and heard in
camp or what he could deduce from his army’s preparations, generals
and leaders could give a broader range of information. But common to
all was a considerable degree of knowledge about their own city or army,
Beyond the Hill
49
171. Polyaenus 2.1.26. Cf. Front. Strat. 1.4.2. Some samples of escapes include Thuc.
7.85.4 and perhaps 3.3.5; Xen. Hell. 1.2.12–14, 1.1.9–10, 1.3.22; Polyaenus 6.49.1. For
exchanges of prisoners, see Thuc. 2.102.1, 5.18.7. Clauses pertaining to the return of cap-
tives were sometimes included in peace treaties, and there are a number of inscriptions
praising men for their efforts to bring home citizens taken prisoners in war. 
In general, the extent of information possessed by escaped prisoners might have been
limited if, as one might expect, they avoided contact with the enemy on ›eeing internment
(cf. U.S. Marine Corps art. 502e: “They may, nonetheless, be able to furnish information
on natural conditions in the area and limited information on enemy forces”).
172. Xen. Anab. 7.4.5; Xen. Cyr. 3.2.13, 5.4.24.
173. As treated in this book, deserters are distinguished from traitors by vocabulary
rather than deed. They are those who abandon their ranks for the enemy’s while serving in
their armed forces. For a wider treatment of betrayal, see Losada passim, esp. chap. 2.
174. Among the more infamous and illustrious deserters was Alcibiades, strategos of
Athens, who ‹rst deserted to the Lacedaemonians, whom he abandoned for the Persians
before ‹nally returning to the Athenian side. For some other examples of deserting nobles
and of‹cers, see Diod. Sic. 18.23.3ff.; Arrian Anab. 1.25.3, 3.21.1, 3.27.2–3; Q. Curtius
3.11.18, 5.13.9. Cf. Polyb. 5.70.10ff. with respect to of‹cers deserting Ptolemy IV to Anti-
ochus III—these men ought to have been able to tell Antiochus of the large force being gath-
ered by Sosibius, but Polybius made no indication that this possibility was realized.
Many references to deserters are to unspeci‹ed individuals, implying, but not necessi-
tating, that these were not of particular note. Some examples: Hdt. 7.219; Thuc. 2.57.1,
5.2.3, 8.40.2; Xen. Anab. 1.7.2; Xen. Ages. 1.19; Arrian Anab. 1.23.4, 5.23.6; Polyaenus
1.48.5, 2.3.10, 2.10.1. It is not impossible that the attribution of information to anony-
mous deserters at times re›ects an uncertainty on the part of the historian rather than actual
evidence: in Polyaenus, for example, (false) information from automoloi is so common as
to be suspect.

absorbed through long exposure and experience. An excerpt from a
speech ascribed to Lysias reads: “who is so unfamiliar with his own city
that he could not, should he want to be a scoundrel, explain to the enemy
which ground they ought to seize, and reveal which forts are poorly
guarded, and instruct them on which public policies and efforts were vul-
nerable, and inform them which allies wish to revolt?”175 What usually
accounts for their presence in the histories is the topographical and tacti-
cal information—details of military activity, intentions, fortunes, forces,
and capabilities—that deserters so often bore and that so often in›uenced
the course and outcome of battles.176 For instance, had Agesilaus not
been warned by an anonymous and obscure deserter that Epaminondas
was marching on Sparta, his city might well have fallen to the Thebans in
his absence.177
Motivations for desertion were many and varied. Onasander mentions
the desire for honor and gain.178 To this must be added jealousy, hatred,
and fear.179 Some soldiers, such as Mantitheus and Apsephio in the ‹fth
century and Amyntas son of Antiochus in the fourth, abandoned their
own side when they were in danger of persecution or death.180 Famine
could also lead men to abandon ranks.181 Unwilling allies pressed into
service might desert, if an opportunity presented, and bring timely infor-
mation: the crew of a Tenian trireme deserted the Persians for the Greeks
before the battle of Salamis and told of Persian movements.182 Plutarch
even mentions troops forsaking their leader because they despised him
50
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
175. [Lysias] XIV (Against Alcibiades I) 35.
176. Some examples: Hdt. 3.4, 6.79, 7.82, 7.219, 8.8, 8.26; Thuc. 5.2.3, 8.40.2; Xen.
Ages. 1.19; Xen. Anab. 1.7.2, 1.7.13; Polyb. 4.57.3ff., 4.66.6, 29.15.1–3 (Plut. Aem. 16);
Diod. Sic. 19.26.1, 19.50.5, 19.68.6, 20.94.1; Q. Curtius 4.13.36–37, 5.13.2, 5.13.7; Livy
24.2.9; Arrian Anab. 1.23.4, 1.25.3, 2.6.3, 3.21.1, 5.23.6; Polyaenus 1.48.5, 2.3.10,
2.10.1.
177. Polyaenus 2.3.10; Front. Strat. 3.11.5. Xenophon (Hell. 7.5.10), who ought to
have known, called the deserter a Cretan; Plutarch (Ages. 34.4, following Callisthenes
FGrHist 124F26) names him Euthynus, a Thespian. Fougères (581 n. 3, 582 n. 1) proposed
the existence of two deserters, one to Agesilaus, another to the Lacedaemonians’ allies at
Mantinea. Polybius would contradict him, saying that Agesilaus was still at Mantinea
(9.8.6), but in this instance at least, Xenophon is to be preferred to his less maligned suc-
cessor.
178. Onas. 10.24.
179. Hdt. 3.4; Xen. Anab. 1.4.7–8 (in the latter case, Xenias and Pasion did not desert
to the enemy but merely abandoned Cyrus).
180. Andocides On the Mysteries 44; Arrian Anab. 1.17.9, 25.3. Cf. Polyb. 4.86.3;
Diod. Sic. 18.22.3–4, 18.25.3, 19.56.1.
181. Xen. Hell. 6.2.15; Diod. Sic. 19.50.1. Cf. Polyb. 1.19.7.
182. Hdt. 7.82; Polyaenus (2.1.18) attributed to Agesilaus a stratagem to prevent such
a move on the part of his allies. 

and admired the reputation of his opponent.183 Although in that passage
the biographer’s ascription of motive must be treated with caution, it
does point to a well-attested broader phenomenon of low morale foster-
ing desertion.
Deserters and traitors could be solicited, although advertising hospi-
tality had its problems. Themistocles left messages by water sources for
the Ionians serving in Xerxes’ expedition; Leotychidas coasted off
Mycale shouting appeals to their brethren.184 In both instances the invi-
tation was obvious to the Persians, who could take measures to prevent
desertion. Ptolemy I, camped across the Nile from the invading army of
Antigonus the One-Eyed, sent men in boats to announce extravagant
rewards (two minae to each common soldier, a talent to each of‹cer) for
those who would desert to him. Bribery proved an effective motivation,
and Antigonus was compelled to station archers, slingers, and catapults
on the banks to check the announcements and the desertions. He also
made unpleasant examples of men caught trying to desert.185 But these
anecdotes illustrate that the intent of such solicitations was to sow dis-
trust or gain military advantage rather than information.186
The example of Ptolemy and Antigonus also serves to demonstrate the
risks faced by would-be deserters, and similar precautions and punish-
ments are well attested as far back as the ‹fth century. Danger was espe-
cially present in three stages: ‹rst on leaving camp, then when entering an
enemy camp, and ‹nally on the conclusion of con›ict. Flight was facili-
tated by darkness, but countermeasures—such as dogs and a close
watch—were heeded more diligently at night.187 Topography and dis-
tance also imposed constraints.188 But despite all obstacles, natural and
man-made, it was universally acknowledged that desertion was
Beyond the Hill
51
183. Plut. Demet. 44.5, 48.3, 49.1.
184. Hdt. 8.19, 9.98; Diod. Sic. 18.39.5.
185. Diod. Sic. 20.75.1–3. 
186. Cf. Antigonus the One-Eyed having had his heralds announce immunity (asphalia)
for Rhodian deserters while his son Demetrius was besieging Rhodes (Polyaenus 4.6.16).
Thucydides noted that Alcibiades, after deserting the Athenians and ›eeing to Elis, came to
Sparta in response to an invitation, having ‹rst obtained a promise of safe passage from the
Spartans (Thuc. 6.88.9). 
187. For desertion by night, see Diod. Sic. 19.26.1, 20.66–67; Plut. Demetrius 49.1. Cf.
also Frederick the Great (121), who advocated special measures at night to prevent and
catch deserters.
188. But cf. Hdt. 8.8f.: Scyllies of Scione, a diver, intended to desert but lacked oppor-
tunity. Finally he left the Persian base at Aphetae and went, by boat or by swimming, to
Artemisium, where he told the strategoi of the shipwreck and movements of the Persian
›eet. A statue at Delphi honoring Scyllies was noted by Pausanias (10.19.1). Cf. deserters
swimming from Molon’s army to Xenoetas’ at Polyb. 5.46.8. 

inevitable.189 Further, strongholds in enemy territory (such as Pylos and
Deceleia in the Peloponnesian War) served to provide relatively acces-
sible havens for deserters and bases for measures taken in response to the
guidance and information they afforded.190
The ‹rst reception of deserters would have been the province of
watchers on guard at the camp or stronghold to which they were
›eeing.191 These guards would have had to establish by some means the
nature and intent of an enemy soldier approaching their camp—a prob-
lem of no little consequence, given the Greek propensity to ambush and
kill enemy guards. No more de‹nitive statement can be made than this: it
seems that individuals were not turned away.192 Yet would a historian
bother to record the unhappy fate of an anonymous and faceless soldier
›eeing his own camp, or would a picket be so bold as to slay unheard an
individual of apparent importance? Large-scale defections (more charac-
teristic of the Hellenistic era than the classical) were more complex.
These were typically negotiated in advance, as was the case prior to the
battle of Lade in the early ‹fth century. Although this practice entails risk
of detection, it is entirely sensible. For what would be the natural reac-
tion to a substantial force of approaching enemy soldiers? If one believes
Herodotus, some of the Thebans who deserted en masse at Thermopylae
were killed before they made it clear that they were not hostile.193 Five
52
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
189. In many instances generals, realizing that deserters were inevitable, withheld infor-
mation from their troops until the last minute. See, e.g., Onas. 10.22–24; Gomme 2:164 on
Thuc. 2.57.1. 
190. Thuc. 1.142.4, 7.26.2, 7.27.5, 8.40.2; Paus. 4.9.1. Cf. Anon. Byz. Peri Strategikes 9.
191. See, e.g., Xen. Cyr. 6.1.46; Polyaenus 4.9.2. Cf. Polyb. 8.24.4ff.: Philemelus and
Nicon, Tarentines seeking Hannibal’s aid against their Roman garrison, were taken into
custody by Hannibal’s phulakes on approaching the Carthaginian camp. They did not say
who they were or whence they came, but they maintained that they wished to meet with the
general. When Hannibal admitted them, they insisted on a private conversation, which was
readily granted. A password (sunthema) was agreed on for future visits, so that they would
gain easy admission from the guards.
Whether or not the details of this story are true (how would Polybius have discovered
them?), they are indicative of what a (later) Greek general would expect to have happened.
192. An Athenian decree mandated that deserters not be received (IG I3 58b, line 24, ca.
430 b.c.), but there are no instances of adherence to this rule. A historian might not think it
worth mentioning an incident when deserters were turned away, except perhaps in unusual
circumstances. Such circumstances existed in the case of Mnasippus’ siege of Corcyra:
oppressed by famine, so many deserted the besieged city that Mnasippus determined that no
more would be received. He ordered a proclamation to be made that deserters would be
sold as slaves, yet they continued to come. Finally he ordered his men to drive them back
into the town with scourges; since the townspeople would not readmit them, many died
underneath the walls (Xen. Hell. 6.2.15). 
193. Hdt. 7.233.

thousand Libyans one night abandoned Agathocles for the Carthagini-
ans; they were spotted by pickets, who thought they were marching to
attack. A confused battle resulted, and the Libyans ›ed back to the Greek
camp, only to meet a similar reception there.194 Even though an under-
standing existed, Antigonus the One-Eyed viewed with some skepticism
a mob of Eumenes’ men approaching to join his side, and he sent ten ele-
phants and a large body of men to check and control their advent.195
Deserters were almost certainly disarmed on reception. For example,
the Greeks of Cyrus’ army compelled those deserting from the king’s
army to throw away their arrows.196 Historians depict deserters being
brought before a commander to impart their information; this may in
part be a product of narrative style, but it probably re›ects practice as
well, for Xenophon noted that Cyrus questioned deserters, “as is ‹t,”
regarding the affairs of the enemy.197 Imparted information was pre-
ceded by an expression of motives—an attempt to establish credibility.
Not surprisingly, given the widespread use of fake deserters in strata-
gems, their veracity was suspect. Thus deserters were kept under guard,
or even bound, until their information was borne out by events or vali-
dated by other sources, at which time they were liberally rewarded.198
Deserters of higher rank and social class might be retained in honor as
advisors, because of their valuable ability to interpret information unin-
telligible to their new patrons. At times even minor ‹gures held positions
of considerable responsibility: Alexander employed one of the Indians
who had deserted to him, a man particularly trustworthy and familiar
with the area, to carry a message instructing Ptolemy to attack when sig-
naled.199 More generally, deserters might be recruited into the ranks, dis-
missed to their homes, or held under some sort of supervision. The ‹rst
option does not seem to be frequently exercised with common soldiers,
Beyond the Hill
53
194. Diod. Sic. 20.66–67.
195. Plut. Eum. 18.2.
196. Xen. Anab. 2.1.6. The allusion is in reference to the use of arrows as ‹rewood and
does not suggest an exceptional demand on the deserters. U.S. Marine Corps intelligence
policy is to handle deserters just as prisoners of war, except insofar as they are separated
from the prisoners (art. 502e3).
197. Xen. Cyr. 3.3.48ff. (Ë!per eÞkñ!). Other instances of information apparently given
directly to a commander include Hdt. 3.4, 6.79, 8.8, 8.26; Thuc. 5.2.3; Xen. Ages. 1.19;
Arrian Anab. 1.23.4; Polyaenus 1.48.5, 2.3.10.
198. Q. Curtius 4.13.36–37; cf. Onas. 10.15. Although no doubt generally effective,
this advice might avail little when practiced on one willing to die.
199. Arrian Anab. 4.29.4; Sisicottus (Quintus Curtius recorded his name as “Sisicostus”
at 8.11.25), who had joined Alexander some time after deserting the Indians, was
appointed commander of a garrison (Arrian Anab. 4.30.4). 

perhaps for good reason, since interest as well as ‹delity was at issue.
While Livy’s depiction of the Romans carrying arms for Syracuse is no
doubt colored by rhetoric, it nevertheless suggests a real possibility that a
large contingent of deserters was potentially disruptive. The second
option was granted by Cassander to those deserting Olympias due to
famine (with her consent, according to Diodorus); Diodorus was some-
what skeptical of his generosity and stated that his altruism was a guise
for a desire that news of the hopelessness of Olympias’ plight might be
circulated.200 The third possibility is suggested by the Old Oligarch’s
description of the duties of trierarchs, which included making decisions
regarding deserters.201 This passage occurs immediately following men-
tion that the trierarchs appointed keepers for the prisons; perhaps some
sort of detainment or restrictions were involved.
When the war ended, a deserter had better have chosen the winning
side. Deserters to the Hellenistic kings faced the prospect of being
returned to the gentle admonitions of their former masters, and later to
Rome, under the terms of an imposed peace treaty.202 Most treaties
between Greek city-states lack clauses pertaining to deserters,203 but
there was still the danger of recapture by the army they had abandoned:
Artaxerxes, when he took Cyrus’ camp, seized those who had deserted to
the Greek side; Amyntas brought back his brother Polemon who had ›ed
in fear of Alexander.204 In neither instance are the fates of the deserters
recorded but it is not likely that they were pleasant. 
Locals (Epikhorioi, Enkhorioi), Especially Guides (Hegemones, or
denoted by an article and [kay-] Bgv participle [often + õdoè (rarely
õdñn) or ploè])
Any commander worth his of‹ce sent out kataskopoi and questioned mer-
chants, captives, prisoners, deserters, and the like, but crucial information
was often available only from the inhabitants of a region—those who, as
Polybius says, “not only know best the directions of the winds, as the say-
54
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
200. Diod. Sic. 19.50.2.
201. [Xen.] Ath. Pol. 3.5; cf. 3.4.
202. Polyb. 18.44.6, 21.30.3, 25.2.8.
203. See, e.g., Thuc. 5.18.1–19.2, 23.1–24.1, 47.1–12.
204. Xen. Anab. 1.10.6; Arrian Anab. 3.27.3. Although they might have been rewarded
by the side to which they had defected, deserters and traitors were, in most cases, under-
standably despised by the peoples they had betrayed (Xen. Hell. 7.3.10; Lycurgus Against
Leocr. passim). 

ing goes, but also the nature of their compatriots.”205 In less eloquent but
more speci‹c terms, we are here speaking of geographic information: most
importantly routes, but also natural and agricultural resources, military
activity and dispositions, and local relationships, customs, and lore.206
This was valuable information, to be sure, but there were complica-
tions inherent in the relationship between informant and informed. In
most instances, we ‹nd the people of a region being approached by mem-
bers of a hostile or potentially hostile army for information about their
homeland. Animosity would therefore impede cooperation, as would
fear of retribution from peers or authorities. Further, there were fre-
quently cultural, ethnic, or even language differences, since locals and
guides often appear in accounts of military expeditions into areas beyond
the familiar hinterlands of the Mediterranean.207 It should come as no
surprise that few volunteered and that none did so out of sel›ess
motives.208 Consequently commanders used persuasion or (more often)
Beyond the Hill
55
205. Polyb. 9.25.3. 
206. Of a sample of sixty citations pertaining to information provided by guides, thirty-
three speci‹cally contain geographical information (twenty-two of which concern routes),
and an additional twelve presume similar content. The remaining ‹fteen involve military
matters, booty, local myth, elephants, and (apparently) whales. Of seventeen citations con-
cerning locals exclusive of guides, eight concern geography (four of which tell of routes);
eight, the situation or activity of the enemy; and one, local myth. Cf. Simonyan and Grishin
184; U.S. Marine Corps art. 502h.
207. Given the prevalence of geographic information, it should not be surprising that the
recorded uses of guides and local inhabitants occur most frequently in passages treating the
great expeditions of Xerxes, the Ten Thousand, and Alexander. There are fewer incidents of
their being employed by Greeks in Greek-speaking territories, and most of these are situated in
areas more or less on the borders of the civilized world (at least in the Attic conception of it).
An interpreter (see chap. 4) would be needed to understand those who did not speak
Greek, and Alexander might have had to employ more than one interpreter at once when
he was campaigning far in the east (see Engels 332, 339). Engels (332) spoke of Alexander’s
Iranian “experts” Pharnuces and Mithrenes, who probably served as advisors or supervi-
sors in the handling of information brought by people of that ethnic group. See Berve nos.
768 and 524. 
Frederick the Great (126) wrote: “We had need of guides in 1760, while crossing Lusa-
tia to march on Silesia. We sought them in the Wendish villages and when they were
brought before us they let on that they could not speak German, which greatly distressed
us. But on being informed that they would be beaten they spoke German like parrots. You
must therefore always be on guard with respect to guides taken in enemy country.”
208. Quintus Curtius maintained that the Persians were particularly reticent, noting
that Alexander was unable to learn the whereabouts of Darius in the prelude to Arbela,
since the Persians had the custom of keeping the secrets of their king with wondrous ‹delity,
in the face of threats or promises (4.5.5–6). He adds that the penalty for not living up to
such a standard was death.
Mazenes, “hyparch” of an island, embarked with Nearchus to serve as his guide. Arrian
(Indica 37.2) emphasized that he did so willingly, which implies that this might not have
been common during Alexander’s campaign.

coercion to obtain information from people living along their path, or
they looked to allies bordering the region or sympathizers within it; also,
they sought to ‹nd particularly well-informed individuals and join them
to their army to have sources available who could continually provide
information and who could be held responsible for what they said.209
Persuasion was effected by rewards, which were at times extrava-
gant.210 These seem to have been in the nature of reciprocal gifts, but in
one case at least, there is a suggestion that a more or less professional
guide might be hired: Xenophon relates that when the Phliasians were
left behind by the Lacedaemonian army in the crises of 370, they hired a
guide from Prasiae to reach Sparta and provide assistance.211 The par-
ticiple used (mi!yv!‹menoi, from mi!yñv) implies the payment of a wage,
such as that of a carpenter, rather than a reward or gift. This passage also
illustrates that it was necessary to solicit geographical information even
within the Peloponnese and mainland poleis, as does a memorial honor-
56
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
209. There were, additionally, a fair number of individuals whose motives are not
speci‹ed. A sampling: Hdt. 8.34, 7.128, 130, 197; Thuc. 7.80.7; Xen. Anab. 2.4.10, 4.6.1;
Diod. Sic. 17.49.5; Arrian Anab. 3.17.2, 6.26.4–5; Arrian Indica 27.1, 30.3, 31.3, 40.11.
Although valuable information was often obtained from anonymous locals, one rarely
‹nds a high opinion of the value of the chance-met informant (see, e.g., [Eur.] Rhesus
266–70 and cf. Frederick the Great 127; Simonyan and Grishin 184); so notes Semmett
(esp. 28–29). This may in part be due to suspicion of a lack of social standing, in part to
suspicion of a lack of expertise. Cf. Vegetius 3.6: one must look to prudentoribus et hono-
ratis ac locarum gnaris for information about topography; guides must be sapientes exerci-
tatique. The Greeks attached a particular value to the knowledge of old men; perhaps for
this reason we ‹nd them being questioned by Xenophon’s cavalry and pressed into service
as guides (Xen. Anab. 6.3.11). 
Information from locals continues to be important and sometimes surprisingly accurate.
Hans von Luck, commander of the Third Panzer Reconnaissance Battalion serving in Libya
in 1943, was cut off from his base and fell in with Bedouins, who gave him exact directions
on how to avoid a British camp and return to his own. Wrote von Luck (107): “I have never
understood how the man knew our position and that of the British so accurately.”
The U.S. Marine Corps (art. 502h) advised: “Enemy civilians in recently captured areas
often give information readily. Many disclose information in consideration of their own self
interests. Generally, the longer the delay in questioning civilians, the less valid is the infor-
mation obtained.” There is no similar theoretical statement available from antiquity, but it
appears that those questioning locals did so soon after contact.
210. Some examples follow. (1) Xen. Anab. 4.7.27: After ‹ve days guidance to the sea,
the Greeks dismissed their guide with generous gifts—a horse, a silver cup, Persian dress,
and ten darics. He also asked for rings and received many from the soldiers. (2) Diod. Sic.
17.68.4–6: meg‹lai! dvr¡ai!. (3) Q. Curtius 8.11.3. Cf. Diod. Sic. 17.85.4–5; Arrian
Anab. 4.28.7–30.4; Plut. Alex. 58.3; Justin 12.7, 12–13: eighty talents. (4) Q. Curtius
5.7.12: thirty talents. 
211. Xen. Hell. 7.2.3.

ing Pythion of Megara, who safely led a large, endangered force of Athe-
nians from Pagae (in Megara) through Boeotia to Athens.212
If persuasion failed, there was always force. The capture and question-
ing of locals is found in the mythical tradition,213 and Xenophon’s (and
later Alexander’s) pragmatic solution to a lack of willing guides was to
compel the unwilling. These would be recruited from prisoners in hand, or
ambushes would be laid to capture soldiers or brigands when local talent
was otherwise unavailable.214 The captives would be motivated by fear:
“Consider,” said Xenophon, “whether you have a better guide in Tissa-
phernes, who is shown to be plotting against us, or in those men whom we
might take and order to lead us, who will know that should they fail in
anything in our cause, they will fail in their own breath and body.”215 Nev-
ertheless, captives were not trusted and were subjected to safeguards.216
The aforementioned Pythion leads us to another motivation: sympa-
thetic factions within a state could volunteer or be persuaded to help for-
eign armies in need of guidance. This phenomenon occurred most fre-
quently in states having subject populations, such as the perioikoi and
helots in Laconia who helped the Athenians and later the Thebans. Like-
wise the guidance of slaves in Chios proved particularly advantageous to
Athenians attempting to subdue the Chian citizenry.217 Similar service
was rendered by political factions within a state, as was the case with
Brasidas’ march through Thessaly in 424.218 At that time the ruling fami-
lies were leaning toward Sparta, while the majority of the state apparently
Beyond the Hill
57
212. Meiggs and Lewis no. 51 (Tod no. 41; Fornara no. 101; dated ca. 446/5). Meiggs
and Lewis (137) suggested that the need for his services was occasioned by Pleistoanax’s
march north, which precluded passage on familiar routes.
213. Lycurgus Against Leocr. 86. Oddly, there are no explicit references to this practice
in earlier sources. It may have been a development born of desperation in the long march of
the Ten Thousand.
214. Xen. Anab. 4.1.22–23, 4.6.17, 6.3.11; Diod. Sic. 17.68.4ff.; Arrian Anab.
4.30.6–7; Q. Curtius 3.13.1–5.
215. Xen. Anab. 3.2.20.
216. The reliability of captives forced to act as guides was, of course, suspect, as Curtius
noted so colorfully when describing the risk Alexander took when he put his life into the
hands of a Lycian prisoner serving as his guide. See Q. Curtius 5.4.4, 5.4.10, 5.4.19; Diod.
Sic. 17.68.4ff. Cf. Polyaenus 4.3.27; Plut. Alex. 37.1–2 (in which the man was not de‹ned
as a captive); Arrian Anab. 3.18.4 (and Bosworth, Commentary ad loc.).
217. Caryaeans (perioikoi): Xen. Hell. 6.5.25. Chian slaves: Thuc. 8.40.2; cf. Hdt.
6.135; Xen. Cyr. 7.2.3. Exiles: Diod. Sic. 18.19.3 and perhaps Hdt. 6.102—Hippias guided
(kathg¡eto) the Persians to Marathon so they could employ their cavalry to advantage. 
218. Thuc. 4.78.1–2; cf. Gomme 3:540ff. ad loc.

favored maintenance of the alliance with Athens. Brasidas sent an angelos
to his friends in Thessaly, asking them to meet him at the Thessalian bor-
der. They did as he bid, along with Strophacus, proxenos of the Chalcidi-
ans, and several Thessalians. Their service was invaluable in arguing with
their fellow countrymen and dissuading them from resisting Brasidas. At
this point, Thucydides steps back from his narrative to note that it was
suspicious to travel through a country without consent, hence the provi-
sion of guides by allies might have another aspect: when a foreign army
passed through one’s own territory, guides were the physical manifesta-
tion of one’s assent to the passage.219
More frequently, an army was guided through its area of operations
by contingents from allied states bordering it. In all such cases, the
guides’ poleis were following the banners of larger, more powerful states
and were often exploiting an opportunity to settle old scores with a hated
neighbor—so the Thebans and the Thessalians served as guides for the
Persians in Phocis, the Messenians and Locrians for the Athenians in the
Peloponnese and Aetolia, the people of Gymnias for the Ten Thousand,
and so on.220 Thus even the most faithful allies had their own motives in
providing guides, and since alliances were not always so warm, there was
often cause for suspicion: who could trust guides provided by Tissa-
phernes, or by Cyrus himself if the Ten Thousand had chosen to abandon
him, or by Uxians recently forced into Alexander’s fold, or by Milesians
itching to escape from Persian dominance?221 The integrity of deserters
58
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
219. Cf. Q. Curtius 5.2.8: Abulites, satrap of Susa, sent his son to Alexander with over-
tures and to guide the king to him. See also Xen. Anab. 7.8.9; Q. Curtius 8.10.2.
220. Thebans: Hdt. 9.40. Thessalians: Hdt. 8.32. Ozolian Locrians: Thuc. 3.95.3. Cf.
Hdt. 5.100: the Ephesians guided the other Ionians during their march on Sardis. Gymnias:
Xen. Anab 4.7.19ff. (the guide urged the Greeks to lay waste the lands they passed through,
making clear his enmity to the local population, and begged them not to leave captured
shields as dedications without making them un‹t for use). See also Hdt. 5.12, 15; Xen.
Anab. 5.2.1–2; Hell. Oxy. 21.3 (and Bruce 138–39 ad loc.; cf. Xen. Hell. 3.4.10; Xen.
Ages. 3.3; Plut. Ages. 11.2; Plut. Lys. 24.1); Arrian Anab. 4.15.4. 
221. Clearchus argues the impossibility of abandoning Cyrus (Xen. Anab. 1.3.14–17);
Xenophon disparages further faith in Tissaphernes’ guides (Xen. Anab. 2.3.14, 2.4.10,
3.2.20); Alexander, advancing through a pass held by Uxians in their native land, prudently
took Susians as guides, even though the Uxians who dwelt on the plains recognized his
authority (Arrian Anab. 3.17.2). At Mycale the Persians, suspecting the loyalty of the Mile-
sians, stationed them in the passes so that they could not work harm in the ranks yet might
serve the Persians as guides and bring them safely to the heights if they were defeated. In the
event, the Milesians misguided and killed the Persians (Hdt. 9.104). Cf. Xen. Anab. 5.4.10:
the Mossynoecians made a pact with the Greeks and sent men to ‹ght alongside them and
to guide them. At one point, when the combined forces were defeated (5.4.20), Xenophon
tried to encourage his men by pointing out that at least they now knew their guides were in
fact enemies of the hostile locals.

serving as guides was also suspect, not only since they had demonstrated
a lack of constancy in abandoning their former allegiance, but also
because fake deserters were by no means unknown.222
Thus even newfound allies and guides provided by allies were sub-
jected to general precautionary measures—that is, binding, death threats,
and occasionally hostages—and, curiously, these measures were appar-
ently accepted as reasonable. Those proffering their services for one rea-
son or another might emphasize their willingness to be subjected to such
terms, thereby enhancing their credibility. Witness those Caryaeans who
came to the Theban army in Arcadia, telling them of the dearth of men at
Sparta, promising to act as guides, and bidding the Thebans to kill them
if they were shown to be deceitful.223 Captives, of course, had no pre-
tense of choice in the matter. They were usually bound, which both made
escape improbable and served as a reminder that their fates were contin-
gent on faithful service.224 The binding and threats were not gratuitous
cruelty, for it seems guides were otherwise decently treated as long as
they performed well. Xenophon criticized Cheirisophus for both ill-treat-
ing and not binding a village chief who was acting as a guide for the Ten
Thousand. The man resented Cheirisophus’ harshness and had the means
to escape. This he did successfully, leaving behind his son, whom the
Greeks held as a hostage.225 In this vignette we ‹nd that while hostages
and threats foster cooperation, they cannot guarantee it—this was true in
the case of the aforementioned captive who suffered death rather than
reveal a path leading by his daughter’s house. In light of this, the Greeks
employed more than one guide simultaneously whenever possible, and
they probably checked their reports against each others’—it cannot be
accidental that two-thirds of the references are in the plural. By the
fourth century some guides were supervised, either by a subordinate
of‹cer (perhaps in the vanguard, as Xenophon described in the Cyropae-
dia), or by one party of a joint command.226
Beyond the Hill
59
222. Diodorus (19.16.4) tells of some of Eumenes’ men who in 317 were captured by
Antigonus, escaped, and then were besieged. Two of these deserted by arrangement with
Stratonice, Antigonus’ wife, to Antigonus’ forces. One (Docimus) was not trusted, but his
unnamed companion was and served as a guide. Polyaenus (7.25.1) offers an anecdote of a
fake deserter as a guide; for more general information on fake deserters, see chap. 5.
223. Xen. Hell. 6.5.25; see also Xen. Anab. 4.7.19ff.
224. Cf. Hdt. 8.23; Xen. Anab. 4.2.1.
225. Xen. Anab. 4.6.1. A similar mishap befell Alexander (Q. Curtius 9.9.1). Alexander
also employed hostages (Q. Curtius 7.2.18); it is possible that Agesilaus did likewise (cf.
Hell. Oxy. 24.3). Cf. Niceph. Camp. Org. 18.
226. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.53. Among the Ten Thousand, Cheirisophus seems to have had
speci‹c responsibility for the guides (Xen. Anab. 4.1.21, 4.6.1).

The preceding precautions, combined with a habitual practice of send-
ing scouts to con‹rm information furnished by guides and locals,
afforded respectable results: voluntary deception was rare, as were mis-
takes.227 The Greeks could afford no less, for often geographic knowl-
edge was a question not just of military advantage but of survival. Igno-
rance of the terrain could prove disastrous in defeat and on campaign
abroad, when logistics were particularly tenuous.228 The vulnerability of
an army without guides was a recurring problem for the Ten Thousand:
it bound the Greeks to Cyrus, it strongly in›uenced Clearchus to try to
come to terms with Tissaphernes, and it made an impact on the theoreti-
cal writing of Xenophon.229
Mercenaries (Epikouroi, Misthophoroi, Xenoi)
Charidemus, who at times rendered Athens service as a military com-
mander, was censured by Demosthenes for serving Cotys when Cotys
was hostile to Athens and for serving the Olynthians under similar cir-
cumstances.230 Leaving aside the question of Demosthenes’ bias, it can be
fairly said that Charidemus was by no means the only individual to ‹nd
60
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
227. Voluntary deception: Hdt. 9.104; Polyaenus 7.25.1. Errors: Arrian Anab.
6.26.4–5; Q. Curtius 9.9.6. Refusal to reveal information: Xen. Anab. 4.1.22–23; Diod.
Sic. 17.68.4; cf. Polyaenus 4.3.27. Desertion: Xen. Anab. 2.2.8, 2.5.35–39; 4.6.1. Sample
size: eighty-three citations.
228. See, e.g., Thuc. 3.98.1: when Athenians campaigning in Aetolia were defeated,
their knowledge of the terrain perished with Chromon, their Messenian guide, and their
›ight was blind. Many were slain, trapped in dried-up watercourses from which there was
no way out, or lost in a forest when the Aetolians set the wood ablaze.
229. Xen. Cyr. 2.4.27. Cf. Xen. Anab. 2.4.5: Clearchus was reluctant to set out on the
long route back after Cyrus’ defeat at Cunaxa, since he had no guide. The eventual outcome
of his decision to remain near King Artaxerxes was his death by treachery, but nevertheless
his policy must have seemed prudent at the time. Alexander was also uncomfortable at the
prospect of proceeding without guides (Q. Curtius 9.9.1–2). For other examples of the con-
sequences of operating without guides, see Xen. Anab. 3.1.2; Arrian Anab. 6.18.4–5,
7.22.1. Cf. Aen. Tact. 16.20.
230. Demosth. XXIII (Against Aristocr.) 149, 150; cf. 130–32 of Iphicrates. For details
of some colorful careers of mercenaries and condottieri, see Parke, Grif‹th, and Pritchett.
See Parke 20–21 for a discussion of the terminology referring to mercenaries and its change
over time. Mercenaries in the Greek world were fairly active in the sixth century, less so in
the ‹fth, and very active in the fourth. 
Mercenaries are treated herein exclusive of incidental functions. E.g., since many merce-
naries served as light-armed troops, it is possible that they were employed as scouts. Menidas
(Berve no. 508), e.g., is mentioned commanding mercenaries at Arbela (Arrian Anab. 3.12)
and scouts on another occasion (Q. Curtius 4.12.4–5). Mercenaries were also particularly
susceptible to overtures regarding desertion (see, e.g., Plut. Pelop. 27; cf. the importance of
Phanes of Halicarnassus, who deserted from the Egyptians to the Persians [Hdt. 3.4 ff.]).

himself in the pay of the enemy of a former employer, especially in the
fourth century.231 Similar circumstances arose when Alexander enrolled
Greeks who had been in Persian service; and when Leosthenes recruited
mercenaries in Taenarum in 323, he no doubt engaged some who had
earlier served the Macedonians.232 Some of these men, like Charidemus,
had attained considerable stature in another’s service, and in such cases it
would be strange if their employers did not seek to learn such informa-
tion as they could provide. Even if they did not, such men could use their
experience to good effect in their own decisions. There is little evidence
for mercenaries from the rank and ‹le informing or advising employers,
but there is ample testimony for commanders doing so.233 It is possible
that there was an information ›ow between Hicetas’ mercenaries and
Timoleon (under whom they had served at the Crimisus), since some sort
of arrangement was implicit in their betrayal of Hicetas to Timoleon
when the Corinthian advanced on Leontini.234
Beyond the Hill
61
231. However, Parke has observed that it was rare to ‹nd mercenaries ‹ghting against
their countrymen, at least during the Peloponnesian War. He cites as exceptional the ex-
ample of the Arcadians serving in both the Syracusan and Athenian armies during the cam-
paign of 415–413 (Thuc. 7.19.4, 7.62).
232. For mercenaries in Persian service subsequently recruited by Alexander, see, e.g.,
Arrian Anab. 1.19.6, 3.23–24. The Persians and Egyptians both made use of Greek merce-
naries; I know of no all-embracing legislation forbidding Greeks to ‹ght for barbarians for
pay against Greeks until the Corinthian League apparently so decreed in the late fourth cen-
tury (cf. Arrian Anab. 1.16.6; Parke 178). See Parke 199ff. for a discussion of Alexander’s
policies toward his satraps and their revolts, which would have occasioned the availability
of mercenaries for recruitment by Leosthenes in preparation for the Lamian War. The Sicil-
ian tyrants would not have bene‹ted from Greeks who had served the Carthaginians until
sometime after 340 (if Plutarch [Tim. 30.3] is correct, the Carthaginians did not engage
Greeks before the battle of the River Crimisus; cf. Diod. Sic. 16.81.4). Both sides did, how-
ever, engage Iberians.
Similar capabilities might be possessed by (nonmercenary) troops of the same national-
ity as the enemy serving a foreign ally. Most of our examples are of Greeks in Persian ser-
vice; the information they provided was on the nature of other Greeks and on the tactics
and devices most suited to taking advantage of them. See, e.g., Hdt. 9.2–3, 31, 39, 58 (the
last is almost certainly ‹ction, as one can assume Mardonius had been present at Ther-
mopylae); Diod. Sic. 14.81.4–6, 14.82.2, 14.83.1, 14.86.6, 17.18.2–3, 17.30.2–3; Q. Cur-
tius 3.2.10–19; Arrian Anab. 1.12.9; Polyaenus 1.48.3. Due to the pro-Athenian bias of our
sources, such service was portrayed as base when they hindered Athenian interests (e.g., the
enrollment of Thebans in the Persian army in the early ‹fth century), noble when advanc-
ing them (e.g., Memnon’s command of the Persian ›eet in campaigns against the Spartans
in the early fourth century).
233. Cf. Hdt. 8.26, in which the Arcadian automoloi seeking employment might be
mercenaries.
234. The men are called stratiotai (Plut. Tim. 32.1), but Parke (176) maintained that
they were mercenaries, since the context suits this interpretation, and since the distinction
between the two was not hard and fast by the late fourth century. He further added: “it is
likely that he [Timoleon] had many agents in their ranks.”

Mercenaries also must have served as informal sources of information
in the manner of travelers and merchants. Mercenaries had an interest in
keeping abreast of political and military developments and can be found
getting wind of existing and potential employment opportunities.235
Thus in antiquity, as today, there were centers, such as Taenarum, that
attracted both mercenaries looking for work and potential employers.236
These places would no doubt have been rich in news and rumor from
around the Mediterranean, and it is possible that an inquirer might have
learned something of the problems and strengths of commanders and ter-
ritories over a casual cup of wine, if he could sift fact from ‹ction. 
On a ‹nal note, mercenaries were frequently engaged by tyrants and,
according to Xenophon, were of use to a tyrant in achieving both exter-
nal and internal security. Not only were they necessary to protect his per-
son and state, “but also,” argued Xenophon, “who would be better pre-
pared to uncover and check the secret and sudden inroads of enemies
than those always armed and organized?”237 Here the enemies are quite
speci‹cally external, and it is likely that watchers or scout patrols are
meant.
The agents and sources described in this chapter were ‹elded by military
commanders. Their information was normally exploited soon after it was
received. It served to position a force advantageously to win or avoid a
battle, to prevent a surprise or ambush by the enemy, and to revise plans
for the conduct of a campaign. Some information provided by these peo-
ple was of enduring value, especially when it pertained to geography and
personalities. But the utility of the bulk of their information was
ephemeral since it often consisted of enemy dispositions that were rarely
static. Strategic information, which was of lasting relevance, was the
province of a different set of agents, who are described in the following
chapter.
62
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
235. See, e.g., Polyaenus 3.10.10. Cf. McKechnie 87; Parke 108.
236. For Taenarum (in Laconia) as a gathering point, see Diod. Sic. 18.9.1, 21.1; cf.
17.111.1–3.
237. Xen. Hiero 10.6.

Chapter 2 
Beyond the Border: Strategic Assets
Envoys (Presbeis, Presbeutai)
Presbeis and presbeutai are translated “ambassadors” by Liddell and
Scott,1 but I have used the translation “envoy” to avoid confusion with
the twentieth-century conception of ambassadors, who are professionals
and normally take up residence in a foreign nation. Most presbeis in the
Greek poleis, by contrast, held their of‹ce for the duration of a speci‹ed
mission and traveled from their own city to a foreign land to accomplish
their assignments.2
Xenophon mentioned that custom accorded envoys some protection,
based on morality and the more practical necessity of keeping lines of
communication open.3 Unlike heralds, however, they did not normally
enjoy a right to immunity (adeia), and they were therefore subject to
arrest and even execution.4 Immunity could be obtained for them
through treaties and speci‹c agreements negotiated by heralds.5 Other-
63
1. LSJ s.v. pre!beut®! I, pr¡!bu!, II.
2. This generalization is more true of democracies and oligarchies than autocracies and
of the classical period than the Hellenistic. We ‹nd, for example, Megasthenes (the ethnog-
rapher) in residence at Chandragupta’s capital in India while acting as Seleucus Nicator’s
diplomatic agent (ca. 300–290, cf. Cary 66–67). For specialization in Antigonus the One-
Eyed’s court, see Billows 252–54.
3. Xen. Anab. 5.7.27ff.
4. Some examples: Hdt. 7.137; Thuc. 2.67ff., 3.72.1, 8.86.9; Xen. Hell. 5.4.22; Xen.
Anab. 5.7.19; Epist. Phil. (in Demosthenes’ corpus) 3; Diod. Sic. 19.79.1; Arrian Anab.
2.15.2, 3.24.4–5; Plut. Ages. 16.3; Photius Biblio. 44b; Harpocration s.v. Hagnias. Even so,
maltreatment of envoys was an offense against the state that they represented—in a later
context (179), we ‹nd it listed among the (alleged) reasons for war between the Romans
and Perseus.
5. The truce between the Athenians and Peloponnesians near the close of the Archi-
damian War, for example, contained provisions for safe conduct for kerukes, presbeiai, and
akolouthoi engaged in negotiating peace terms (Thuc. 4.118.6). It is odd that special provi-
sion was made here for heralds, who would normally have already possessed adeia—per-
haps the outrages of the war had rendered even these “untouchables” touchable. See also
Thuc. 8.70.2. States sometimes sent kerukes ahead to arrange safe conduct for other

wise, open (and even imminent) hostilities could and did interrupt the
›ow of envoys to and from states and hence limited their use.6 Even in
such times, however, envoys might conduct sub rosa negotiations
between disaffected subjects and their prospective allies.7 Given their
sphere of operation and their curtailed use during con›icts, it comes as
no surprise that the information they provided related almost exclusively
to diplomacy and contained little military content.8
The criteria for the appointment of envoys varied according to state,
period, and circumstance, and a full treatment of these factors is a study
in itself. For our purposes, it suf‹ces to note a few aspects that have a
bearing on their function as agents or sources.
First, during crises, when another state was hostile and needed to be
placated, men were sometimes selected as envoys on the basis of their
good personal relationships with the foreign state’s leaders. Such was the
situation when the Athenians sent the pro-Spartan Callias to Sparta to
secure peace (in 371) and when they chose men congenial to Alexander
after he had crushed the Theban revolt (in 335) and was looking south
with a suspicious eye.9 One would expect that reports sent by such men
could be colored by their sympathy. Conversely, in situations in which a
state’s fate did not rely so heavily on another’s goodwill, the selection of
people hostile to a foreign government was thought to ensure that the
envoys would be critical of appearances and announce what was true
rather than what was pleasant. Demosthenes alleged that Aeschines was
64
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
envoys or to accompany them. See, e.g., Aeschin. II (On the embassy) 109; Demosth. XIX
(On the embassy) 163. Cf. Adcock and Mosley 153–54.
At the opening of the Peloponnesian War the accompaniment of envoys by a herald’s
kerukeion would have indicated that a state of war existed (Thuc. 1.53.1ff.; cf. Demosth.
XVIII [On the crown] 166). Thucydides noted that before war between the Athenians and
the Peloponnesians was openly admitted, there was interaction between Athens and Sparta
without heralds, albeit with suspicion; after the war was being waged openly, they no
longer had relations without heralds present (Thuc. 1.146; cf. Hdt. 3.43).
6. E.g., Thuc. 1.139.1, 5.80.1.
7. E.g., Thuc. 1.67.2, 8.7.1. Cf. Aratus’ secret negotiations with Antigonus, at the time
his enemy in policy, if not in spirit (Polyb. 2.47.4).
8. Except insofar as foreign relations and military operations on the strategic level were
always intertwined. However, in the Hellenistic period there are references to quite detailed
descriptions of military forces given by envoys: Polyb. 21.26.1–4; Plut. Flam. 17.4.
9. Xen. Hell. 6.3.2; Arrian Anab. 1.10.3. See also Thuc. 5.40.2, 5.44. Cf. Homer Iliad
9.197–98; Xen. Cyr. 5.1.3; Plut. Nic. 9.3–5. It is possible that when Alexander chose a man
from his ranks who happened to be of the same ethnicity as the recipients of his embassy,
he did so for convenience of translation as much as congeniality (Q. Curtius 8.2.25). See
also Thuc. 8.5.4, 8.85.2, for Persian employment of Greeks and Carians.

sent as an envoy to Philip because of his initial hostility to the Macedon-
ian, since other envoys had given misleading reports about the prospects
of peace.10 One might, however, expect that interpretations of events
presented by these men would be in›uenced by their ill will. An embassy
comprising both types might provide a balance, and the Greeks may well
have realized this. In any event, the custom of sending three or more
envoys on a given mission afforded recipients of information access to
different perspectives and also made it dif‹cult for any one envoy to
manipulate messages based on his own personal agenda.11
Second, while envoys did not normally hold a professional of‹ce, they
were often drawn from small groups of people considered appropriate
for particular tasks, based on their status in their own community and
their connections to men of in›uence abroad. This characterization has
some validity even in democratic states but is particularly true of the
Lacedaemonians (who might have been inclined to restrict the number of
individuals exposed to foreign corruption). Antalcidas, for example, is
thought to have handled all embassies to Persia in the early fourth cen-
tury.12 Autocrats might go so far as to appoint specialists, as the Thra-
cian Seuthes appointed Medosades.13 Hence there was a possibility for
individuals to develop expertise in policy with a given state and be rec-
ognized as an authority on it. 
Third, the application of minimum age requirements could also have
an impact on the credibility of envoys as sources, if older men were per-
ceived (as Lysias indicated) as knowledgeable and wise.14
State control of presbeiai was strict. People were not permitted to
speak on behalf of their states unless so appointed; otherwise they faced
‹nes or death.15 In Athens, envoys returning from service abroad were
subject to a scrutiny of their actions and reports.16 They were account-
able for the accuracy of their reports as well as for the general conduct of
their missions, and they could be liable to measures taken by a state exas-
Beyond the Border
65
10. Demosth. IX (On the embassy) 12.
11. Nearly all references to diplomatic activity refer to more than one envoy. See
Adcock and Mosley 155 for numbers commonly sent by various states.
12. Adcock and Mosley 156.
13. Xen. Anab. 7.2.13 and 23, 7.7.6.
14. Lysias XXIII (Against Pancleon) 5. Cf. Iliad 1.250–74; Isoc. VI (Archidamus) 4. I
know of no upper limit on the age of envoys—a Rhodian envoy, Theaedetus, was over
eighty years old when he appeared before the Roman senate. The poor man died of natural
causes before the senate made an of‹cial reply (Polyb. 30.21.1–2).
15. Xen. Hell. 5.3.11; cf. 2.3.40.
16. Demosth. IX (On the embassy) 211; the scrutiny was conducted by the logistai.

perated with failure. Andocides mentioned that envoys must be guided
by written instructions when negotiating for peace, although it is not
clear whether his statement is a recommendation or a re›ection of prac-
tice.17 If the latter, envoys would be precluded from taking advantage of
information garnered by themselves in the course of an embassy. Such a
practice would also provide a target for the information-gathering ser-
vices of another state, which would no doubt find these instructions
highly interesting and valuable for conducting negotiations. In any case,
envoys were rarely authorized to make decisions on the spot but were
compelled to refer developments back to their states and await instruc-
tions.18 Consequently, negotiations were often protracted.
Before examining the role of envoys as information sources and
agents, it would be pro‹table to look at one of the circumstances sur-
rounding their employment. Lee has illustrated a logical dependence of
particular diplomatic activities on intelligence and thereby has shown
that diplomatic activity can provide evidence for a reception of informa-
tion not mentioned in our sources.19 His theory has application to the
ancient Greeks.
There are examples of embassies sent in reaction to received informa-
tion: the Syracusans, on receiving from various sources news of an immi-
nent Athenian invasion, sent out envoys to the cities of the Sicels as part
of their preparations.20 The link between embassy and intelligence source
is here explicit; in many instances it is not. How, at a later date, did the
Syracusans know that the Athenians were sending home for aid and so
know to send envoys to Corinth and Sparta?21 One might reasonably
conjecture that they discovered this through deserters or captives, but
clari‹cation is lacking in the text. All too often, historians not only fail to
specify a source but do not even report that information was received.
But how else could the Lacedaemonians have decided to send envoys to
Corinth to attempt to forestall secret negotiations between Corinth and
Argos in 421?22 In such instances, the fact that the embassy was sent pro-
vides the only testimony to an unmentioned, but essential, ›ow of infor-
66
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
17. Andocides On the Peace 35. 
18. E.g., see Xen. Hell. 2.2.17, 5.3.26.
19. Lee, Information and Frontiers; “Embassies as Evidence for Movement.” 
20. Thuc. 6.45.
21. See Thuc. 7.7.3. Nicias somehow knew of these embassies at 7.12.1. A few other
examples: Thuc. 5.4.1; Xen. Hell. 1.5.8–9, 3.5.7, 4.7.1.
22. Thuc. 5.27–30.

mation.23 We also ‹nd envoys sent to counter embassies sent by rival
states, resulting in the dramatic rhetorical agons so loved by ancient his-
torians, but also logically demanding expeditious information-gathering
and decision-making processes.24
Aside from this implicit link to intelligence, envoys served both to
communicate information to foreign states and to collect it for the bene‹t
of their own. 
Collection of Information
The collection of information is and was implicit to diplomacy and no
doubt was carried on casually as often as formally.25 At times it was
of‹cially mandated, as in the case of the Athenians who were commis-
sioned by their city as envoys to investigate whether the Egestaeans had
the money they said they did and to ascertain the situation pertinent to a
war in Sicily.26 Lycon proposed to the Ten Thousand that they choose
envoys and send them to Heraclea and on the basis of their reports take
counsel as to whether or not to engage in extortion.27 In such cases as
these, the primary role of the presbeutes was that of information gath-
erer. In others, he acted more as a conduit than a collector, as when in
387 the Persian satrap Tiribazus summoned envoys from the Greek states
to read them the king’s terms, which they in turn reported to their respec-
tive states.28
Demosthenes would have us believe that Phocian envoys were sent to
Athens in 346 in the capacity of political observers: “The news [of
Philocrates’ decree] would have reached Phocis on the fourth day, since
there were Phocian envoys in Athens, and they were interested in know-
ing what report these men would submit and what decree you would
Beyond the Border
67
23. This information ›ow suggests that some source available to the Lacedaemonians
was privy to con‹dential information. For other examples of an embassy implying intelli-
gence not otherwise indicated, see Thuc. 4.122.4, 5.37; Arrian Anab. 1.4.6, 1.10.2, 1.24.5,
3.24.3.
24. An example well dramatized by Thucydides was the Corinthian embassy sent to
Athens to counter the claims of the Corcyran envoys (Thuc. 1.31ff.). Cf. Thuc. 6.75.3; Xen.
Hell. 4.8.12–13; Plut. Pelopidas 30.1.
25. The potential scope of information available was broad—cf. Lee, Information and
Frontiers, 166–67 and n. 1.
26. Thuc. 6.6ff.; see 6.46ff. for the story of the trick to which they fell victim. Phaeax’s
mission sometime earlier might have had similar, if less blatant, functions (Thuc. 5.4.1).
27. Xen. Anab. 6.2.5. 
28. Xen. Hell. 5.1.32. Cf. Thuc. 4.50.1–3; Xen. Hell. 4.5.6ff.

adopt.”29 Similarly the Athenian ambassadors in Thebes were in com-
munication with Athens regarding the situation there, and while there is
no evidence that such information was demanded of them, it is probable
that it was desired. Moreover, the practice does not appear to be in any
way out of the ordinary.30 Indeed, when Demosthenes de‹ned the duties
of envoys, he noted ‹rst their responsibility to submit reports.31 They
were accountable for the veracity of these, since false information pre-
cluded good judgment—and the punishment for falsehood in Athens
was, apparently, death.32
Communication of Information
Of‹cial communication by envoys was fundamentally dictated by the
interests of the state imparting it. A goal or object was intrinsic to the
message. When, for instance, the oligarchs usurped power in Corcyra in
427, they at once sent envoys to Athens to explain their version of recent
events. Their aim was to persuade the Athenians to keep aloof from their
affairs. They were unsuccessful: the Athenians arrested them as revolu-
tionaries and deposited them on Aegina.33 Hardly less subtle are the
recurring tidings of danger borne by envoys, which were delivered in con-
junction with appeals for help. Hermocrates proposed sending out
envoys to inform the other cities of Sicily and southern Italy that the
Athenians were a danger to them all—Thucydides need not add that Her-
68
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
29. Demosth. XIX (On the embassy) 59, which continued, “When the Phocians learned
your policy from the proceedings of the ecclesia, received the decree of Philocrates, and
were informed of the report and promises of Aeschines, their ruin was complete” (both
translations are from Loeb); cf. 53. Examples of presbeis happening to be on hand in for-
eign states when important matters were debated include Thuc. 1.72.1ff., 5.30.5, 5.50.5,
6.5.33.
30. So Demosth. XVIII (On the Crown) 211: Demosthenes had the dispatches of Athen-
ian presbeis active in Thebes read out. These, describing the Boeotian political situation,
had been written in 338, while Demosthenes’ speech is dated to 330, signifying that such
documents were preserved. Cf. ibid. 31.
31. Demosth. XIX (On the embassy) 4: they were responsible for reports they had
made, advice they offered, observance of their instructions, and acting with integrity.
32. For the sentiment about judgment, see Demosth. XIX (On the embassy) 183; for
allegations of false reports, 12, 174; for the death penalty, 279, in which Demosthenes
recalls an old decree against Epicrates and others, who were convicted and executed for not
reporting the truth in the boulé.
33. Thuc. 3.71–72. Similar intentions were attributed to envoys at Thuc. 5.82.4 and
Xen. Hell. 7.4.39–40.

mocrates was thereby requesting aid against Athens.34 Demosthenes time
and again badgered the ekklesia to send presbeiai to tell of Athenian
resolve and incite action against Philip.35 Conversely, appeals for aid and
alliance almost certainly (even when not explicitly) contained some sort
of information about the situation that necessitated the request.36
On occasion envoys were sent in response to speci‹c inquiries. An
Athenian decree from the fourth century preserves a record of three
envoys selected to go to Hebryzelmes, the king of the Odrysians, to
respond to questions concerning their political and military disposition.37
One wonders just how forthright the envoys would be. While informa-
tion furnished by envoys as representatives of their states was valuable, it
was liable to manipulation. The Corinthians charged the Lacedaemoni-
ans with ignorance of affairs beyond the Peloponnese and, more to the
point, with suspecting the party bringing information (here, the Corinthi-
ans) as much as the party accused (the Athenians).38 But were not the
Spartans quite right to do so? When Cleomenes I rejected the overtures of
Aristagoras, who was trying to involve the Spartans in the Ionian revolt,
he realized that the interests of Aristagoras did not coincide with those of
his people.39 The Lacedaemonians of the early fourth century were per-
haps less prudent or more ambitious than the mad Cleomenes of the early
‹fth, when envoys from Ionian cities told them that Tissaphernes would
make the Greek cities independent if he was forced to deal with an army
in Asia.40 In the event, it proved not so simple. 
The communication of information by envoys was nearly always ver-
bal. There are a few instances in which they acted much like couriers,
bearing messages in the form of letters rather than delivering them
Beyond the Border
69
34. Thuc. 6.34.2.
35. E.g., Demosth. II (2 Olynth.) 11, VIII (On the Chersonese) 34–35, XIV (On the
navy boards) 12.
36. Requests for aid: e.g., Thuc. 1.24.6, 3.4.5, 3.5.4, 3.92, 3.100.1, 6.73.2, 8.5.1,
8.32.1; Xen. Hell. 2.4.28, 3.1.3, 3.5.4, 4.6.1, 5.2.11, 6.1.1. Requests for alliance: Thuc.
2.7.1–3, 5.80.2, 8.5.4, 8.6.1; Xen. Hell. 3.2.24. Cf. Thuc. 7.2.2–3, 25.1; Xen. Hell.
4.8.12–13.
37. IG II2 31 (Harding no. 29; dated to 386/5). 
38. Thuc. 1.69.2. This passage has been brought forward to support notions that the
Lacedaemonians were ignorant of the world beyond southern Greece (see, e.g., D. Lewis
29–30; Starr 3 [but cf. 44]). It is far more likely that it is a rhetorical ploy. 
39. Hdt. 5.49–51; the Athenians were more ambitious or more gullible, or perhaps
Aristagoras was more wily in his presentation after his experience in Sparta. 
40. Xen. Hell. 3.2.12.

orally.41 It is possible that they differed from angeloi in such cases only in
that they were perceived as of‹cial representatives of their states. It
should be noted that the terms presbeutes and angelos can, at various
times, be applied to the same individuals and that the verb gg¡llv is
not infrequently used in connection with envoys. The distinction, then, is
by no means absolute.42
While the examples of communication of information by envoys on
the whole re›ect action in an of‹cial capacity, it is probable, indeed
almost inevitable, that they imparted information informally—perhaps
in casual conversation with of‹cials while receiving hospitality at such
institutions as the prutaneion or perhaps with proxenoi or xenoi.43 A fair
proportion of envoys can be recognized as individuals of some stature,
and these enjoyed connections of xenia or philia with citizens of other
states, which have been known to transcend civic ties of fealty. Indeed,
Aeneas Tacticus recommended that contact with envoys be limited to
curb opportunities for treachery and gathering information.44
Heralds (Kerukes)
Kerukes held a socially recognized of‹ce, which is attested as early as the
Mycenaean era, certainly well de‹ned by the time of Homer, and more or
less consistent throughout the classical era.45 The of‹ce underwent some
modi‹cations during this time, among them the adoption of the task of
securing the bodies of the fallen when the battle‹eld was in hostile hands;
this ‹rst appears in Thucydides.46 The possession of adeia afforded her-
70
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
41. E.g., Arrian Anab. 2.14.1.
42. A similar phenomenon occurs in sources treating heralds (who are discussed in the
next section); the same individuals are called alternately kerukes and angeloi in passages in
Herodotus (1.81–82) and Xenophon (Hell. 6.4.20). ƒAgg¡llv is likewise used for them at
times (e.g., Hdt. 8.29, 9.21; Thuc. 1.29.2, 4.38; Xen. Hell. 7.1.32; Tod nos. 66, 67, 74).
43. See, e.g., Xen. Hell. 3.2.6–8, 5.4.22; Isoc. Epist. VI (To the sons of Jason) 1;
Demosth. XXIV (Against Timocrates) 202. Cf. Adcock and Mosley 154–55. Note the often
cited Plut. Alex. 5.1–3, in which the young Alexander was said to have questioned Persian
envoys as to the length and nature of the journey into the interior, about the character of
the Persian king (especially in regard to warfare), and about the bravery and power of the
Persians. See also Aristoph. Acharn. 647, for a joking reference to the Persian king exacting
information from Lacedaemonian envoys.
44. Aen. Tact. 10.11. Cf. Xen. Anab. 2.3.8, 2.3.21; Aeschin. III (Against Ctes.) 250. 
45. For Mycenaean attestation, see Ventris and Chadwick no. 123 from Pylos. 
46. Adcock and Mosley 152–53. In the Iliad and the Odyssey they can be found sum-
moning and refereeing gatherings and contests (e.g., Il. 2.50–52; Od. 2.6, 8; cf. Xen. Anab.
3.1.47, 4.5.7, 5.7.3); seeing to sacri‹ces, prayers, oaths, and meals (e.g., Il. 3.116–18; Od.

alds freedom to operate during time of war. It was considered an act of
impiety to harm a herald, and this religious protection was augmented by
a general recognition that some lines of communication must be kept
open even in war.47 A staff, called a kerukeion, was the sign of their of‹ce
and was a tangible reminder that they were under the care and auspices
of Hermes.48
In some societies, families (such as the Talthybiadae in Sparta and the
Eumolpides and Kerykes in Athens) had rights to the of‹ce of herald. In
Athenian practice, the effect of inheritance seems to have applied more to
heralds appointed to the performance of religious functions than to those
engaged in matters of state. In Athens, heralds were elected and dis-
patched—at least for diplomatic tasks—by the boulé. The messages they
were to communicate, and even the routes they were to travel, were ‹xed
by the demos and its of‹cials.49 In Spartan practice (at least according to
Beyond the Border
71
20.276; cf. Hdt. 6.11; Thuc. 6.32.1, 8.53.2; Dinarchus Against Aristogeiton 14; Tod nos.
34, 144, 146); fetching people and items (e.g., Il. 1.320–48; Od. 8.47); and going on
embassies (e.g., Il. 7.381–417; Od. 10.59). 
Some examples of the recovery of corpses are Thuc. 4.38.4, 4.44.6, 4.97–101. Cf. Thuc.
4.114; Xen. Hell. 4.3.21, 6.4.15. 
47. An anecdote in Herodotus (7.133ff.) vividly illustrates the powerful impact the
killing of kerukes had, whether in fact or propaganda: heralds were sent by Darius I to the
Greek states to collect earth and water; in Sparta, they were thrown down a well. After that,
the Lacedaemonians were unable to ‹nd good omens in their sacri‹ces and attributed this
to the wrath of Talthybius, who was the herald to Agamemnon and patron hero of heralds
at Sparta. The Lacedaemonians called for volunteers to go to Persia and be killed to appease
Talthybius: both Sperthias son of Aneristus and Bulis son of Nicolaus volunteered. Xerxes,
upon their arrival, is said to have spared them, saying that he would not himself transgress
the laws of all men as the Lacedaemonians had done. 
The sons of Sperthias and Bulis were slain by the Athenians when arrested on a diplo-
matic mission in the Peloponnesian War. Herodotus was careful to call the sons angeloi, to
absolve the Athenians (who also killed the Persian heralds but offered no restitution) from
the shame of impiety; I argue that he deliberately misrepresented the situation to cast a bet-
ter light on Athens, since he elsewhere (Hdt. 6.60; cf. 7.134) noted that the of‹ce of herald
was hereditary at Sparta and that the fathers of these men were acknowledged by Xerxes to
be at least de facto heralds (Hdt. 7.137). In comparison, the Athenians down to the time of
Pausanias held the Megarians culpable for the execution of their herald Anthemocritus in
the ‹fth century b.c. (Plut. Per. 30.2–3; Paus. 1.36.3); as Strepsiades said in the Clouds
(484–85), µn m¡n g' ôfeÛlhtaÛ ti moi, mn®mvn p‹nu, ¤Œn d' ôfeÛlv !x¡ltio!, ¤pil®!mvn
p‹nu.
Other violations of adeia are found in Tod no. 137 (arrest), Epist. Phil. 2 (kidnapping
and imprisonment), and Q. Curtius 4.2.15 (death); cf. Hdt. 3.13 (death). Cf. Xen. Anab.
5.7.3ff. for pragmatic reasons for preserving heralds inviolate.
48. See, e.g., Dinarchus Against Demosthenes 18; cf. Hdt. 9.100.
49. See, e.g., Tod nos. 66 (= IG I3 71; Meiggs and Lewis 69; Fornara 136), 67. Taktai
wrote down their routes; the demos and prytanes determined what they would say. Their

Herodotus) both spheres were elemental to the inherited of‹ce.50 This
suggests a potential for the existence of men experienced in diplomacy
and hence able to recognize more subtle forms of information pertinent
to the conduct of foreign policy. Heralds operating in military contexts
seem to have been closely attached to the commander, most likely for
convenience in passing on orders. More generally, however, it seems that
any individual with a makeshift herald’s wand could suf‹ce in a pinch for
secular functions. A ready example is the Argive selected for his swiftness
to serve as a herald to Mardonius, to warn him that a Lacedaemonian
army was heading north and that the Argives would not be able to stop
it.51 Here celerity rather than family or professionalism was the deter-
mining criterion, and the Argive was appointed herald for the sake of
adeia, since he had to travel through hostile (Corinthian and Megarian)
territory to reach the Persians.52 Even more interesting, for the purposes
of this study, is the account in Xenophon of a visit to the Ten Thousand
by emissaries of the Persian king and Tissaphernes.53 The members of the
embassy were all referred to as kerukes and included a single Greek
among the barbarians. This Greek was a certain Phalinus, who was hon-
ored by Tissaphernes and professed to be an expert in tactics. The reason
for his presence undoubtedly lay in these quali‹cations: his expertise
would enable him to evaluate the ‹ghting potential of the Greek merce-
naries. Given the situation, it is perhaps a measure of Clearchus’ desper-
ation that he asked Phalinus for advice on the grounds that he was a fel-
low Hellene.
Like envoys, kerukes most often served in an of‹cial capacity to con-
vey information and, occasionally, to collect it.
72
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
pay was furnished by the kolakretai (the amount was not here recorded; Tod no. 169 (dated
ca. 346–344) included a payment of two drachmas for a herald, but the duration and type
of duty performed was not speci‹ed).
50. Hdt. 7.134.
51. Hdt. 9.12.
52. In another instance when a herald was used as a courier, however, the route was
entirely through friendly territory (Xen. Hell. 7.1.32). Dromokerukes (“runner-heralds”)
were found in situations in which speed was of the essence, including an example in which
they are described as couriers between skopoi and commanders. See Shepherd 216n on
Polyaenus 5.26.1, who added, without providing corroboration, “The dromok®ruke! were
not always employed: but only when the urgency of affairs required the continued attention
of the !kopoÛ.” 
53. Xen. Anab. 2.1.7. 

Collection of Information
Greek heralds do not appear to have been bound by a code of silence
regarding what they had seen while performing their duties, unlike their
counterparts of the medieval era.54 Rather, from the ‹rst they were at
least ancillary to collection. When Odysseus beached his ship on the
shores of yet another land, Homer twice sang the following lines:
then I sent forth companions to go and inquire
what men, eaters of bread, might live in this land,
choosing two men, and sent with them a third, a herald.55
The inclusion of a herald in a miniature “type-scene” of a reconnaissance
of unknown territory suggests that this might have been thought sensible
and normal practice during the eighth century. Later works contain ves-
tiges of an association of heralds and scouts: the horseman who was sent
by the Athenians to have a look at what their Lacedaemonian allies were
up to at Plataea was called a kerux, and the use of herald’s boats (ker-
kouroi) by Alexander’s scouts is attested in Arrian.56
Due to their particular of‹ce, heralds had opportunities to collect
Beyond the Border
73
54. For medieval heralds, see Allmand (in Neilson and McKercher) 34, 40, and 44 n. 9. 
55. Od. 9.88–90, 10.100–102. Eustathius (1.171) reasoned that the heralds were pres-
ent because of the immunity (diŒ "!ulon) that they conferred on the mission.
56. Hdt. 9.54: ßpp¡a ôcñmenon = 55: õ k°ruj; Arrian Anab. 6.19.3, 6.20.3. Cf. Thuc.
6.50.4–5: men sent on triremes to scout out (katask¡ca!yai) the harbor of Syracuse also
made a proclamation (khrèjai) to the Leontines in that city. There is a mythical account of
a herald named Leos, of Agnus, who betrayed to Theseus the plans of the Pallantidae. The-
seus believed his story, contrived an ambush, and slaughtered them (Plut. Theseus 13.2–3).
Medon, who was a herald in the house of Odysseus, served as an agent of sorts: he over-
heard the suitors plotting against Telemachus and communicated their intent to Penelope
(Od. 4.675–714). He was not, so far as the text conveys, assumed to be a covert agent by
virtue of his of‹ce, but rather his of‹ce seems to have been accidental to these actions. In
fact, his allegiance was also somewhat ambivalent—when Penelope received him, she
thought him sent by the suitors (Od. 4.694), with whom he was on friendly terms (Od.
17.172–73). The ambivalence is preserved through to the end of the epic, when he spoke in
an assembly, telling the suitors’ families that Odysseus and Telemachus killed their relatives
with the aid of a god (Od. 24.442–49), at which point some armed for war. Telemachus
numbered him among the suitors, along with the minstrel (Phemius) and two squires, when
relating the inhabitants of his household to Odysseus (Od. 16.252). In the end he was
spared at Telemachus’ request (Od. 22.355–72). It is perhaps worthy of note that he and
the spy Dolon appealed for their lives in similar words (Od. 22.371 = Il. 10.400); in
Medon’s case the supplication was honored.

information when arranging for the return of the dead. There is a curious
account in Thucydides of an Ambraciot kerux who came to request the
bodies of those who had perished during a disastrous retreat two days
earlier. Some Acarnanian thought he had come for those who had per-
ished at Idomene the preceding day and gave over far more arms than the
herald expected. In the ensuing dialogue, worthy of a tragedy, misappre-
hension gave way to realization, and the herald learned that his people
had suffered two disasters rather than one. Such was his distress and
urgency to report back that he left before concluding arrangements for
the dead.57 Not all news was so bad: the morning after a night escape
attempt from besieged Plataea, a herald was sent out by the remaining
Plataeans, who thought that those trying to escape had failed and been
killed; he returned to tell them that there were no dead to be recovered:
the attempt had succeeded.58
Aside from the preceding examples, the role of heralds in gathering
information is not well attested. Further evidence is inferential: when the
Spartiate herald Melesippus was refused admittance by Athenians, he
was escorted back on his route to prevent him from contacting any-
body.59 This provision might have been calculated to insult or perhaps to
prevent the populace from learning anything that Melesippus had to say.
A further possibility, in no way precluding the other two, is that the pur-
pose of isolating Melesippus was to prevent him from learning anything
of Athens’ preparations for war.60 It may be presumed that kerukes, like
envoys, had the opportunity to learn information from observation and
conversation. Clearchus was aware that Persian heralds would form
impressions of his men when they were admitted into his camp, so he
kept the heralds out until his troops were drawn up in an ordered
parade.61 It is not impossible that he had been reading Herodotus, who
74
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
57. Thuc. 3.113. Cf. the ignorance of the Athenian kerux of the fall of Delium (Thuc.
4.97ff.).
58. Thuc. 3.24.
59. Thuc. 2.12.1–2.
60. Kerukes and envoys were at times refused admission by warring cities (Thuc. 5.80,
8.75.2; cf. Thuc. 4.38.3; Xen. Hell. 6.4.21; Xen. Anab. 3.3.5; Polyaenus 2.18.1); this
refusal was probably more a form of protest or insult than a security measure (although one
must admit that, should the Peloponnesian army be in Attica, kerukes and envoys going to
and from Athens would have kept the Peloponnesians informed of the result of their actions
on morale and about any possible Athenian countermeasures).
61. Xen. Anab. 2.3.1ff. 

told of preparations by the besieged and starving Milesians to make their
city appear well stocked when a Lydian herald entered.62 Exceptionally,
there is a story that a herald sent by Alexander to those besieged in the
citadel of Celaenae was taken to the top of a tower and told to report to
his commander the strength of their forti‹cations that lay exposed to his
eyes.63
Communication of Information
Heralds conveyed information far more often than they gathered it.
Within an army or city, they did so in of‹cial announcements, these being
for the most part orders to troops or formal noti‹cations to citizens and
metics.64 They served also to publish policy, demands, and decrees
abroad.65 To hostile cities or armies they announced warnings, demands,
or offers, and in a few instances they made proclamations containing
overtures to potential sympathizers among the enemy. Declarations of
war were also among their duties.66
All messages and announcements were delivered verbally. Sometimes
(e.g., for the proclamation made from Athenian ships off the Syracusan
harbor to people no doubt out of range of a bow-shot) their voices had to
carry over noise and distance. For this reason heralds were chosen from
Beyond the Border
75
62. Hdt. 1.21–22.
63. Q. Curtius 3.1.6–7.
64. Orders to troops: e.g., Hdt. 6.77–78; Xen. Hell. 3.4.19, 4.5.7, 5.1.11, 7.2.22; Xen.
Anab. 2.2.20, 3.1.36, 4.1.13, 5.2.18, 5.7.3, 6.4.14–15, 6.4.23, 6.5.3, 7.1.36; Xen. Lac. Pol.
12.6; cf. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.9. Anderson (79) noted that when the army was in bivouac, her-
alds with specially trained voices were used to summon the senior of‹cers or make
announcements at moments of emergency; only exceptionally were their voices used to
transmit orders on the ‹eld of battle. Noti‹cations to citizens and metics: e.g., Tod no. 24;
Thuc. 1.27.1, 3.101.1, 5.115.2; Xen. Hell. 1.7.9, 7.4.4; Arrian Anab. 5.19.6. See also S.
Lewis 52ff.
65. See, e.g., Tod nos. 66, 67, 74; Hdt. 1.153, 5.70, 6.105, 8.27, 8.114; Thuc. 2.6; Xen.
Hell. 6.4.20; Xen. Anab. 6.6.9; Arrian Anab. 4.22.6; cf. Hdt. 1.77. At Athens, two heralds
were often sent to each of ‹ve (after 438, four) ‹xed regions (Thrace, Ionia, Caria, the
Islands, and the Hellespont).
66. Warnings: e.g., Hdt. 6.123, 9.87; Thuc. 1.29.2, 2.5.5, 3.52.2, 4.30.4, 4.114, 7.3.1,
7.83.2; Xen. Hell. 1.1.15, 2.1.7, 3.1.18; Arrian Anab. 4.19.3, 4.21.6, 4.27.2, 4.30.2. Over-
tures: e.g., Thuc. 2.2.4, 6.48.1, 6.50.4–5, 6.52.1, 7.82.1; Xen. Hell. 2.4.20; Diod. Sic.
17.9.5; cf. Hdt. 1.76. Overtures as a stratagem to cause dissent: Thuc. 4.68.3; Polyaenus
2.10.1. Declaration of war: e.g., Polyaenus 5.6.1. In exceptional cases, hostilities were
opened without a declaration of war, to achieve surprise (e.g., Hdt. 5.81; Paus. 4.5.8).

those possessing clear, loud voices.67 It seems a natural (if curious) conse-
quence that heralds were rarely used for secret communication. Art may
imitate reality in the contrast between a herald, who openly announced to
Penelope before her handmaids (not all of whom were trustworthy) that
Telemachus had returned, and Eumaeus, who did so softly.68 There are
only a few incidents in which heralds were employed for clandestine mis-
sions. One is an unlikely tale of a secret request made by Polycrates of
Cambyses through a herald, another a mention of appeals made to Nicias
through heralds sent by Athenian sympathizers in Syracuse.69 The third is
an account of Athenian subject cities sending heralds in secret to Brasidas,
in hope of securing his aid in a revolt against Athens.70 In the last two
cases, the employment of heralds was a reasonable measure, since the
communication was between people who were technically enemies.
Proxenoi
Proxenoi were men chosen by a polis to represent its interests in another
state. They were selected not from the population of the state they repre-
sented (i.e., the one that conferred the honor) but rather from that of the
state in which they lived (and performed their of‹ce). The practice is best
illustrated by example: in a decree dated to 411, Hegelochus, a citizen of
Taras, was appointed Eretrian proxenos at Taras by the people of Ere-
tria. The award was given in recognition of his services to the Eretrians
and was extended to his descendants. Hegelochus would henceforth have
represented Eretrian interests in his native city.71
76
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
67. Epithets in the Iliad relating to heralds’ voices include ±pæta, 7.384; kal®tora,
24.577; !tuboÅthn, 24.701; yeÒ ¤nalÛgko! aéd®n, 19.250; ligufyñggoi!i, 2.50, 2.442,
23.39. Other epithets allude to wisdom (pepnum¡na m®dea eÞdÅ!, 7.278; pepnum¡nv "mfv,
7.276; daÛfrvn, 24.325) and age (geraÛtero!, 24.149, 24.178; tò gŒr g¡ra! ¤!tÜ
gerñntvn, 9.422; cf. Periphas 17.324–25); swiftness is also implied in some of their names,
when they act as messengers or dromokerukes (YoÅth!, “the swift,” 12.342–43;
Eérub‹th!, “wide-walking,” 1.320, 2.184, etc.).
Demosthenes (XIX [On the embassy] 338) noted that if it was necessary to have a doki-
masia for a herald, one must ensure that he had a good voice. S. Lattimore has brought to
my attention the inclusion of contests for heralds in the Olympic games, beginning in 396. 
68. Od. 16.333–41.
69. Hdt. 3.44; Thuc. 6.48.2.
70. Thuc. 4.108.3; cf. Thuc. 8.44.1, 8.70.2.
71. Tod no. 82. Inheritance or bene‹cence was the normal way one gained this of‹ce.
Sparta was, as usual, the exception. Herodotus (6.57) said that the Spartan kings appointed
proxenoi (presumably at the time he was writing) from those of the citizens willing to serve
as such. How and Wells (86 ad loc.) thought that the kings appointed these only for those
countries without ordinary representatives at Sparta to ful‹ll honorary functions.

Proxenia accorded a certain status to its recipients (many of whom
had positions of in›uence already). It appears that this status may have
declined—coincidentally with the role of proxenoi in intelligence—by the
late fourth century, although a wider sample of evidence from earlier
periods is needed to establish this more ‹rmly.72 The of‹ce was not lim-
ited to Hellenes, as is indicated by a fourth-century Boeotian decree con-
ferring proxenia on a Carthaginian, Nabas son of Axioubos.73
Proxenoi seem to have operated fairly independently, but there were
some controls. A provision of the treaty between Oeanthea and Chaleum
reads, “regarding the proxenos—if he should act as a proxenos falsely,
let him pay a double ‹ne.”74 It is by no means clear what type of malfea-
sance is referred to here. Espionage in some states constituted prodosia,
or betrayal, and hence called for the death penalty rather than a ‹ne. It is
possible that misrepresentation of information could fall under the
charge of serving falsely—especially given the choice of the word ceud¡a,
which denotes deceit—and one could argue that such a misdemeanor
would call for a ‹ne rather than death, since it is so close to misinterpre-
tation, which can be quite unintentional. Such musings are, of course,
speculation; but the inscription indicates that the activities of proxenoi
could be monitored.
Although the institution of proxenia dates back to the seventh century,
explicit examples of their participation in intelligence begin in the ‹fth
and end in the mid-fourth century.75 The ‹rst involves Alexander son of
Amyntas, king of Macedon, who served under Mardonius in the Persian
expeditionary force of 480–79. At the same time, according to
Herodotus, Alexander held the titles of benefactor and proxenos of the
Athenians, who were among the most bitter foes of his Persian over-
Beyond the Border
77
72. For the enhanced status conferred by the of‹ce, see Adcock and Mosley 161;
Meiggs, Athenian Empire, 216 (although the latter’s notion that proxenoi were motivated
to give information for the sake of commemoration on a stele in Athens has no foundation
in any source to which I have had access). Gerolymatos (7–8, 10–11, 97–98) testi‹ed to a
decline in status in the fourth century (and, interestingly, a shift in loyalty from state to indi-
vidual patron). Passages in Dinarchus (Against Demosthenes 45) and Hyperides (Against
Demades 76)—who charged that base individuals were being appointed proxenoi as a
result of political machinations—can be read to bolster or to weaken his argument. They
may indicate that such a practice was becoming widespread, but equally they illustrate a
concern lest an of‹ce—one presumably still valued—be given to someone unworthy of it.
73. Harding 48 (IG VII.2407). 
74. Tod no. 34 (which he dates to ca. 450), lines 8–9.
75. The earliest attestation is found in a cenotaph, dated to ca. 625–600, of a Corcyran
proxenos at Oianthea in Ozolian Locris (Meiggs and Lewis no. 4; cf. Meiggs, Athenian
Empire, 215). 

lords.76 Herodotus narrated a story in which Mardonius sought to
exploit Alexander’s position by employing him as an emissary (angelos)
to the Athenians, hoping that the Macedonian could convince them to
defect to the Persian side. His hopes were unful‹lled, and Alexander
returned with rebukes of faithlessness stinging his ears. Later, at Plataea,
he rode out from the Persian camp to the Athenian lines without the
knowledge or consent of Mardonius and hailed the Athenian sentries,
asking for strategoi by name.77 Some of the pickets went back to fetch
their commanders, while most stayed with Alexander. When the strate-
goi arrived, Alexander ‹rst appealed for secrecy from all save Pausanias
and then described his motive (philhellenism) for trying to help the Greek
cause. He went on to warn the strategoi that the Persians would attack at
dawn, and he outlined Mardonius’ logistic situation. He ‹nally asked
them to remember his service after the war and only then gave them his
name.78
Alexander’s information was taken seriously by the strategoi and was
passed on to Pausanias, who proceeded to alter his dispositions; but the
last-minute shuf›ing of ranks resulting from his warnings does not
appear to have put the Greeks in a better situation when battle was
joined. Mardonius did not attack in full force at dawn, as Alexander had
said, but it must be acknowledged that Alexander allowed for a delay
when describing Mardonius’ situation, and the information seems to
have been more or less accurate.
The story of Alexander has a Themistoclean feel to it (the necessity of
forcing an engagement, the secret communication by night with the
enemy, the desire on the part of the communicant to assure a reward or
refuge with the enemy, etc.), and one hesitates to put a great deal of
con‹dence in it. However, it seems to be, if not real, realistic and thereby
instructive. Implicit in it are some questions: was there an arrangement
between Alexander and the Athenians for providing information, and
was the provision of information intrinsic to his role as proxenos? An
analysis of the events suggests that this was not the case.
Alexander’s arrival at the portion of the line held by the Athenians
can, it must be acknowledged, be better ascribed to intent than accident
78
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
76. Hdt. 8.136, 143. Some modern scholars have argued that Alexander did not receive
the proxenia until after the battle of Plataea. 
77. In Plutarch’s account (Arist. 15), he asked for Aristides.
78. Hdt. 9.44ff.

since, as proxenos, he had a degree of relationship with them and might
expect more serious consideration than he might have gained had he rode
up to the Lacedaemonian contingent. To argue that his knowledge of the
names of the strategoi necessitated a prior arrangement would be rea-
sonable but hardly conclusive, since he might have learned them on his
‹rst embassy or perhaps from captives, deserters, or other sources. Also,
he was apparently not recognized by the strategoi, and indeed he with-
held his name until he was ready to depart. It is further interesting to note
that the Athenian pickets received Alexander in a manner similar to the
way they handled deserters or defectors—with caution, as be‹tted the sit-
uation. It appears that no special arrangements—such as devices or pass-
words—had been made for his admittance, which again suggests that
Alexander’s actions were not based on a prior arrangement. Moreover,
the necessity of explaining his motives to the strategoi, as was typical
with deserters and traitors, suggests that during this time period proxenoi
were not expected to act as information-gathering agents.79 Finally,
Herodotus felt a need to explain Alexander’s motives, which suggests
that a connection between proxenoi and intelligence was not widely
known before the Peloponnesian War. Thus it is probable that Alexan-
der’s proxenia was incidental, rather than essential, to his intelligence
role, and it does not serve as an explanation for his actions or lead one to
consider him an Athenian agent by virtue of being a proxenos.
A half century after Plataea, it begins to be possible to argue that gath-
ering information was an intrinsic function of proxenoi.80 When Myti-
lene prepared to revolt against Athens in 428, the Athenian proxenoi in
Mytilene, some Mytilenaeans motivated by political dissatisfaction, and
some citizens of hostile poleis brought news to Athens of Mytilene’s
Beyond the Border
79
79. Alcibiades’ circumstances offer a good parallel (Thuc. 6.89.2; cf. Thuc. 5.43.2 and
Gomme 4:49–50 ad loc.; Plut Alc. 14.1). It would be most dif‹cult to argue that he was
passing on information to the Lacedaemonians as an aspiring (or better, lapsed) proxenos
before he jumped ship in Sicily and sought refuge at Sparta. Once there he took pains to val-
idate his actions, including a neat rhetorical dance about the issue of his ancestral proxenia.
Surely Alcibiades was looking out for Alcibiades at all times, and the proxenia provided an
entrée, rather than a motive, for giving information and advice to the Lacedaemonians. 
80. There are no explicit examples of intelligence activity in the interval. Meiggs (Athen-
ian Empire, 216), however, suggested a possibility that Sophocles derived information on
the Samian revolt through an Athenian proxenos on Lesbos. He cited (216 n. 3) Ion of
Chios (FGrHist 392F6 in Athen. 13.603f., Meiggs’ translation): “When Sophocles during
the Samian revolt was dispatched from the main ›eet to bring reinforcements from Lesbos
he dined with Hermesilaus, a proxenos of Athens.”

intentions.81 The Athenians did not at ‹rst lend credence to their reports,
wishing to believe what was pleasant rather than what was true. But they
eventually took them seriously enough to send envoys, who tried unsuc-
cessfully to curb the revolt.
In this instance, proxenoi imparted information of serious conse-
quence to the integrity of the Athenian Empire. Thucydides did not feel
the need to explain their motives, as he did for the other citizens of Myti-
lene and its enemies; this suggests that the explanation is implicit in their
role as proxenoi.82 Within an empire, and to some extent in other con-
texts, proxenoi tended to have a coincidence of interest between self-
preservation and the authority and power of their patron state, which
could therefore expect to be informed by the proxenoi, as in the case of
Athens and Mytilene, of potential threats or revolts. Should a faction or
power hostile to their patron city gain control, the proxenoi faced a real
danger from their fellow citizens. The would-be Athenian proxenos on
Corcyra met a bloody end, after protracted in‹ghting among rival fac-
tions.83 A decree mentions the slaying of the Athenian proxenos on Iulis
by a rebelling faction, “contrary to the decrees of the Athenian demos
and in transgression of oaths and agreement.”84 This last example shows
that patron states attempted to protect proxenoi operating on their
behalf, and it hence further complicates the question of allegiance.85
Proxenoi looked for political and military assistance as well as protec-
80
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
81. Thuc. 3.2.3. Thucydides noted that the proxenos later repented of his action and
embarked on an unsuccessful embassy on behalf of the Mytilenaeans. At 3.4.4 the repen-
tant informer is referred to as diaballñntvn §na; at 3.5.1 he is speci‹ed as a proxenos.
82. Aristotle (Politics 1304a9), linking great consequences to minor causes, mentioned
only one informer, Dexandrus, the proxenos of the Athenians who was piqued at not get-
ting the desired brides for his sons. Gomme (2:252–53 on Thuc. 3.2.3) argued convincingly
that Aristotle’s account is not entirely reliable. Perhaps Aristotle’s point of view was
in›uenced by the decline of the role of proxenoi in intelligence in the mid–fourth century,
so that he found it necessary to seek a motive elsewhere.
83. Thuc. 3.70.3ff. Peithias, an etheloproxenos of Athens and a leader of the demos,
was brought to trial on the grounds that he was serving Athenian interests at the expense of
his native Corcyra. Upon his acquittal, he brought counter-charges against his prosecutors,
who grew desperate and killed him. Gomme (2:360 ad loc.) de‹ned the term etheloprox-
enos as “presumably a proxenos not recognized of‹cially by the state (here Athens) for
whom he worked: self-appointed; or perhaps, as the scholiast says, not con‹rmed by his
own city.” Cf. Thuc. 6.89.2.
84. Tod no. 142 (dated to 362), lines 37–41; cf. Meiggs, Athenian Empire, 218.
85. Adcock and Mosley 162, citing IG II2 33, 111. Cf. also IG I3 19; Arrian Anab.
1.9.10. Meiggs (“Athenian Imperialism,” passim, citing IG I2 27.13–17 and 28.11–13)
argued that protection may have been granted in special cases, but it was not the general
rule. 

tion, as seems to be the case of Polydamas, a prominent man in
Pharsalus, who came to Sparta to brief the Lacedaemonians on the rise
and imminent threat of Jason of Pherae in Thessaly. His speech is pref-
aced with a reminder of his of‹ce and is laced with terms of obligation,
and Xenophon may be correct to ascribe his motive to honor, but a cynic
would argue that he was only appealing for military backing.86 Proxenoi
were also vulnerable to spillover in con›icts between their patron state
and its rivals, or so it seems in Demosthenes’ accusation that Philip killed
the Athenian proxenos of Carystus and refused to hand over his corpse
for burial to the envoys sent by Athens to recover it.87
It has been noted that the ›ow of information from the proxenoi to
their patron cities was, whether formally or not, one of their duties.
Intrinsic to the role of the proxenos was contact with diplomats and
of‹cials from his patron state. This could entail an informal brie‹ng on
how matters stood in his native city, as we see the episkopos in the Birds
apparently wishing to check in with the local proxenos before carrying
out his duties.88 But a gap remains between this practice and Geroly-
matos’ theory that “the title of proxenos was at times given to certain
individuals in exchange for the past, present, or future conduct of intelli-
gence work.”89 This gap is to some extent bridged by an inscription that
reads as follows:
Cephalus proposed: let the other matters be as was decided by the
boulé, but also record Phanocritus the Parian as proxenos and
benefactor, him and his descendants, on a stone stele, and let the
secretary of the boulé place it on the acropolis, since Phanocritus
gave information to the strategoi about a naval expedition; if the
strategoi had believed him, the enemy triremes would have been
Beyond the Border
81
86. Xen. Hell. 6.1.2ff. Westlake (Thessaly, 76–81, esp. 78) suggested that Polydamas’
actions were in›uenced more by a dependency on Sparta for his position than by the prox-
enia. He further referred (77 n. 3) to Tropea’s notion (Giasone il tago della Tessaglia
[Messina, 1898] n.p.) that Polydamas was in fact a secret agent. Westlake did not seem to
take Tropea’s idea seriously; neither can I, since such an interpretation, while not demon-
strably false, is unnecessary given the relationship as described by Xenophon, or conjec-
tured by Westlake.
87. Demosth. VII (On Halonnesus) 38.
88. Aristoph. Birds 1021ff. Cf. Xen. Hell. 4.5.6, 5.4.22. Alcibiades’ trick on Lacedae-
monian ambassadors during the Peace of Nicias (Thuc. 5.45.2) seems to have been loosely
based on such a practice.
89. Gerolymatos, Espionage, 5.

taken. For these deeds accord him proxenia and the status of bene-
factor and invite him to hospitality at the prutaneion tomorrow.90
That this award of proxenia was based on the giving of information is
quite clear; it is less clear whether the information given was merely one
of the many types of benefaction or whether it was a quali‹cation perti-
nent to the role to be assumed.91 Given the lack of solid evidence for the
latter possibility, the former seems preferable. 
Information did not always ›ow in one direction. Because of their con-
tinued and intimate contacts with their patron state, proxenoi were per-
ceived to be experts on the affairs of that state. Their expertise was called
on when formulating policy, as is illustrated by the role of Demosthenes
with Thebes and Nicias with Syracuse. It should also be noted that prox-
enoi did not always act in the interests of their patron state. Timesitheus,
proxenos of the Molossians at Trapezuntum, used his knowledge of
Molossian affairs to the advantage of the Ten Thousand. When the Ten
Thousand reached the Molossian border, they sent Timesitheus ahead to
ask whether they should pass as friend or foe. The Molossians replied,
“Neither.” Timesitheus thereupon informed the Ten Thousand that the
Molossians were divided into factions and that they would be well
advised to exploit the division by allying with another faction against
82
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
90. Tod no. 116 (which he dates to ca. 386), lines 6ff.
91. Other examples of benefaction leading to an award of proxenia include the provi-
sion of wood and timber (Tod no. 91: Athens, to Archelaus, king of Macedon, 407–406);
hospitality given to envoys (Tod no. 139: Athens, to Strato, king of Sidon, ca. 367); inter-
cession and negotiation on the polis’ behalf (Tod no. 148: Ilium, to (ironically) Menelaus,
an Athenian envoy, ca. 359); an interest-free loan, the ransom of prisoners, and general
good rule (Tod no. 152: Arcesine, to Androtion, its Athenian governor, 357–356); the
ransom of citizens captured by pirates (Tod no. 170: Athens, to Cleomis, tyrant of
Methymna).
Gerolymatos’ argument for the recruitment of proxenoi for future intelligence activity
rests in part on circumstances that might be favorable to intelligence activity and in part on
the examples of Alexander son of Amyntas and Nymphodorus son of Pythes.
Nymphodorus was the brother-in-law of Sitalces, king of Thrace. The Athenians made him
their proxenos in Abdera even though he had been their enemy in the past. They summoned
him to Athens and asked him to win over Sitalces as an ally, which he did (Thuc. 2.29). At
a later date, he betrayed Spartan envoys passing through Thrace and handed them over to
the Athenians (Hdt. 7.137). Nymphodorus was not necessarily acting in an intelligence
capacity here, except insofar as the Spartans he seized might have been questioned at
Athens. In any case, he was recruited to act on Athens’ behalf with regards to diplomacy
rather than information gathering.

those who had refused them passage. The Greeks did so, and were able
to continue their trek homeward.92
In general, the Greeks were alive to the need to suspect the allegiance
of proxenoi. When the Ten Thousand were debating their course home-
ward along the coast, Hecatonymus, the Cotyoran proxenos at Sinope,
gave the Greeks information tailored to dissuade them from a land march
to Sinope. The Ten Thousand suspected him of having his own motives
for keeping them out of Cotyoran territory, on the grounds of his alle-
giance. They did, however, follow his advice and went by sea.93
Meiggs, Starr, and Gerolymatos have all recognized the intelligence
potential of proxenoi; Gerolymatos has gone so far as to propose that
they functioned as a comprehensive organization for espionage and ‹fth-
column activities. While the evidence cannot support Gerolymatos’ sus-
picions of espionage networks, it can fairly be claimed that this institu-
tion did afford states with agents who had a vested interest in providing
timely and reliable information.
Allies, Sympathizers, and Foreign Clients
Allies most frequently provided information unbidden, motivated by
goodwill or advantage, but there are a number of examples in which their
advice was sought. In some cases the duty of an ally to communicate
Beyond the Border
83
92. Xen. Anab. 5.4.2. A similar story was told of Arthmius son of Pithonax, of Zelea,
who was an Athenian proxenos. He was believed to have been sent by Artaxerxes to Greece
with the intent of conveying gold to the Peloponnese; the gold was to instigate a war against
Athens to distract the Athenians from their intervention in Egypt. A stele was erected on the
acropolis condemning him and his descendants (Dinarchus Against Aristogeiton 24–25;
Demosth. IX [3 Phil.] 42, XIX [On the embassy] 271; Plut. Them. 6.3; cf. Thuc. 1.109;
Diod. Sic. 11.74–75; Aeschines III [Against Ctes.] 258; Aristides 2.287 and scholion). This
example indicates intelligence activity indirectly—how did the Athenians know of his mis-
sion? As an aside, despite the orators’ protestations that the Athenians performed a general
service to all Greeks by condemning Arthmius, they were only too glad to have the Rhodian
Timocrates try to stir up war against the Lacedaemonians on Tithraustes’ behalf (Paus.
3.9.8). 
Yet another, if less glamorous, example is Nicias, a Cretan from Gortys and an Athen-
ian proxenos, who persuaded the Athenians to sail against Cydonia in Crete, promising
to bring Cydonia over to their side, but in fact acting on behalf of another people, the
Polichnitans, who were hostile to Cydonia. Nicias thereby wasted Athenian time and
resources on a fruitless endeavor and prevented a timely reinforcement of Phormio (Thuc.
2.85).
93. Xen. Anab. 5.6.7ff.

information was written in stone. A fair number of fourth-century
alliance treaties contained clauses that required one party to notify the
other when assistance was needed.94 Other treaties included provisions
for informing one party of economic activity, as did that between Amyn-
tas of Macedon and the Chalcidians, which mandated that the Chalcidi-
ans notify Amyntas before exporting timber.95 At least some of the sub-
ject “allies” of the Athenian empire were required to report signs of
insurrection.96 Those soliciting alliance on some occasions provided
information as a gesture of goodwill or to incite action on their behalf. 
More typically, however, allies furnished information on their own
initiative. A passage in Arrian tells of Langarus, king of the Agrianians,
who accompanied Alexander the Great when the Macedonian was cam-
paigning in his vicinity. When Alexander learned from messengers that
the Autariates planned to attack him as he marched, he made inquiries
about the nature and numbers of these people. Langarus learned of
Alexander’s efforts, approached him, and gave him the information he
wanted, adding that the Autariates were unwarlike. He further promised
the Macedonian that he would keep them busy so that Alexander could
turn his attention to the problems posed by the rebels Clitus and Glau-
cias. Alexander rewarded him with honor and gifts and promised a mar-
riage alliance, but Langarus died soon after.97 There are some notewor-
thy points here. First, Alexander knew nothing of a people who inhabited
an area bordering his line of march, who apparently lived near the Maedi
(against whom he had earlier campaigned) and the Agrianians (who had
served in his forces).98 Second, the Autariates apparently knew of
Alexander’s movements, perhaps as a result of survivors from his battles
to the north, deserters traveling south toward Pella, or captives taken in
skirmishes. Third, Alexander’s immediate reaction to the threat was to
seek to learn more about it. Fourth, Alexander’s efforts to get informa-
tion did not go unnoticed by his ally. While it is possible, it is not proba-
ble that Alexander would let news of the threat spread unchecked about
the camp, and a public appeal to his soldiers for information on the
84
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
94. E.g., Tod nos. 101, 102, 124, 127, 136; cf. Adcock and Mosley 192–93.
95. Tod no. 111 (ca. 393).
96. Fornara nos. 102 (Eretria) and 103 (Chalcis). 
97. Arrian Anab. 1.5.2ff. For other examples of subjects or allies providing information
on local conditions, see Xen. Hell. 4.1.2–28, Xen. Cyr. 5.2.23; Q. Curtius 9.2.5–6.
98. In Bosworth, Commentary, cf. the map facing 52, and see 66 ad loc.

Autariates would have sparked uneasy rumors. It is more probable that
Langarus came in response to an appeal circulated among the comman-
ders of northern contingents. In some cases, a person would have to
know enough about his ally to know what sort of information he
needed—Periander, for instance, had to know that Miletus was besieged
by Alyattes to have any inclination to send news of the Lydian’s consul-
tation of Delphi to the Milesians.99 Fifth and ‹nally, Langarus offered the
information freely, and he was rewarded. One could argue that the
reward was more for his promise than for his information, but a gift of
information was often reciprocated by other gifts.
Private individuals were occasionally motivated by sympathy or xenia
to provide information to foreign states—these might be distinguished
from traitors in that they were working not necessarily to subvert their
own state but to advance the interests of a personal ally. Such was the
motive of Archias (hierophant of Athens) when he sent a letter to another
Archias (the Spartan-backed ruler of Thebes), his xenos and philos,
describing in detail the plot of Pelopidas.100
In general foreign clients depended for their livelihood on remaining in
the good graces of their patrons. One way to achieve this standing was to
provide information. All could offer at least a rudimentary outline of the
political and social structure of their native lands. Those who possessed
extensive social connections, elevated status, or acute intellect and per-
ception could also provide valuable information pertaining to policies,
Beyond the Border
85
99. Hdt. 1.20.
100. Plut. Pelopidas 10.3–4. The Theban Archias (j¡non önta kaÜ fÛlon) received the
courier bearing the letter but postponed opening it to continue with his party, and so he
soon perished. It is possible that the Athenian Archias was also responsible for the earlier,
more vague warnings of conspiracy (Plut. Pelopidas 9.3). Cf. Thuc. 4.89.1–2: Nicomachus,
a Phocian from Phanotis, betrayed an Athenian plot to take Boeotia, informing the
Lacedaemonians, who in turn told the Boeotians, who forestalled it.
In a few instances it is unclear whether personal or state alliances are behind the provi-
sion of information. During the Archidamian War, the Corinthians got word through
Argos of an imminent Athenian offensive and so were able to bring up all their troops to the
Isthmus in its defense (Thuc. 4.42.3). Thucydides’ use of the phrase ¤j …Argou! here is
rather odd with propuyñmenoi—the verb normally takes a genitive for the agent or source
(LSJ s.v. puny‹nomai I.1, 4). One would expect tÇn ƒArgeÛvn to be used if the information
was passed on of‹cially, so this passage might indicate individual Argives or even
Corinthian metics, but such is the ambiguity of the Greek that of‹cial action cannot be pre-
cluded. Gomme presumably assumed the information derived from the government, when
he noted (3:490 ad loc.) that “Argos had a foot in each camp,” citing Aristoph. Peace
475–77.

individuals, sentiments, political factions, military arrangements, and the
like.101 As Macchiavelli once observed, however, the problem with exiles
(and the same may apply to hostages) was that their stories were colored
by their situations and that their aspirations might not coincide with
what would be expedient for their patrons.102 A rather blatant example
can be found in Leandrias, a Spartan exile at Thebes, who told of an old
story bandied about in Laconia that one day the Spartans would be
defeated at Leuctra.103 If Diodorus was not exercising his talents in cre-
ative writing here, Leandrias must have been exercising his own poetic
license. Would not every other Spartan also have heard the tale? Surely
Leandrias contrived such a story to encourage the Thebans to continue
the ‹ght. For if the Thebans were victorious, he would be reinstated with
their backing; if not, he was no worse off than before. This is not to say
that all information available from exiles was calculated to mislead, sim-
ply that cautious use by its recipients was warranted.
Like exiles, hostages could serve as sources of information on their
native land. But while Polybius learned to be a great admirer of the
Romans, many hostages would have feared and resented their masters
and, perhaps, their own compatriots who had evaded their unhappy fate.
Their cooperation could not be taken for granted and any information
they provided would have to be weighed carefully. It is also quite possi-
ble that hostages could gather information during their involuntary
sojourn and use it against their patrons at a later date—as the Thebans
rued the day when Philip II acquainted himself with the tactics of
Epaminondas and Pelopidas. While exiles might have a similar capacity,
they would not have opportunity to act on it, unless upheavals in their
native state ‹rst brought them home, then pitched them against their for-
mer patrons.
86
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
101. See, e.g., [Lysias] XIV (Against Alcibiades I) 35; Xen. Cyr. 5.2.23ff. For a rather
specialized service, see Thuc. 4.75 (of Samian exiles providing Peloponnesian ships with
pilots). Information might go two ways if the exiles were reconciled to their former compa-
triots: Artabazus, a satrap of the Hellespont region, had ›ed to Philip II after a failed revolt
(Diod. Sic. 16.52.3) and might have been of considerable use to Philip, with whom he
resided, by providing information for Philip’s planned campaign into Asia Minor. Eventu-
ally, however, he was pardoned by the Persian king and returned—by that time, perhaps,
with much to say about Philip’s plans.
102. Macchiavelli Discorsi 2.31.
103. Diod. Sic. 15.54.1.

Of‹cial Investigations 
There was a wide range of resources available to a state to conduct inves-
tigations of private and public nature. Of‹cials and military commanders
were frequently subject to supervision or investigation by individuals or
committees appointed by the state (whether constitutionally, by custom, or
on an ad hoc basis). In fourth-century Athens, for example, strategoi were
accompanied by paymasters (tamiai) and auditors (exetastai), who over-
saw expenditures and veri‹ed the strategoi’s reports on recruitment.104 The
strategoi would undergo reviews of their performance on their return; sim-
ilar procedures were established for envoys, and of‹cials leaving of‹ce had
to render accounts to appropriate bodies.105 Citizens aspiring to public
of‹ce were subject to preliminary reviews (dokimasiai) as to their ‹tness.
Investigations (zeteseis) of various types (including inquiries into treachery,
and hence espionage) were undertaken by such bodies as the Areopagus.106
In brief, even in relatively open states such as Athens, there were institu-
tions established to enable governments to gather information on their
subjects. These might also be set up on an ad hoc basis. Examples include
the obsessive inquisition into the mutilation of the herms and the parody of
the Mysteries in Athens in 415, and the commission established by the peo-
ple of Mylasa (in Caria) to investigate whether Manitas son of Pactyes had
accomplices in his attempt to assassinate Mausolus.107 Decrees might also
be passed soliciting information from citizens.108
Assessments of situations abroad might be undertaken by specially
appointed of‹cials, such as the Athenian kataskopoi sent to Pylos to
establish how matters stood there in 425 or the three men sent by the
Lacedaemonians to Asia Minor to check on Dercylidas and to con‹rm
him as commander for another year.109 Balcer has convincingly detailed
Beyond the Border
87
104. See Pritchett 2:38–39, 41. 
105. Euthunai: Isoc. XV (Antidosis) 129; cf. Plut. Phoc. 23.4; Demosth. XVIII (On the
crown) 245. Presbeis: Demosth. X (4 Phil.) 82.
106. Wallace 113.
107. Andoc. On the Mysteries passim; Tod no. 138 (dated to 355/4). Another man,
Thyssus, was found to be involved. Quintus Curtius (9.10.21) related that when Astaspes
was suspected of plotting against Alexander, Alexander continued to treat him well pend-
ing investigation. Astaspes was subsequently executed (9.10.29).
108. E.g., Meiggs and Lewis 85, lines 44–47.
109. Thuc. 4.27.3–4; Xen. Hell. 3.2.6 (Aracus, Naubates, and Antisthenes). Cf. Hdt.
3.123ff., 4.151 (also called kataskopoi), 7.163–64; Thuc. 1.91.2–3 (cf. Demosth. XX
[Against Leptines] 73.8), 4.15.1, 6.6.3; Xen. Hell. 5.2.8.

a relationship between episkopoi and proxenoi (both appointed by the
Athenian boulé), which produced a network conducive to collecting
information, monitoring the “allies,” and bringing word back to
Athens.110
Oracles
Fontenrose, in assessing the characteristics of recorded oracles given at
Delphi, noted that almost a quarter of extant historical responses con-
cerned res publicae—questions of rulership, legislation, city foundations,
interstate relations, and war.111 How illuminating were the insights of
Apollo? The extant oracles cannot answer this question, since apologists
have synthesized prophesies and outcomes, not a few pronouncements
were composed post eventum, and discredited responses are more likely
to have become lost. As I cannot capably address issues of supernatural
or preternatural communication, I can only endeavor to address this
problem with a few observations. 
Presuming that oracles were limited to temporal sources for informa-
tion, their attendants would have had every incentive to have an excellent
grasp of current events and issues, since their own status and livelihood
depended on the oracle’s prestige. Lucian, in his story of Alexander of
Abonotichus, painted a delightful portrait of what might happen when
an unscrupulous con man took up the lucrative business of running an
oracle. This worthy had a large staff of employees, including “investiga-
tors [peuthenai], oracle makers, oracle keepers, copying clerks, seal
experts, and interpreters.”112 He ‹elded a large number of agents in
Rome to report what his clients were like, what questions they were
going to ask, and what they particularly wanted, so that he could work
out his answers in advance. He also questioned couriers about the con-
tents of sealed messages.113
While Alexander’s story is somewhat anachronistic and is subjected to
a satirical pen, it is suggestive. On a somewhat higher plane, Parke and
88
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
110. Balcer passim. See also Meiggs, Athenian Empire, 215; Gerolymatos, Espionage,
93–95; Losada 112. Cf. Meiggs and Lewis no. 40 (= IG I3 14; Fornara no. 71), 46 (= IG I3
34; Fornara no. 98).
111. Fontenrose 50, table VII–A. The proportions are somewhat higher for legendary
(28.4 percent) and “quasi–historical” (43.4 percent) responses.
112. Lucian Alexander 23.
113. Lucian Alexander 37, 53ff.

Starr have noted that the temple personnel at Delphi must have had fre-
quent contact with representatives and private individuals from many
states and would thereby have insight into current events.114 People came
from all over the Greek world not only to consult the oracle but also to
attend the Pythian Games. Like the other great panhellenic festivals, the
games at Delphi were protected by a divinely sanctioned truce. During
the intervening years, Delphi remained open to all comers, even in time
of war. One might expect intelligence activity to be intense in this milieu,
in a manner analogous to Switzerland during World War II. Such a char-
acterization can be indirectly supported by Thucydides, who mentioned
that the Athenians obtained clear information on the secret negotiations
between the Chians and Lacedaemonians while participating in the Isth-
mian games.115 More to the point, Herodotus reports that Periander’s
knowledge of the plight of the Lydian King Alyattes came about because
Periander was present at Delphi when Lydian ambassadors consulted the
oracle.116 Lycurgus’ rendition of the story of Codrus is yet more sugges-
tive: he related that when in the distant past the Peloponnesians had
inquired at Delphi whether they should take Athens, they were told they
would succeed if they did not kill the Athenian king, Codrus. Cleoman-
tis, a Delphian, learning of this, secretly informed the Athenians, and
Codrus devised a ruse to sacri‹ce his life.117 Pausanias related that a Del-
phian tipped off the Lacedaemonians about an oracle received by their
Messenian foes, which dictated that the ‹rst nation to dedicate a hundred
tripods on Ithome would be victorious. The Spartan sent an obscure fel-
low, by the name of Oebalus, in the guise of a huntsman to sneak into the
Messenian camp on Ithome with a hundred miniature cauldrons.118
While hardly historical, these stories admirably illustrate that the
Greeks conceived of Delphi as a place to acquire information that was
otherwise dif‹cult to access. Why would the Delphians (or the caretakers
of other oracles, such as Dodona) not take advantage of their position?
Beyond the Border
89
114. Starr 28; Parke and Wormell 50. The latter observe that the extensive knowledge
of geography implicit in oracles concerning colonization was probably derived from the
inquirers themselves or was a result of oracles composed after the settlement had been
made, in order to lend divine legitimacy to the foundation.
115. Thuc. 8.10.1.
116. Hdt. 1.19–22.
117. Lycurgus Against Leocrates 84ff. This story was told to mark the goodwill of for-
eigners toward Athens. Clemantis and his descendants were duly rewarded.
118. Paus. 4.12.8–9.

And why would states not wish to ‹nd out what questions their rivals
were putting to the gods?
Conjecture aside, it is evident that oracles, such as Delphi, had a place
in a state’s decision-making process. Hyperides, in defending Euxenip-
pus, spoke of Delphi as the ultimate authority in matters beyond the
sphere of reason.119 In some states individuals were commissioned to
consult oracles (or other religious sources of knowledge) and accorded an
of‹cial status. The of‹ce could be quite temporary and relatively infor-
mal, as with the theopropoi habitually sent by Athens. In Sparta, by way
of contrast, specially appointed puthioi carried on of‹cial correspon-
dence with Delphi; two of these were permanently attached to each
king’s entourage.120
Collections of Delphic responses were kept by the Spartan kings and
may have been entrusted to the care of the puthioi.121 Besides those of
Delphic origin, there were a fair number of oracles derived from other
sources in general circulation or collections. In Sparta oracles originating
from places other than Delphi were kept in the city archives, while the
Athenian archives preserved both Delphic and non-Delphic responses.122
There is some evidence—although there are few details—for other col-
lections, public and private, among the states and individuals of the
Greek world.123 Parke and Wormell suggested that records were also
kept at Delphi, although these have not come to light (perhaps being
written on perishable material). It seems implausible, however, that the
Delphians would not be motivated, by reverence or expediency, to chron-
icle their god’s words.124
90
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
119. Hyperides For Euxenippus 14: Euxenippus and two others were ordered by the
demos to sleep in a temple and report their dreams. A while after, in the course of a trial in
which Euxenippus was the defendant, the prosecution charged that he had reported his
dream falsely. Hyperides answered the charge by claiming that it was the responsibility of
the state to verify the dream at Delphi had they thought it or him unreliable. Cf. Xen. Hell.
4.7.3 (of Olympia and Delphi).
120. Hdt. 6.57; Xen. Lac. Pol. 15.5. Cf. Anderson 69 n. 14; Fontenrose 164. 
121. Hdt. 6.57; Fontenrose 164 and n. 31.
122. Fontenrose 164. He further described consultations carried out through the use of
tablets or couriers at various shrines (217–18 n. 27, 219); these would leave material avail-
able for records. Herodotus (7.142) mentioned that the Athenians who received the oracle
about the wooden walls immediately wrote it down; it is likely that such documents were
preserved.
123. For which see Fontenrose 158–65.
124. Parke and Wormell 2:xiii. Fontenrose (165) noted this lack, together with a
paucity of references to oracles in Delphic inscriptions. 

Chresmologoi (“oracle tellers,” or “oracle gatherers”) collected (and
sometimes forged) oracular pronouncements of various derivations.125
They enjoyed considerable prestige in the archaic and classical periods
and are thought to have retained general favor, although they earned the
scorn of the likes of Aristophanes and Thucydides in the ‹fth century.126
They did not function as state of‹cials, although they could exert
in›uence on state policy both through judicious presentation, manipula-
tion, and suppression of oracles in their private collections and through
interpretation of oracular responses and oracles in general circulation.
The use and abuse of oracles was by no means limited to chresmologoi,
and there were enough examples of corruption and partisanship to make
it possible for statesmen such as Demosthenes to cast doubts on the reli-
ability of oracles that did not favor their position.127 It was more com-
mon, however, to put forth interpretations that coincided with one’s
ambitions. The impact of exegesis on the discussion of policy is visible in
such events as the contested succession of Agesilaus and the more famous
debate over the signi‹cance of “wooden walls” for the course of action
Athens should take in view of the Persian menace.128
Beyond the Border
91
125. Fontenrose 154ff. Unlike manteis, they did not engage in the divination of dreams
or omens. 
126. See, e.g., Thuc. 2.54, 8.1.1 (cf. 5.26.3); Aristoph. Birds 959–91; Aristoph. Peace
1043–1126.
127. Plut. Demosth. 20.1: Demosthenes did not heed oracles about Chaeronea, because
he suspected the Pythia of being in sympathy with Philip. There is also a story of Lysander’s
failed attempt to bribe the priests at Delphi, Dodona, and Ammon; his attempts were duly
communicated by the priests to the Spartan authorities (Plut. Lys. 25.3 [and see 26.1ff.],
giving Ephorus as his source; Diod. Sic. 14.13.3–7). Cf. Hdt. 5.63; Thuc. 5.16.2; [Aristotle]
Ath. Pol. 19.4; Paus. 3.4.3; Plut. On the malignity of Herodotus 23.
It is odd that the only attempt to verify the authority of oracles is probably ‹ctional (the
tests of Croesus recounted by Hdt. 1.47ff.; cf. 2.174). It is not impossible that tests were
made but were not publicized, for fear of charges of impiety (which could carry the death
sentence in, e.g., Athens). Lucian gave a detailed account of the tests and tricks to which he
subjected Alexander of Abonotichus, but this story is set after the period under discussion
in this book. 
128. (1) Diopithes, who supported Leotychidas, informed the Spartans of an oracle
warning them against a lame kingship (Agesilaus was lame), but Lysander was able to con-
vince them that “lame” was to be taken metaphorically (Leotychidas was reputedly a bas-
tard, hence Lysander argued that Sparta would be “lame” if one of its two kings were
unsound). Cf. Fontenrose Q163; he further noted the story’s sources. He also suggested
(165) that the oracle was drawn from a Lacedaemonian collection, perhaps the state’s. (2)
Hdt. 7.142.3–143.1; see Fontenrose Q147 for the text of the oracle and further sources.

Merchants
Merchants were ubiquitous and welcome in most of the Greek world.129
They themselves had need of information on routes, markets, prices, and
the like, and hence they had a vested interest in keeping tab on the polit-
ical climates and activity at home and abroad.130 Xenophon compared
the skills of merchants and generals, and he noted that a wary eye for
potential disaster was common to both.131 Lysias further remarked—a
bit cynically—that merchants either received news of disasters in advance
of everyone else or fabricated rumors themselves, since news of disasters
entailed higher prices, which in turn yielded larger pro‹ts.132
There are examples of important military information (usually con-
cerning naval matters) imparted by merchants who picked up informa-
tion on their travels. Herodas, a Syracusan, happened to be in Phoenicia
with a shipowner at an opportune place and time. Herodas was not
speci‹cally called a merchant, but he was at least accompanying one, and
it is probable that trade of some sort was the reason he found himself in
92
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
129. Xenophon recommended that spies be disguised as merchants for this very reason
(Xen. Cav. Com. 4.7). The freedom of merchants was limited, however, especially during
con›icts. Knorringa (128) maintained that Athens restricted trade during war; although he
did not provide evidence for this assertion, I have no reason to doubt him, given the way
they treated the Megarians. The Athenians did not appreciate Perdiccas’ ban on Methonian
merchants operating in his territory, and they insisted he lift it (Meiggs and Lewis no. 65;
cf. Fornara no. 128, IG I3 61; ca. 430 or later). They further justi‹ed their killing of Spar-
tan ambassadors by alleging that the Spartans killed Athenian traders when they came on
them off the Laconian coasts (Thuc. 2.67ff.). 
130. Some of the information collected to this end—particularly that concerning navi-
gation and geography—was recorded and preserved in written form. Starr (22) noted that
by the sixth century a survey of the Spanish coast existed and that the Periegesis of
Hecataeus contained much geographical information of the Mediterranean coasts. 
McKechnie (200 n. 104) commented that Scylax’s Periplous (the basis for which goes back
at least to the fourth century) represented “a tradition of know-how [that] was probably
built up in the context of communities of professional seafarers and traders.”
131. Xen. Mem. 3.4.11.
132. Lysias XXII (Against the grain-sellers). The examples to which Lysias referred were
the losses or capture of ships, blockades, and impending ruptures of truces. Knorringa
(35–36) had a fair bit to say in this regard. Besides the preceding Lysias passage, he noted
(36 n. 2) Isaeus frag. 15 (ed. Thalheim) and Xen. Oec. 20.27, and he added: “it appears that
they [merchants] always found the means to get such information as they thought neces-
sary, either by means of agents or in another way.” The agents to whom he referred were
‹elded by Cleomenes (Berve no. 431), who was appointed governor of Egypt by Alexander
the Great in 331. Cleomenes developed an organization with a ‹eld headquarters in Athens
that was “continually sending quotations of prices to the branches in other places” (Knor-
ringa 126; cf. 99, 100, 125). 

Phoenicia.133 At any rate, he saw large numbers of Phoenician warships
gathering and being readied. Having learned that there were to be three
hundred, he departed on the ‹rst boat sailing to Greece to report this to
the Lacedaemonians.134 His news prompted them to send an expedi-
tionary force to Asia under King Agesilaus.
Less momentous examples include an anonymous trader who tipped
off the Peloponnesians on Abydus that the Athenians planned to slip by
them and Sinopean merchants who reported Xenophon’s intent to found
a colony if provisions were not provided for his men.135 The value of
merchants as sources of information can also be seen from characteriza-
tions in speeches and literature and from measures taken against them.
An example of the former can be found in Lycurgus’ case against
Leocrates: he attacked the defendant for ›eeing Athens after the defeat at
Chaeronea and spreading word of their misfortune in Rhodes, on the
grounds that the merchants who frequented that island passed on the ill
news about Athens as they sailed about the known world.136 Evidence
for measures taken to suppress the spread of news by merchants can be
seen in the seizure of their boats by Alcibiades to prevent his various ene-
mies from getting wind of his approach.137
Of‹cial Documents (Both Published and Archived)
Since the political and military leaders of the Greeks used written records
(e.g., rosters of men and equipment) for their own purposes, it is unlikely
that they would overlook other people’s records as potential sources of
information. A look at what sort of information was preserved, together
with some notes on its availability to foreigners, would therefore be of
potential bene‹t.
A visitor strolling through the Athenian agora and acropolis in the
‹fth or fourth centuries would come on a large number of freestanding
Beyond the Border
93
133. See D. Lewis 60, for evidence for Greek trade with Phoenicia; S. Lewis 1–2, 75–77,
94–95, on this incident.
134. Xen. Hell. 3.4.1. According to the story, Herodas did not know what plans Tissa-
phernes and the king had in mind for this ›eet and was honest enough to admit his igno-
rance. 
135. Thuc. 8.102.2; Xen. Anab. 5.6.19. One wonders whether the latter example was a
deliberate leak on the part of Xenophon and Timasion.
136. Lycurgus Against Leocrates 14–15. Cf. Aesch. Ag. 631; Aesch. Choeph. 680; Eur.
Iph. Taur. 447, 756.
137. Plut. Alc. 28; Xen. Hell. 1.1.15.

stone documents, or stelai. One could peruse decrees and announcements
written on whitened boards af‹xed to the base supporting the epony-
mous heroes or displayed at the royal stoa. Here those who were not or
could not be present at meetings of the deliberative bodies could learn of
their enactments. 
Much of the information published was of obvious value to a foreign
state.138 Extant inscriptions include casualty lists, catalogues of military
expenses, and a resolution to launch a major expedition.139 Catalogues
of military resources available on land and sea were commonly inscribed
from the mid–fourth century; catalogues of individuals called up for ser-
vice were posted on whitewashed boards called leukomata.140 The state
of Athens’ foreign policy could be determined from treaties and records
of embassies sent and received; one might also deduce who was or was
not paying tribute to the Athenians at a given time and thereby draw con-
clusions about the cohesion and resources of Athens’ empire (even as
scholars do today). Further information on economic capabilities could
be had from yearly publications of the accounts of of‹cials and trea-
suries.141 While the Athenians were especially proli‹c in publishing doc-
94
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
138. The interval of time between decision and publication was probably short. Some
time would be necessary for cutting the letters into the stone, but for most documents this
would entail hours or days rather than weeks; in any case, the original document, written
in ink on a whitened board, would not take long to prepare and post. Some indication of
the brevity of time can be seen from a stele giving parameters for the expedition to Sicily,
which was inscribed according to the will of the ekklesia before changes made a few days
later; a second inscription was then needed to record the new information. Whether or not
the ‹rst was actually displayed in the interval is not certain. Cf. Tod no. 78 A and B;
Gomme 4:223–29 on Thuc. 6.8.1–2.
Adcock and Mosley (179) noted that inscriptions were reexamined on occasion, since
inscriptions bearing treaties have been found to be supplemented and updated with mar-
ginal notations. 
139. Casualty lists: e.g., Tod nos. 26 (459/8), 28 (457), 48 (= Meiggs and Lewis no. 48,
ca. 447); cf. Meiggs and Lewis no. 35. Expenses: e.g., Tod nos. 55 (433), 75 (418–414), 83.
Expedition: e.g., Tod no. 78 (to Sicily). The extant Themistocles decree (Meiggs and Lewis
23), a detailed plan of the Athenian evacuation and strategy established just prior to the
Persian sack of Athens in 480, has not—to my mind—been adequately demonstrated to be
anything but a later fabrication.
140. Adcock and Mosley 179. 
141. Adcock and Mosley 179. This proposition may seem rather fanciful and anachro-
nistic until one asks how the Peloponnesians knew that Athens had better ‹nancial
resources than they did; concerns for economic information can be found, e.g., in Hdt.
3.122–23; Thuc. 6.6.2–3, 6.8.1–2, 6.22, 6.46.1–5, 7.49.1.

uments, a wide range of inscriptions from a wide range of states show
that the custom was hardly unique to them.142
Our same visitor might amble over to the nearby Metroon (formerly
the Old Bouleuterion) and arrange for access to documents kept in the
state archives.143 Of‹cial correspondence was kept there, such as a letter
from Philip II of Macedon to the Athenians and documents pertaining to
the conduct of embassies.144 It is possible that copies of publication of
correspondence between other states were somehow obtained and pre-
served, for in his speech On the Crown, Demosthenes is found reading
aloud a letter from Philip to the Peloponnesians.145 How had he obtained
the letter, and how was it preserved? Given his questionable scruples, it
is quite possible that he made it up. Yet if he had, one would have
expected a few choice remarks from Aeschines about his practice of forg-
ing documents; these are lacking. Such an argument from silence is weak
but ought to be considered. Perhaps Demosthenes acquired the letter—or
Beyond the Border
95
142. Cf. also inscriptions set up by non-Greek peoples, such as the Behistun Inscription,
and the pillars raised by Ramses II in conquered lands (cf. Hdt. 2.102, 103, 106).
143. Aristotle may have used these. Access was apparently readily available. Posner
observed (113–14) that “the very combination of archives and sanctuary in a ‘multi-func-
tional’ building may have caused problems of control and safety, for Apellikon of Teos, a
collector of books, was able to appropriate some old decrees of the Metroon and would
have been brought to trial had he not ›ed the city.” 
144. Philip’s letter: Demosth. VII (On Halonnesus) 33. Conduct of embassies: Demosth.
XIX (On the embassy) 129. Cf. Demosth. XVIII (On the crown) 211, 218. Cf. also Starr
(38), who plays down the importance of written records to information gathering. His
arguments are based on ›awed readings of the evidence. E.g., he dismissed (41) the capture
of the Syracusan documents containing a catalogue of their citizens by misinterpreting
Plutarch (Nicias 14.5: aðtai [= the Athenian ships] lamb‹nou!i naèn polemÛan !anÛda!
komÛzou!an, eÞ! ‘! pegr‹fonto katŒ fulŒ! aêtoç! oß Surakoæ!ioi: keÛmenai dƒ "pvyen
t°! pñlev! ¤n ßerÒ Diò! ƒOlumpÛou tñte prò! ¤j¡ta!in kaÜ kat‹logon tÇn ¤n ²likÛ&
metep¡mfyh!an. É! oïn êpò tÇn ƒAyhnaÛvn Hloè!ai prò! toç! !trathgoç! ¤komÛ!yh!an
kaÜ tò pl°yo! Êfyh tÇn ônom‹tvn, ±xy¡!yh!an oß m‹ntei! m® pote "ra tò xreÆn
¤ntaèya toè xrh!moè peraÛnoi, l¡gonto! É! ƒAyhnaÝoi l®contai Surakou!Ûou! ‘panta!.
oé m¯n llƒ ¥t¡rÄ [MSS, §teroi Coraës and Bekker] fa!in ¦rgÄ toèto toÝ! ƒAyhnaÛoi!
gen¡!yai ¤pitel¢! kayƒ ùn xrñnon pokteÛna! DÛvna K‹llippo! õ ƒAyhnaÝo! ¦!xe
Surakoæ!a!). Starr read Plutarch as saying that the capture of the ship happened much
later: “the report itself may be doubted in view of his own [Plutarch’s] remark that schol-
ars [nowhere mentioned in Plutarch] dated this event to a much later occasion.” The
“event” whose date was in question was not the capture of the ship but the ful‹llment of an
oracle predicting that the Athenians would master the Syracusans; Plutarch said that this
prophecy was ful‹lled later when Callipus the Athenian murdered Dion and set himself up
as tyrant over Syracuse. 
145. Demosth. XVIII (On the crown) 218.

a copy of it—through Peloponnesian friends who had access to it, and
then kept it himself.146 Although such a theory is compatible with the
concept of personal networks, it is open to the same objection as above:
Aeschines’ silence. An alternative is that by the late fourth century Athens
preserved in its archives documents of particular import gathered by its
agents and sources. If this was indeed the case, these archives in turn
should have been made accessible so that actors on the political stage,
such as Demosthenes, could make use of them to supplement their own
information.147 Oracular pronouncements, in any event, were preserved
for current and future reference. State archives were more generally
administered by secretaries (grammateis), whose of‹ces were specialized
and (at least in Macedonia) subject to a hierarchy of authority.148 The
strategoi and the cavalry commanders (in Athens, at any rate) were
served by specially appointed secretaries; these men would almost cer-
tainly possess a fair bit of valuable information at their ‹ngertips and
might conceivably have functioned as advisors or intelligence of‹cers to
their military commanders. Such a position would be perfect for a spy,
and it is little wonder that Phillidas sought it when the Thebans were
plotting to throw off their Spartan-backed government.
It is hopefully self-evident that Greek states of the sixth through fourth
centuries would have had much to gain from their neighbors’ documents,
if they could but have contrived to get possession of them. Persian
archives have been found and excavated in the palace at Persepolis—
these, the “forti‹cation” and “treasury” tablets, are primarily concerned
with payments in food (510–494) and species (492–459), respectively.
The recovered tablets do not contain data of immediate political or mili-
tary value but it is possible that yet unexcavated records contain such
information. Herodotus mentioned that catalogues were taken of the
forces that marched with Xerxes on his ill-fated expedition in 480, and
96
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
146. Lysander was supposed to have preserved his correspondence with states in his pri-
vate dwelling, rather than in a state archive (Plut. Lys. 30.3). A state archive existed in
Sparta in Plutarch’s day, and in it the biographer found the names of Agesilaus’ daughter
and wife. Such records were therefore kept as early as the late ‹fth or early fourth century
(Plut. Ages. 19.6), unless they were contrived later. 
147. Polyaenus (4.6.2) mentioned the uses put to the record system of an Antigonus,
perhaps Antigonus Doson (ruled 229–221). Implicitly, these were exceptional enough to be
included in a collection of stratagems.
148. For more complete descriptions of these of‹ces, see Posner 111–12 on the Atheni-
ans; Berve 54–58 on the Macedonians.

these have not come to light.149 Yet undiscovered royal archives are
attested in Babylon and Ecbatana. Records may also have been kept by
satraps in provincial capitals, since Plutarch mentioned an archive at
Sardis.150
Could the Persian archives be a viable information source for the
Greeks? The information they contained could be valuable, particularly
to the Ionians. The problem was access. There is no evidence (save a
boast of Ctesias) that the archives were open to Greek inquiry before
Alexander captured Persepolis,151 but the Persians frequently made use
of scribes and records clerks of various nationalities—among these were
Greeks. One of the aides mentioned in the forti‹cation tablets was called
“Ya‰na,” which is the ethnic name for a Greek.152 Among the tablets
found was one written in the Greek language, implying that another
Greek (or an individual to whom it would be natural to write in Greek)
served in another archive center.153 There were likely others, as D. Lewis
pointed out.154 It is not improbable that these Greeks retained some con-
tact with their communities of origin and could have passed on pertinent
Beyond the Border
97
149. Hdt. 7.100: Xerxes’ scribes (grammatistai) recorded the numbers of Xerxes’ forces
and the questions he made of their captains. How and Wells (ad loc.) maintained that these
lists existed but that they were not made at Doriscus; the commentators did not, unfortu-
nately, indicate how they knew this.
150. Plut. Demosth. 20.4–5: “Alexander . . . discovered at Sardis certain letters of
Demosthenes and documents of the king’s generals, which revealed the amount of money
given to him.” To be sure, Alexander had a motive for framing Demosthenes. D. Lewis (25,
citing Ezra 5.17–6.2) has pointed out that this diffused system of archives led to retrieval
problems: a search for a twenty-year-old document began in Babylon and ended in
Ecbatana.
151. Cf. Diod. Sic. 2.32, where they were called diphtherai basilikai.
152. D. Lewis 5–6. Ya‰na appears frequently on the tablets, and from December 499 to
September 498 he is the only visible aide of Pharnaka, the Persian overseer (D. Lewis 12). 
153. D. Lewis 12–13. Before the mid–‹fth century, when the use of Aramaic on docu-
ments became general, it was necessary to write in the language used by the recipient (Pos-
ner 119 and n. 4; cf. Meiggs and Lewis no. 12 [= Tod no. 10, ca. 522–486 b.c.], a letter
ostensibly from Darius to Gadatas in Greek, which Meiggs and Lewis thought to be authen-
tic). The tablets at Persepolis were, for the most part, written in Elamite (Posner 123). 
154. D. Lewis 14: “If we ‹nd Greeks in a secretarial capacity as early as this [ca. 499]
and as far east as this [Persepolis], there is no reason to doubt their availability to the King
or to other satraps, particularly in the west, in all relevant periods. The line between a sec-
retary or aide and an exiled Greek maintained at the court of the King or of a satrap for his
possible usefulness will not be an easy one to draw.” He mentioned Calligeitus of Megara
and Timagoras of Cyzicus with Pharnabazus (Thuc. 8.6.1), the bilingual Carian Gaulites
(Thuc. 8.85.2), and Praxinus of Zacynthus (Xen. Anab. 2.1.7ff., Plut. Art. 14.5; Diod. Sic.
14.25.1) with Tissaphernes.

information, however informally. One might speculate on the opportu-
nity such employment would have presented to a spy.
Miscellaneous
Itinerants and Philosophers
There were a variety of people who traveled or held itinerant professions
and thus had the opportunity to gather and communicate information in
an informal fashion. In surveying the types and natures of outsiders in
Greek city-states in the fourth century, McKechnie included specialized
builders and craftsmen, doctors, entertainers, actors, musicians, orators,
soothsayers, and cooks.155 While there is no evidence that most of these
groups of people consciously collected information for city-states, it is
inevitable that the experiences they gained on their travels would
in›uence their indigenous communities. A few examples of speci‹c infor-
mation are available; among them is the news obtained in Sparta of the
Athenian effort to rebuild their walls immediately after the Persian Wars,
which was provided by travelers.156
Philosophers were likewise known to travel and to obtain posts as
teachers or advisors of the ruling classes. Aristotle collected a fair amount
of information of a political (and hence military) nature by sending his
students out to learn about the history and constitutions of a large num-
ber of Greek poleis. While one might argue that his interest was purely
academic, one might also note that he was directing such research at a
time when Philip II was trying to work out a political arrangement in
Greece with himself as hegemon, and such information would have been
of great value to the Macedonians.157
By the early fourth century there were men who marketed themselves
as teachers of strategy and tactics. While the impression of these obtained
from Xenophon’s Memorabilia does not inspire con‹dence in their capa-
bilities, they could have been good sources of information on how vari-
ous peoples trained and prepared for war.158 Tissaphernes thought
98
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
155. McKechnie 143–57.
156. Thuc. 1.91; cf. Hdt. 1.27 (Diod. Sic. 9.25.1–2).
157. It is also worth noting that Aristotle had close connections with Philip and Alexan-
der and further that he thought it expedient to ›ee Athens on at least two occasions (cf.
McKechnie 150–52).
158. Xen. Mem. 3.1.1; cf. 3.5.21–22.

highly enough of a Greek military expert, Phalinus by name, to retain
him as an advisor in military matters. This was only sensible, considering
that he, as satrap, was faced with continual battles with the Greeks in the
late ‹fth and early fourth centuries.159 Plato stated, with some irony, that
drillmasters seemed to have regarded Sparta as a place too holy to enter
and did not practice there—it is highly unlikely that the Lacedaemonians
would have suffered their presence.160
Geographers
It would have been possible for interested parties to obtain geographic or
ethnographic information from historians and geographers. Strabo men-
tioned the existence of a number of geographical works by the ‹rst cen-
tury, including Limenai, Periploi, Periodoi, and the like. Xenophon’s
Hellenica and Anabasis might have been of some service to Alexander,
though there is no mention of Alexander’s having read them.161 It has
been noted that Alexander’s entourage included geographers and schol-
ars and further that Alexander maintained a group of men, called bema-
tistai, whose duty was to survey the country through which he was pass-
ing.162
Hired Agents, Sycophants
Sycophants had the reputation for an overindulged ability to discover or
fabricate misdeeds of the wealthy. They pro‹ted materially from this
skill, and in Athens they were perceived as a plague that was endured but
never cured. In the Memorabilia, Xenophon portrayed a treatment for
this ailment: an agent hired by a wealthy man to investigate sycophants
persecuting him. The agent, Archidamus, uncovered their dirty secrets
and sought out their enemies to help him in his counterattack. The
Beyond the Border
99
159. Xen. Anab. 2.1.7—Xenophon called Phalinus a man who represented himself as
one learned in matters concerning both tactical formations and hoplite warfare.
160. Plato Laches 183a–b.
161. D. Lewis (144 nn. 56–57) remarked that when Pharnabazus captured and gar-
risoned Cythera in the spring of 393 (Xen. Hell. 4.8.8; Diod. Sic. 14.84.5), he might have
been acting on “good sense,” or under the in›uence of a passage in Herodotus (Hdt. 7.235)
that calls attention to the vulnerability of Laconia to such a move. 
162. Tod no. 188 (SIG 303; Harding no. 110; post-334) recorded a dedication of a Cre-
tan, Philonides son of Zoites, at Olympia, which refers to the dedicator as both bematistes
and hemerodromes/os, suggesting a link between surveying and communication. For a
more detailed description, see Berve 51–52. 

patron, Criton, paid him in goods and honor and retained him in his ser-
vice, occasionally lending his talents out to friends who had need of
them.163
In his life of Demosthenes, Plutarch mentioned a bounty hunter by the
name of Archias. This man was engaged by Antipater to discover the
whereabouts of the Macedonian’s enemies and arrest them. To this end
Archias directed a group of men known as “fugitive hunters”
(phugotheres). Archias was apparently quite successful at his job, which
no doubt involved investigation in the course of his pursuits. Among his
victims was Demosthenes, who escaped him only by committing suicide
in 322.164
Aside from these two men, the evidence is scanty: there is some sug-
gestion that information pertaining to legal cases might be purchased
from sycophants, and an allusion to an overseer engaged by mer-
chants.165
Survivors and Escapees
News of disasters was at times brought back by those who had survived
them, as when the Arcadian Nicarchus stumbled wounded into the camp
of the Ten Thousand to tell of the treachery of Tissaphernes.166 In a num-
ber of instances their news was so shocking as to strain their credibility
(the Athenian reaction to the survivors of the Sicilian disaster is a case in
point),167 but when measures could yet be taken to avert peril, these were
generally done.168
Servants and Slaves
Servants and slaves might have made inquiries or communicated infor-
mation on their masters’ behalf, but most references to them in the con-
text of information portray them giving information against their current
or former masters. The reliability of slaves as informants was open to
some question (this problem is treated in chapter 4 in the context of tor-
100
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
163. Xen. Mem. 2.9.1–8.
164. Plut. Demosth. 28.2–4.
165. Overseer: Demosth. XXXIV (Against Phormio) 8. Purchase of information:
Demosth. XXI (Against Meidias) 36; cf. Lofberg 57, 59.
166. Xen. Anab. 2.5.33.
167. Thuc. 8.1.1. Cf. Plut. De garrul. 509.
168. See, e.g., Thuc. 3.3.5ff.

ture). Aristotle remarked that tyrants looked to slaves as allies in inform-
ing against their masters; the same might be said of leaders in other forms
of government.169
Others 
There are a large number of informants of types so varied and singular as
to defy meaningful categorization. Many of these obtained or imparted
information through a fortuitous combination of chance and the knowl-
edge that a prospective recipient of a piece of news would be interested to
learn of it. Although it would be tedious to enumerate the plethora of
examples available, I cannot resist an anecdote illustrating the preceding
statement. Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse, had delusions of grandeur as
a poet and in 368/7 was fortunate enough to win a victory for one of his
pieces that had been performed at the Lenaea in Athens. A member of the
chorus hastened to Corinth as soon as the victory was announced and
thence took the ‹rst boat to Syracuse, in hopes of being the ‹rst to inform
Dionysius. He succeeded and obtained the expected reward for his good
news.170
Sources and Agents of Unspeci‹ed Nature and Provenance 
Our sources are often negligent or vague when it comes to providing
details of how information was obtained before actions were taken. Ref-
erence to agents and sources might be relegated to an inde‹nite pronoun
(e.g., Alcibiades learned of secret arrangements between the Lacedaemo-
nians and Cyrus diŒ tÛnvn) or to a relative pronoun in conjunction with
a participle (e.g., oß paggellñnte! the defeat at Leuctra who came to
Sparta with the names of the dead).171 Quite often verbs of learning in
participial form or in subordinate clauses governed by É! or ¤peid® are
the only record that intelligence was involved. Passive forms of the verb
gg¡llv are frequently used, and occasionally we ‹nd the use of
lany‹nv with a negative. In many other cases, even such rudimentary
Beyond the Border
101
169. Aristotle Politics 1313b; one might recall, e.g., the information given by slaves on
the parodies of the mysteries. Cf. Lysias V (For Callias) 5, who warns that the precedent
given by trusting slaves will encourage others to obtain freedom by falsely informing
against their masters. 
170. Diod. Sic. 15.74.1–2.
171. Diod. Sic. 14.11.2ff.; Plut. Ages. 29.2.

notations are lacking, although the receipt of information must have, or
probably did, precede an action. Again, it would be tedious to go through
even a fraction of such examples, but a single incident might demonstrate
how even important information, obtained in advance of an event, might
rate no more than a passing mention. Thucydides reported that Demos-
thenes (the strategos, not the orator) was preparing a force to invade the
Aetolians in 426; this did not escape their notice from the time he ‹rst
formed the plan.172 It is apparent that some form of information gather-
ing went on; perhaps one of the Acarnanians to whom Demosthenes
communicated his intent passed news of it on to the Aetolians out of bit-
terness, when Demosthenes failed to support an Acarnanian plan to
invest Leucas.173 It is possible that the Aetolians learned of it still earlier
through an anonymous traitor, deserter, or spy.
102
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
172. Thuc. 3.96.3.
173. Cf. Thuc. 3.95.2.

Chapter 3 
Beyond the Pale: Spies 
(Kataskopoi, Otakoustai)
It is almost as dif‹cult to de‹ne a spy as to catch one. 
The most common word among the Greeks for spies was kataskopoi,
but throughout the classical era they did not use this term for spies alone:
an author might employ it in one context where we would say “spy,” in
another where we would understand “scout,” in a third where we would
have dif‹culty translating it at all.1 Otakoustai were consistently used as
covert agents, but they were rarely sent abroad.2 Is it then anachronistic
to distinguish spies from other agents? 
The answer to this problem can perhaps be found in a distinction in
the social perception of different types of kataskopoi (et al.). Some
kataskopoi (i.e., spies) were perceived by their victims as treacherous and
seem to have been subject to legislation concerning treachery; others (i.e.,
scouts et al.) were not.3 Whereas spies were normally interrogated under
103
1. Thucydides, e.g., used kataskopoi for spies at 6.45.1 (they were not named but were
distinguished from other sources reporting to the Syracusans) and 8.6.4 (the perioikos Phry-
nis, discussed shortly); mounted scouts at 6.63.3; and of‹cial investigators at 4.27.3–4
(Cleon and Theagenes, chosen by the Athenians to investigate matters at Pylos) and 8.41.1
(men appointed to oversee the Spartan navarch Astyochus). The word kataskopos is not
found in Homer—he instead used episkopos or skopos indiscriminately for spies, scouts,
watchers, and overseers.
A confusion of terms also existed in late antiquity (cf. Lee, Information and Frontiers,
170–72 for a discussion). A similar parallel can be found in American usage during the Civil
War: Luvaas (“The Role of Intelligence in the Chancellorsville Campaign, April–May
1863,” in Handel, Intelligence and Military Operations, 102–3) observed that “scout” and
“spy” were used interchangeably, although properly a differentiation in technique existed
between the two classes.
2. Except, perhaps, in Polyb. 16.37.1 (of Nabis’ “large numbers of <ot>akoustai and
kataskopoi”). Cf. Suda s.v. ƒVtakou!teÝn: “to wish to learn secrets through certain people.”
The noun was not used of agents other than spies, although the verb was on occasion (e.g.,
Xen. Cyr. 5.3.56, of scouts advancing by night, in the sense of relying on ears rather than eyes). 
3. Barkan 6, 9, and nn. 2 and 3. Cf. Eur. Helen 1173–76; schol. Theocr. 5.876 (FGrHist
115 F357). For perceptions of even allied spies as less than honorable, see [Eur.] Rhesus
510–17.

torture before execution, there is no indication that other kataskopoi suf-
fered fates different from ordinary captives.4 Context also provides a dis-
tinction, as scouts were only employed by military forces on campaign,
while other types of kataskopoi were under no such restriction. Further,
there is no historical reference to spies being armed, much less armored;
their protection lay in anonymity or disguise. Scouts relied on celerity for
protection but augmented their defense with light arms; they did not
employ disguise.5 While of‹cials often conducted investigations openly,
spies gathered their information covertly. Finally, while only men served
as scouts and of‹cials, spies were recruited from both genders, at least in
Syracuse.
Spies may in turn be categorized according to differentiation in prac-
tice and such theory as can be found in Xenophon’s Cavalry Comman-
der.
It is also necessary to have given thought to spies [kataskopoi]
before the outbreak of war, so that they may be from states friendly
to both warring parties and also from merchants; for all states
always receive those importing goods as men well disposed to them.
Fake deserters [pseudautomoloi] can be useful as well. Do not,
however, neglect to be on guard even if you have con‹dence in your
spies; rather it is always essential to make preparations as if they
have come reporting the enemy to be at hand. For even if your spies
are entirely reliable, it is dif‹cult to provide timely information,
since many mishaps occur in war.6
104
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
4. This is not to say that scouts were never killed (cf., e.g., Front. Strat. 2.5.15), but there
is no evidence for their being tortured. For torture used on spies or suspected spies, see Hdt.
7.146; Demosth. XVIII (On the Crown) 132; Polyb. 15.29.5ff.; Athenaeus 2.73.
5. The distinction is somewhat blurred in the literary world of Homer: to which cate-
gory does Odysseus belong? His adventures in Troy are a blend between those of historical
spies and scouts, together with a large dose of fantasy.
The single exception to the spurning of disguises by scouts is found in Xenophon (Cyr.
2.4.15–23), when Cyrus’ scouts preceded his army disguised as brigands, lest his foes be
alerted to the presence of a military force.
6. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.7–8. The Cavalry Commander, and indeed Xenophon’s scripta
minora in general, seem to have been consistently neglected by scholars writing on the sub-
ject of intelligence. The only mention the Cavalry Commander has received in an associated
context is in Pritchett (1.131), in his discussion of scouts. S. Lewis has mentioned it (175 n.
10) but interprets it to mean that spies were not important, since they ought to be supple-
mented with other agents (phulakes). 

This neglected passage—of no little relevance to the study of Greek espi-
onage—indicates a distinction between three types of spies: fake desert-
ers, merchants, and neutrals.7 Would that this distinction could be cor-
roborated by evidence! Instead, in the ancient sources, we ‹nd no
historical testimony to the use of merchants as spies, although it is logi-
cal and probable that they should be recruited, and the guise would
almost certainly have been assumed—a case may be made, for instance,
for the perioikos Phrynis being a merchant or operating in the guise of
one. Richmond cites Odysseus’ henchman in the Philoctetes as an ex-
ample of a spy assuming the guise of a merchant, but, if it is permissible
to split hairs, this man is not really a spy: his task is to manipulate
Philoctetes through the story he tells, rather than to learn information.8
Neutrals cannot be found serving as spies, save only in the Education of
Cyrus, but that work at least proffers material for a discussion later in
this chapter. Fake deserters were perhaps the most common manifesta-
tions of a broader class of agent: those recruited from a leader’s own pop-
ulace to in‹ltrate a target. A fourth class, not mentioned in the Cavalry
Commander, but well represented in other sources, consisted of those
people enlisted from an opponent’s populace. In antiquity these were
generally perceived to be traitors; today they are referred to as “agents in
place” by their employers, as traitors by their victims. 
If we subject the preceding passage from Xenophon’s Cavalry Com-
Beyond the Pale
105
7. Sun Tzu (perhaps s. VI or s. IV) distinguished ‹ve types of covert agents (13.5–20):
“native” (“those of the enemy’s country people”), “inside” (“enemy of‹cials”), “doubled”
(“enemy spies whom we employ”), “expendable” (or “death”; “those of our own spies who
are deliberately given fabricated information” with the intent of deceiving the enemy who
interrogates them), and “living” (“those who return with information,” referring to agents
recruited from one’s own populace). Cf. Chakraborty 25–28 and 18–44 generally, for a
study of ancient Indian classi‹cations and functions of spies (those of Kautiliya [probably
›. between s. III and s. I] are particularly interesting). Frederick the Great (122): “There 
are several kinds of spies: (1) ordinary people who become involved in this profession; 
(2) double spies; (3) spies of consequence; and (4) those whom you force into this unpleas-
ant business.”
There is no conclusive evidence that the Greeks distinguished according to status
between secret agents recruited from the foe. Hyperides (Against Demosthenes 12) perhaps
indicated a difference in quality rather than nature. There is no explicit report of turned
spies. The practice of misinformation does not exactly correspond. 
8. Richmond 3, citing Sophocles Philoctetes 128 and 542. To split the hair yet again,
one makes an assumption (albeit a reasonable one) in calling him a merchant. For while the
manuscripts developed role attributions labeling him Emporos, or “merchant,” he is simply
a naukleros, or “ship captain,” in the text itself. 

mander to consideration of his implicit basis for distinction, we may
arrive at a reconciliation between what he says and the historical ex-
amples we have. The key is access, and the categories are essentially
three: outsider, neutral, and insider. The outsider is typi‹ed by the fake
deserter, who is distinguished in syntax and thought from the neutral and
merchant. The outsider seeks to in‹ltrate another state or social group, to
which he or she would be denied access if his or her af‹liation and pur-
pose were known. Merchants and neutrals, however, are more likely to
be admitted to a target state. Merchants were associated more with their
trade than with their state of origin, and since their trade was bene‹cial,
their presence was welcome. So, obviously, was the presence of those
people from states known to be friendly. They would be permitted a
degree of access based on their relationship. That the third category—
that of insider, or agent in place—is not mentioned by Xenophon is by no
means evidence for his ignorance of the utility of the type in espionage. It
may be absent for a number of reasons. For example, agents in place have
always been perceived in the Western tradition as corrupt and corrupting
and therefore may have been irreconcilable with Xenophon’s personal
morality, or at least their use was not to be admitted or advocated in a
published document; or perhaps Xenophon hesitated to recommend such
politically charged and potentially dangerous agents to the young and
inexperienced.  
Be that as it may, the theoretical categorization of espionage along the
lines of access has merit, for the problems faced by each type of spy dif-
fered, as did the methods employed to acquire information. Hence they
are treated separately in this chapter.
In‹ltration Agents
The basic problem of agents recruited from one’s own forces was one of
access to information—both physical access to other states (particularly
those that took measures to exclude them) and acceptance into groups of
their compatriots who wished to exclude supporters of the agents’
patrons. All such agents had to present themselves as something they
were not, and they did this variously through disguise, dissimulation, and
innocuity. These agents were more likely to be selected on the basis of
their skills or training than were, for instance, agents in place, who were
almost by de‹nition amateurs. 
106
Information Gathering in Classical Greece

Those Operating in an Internal Context 
Writers on Greek intelligence have tended to excuse themselves from
considering domestic agents in their discussions. Yet while we today dis-
tinguish between the CIA and FBI, or MI 6 and MI 5, the distinction was
less marked for the Greeks. Admittedly those operating in internal espi-
onage were despised more than their foreign counterparts, but they were
still called kataskopoi as well as otakoustai, and hence they trace their
lineage to the same family.
In Syracuse and Cyprus
As Demosthenes pointed out, a monarchic state has a number of advan-
tages over its democratic counterpart with regard to protecting or acting
on information. But rulers whose authority rested on the domination of
their subjects had peculiar needs of their own: in particular, a need to
learn of threats to their power from within as well as without.9 Threats
of this nature took the form of plots and insurrections, so that the knowl-
edge required by tyrants derived ultimately from information on the
‹delity of their subjects, individually and collectively. The tyrant or king
was therefore obliged to devote resources to monitor the population.
How was this done?
The richest evidence pertains to the tyrants on the western and eastern
edges of the Greek world and is derived mainly from Aristotle, Clearchus
of Soli (via Athenaeus), and Plutarch. 
[The tyrant must] see to it that none of the things his subjects say or
do escapes his notice; rather, he must have spies, [kataskopoi] like
the women called potagogides at Syracuse and the spies [otakous-
tai] that Hiero used to send whenever there was any gathering or
conference, for when men fear such as these they speak less freely,
and if they do speak freely they are less likely to escape notice.
(Aristot. Pol. 1313b11–16)
Moreover the breed [genos] of ears [ota] and provocateurs [prosa-
gogides] make tyrants, who are obliged to know everything, most
Beyond the Pale
107
9. Thus Plutarch (de curiositate 522f–523a), Aelius Aristides (Eis Basilea 62), and Dio
Cassius (77.17.2) explain the use of spies by kings and tyrants.

detested. Darius Nothus ‹rst employed spies [otakoustai], since he
had no con‹dence in himself and suspected and feared everyone;
and the Dionysii in‹ltrated provocateurs among the Syracusans.
(Plut. De curiositate 522f–523a)10
The monarchs of Cyprus have all accepted the breed [genos] of
noble parasites [kolakes] as useful; for their possession is typical of
tyrants. No one knows the number or the appearances of these men
(aside from the most conspicuous), as is the case with some Are-
opagites. The parasites in Salamis—from whom are derived the
parasites in the rest of Cyprus—are distinguished according to type
[sungeneia], one group being called “Gerginoi,” the other “Proma-
langes.” Of these the Gerginoi hold the position of spies
[kataskopoi], and eavesdrop while mixing with people throughout
the city, in workshops and markets; each day they report back what
they hear to those known as “Masters” [Anaktes]. The Proma-
langes, being a type of investigator, conduct inquiries into whatever
reported by the Gerginoi seems to be worthy of investigation. And
so skillful and plausible is their interaction with all that it seems to
me—as they themselves say—that the seed of the noble parasites
has been sown by them into foreign lands. (Clearchus frag. 25 in
Müller 2:310)11
And a certain noble order in Cyprus, they say, were called “Anak-
tes.” To these, they say, was referred whatever the spies [otakous-
tai] had heard each day. This was done to keep people throughout
the island in order. And such spies are also known as “investiga-
tors” [peuthenes] as if from the word investigate [peutho].
(Eustathius 3.515–16)12
108
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
10. Cf. Synesius Egyptians 2.8 on hatred of this sort.
11. From Athen. Deip. 255f–256b. Athenaeus notes that some say that their ancestry is
to be traced back to captive Trojans whom Teucer led off to settle in Cyprus. Berve (no. 224
[GergÛyio!]) said that Clearchus’ work was named “Gergithios, or Concerning Flattery”
after a certain Gergithius who followed and ›attered Alexander. Unfortunately, neither
Athenaeus nor Berve recorded their sources.
12. The translation of peuy°new and peæyv is rather forced to show the parallel. Accord-
ing to the LSJ (s.vv.), peæyhn denotes an “inquirer or spy,” while peæyv means “give notice,
lay an information.” Peæyv is an older form of puy‹nomai, which signi‹es learning by ques-
tioning.

These four passages point to the existence of organized, permanent,
and perhaps professional intelligence networks in the ‹fth and fourth
centuries. Although they apply to various rulers, taken together they give
rise to some interesting problems.
Let us begin with the agents themselves. It is immediately striking,
given the notable absence of women in the roles of overt agents, that
Aristotle speci‹ed female agents employed in Syracuse. There have been
attempts to emend the text here to masculine forms of the article and par-
ticiple (aß to oß and kaloæmenai to kaloæmenoi) on the basis of the mas-
culine plural article (toç!) used in the passage quoted from Plutarch.13
Masculine forms, however, were used by Plutarch (and in Greek gener-
ally) to encompass both genders when a mixed group was referred to.
Such is probably the case here. Further, when describing the retribution
in›icted on the agents of Dionysius II after his overthrow, Plutarch used
the term nyrÅpou! (people) rather than !ndra! (restricted to men) for
the victims of their wrath.14
Female potagogides were probably recruited from ›ute girls and pros-
titutes (hetairai), who would have had access to the private gatherings
and drinking parties of prominent citizens.15 Aristotle implies that
respectable women (who were denied access to these gatherings) and
female servants could also be suborned.16
Other types of agents—the Gerginoi and the Promalanges—demon-
strate a degree of specialization. From Clearchus’ passage, one would
Beyond the Pale
109
13. Cf. Newman 4:455 on Aristotle Politics 1313b13. 
14. Plut. Dion 28.1.
15. Potagogides is the Doric form—i.e., the form that the Syracusans themselves would
have used—of prosagogides. The term might have been a nickname (“jackal”) or
euphemism (“one who introduces”); LSJ s.v. I and II. 
Polyaenus (5.2.13) told of Dionysius rounding up musicians and hetairai. These people
were tortured and questioned as to the identity of Dionysius’ opponents, in light of what
they had heard while entertaining at gatherings. It is possible that the tyrant did this as a
cover for recalling his agents for debrie‹ng or instructions, but such a practice could only
diminish the ability of his spies to gather information, since people would henceforth be
wary of what they said in front of any hetaira or musician.
For the use of prostitutes as spies in ‹fteenth-century Normandy, cf. A. Curry, “Sex and
the Soldier in Lancastrian Normandy, 1415–50” Reading Medieval Studies 14 (1988):
25–26. Cf. also Chakraborty 25, 27–28, on Kautiliya’s use of women as spies: among these
were vrishalis (identi‹ed as prostitutes) and courtesans.
16. Aristotle Politics 1313b32–35, in which he suggested that tyrants promote the sta-
tus of wives, so that they might bring information against their husbands. On the face of it,
one might dismiss this statement as cynical or misogynistic, save for Plutarch attesting to
just such an appeal made to Dion’s wife by Dionysius I (Plut. Dion 21.7–8). 

expect the Gerginoi to be competent observers and dissimulators, with-
out having to be intellectually gifted or expert in the use of reasoned
deduction. Their duty seems to have been simply to gather information,
not to evaluate it, except insofar as to ‹lter out irrelevant detail from
their reports. The methods of the Promalanges are more dif‹cult to
assess, since a clear picture of the process of investigation or inquiry is
not forthcoming, and since modes of inquiry are variable. It would
appear that they, unlike the Gerginoi, undertook their researches
overtly. Such a proposal is made all the more viable by Clearchus’
restriction of the term kataskopoi to the Gerginoi; investigators (ere-
unetai) possess no such intrinsic quality of secrecy. Further, Clearchus
noted that the identities of the more conspicuous were known. This sys-
tem would afford the Anaktes secret access to information all but
impossible for overt agents to discover, through the Gerginoi, yet per-
mits them, through their delegated agents, the Promalanges, to pursue
leads with inquiries endowed with of‹cial sanction and authority. Such
a hypothesis would make the division of the Cypriot organization more
rational, but one must acknowledge that rationality is no guarantee of
accuracy, as any student of the history of intelligence well knows. Nev-
ertheless, analogies may be found in Persian practice, which would be
all too familiar to archaic and classical Cypriots. The Persian kings
employed two sorts of agents for monitoring their subjects: these were
called the “Eyes” and “Ears” of the King. The “eyes” were not covert
agents but rather of‹cials of some stature who undertook investigations
at the behest of their sovereign. The nature of the “ears” is less well
attested, but they seem to have been drawn from humbler stations and
to have acted as spies in a manner similar to that of the Gerginoi.17 It is
110
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
17. A conceptual distinction between the use of ears and eyes exists at least as early as
Xenophon and as late as Basilius (On the Holy Spirit 1.1). Kroll (1070) also traced the
kolakes in Clearchus’ passage to origins in the “eyes” and “ears” of the Persian kings. He
did not, however, draw a distinction between Gerginoi and Promalanges but generally
linked the Gerginoi with both “eyes” and “ears.” See Hdt. 1.114; Xen. Cyr. 8.2.10–12,
8.6.16 (in which the “eye” is linked with the son or the adelphos, of the king); Xen. Oeco-
nomicus 4.6–8; Aristotle Politics 5.9.2–3; Suda s.v. ƒOfyalmò! basil¡v!. Cf. Aesch. Per-
sians 960; Aristoph. Acharnians 92. [Aristotle] (De Mundo 398a) and the scholiasts to
Aristophanes (schol. vet. on Acharn. 92a, 92b—the latter identifying the “eyes” with the
satraps, although this does not sit well with Xenophon’s account) distinguished the “eyes”
and “ears” of the king according to status and function. 
For further mention of the “eye of the king,” see Plut. Artaxerxes 12.1–3 and the follow-
ing citations (which are owed to Hirsute): Lucian De mercede conductis 29; Lucian Adversus
indoctum 23; Heliodorus Aethiopica 8.17; Ael. Arist. Oration 16; Pollux 2.84; Themistius
Oration 21.225d; Philostratus Life of Apollonius of Tyana 1.21; Hesychius s.v. Bas. ƒOfy.;
Dio Chrysostomus 3.118. See also D. Lewis 19–20 and nn. 97–100; Dvornik 24–27, 31. 

entirely possible, even probable, that Cypriot monarchs imitated their
Persian overlords in this way.18
Issues of organization lead naturally into those of supervision and
hence to the Anaktes. The word Anax means ruler, or lord; in Cyprus,
according to Aristotle, the Anaktes were the sons and adelphoi (brothers
and perhaps cousins) of the monarch.19 The choice of kin may have been
in›uenced by an optimistic hope that relatives would be more faithful
than hirelings, since a traitor working as a director of secret police would
be a very real danger to any ruler. Also, the accuracy of a tyrant’s per-
ception of his situation would be in›uenced by the competence and reli-
ability of his intelligence of‹cers. While reliability was fostered by kin-
ship, competence might have been augmented by experience and
continuity in of‹ce; however, patronage systems do not ensure that the
best quali‹ed person holds authority.
Given this testimony, we must posit a group of individuals supervising
the intelligence effort on behalf of their relative and sovereign. They are
said to have received information from the Gerginoi in an intermediate
step before the Promalanges went out to follow up matters deemed
important. Clearchus’ phrase “whatever reported by the Gerginoi seems
to be worthy of investigation” does not specify to whom the information
seems worthy. He is probably referring to the Anaktes, since they not the
Promalanges, were the recipients of the news. The tasks of the Proma-
langes, then, would be assigned to them by the Anaktes, who were prob-
Beyond the Pale
111
Hirsch (101–39) has argued that the “eye of the king” was a fabrication of the Greeks,
citing as evidence the absence of such a title in Persian sources. Perhaps the Greek title was
a nickname, such as “spook,” “cop,” or the like? Be that as it may, Persian narrative
sources are decidedly scarce and even myths as outrageous as that of Midas’ ears may have
some reason for existence, however altered from reality. The myth of the donkey’s ears pos-
sessed by the Phrygian King Midas has been explained in antiquity as derived from the
number of “ears” [ota, otakoustai] that he employed [schol. vet. on Aristoph. Wealth 287;
schol. on Plato 408b; Suda s.v. MÛda!]. 
18. Aristotle (Politics 1313a34–38) noted that tyrants borrowed many of their safe-
guards from the Persian Empire and from Periander of Corinth as well. Evidence for Per-
sian in›uence in archaeological remains of the archaic period is limited, but Cyprus became
part of the ‹fth satrapy of the Persian Empire around 525, and according to Diodorus, Per-
sian garrisons were maintained at intervals during the ‹fth century (cf. Reyes 89–97).
Dvornik (15) speaks brie›y of an Egyptian high of‹cial known as “the eyes and ears of the
King” (he does not, however, cite a source). If such an of‹ce existed in preconquest Egypt,
it is conceivable that the Persians borrowed it from there.
19. LSJ s.v. !naj II, III; Harpocration s.v. !nakte! kaÜ !na!!ai: “Isocrates [letter] to
Evagoras: it is likely that the rhetor makes mention of some practice in Cyprus. For Aris-
totle says, in the Constitution of the Cypriots: ‘the sons and brothers [adelphoi] of the king
are called “Anaktes,” the sisters [adelphai] and wives [gunaikes] “Anassai.”’” Cf. Isoc. IX
(Evag.) 72. As noted previously, the “eyes of the king” might also be adelphoi.

ably responsible for obtaining intelligence goals from their sovereign and
communicating the consequent results to him, perhaps bringing along
Gerginoi or Promalanges as eyewitnesses. The Anaktes could therefore
be called intelligence of‹cers, as opposed to information gatherers. If this
was in fact the case, it may represent another parallel to Persian prac-
tice—in at least two instances, Persian kings appointed “control of‹cers”
to foreign traitors who were covertly working for them among their ene-
mies.20
Communication between Anaktes, Gerginoi and Promalanges was
complicated by the fact that some (the Gerginoi) were secret while others
(logically the Anaktes, given that they were the kin of the tyrant) were
known. The Gerginoi were therefore faced with the problem of reporting
to the Anaktes while at the same time retaining their secrecy. This prob-
lem would have been solved most expeditiously by resorting to the forms
of covert communication mentioned in chapter 4. I have suggested that
the Promalanges conducted investigations openly; if so, they could have
met with the Anaktes without any dif‹culties. If the Promalanges oper-
ated covertly, however, they would be subject to the same strictures as
the Gerginoi.
The information provided by Clearchus and Eustathius, scant as it is,
is the best explicit evidence available for intelligence of‹cers supervising
covert agents on behalf of a sovereign in a manner bearing some kinship
with twentieth-century control of‹cers. The time limits in which this net-
work operated are not certain, but the passages are associated with the
late ‹fth and early fourth centuries, since Harpocration links the Anaktes
with Evagoras (435–374/3).21 The present tense of kaloèntai implies
that they still existed in Aristotle’s time. Moreover, a letter purporting to
be from Nicocles (Evagoras’ son and successor) to his subjects, in which
the monarch warned his people that they could not hope to hide anything
from him, suggests that the practice did not die with Evagoras.22
Details on the supervision of the Syracusan ota, otakoustai, and pota-
gogides are less forthcoming. It is not impossible that these agents
112
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
20. Thuc. 1.129.1ff.; Arrian Anab. 1.25.3.
21. The limits post and ante quem would technically be the Trojan War and the death
of Aristotle. The earlier date is not to be considered seriously, but it is quite possible that
the spies remained operative long after their chroniclers. 
22. Isoc. III (Nicocles) 51–52. Cf. idem 16, 53; II (to Nicocles) 23; IX (Evag.) 42. Nico-
cles seemed to rely on the consciences of loyal citizens to keep him informed, but then again
it would not be politic to speak of your secret police while lauding your enlightenment,
would it? 

reported to an of‹cer subordinate to the tyrant: Aristotle, in his Politics,
recommended a magistracy (arkhe) for keeping an eye on potential dissi-
dents.23 The alternative, that the tyrant oversaw his agents personally,
raises dif‹culties, especially with respect to security (i.e., that of the
tyrant’s person had to be balanced by that of the agent’s cover). But there
is always a risk involved in delegating supervision of a secret service. This
is indirectly illustrated by the example of Dion, who employed the Athen-
ian Callipus, a companion and fellow student of Plato, as an agent provo-
cateur. Callipus used the opportunity to solicit partners for a plot against
Dion, doing so without fear since when he was reported by those who
spurned his overtures, his defense was always at hand: he was only doing
his job.24 Eventually Dion met a nasty end at Callipus’ hands, although
the latter had little pro‹t of his treachery. Perhaps fear of such an event
dissuaded the Syracusan tyrants from delegating the supervision of their
covert agents and they instead faced the risk of personal encounters.
Solid evidence is lacking for either alternative, but this last may be prefer-
able, since there is no mention of an individual to whom the Dionysii
accorded such authority. Further, surviving anecdotes suggest that the
tyrants expected to learn of news ‹rsthand and had adequate security
measures for receiving potential assassins. Finally, the identities of at
least some of the agents were suspected: when Dion “liberated” Syracuse,
the people are said to have seized Dionysius’ provocateurs and killed
them.25
While the discussion to this point has focused on Cyprus and Syra-
cuse, the preceding passages from Aristotle, Plutarch, and Clearchus lead
us to believe that the use of covert agents was typical of Greek tyrannies
Beyond the Pale
113
23. Aristotle Politics 1308b20–22: “Since people also revolt because of their private
lives, it is necessary to set up some magistracy [arkhé] to inspect those who live in a man-
ner deleterious to the constitution.” Aristotle further noted that this practice was necessary
in all forms of constitution; he speci‹cally included democracies and oligarchies. Newman
(4:392–93) conceived of this of‹ce as one instituted to curb extravagance, drawing analo-
gies with the ephorate at Sparta (Xen. Lac. Pol. 8.4; but cf. Polyb. 18.53.4–5), the Areopa-
gus in Athens (Isoc. VII [Areopag.] 46; cf. Plut. Solon 22), and similar bodies in other states.
See also Plato Laws 945–48. 
24. Plut. Dion 54.4–5, 56.2. Cf. Macchiavelli Discorsi 3.6.
25. Plut. Dion 28.1–2: “and they seized many of those called prosagogides, people who
were unholy and hateful to the gods, who stalked the city and mixed with the Syracusans,
stirring up trouble and informing the tyrant of the plans and words of each.” The fact that
their covers were blown (if in fact the targets of the peoples’ hate were indeed Dionysius’
agents) does not necessitate that no subordinate was employed, but the death of their com-
mander, had he been known, would surely have been mentioned.

in general. Aristotle and Plutarch used Hiero and the Dionysii as ex-
amples illustrative of means that all tyrants must take for self-preserva-
tion. Clearchus described the possession and utility of “noble kolakes” as
something characteristic of tyrants; he further spoke of the spread of the
employment of these agents to lands outside Cyprus, not limiting the
attribution to Syracuse.26
In Macedon
The evidence for domestic in‹ltration agents begins (perhaps not coinci-
dentally) with Alexander the Great’s concern lest tensions in his camp
fester and give rise to plots. It is possible that he adopted this practice
under the in›uence of his exposure to Persian practice, but it takes little
imagination to conceive of such measures as familiar to the likes of his
father and predecessors. The sources do not mention an established net-
work of covert agents; rather, Alexander’s security arrangements seem to
have been overt or ad hoc, perhaps in keeping with his character. The one
example of his employment of a covert agent—Antigone, Philotas’ mis-
tress—seems to have come about as a result of opportunism rather than
precaution. Philotas, who was prominent in the Macedonian army, had
complained to his mistress about Alexander’s self-aggrandizement.
Antigone was no better than Philotas at holding her tongue and word
eventually reached the ears of another of‹cer, Craterus. Even before this
there was little love lost between Philotas and Craterus, who competed
for recognition and command. Craterus had Antigone brought in secret
to Alexander. Plutarch reports that the king instructed her to continue to
see Philotas but to inform “him” about all that Philotas said.27 The him
(aétñn) of Plutarch’s text is somewhat vague—it seems to signify Alexan-
der, but it could also denote Craterus.28 Assuming for the moment that
114
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
26. Clearchus frag. 25 in Müller 2:310. Dionysius might have been a model for other
tyrants in this respect, even as he was to Clearchus of Heracleia with respect to mercenar-
ies (cf. Diod. Sic. 15.81.5; Parke 97).
27. Plut. Alex. 48.5–49.2; Plut. Mor. 339d–f. Cf. Q. Curtius 6.7–11; Diod. Sic.
17.79–80; Arrian Anab. 3.26.1–3; Strabo 15.2.10; Justin 12.5.3. See Berve (no. 86) and
Wilcken (“Antigone” no. 7, RE 1(1894): 2403) for further information on Antigone.
Arrian (Anab. 3.26.1) referred to earlier charges made during the Egyptian campaign;
Bosworth (Commentary, 361 ad loc.) suggested that since Antigone had been captured at
Damascus, she might have been reporting on Philotas soon after the fall of that city. 
28. Badian has argued that the Philotas affair was prompted by a desire on Alexander’s
part to get rid of Philotas, rather than the other way around. He further noted (337): “it
was he [Craterus] who had initiated the plan to spy on Philotas through the services of his
mistress.”

Plutarch himself had a clear and reliable source and that he was referring
to Craterus, then there is a possibility that Craterus had the charge of
internal security, and the appointment of such a notable man to an of‹ce
of this kind would accord it no little importance. Should this be the case,
Engels may be right to posit an organization existing among Alexander’s
troops, but more solid foundations are needed for an edi‹ce of any sta-
bility.29
One of Alexander’s letters to Antipater reputedly contained admoni-
tions to retain guards (phulakes) about himself as a precaution against
plots.30 An anonymous composition containing a dialogue between two
Macedonians suggested that Antipater not only took Alexander’s
advice but improved on it. When one character complains, the other
whispers: “Look out! Look everywhere, Mnesippus, lest some prosago-
gos or some kataskopos overhear us. For never was there law or democ-
racy in Macedonia; rather, we have been subjected to tyranny and
fear.”31 Mnesippus then goes on to say that Antipater became hateful
after the death of Alexander removed him from all constraint. The
writer may here be contrasting a noble king with a base successor in the
manner of Aeschylus in the Persians—that is, making the contrast more
marked than it was. The use of covert agents by Antipater before the
death of Alexander (and, indeed, by the kings before him) is not explic-
itly denied, although the situation is presented as having deteriorated.
While a literary composition of the second century A.D. is hardly con-
clusive evidence, it certainly is possible that the regent employed spies
while governing Macedonia.
In Laconia
Hollow Lacedaemon still preserves its secrets, but there are some glim-
mers of what went on behind the bronze curtain. It appears that the
ephors received information, both covert and open, whether originating
at home or brought to Lacedaemon from abroad, although before the
‹fth century or under strong kings like Agesilaus, their prerogative may
Beyond the Pale
115
29. Engels (336) cited as evidence the detection of Philotas’ plot and the censorship of
mail. One might conjecture that Alexander’s later apprehensions about plots (attested, e.g.,
in Plut. Alex. 55.7) would have led him to take such a measure.
30. Plut. Alex. 29.11; the letters to which Plutarch alluded have neither survived nor
won universal recognition as authentic. 
31. Anon. Alexandergeschichte (from P. Freib.) FGrHist 153F7. 

well have been less than absolute.32 There is also evidence suggesting that
they directed information-gathering efforts within its borders as well.
The ‹rst indications of their activity in this realm are found in the frag-
ments of the historian Antiochus and are probably ‹ctional. Antiochus
related that when the Spartans learned of the plot of the Parthenioi, they
secretly sent men to in‹ltrate the circle of revolutionaries to discover the
details of the plot.33 Somewhat less mythical, but conceivably disinfor-
mation on the part of the Lacedaemonians, is the story of the fall of the
regent Pausanias. Pausanias entered into a treacherous correspondence
with King Xerxes of Persia, which came to light when a courier, an
anonymous slave from Argilus, considering that his predecessors had
never been seen again, opened the letter he was to carry to Artabazus
(Pausanias’ Persian control of‹cer). Having found his death written
therein and other contents unequivocally treacherous, he delivered the
letter to the ephors. They in turn felt that such a grievous charge against
so illustrious a personage had to be veri‹ed and came up with a scheme
to overhear a contrived conversation between the courier and Pausanias,
in which the regent’s guilt was manifest. For all the care inherent in this
process, human frailty once again broke security, and out of friendship
one of the ephors gave a covert nod to Pausanias just before his arrest. He
›ed to sanctuary but found only starvation.34
Xenophon’s account of the conspiracy of Cinadon describes a some-
116
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
32. A few examples of ephors receiving information: Hdt. 1.67–68; Thuc. 1.131.1,
1.132.5; Xen. Hell. 3.4.1. The kings received information when commanding in the ‹eld,
most of which was provided by military or diplomatic sources (e.g., Hdt. 7.219ff.). Starr
(32) proposed that the ephors undertook this duty in the ‹fth century and that formerly it
had been in the hands of the kings, and in this he may be correct.
The link between ephors and intelligence is implicit in their very name: ¦foro! is
derived from ¤pÜ + õr‹v (literally “look” or “watch over”). This sense no doubt became
obscured with time and usage, as did ¤pÛ!kopo! (¤pÜ + !kop¡v, also meaning “watch over,”
but with an association of evaluation or consideration), which in Homer’s poems can
denote a spy or overseer, but which eventually came to signify a bishop. Cf. Suda s.v.
Skopñ!.
33. Antiochus of Syracuse FGrHist 555F13, found in Strabo 6.3.2. Phalanthus was sup-
posed to have eventually led the conspirators to found the colony of Taras. The versions of
Ephorus (from Strabo 6.3.3), Aeneas Tacticus (11.2), and Polyaenus (2.14.2) differ in that
they focused on the initial information given by helot informers, while the man with the hat
was not distinguished as a covert agent. An analogous passage in Aeneas Tacticus (11.7)
describes the use of covert agents by a leader of the democratic government in Argos against
an oligarchic faction preparing a coup.
34. Thuc. 1.128.2–134.4. See also Diod. 11.44–45; Plut. Arist. 23; Plut. Cimon 6; Paus.
3.17.7–9.

what different type of operation.35 Instead of the in‹ltration of covert
agents among the conspirators, a trap was devised by concealing the
assignment of the state’s agents until the suspect was in their power. The
story begins with an unspeci‹ed member of a conspiracy bringing word
to the ephors of Cinadon’s involvement in a plot to overthrow the gov-
ernment. The ephors questioned this source in detail on the numbers and
arms of the conspirators and on the date set for the coup. Finding the plot
to be of a serious nature, they were alarmed and did not call an of‹cial
meeting lest a leak occur or lest this very action suggest to the conspira-
tors that their plans had been revealed.36 For similar reasons, they
devised an assignment for Cinadon that necessitated that he leave town.
The task the ephors gave to Cinadon was to go to the nearby village of
Aulon and arrest some helots and Aulonians (whose names were
recorded on a skutale), as well as a beautiful woman of that place who
was apparently corrupting visiting Spartiates. Curiously, Xenophon
noted that Cinadon had done such work before.37 They promised to pro-
vide three wagons, as if to bring back these captives, and directed him to
go to the most senior (presbutatos) of the marshals of the knights (hip-
pagretai).38 The ephors had made arrangements with the marshal to
enroll as aides a number of those “who happened to be on hand.” These
“aides” were soon reinforced by a company of knights (hippeis). They
arrested Cinadon when safely removed from view of the people of
Sparta, interrogated him (under torture, according to Polyaenus), and on
his confession, sent a list of the names of his conspirators back to the
ephors as swiftly as possible. The ephors thereupon arrested the most
notable and bid the hippeis to return Cinadon for further questioning on
his motives for instigating the plot.
This passage demonstrates not only the direction of covert agents by
ephors but also the existence of a cadre of men from whom these agents
Beyond the Pale
117
35. Xen. Hell. 3.3.4ff.; Polyaenus 2.14.1.
36. Their caution and arrangements would have been commended by Macchiavelli (cf.
Discorsi 3.6) and are entirely justi‹ed if Thucydides’ story of Pausanias is true.
37. Xen. Hell. 3.3.9. According to Xenophon (3.3.5), Cinadon was not a Spartiate;
hence he would not have been eligible to be a hippeus. No comment was made on whether
he had passed through the agoge (and so the krupteia). His participation in the sort of work
here associated with the hippeis is thus curious.
38. While presbutatos can mean “eldest,” it can also denote high authority—hence the
ambiguous translation given. The hippagretai enrolled the hippeis.

would be recruited.39 Anderson went so far as to maintain, on its basis,
that the hippeis were employed as “a police and intelligence service.”40
He may be on the right track: this is not the only testimony to their activ-
ity in this ‹eld. Herodotus related a tale of the Spartiate Lichas who dis-
covered the bones of Orestes in Tegea. The merit of the tale as history is
dubious, but it contains some interesting information: “The Benefactors
[agathoergoi] are always the ‹ve most senior [presbutatoi] of those citi-
zens who retire from the hippeis each year; these, for the duration of the
year after leaving the hippeis, are obliged by the Spartan state to go wher-
ever it bids on active service.”41 This service, as the story makes clear, has
associations with information gathering. But who are the presbutatoi of
whom Herodotus speaks, and was there a link to the presbutatos of the
marshals (hippagretai) of whom Xenophon spoke? It would be conve-
nient to identify the presbutatoi with the marshals, but these numbered
three rather than ‹ve.42 It is not impossible that the lower number could
be due to a change in practice between the periods in which Herodotus
and Xenophon wrote, but there is no foundation for such a proposal, and
the two writers give the same total (three hundred) for the number of
hippeis. An escape is to take presbutatos in its literal meaning of “eldest”
or “most senior” and attribute the parallel to coincidence, but such a
solution is hardly satisfying.43
118
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
39. Cozzoli 96 argued that the “aides” were not hippeis, on the grounds that they were
Cinadon’s social superiors and therefore would not have been subordinated to his com-
mand. But what then would be the purpose of applying to the hippagretes? Cozzoli’s expla-
nation that a hippagretes was speci‹ed because he knew which elements of the population
were trustworthy, having supervised the selection of the hippeis, is possible but by no means
conclusive.
40. Anderson 249 and nn. 105–6.
41. Hdt. 1.67. This is an odd bit of information for Herodotus to have picked up, and
one wonders how he did so. A scholiast on Aelius Aristides 172 identi‹ed the agathoer-
goi with the commissioners described in Plato’s Laws, who traveled with an eye to learn-
ing of good laws and measures in other states (cf. Plato Laws 951–52). Given the subject
matter of Aristides, it is not surprising that a scholar studying him would know enough
Plato to draw this parallel, but I question its basis in reality. The duties of the agathoer-
goi are not elsewhere clari‹ed, but cf. Hesychius s.v. gayoergoÛ and Suda s.v. oß ¤k tÇn
ƒEfñrvn.
42. It is conceivable that G (three) could have been corrupted into E (‹ve) at Herodotus
1.67, but there are no indications of variant readings in the MSS. Each of the three hippa-
gretai was selected by the ephors to enroll one hundred hippeis (Xen. Lac. Pol. 4.3). The
role of the ephors in choosing the hippagretai does not in itself demand a link between the
latter and intelligence, since the ephors had many duties unrelated to this sphere.
43. Oß pre!bætatoi does not here mean old men, as Xenophon speci‹cally referred to
the hippeis as chosen from those in their prime (Lac. Pol. 4.1: ²bÅntvn; 4.2: ²bÇnta!; cf.

Whatever the status of the presbutatoi, the hippeis are at least as likely
candidates for the domestic covert intelligence operations as the krupteia,
which has often been perceived as a Spartan secret service. In the classi-
cal period, the functions of the krupteia reputedly centered on murdering
helots rather than gathering information. 
The magistrates from time to time sent out into the country at large
the most discreet of the young warriors, equipped only with dag-
gers and such supplies as were necessary. In the day time they scat-
tered into obscure and out of the way places, where they hid them-
selves and lay quiet; but in the night they came down into the
highways and killed every Helot whom they caught.44
If this is true—and it may well be true, even though it smacks of the
enduring in›uence of Athenian propaganda—we must conclude that the
murders either were carried out to enforce a curfew (as they were said to
be perpetrated at night) or were random acts of terror. They would have
had nothing to do with intelligence. Alternatively, one might review the
propaganda posters used by all belligerents in World War II and recon-
sider the ultimate sources for Spartan history: perhaps the krupteia was
in fact an institution not unlike that experienced by ephebes in other
states (such as Athens and Argos), which amounted to lessons in rough
living and campaigning in hill country and included patrolling and obser-
vation in its curriculum.45 So it would seem from our only classical
source, Plato, who mentions the training in the hills but says nothing of
a reign of terror.46
Another vignette in Plutarch depicts the head of the krupteia, Demote-
les, being called on by King Cleomenes III at the battle of Sellasia (222).
Cleomenes, since he could not see any Illyrian or Acarnanian contingents
and wondered what they were up to, asked Demoteles to check the situ-
ation on the ›anks of the Lacedaemonian line. Demoteles, who had been
bribed, deceitfully assured him that the ›anks were safe.47 Walbank has
Beyond the Pale
119
Cozzoli 88; Lazenby 10–11 and 182 n. 28, where his explanation of the relation of recruit-
ment to age groups is dif‹cult to reconcile with the preceding passages and Lac. Pol. 4.3,
which he cited).
44. Plut. Lyc. 28.1, Loeb translation.
45. Cf. Jeanmaire passim; Mitchell 162; J. Oehler, “Krypteia,” RE vol. 11.2, 2031–32.
46. Plato Laws 633b and the scholia ad loc. Sinnigen (“The Roman Secret Service,” 65)
conceived of the krupteia as a sort of secret service; Losada (111), as a “security force.” 
47. Plut. Agis and Cleom. 28.2–3.

pointed out the absurdity of this story, and one cannot help but agree
with him that it is odd.48 Nevertheless, the passage is worth discussing,
though problems of historicity must be kept in mind. Plutarch’s account
derives from Phylarchus, an Athenian who was alive at the time of the
battle.49 Phylarchus tended to be dramatic, and Polybius condemns him
at some length as a source, perhaps in part legitimately; but no doubt
Polybius’ tirade owes some of its vigor to the different political views of
the two historians—Phylarchus was an admirer of Cleomenes and a
detractor of Aratus and Polybius’ native city of Megalopolis.50
Let us begin with the position of Demoteles (who is otherwise
unknown). It is rather vague: he is “the man appointed over the
krupteia.”51 Nowhere else is there an allusion to such an of‹ce in Sparta,
but it is conceivable that one existed by the third century. Given that the
battle of Sellasia was a recent memory for Phylarchus’ audience, the his-
torian would have had a motive to make his account plausible, even if it
was not entirely accurate. Thus the institution to which he refers may
have existed, even if the event never occurred. Alternatively, he may have
been con›ating the krupteia with other bodies that collected information,
or he may have been using a well-known entity in lieu of a less familiar
(in how many movies does one meet the GRU, as opposed to the KGB?).
In what manner is Demoteles expected to know about the absence of the
Illyrians and Acarnanians? Was he called on to inform Cleomenes
whether they had joined Doson’s march south to Sellasia or to report
their position in the opposing line of battle? While a military intelligence
of‹cer may be expected to know the answer to either question (e.g.,
through scouts, deserters, or prisoners), a chief of a (more strategically
oriented) “secret service” employing spies would be much more likely to
know the ‹rst than the second. The director of an organization encom-
passing both external and internal intelligence (such as the hippeis) might
answer both questions, but the chief of a purely domestic institution (as
the krupteia is described) would not likely know either. 
In summary, it seems best to sacri‹ce assurance to honesty: the
krupteia may have had a role in intelligence by the third century, or it
may not. Before that time, it is not mentioned in connection with intelli-
120
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
48. F.W. Walbank 1:285 on Polyb. 2.69.6.
49. FGrHist 81F59.
50. Polyb. 2.56.1–64.6.
51. Plut. Agis and Cleom. 28.2: tòn ¤pÜ t°w krupteÛaw tetagm¡non.

gence, and instead it is probable that in Sparta internal intelligence was
directed by the hippeis.
In the Athenian Empire
There has been some attention paid to the nature of information gather-
ing within the Athenian Empire. Meiggs proposed that the proxenoi
served to keep the Athenians apprised of the situation in their subject
states; his idea was developed by Gerolymatos into a pervasive system of
intelligence and ‹fth-column activity. Balcer drew parallels between the
episkopoi and the king’s “eyes” and detailed Meiggs’ and Losada’s asso-
ciation of episkopos and proxenos.52 While it is evident that the proxenoi
were valuable for gathering intelligence, the likelihood of their doing so
covertly is minimal, since the status of individuals accorded proxenia was
generally known and was in fact published on stelai.
Bekker, in the Anecdota Graeca, records a reference to an Athenian
secret service: “secret: a certain magistracy sent by the Athenians into
their subject cities so that they could secretly control what happened out-
side of Athens. For this reason they [the people who were sent] were
called secret <agents>.”53 Meiggs dismissed this statement, and Losada’s
treatment of it was understandably cautious.54 In its defense, it can only
muster a brief comment in the scholia to Aristophanes, which mentions a
secret arkhe in Thasos, which might have been instituted by the Atheni-
ans after that island revolted in the 460s.55 Having no further evidence, I
can only point out that this was not likely to be the proxenos-episkopos
network. If a secret service existed, the Athenians were as effective in
concealing its details as they were those of their Eleusinian mysteries. 
Beyond the Pale
121
52. Balcer, “Athenian Episkopos,” passim. See also Meiggs, Athenian Empire, 215;
Gerolymatos, Espionage, 93–95, Losada 112.
53. Bekker 1:273. 
54. Meiggs, Athenian Empire, 214; Losada 112 n. 5. Cf. J. Oehler, “Krypteia,” RE
11.2, 2032.
55. Schol. Aristoph. Thesm. 600 (alluding to the women’s realization that their meet-
ing has been in‹ltrated by a spy, that is, Mnesilochus in drag): kruptñ!: ntÜ toè
kekrumm¡no!. kaloèntai m¢n gŒr kaÜ kræptoi parŒ Pl‹tvni tÒ filo!ñfÄ [= Laws 763b,
regarding the Spartan krupteia] kaÜ par' EéripÛdú kaÜ ¤n taÝ! tÇn LakedaimonÛvn
politeÛai!. kaÜ ¤n Y‹!Ä rx® ti! kræptai [krupteutaÛ Bernhardy]. kruptñ!: CplÇ! ntÜ
toè kekrumm¡no!. The debate over the exact date of the revolt of Thasos need not concern
us here.

Those Operating in an External Context
Fake Deserters or Fugitives
With respect to intelligence, fake deserters were employed for two differ-
ent and (for the Greeks) mutually exclusive ends: to give the enemy mis-
information or to gather information and return. Xenophon provides the
only exception to the division of these roles in the Araspas story, yet even
there the provision of (true but misleading) information is directed at
establishing trust and is peripheral to the agent’s main purpose of learn-
ing about the enemy.
Most examples of fake deserters are literary or theoretical rather than
historical. Literary examples extend at least as far back as the Odyssey,
and it seems that the association between the fake deserter and the spy
continued to hold the Greek imagination in the ‹fth and fourth cen-
turies.56 Theoretical examples begin and end with Xenophon. He noted
in the Cavalry Commander that fake deserters (pseudautomoloi) were
useful as spies. In the Education of Cyrus, he attributed to his model
Cyrus the practice of sending out spies in the guise of slaves deserting
their masters.57 The Education of Cyrus provides the only (relatively)
detailed account of how a Greek might conceive of a mission undertaken
by a fake deserter, and thus it is worth some attention.
The story begins with Cyrus wishing to send a spy to learn what his
enemies are doing.58 He did this well before battle was imminent, while
122
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
56. Od. 4.244ff.: Odysseus marred himself with blows, put a ragged cloak about his
shoulders, like a slave, and went into Troy disguising himself in the likeness of a beggar (or
possibly, a man called Dektes [“Beggar”]—!llÄ d'aétòn fvtÜ katakræptvn ³i!ke, d¡ktú).
The Trojans were duped, but Helen recognized him, and her ministrations in effect stripped
him of disguise. After extracting an oath from her, Odysseus related how matters stood
among the Achaeans. He then killed some Trojans and went back with much information.
Note Helen’s use of the information that she obtained from Odysseus, as told by Menelaus
(Od. 4.274ff.). Cf. Epicharmus Odysseus Automolus (Kaibel 108–10, nos. 99–108);
Sophocles Lakainai (Nauck frag. 338); Eubulus Odysseus or the Panoptae (Edmonds vol.
2, no. 71, from Athenaeus 478c); Plut. Solon 30.1; Lycophron Alexandra 777–85;
Eustathius on Od. p. 1494, lines 40ff.; Servius on Vergil Aen. 2.166.
Cf. also Aristotle Rhetoric 1416b1–4 (referring to Sophocles’ lost play Teucer): when
Odysseus reproached Teucer with being a relative of Priam, Teucer retorted that his father
Telamon was an enemy of Priam and that he himself did not denounce the spies. If the scho-
liast on Aristophanes’ Knights (schol. vet. on 1056a) was referring to the same tradition,
these spies were sent by Nestor to learn of Trojan morale. See also Eur. Hecuba 239ff.;
[Eur.] Rhesus 503–9; Paus. 4.12.2.
57. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.7; Cyr. 6.2.11.
58. The story is told in Xen. Cyr. 6.1.31–43, 6.3.11, 6.3.13–20; cf. Suda s.v. MeÛou.

his enemies were far off in Lydia, since he reasoned that he and the Assyr-
ians would collide in the not-too-distant future. He did not have a service
from which he could appoint an individual for the mission, so he sent for
Araspas, who was known to be in fear of him since he had abused his
ward, but who had been a close and true friend otherwise. Cyrus calcu-
lated that Araspas, should he go to the enemy under pretense of ›eeing a
king’s wrath, would be admitted and trusted. Araspas agreed to spy for
Cyrus, and he spread word of his alleged motive among his friends before
leaving—Xenophon was probably thinking that rumors would thus get
back to the Assyrians through other sources than Araspas’ own mouth. 
Both men expected Araspas to gain a position of some stature within
the Assyrian force, and their hope was not as far-fetched as it might seem.
The Greeks accorded fugitives considerable status—the example of
Alcibiades comes easily to mind. Cyrus expected that Araspas would be
admitted to his enemies’ discussions and councils and that all would be
open to him. There was basis for this hope also, since foreign clients were
particularly valued as advisors and could not give advice on matters
withheld from them.
Araspas was asked to collect full information on the enemy’s affairs.59
He was not to communicate with Cyrus until his return, and he was to
stay with the enemy as long as possible. He was also to give the enemy
information about Cyrus’ affairs, but interpreted in such a way as to hin-
der, rather than help, the enemy.60 The purpose of giving this informa-
tion was to establish Araspas’ cover yet more solidly—as we have seen,
deserters were expected to provide such information. It also enhanced his
value to the Assyrians as an advisor. The notion that true information,
interpreted to one’s own purposes, can harm or manipulate the enemy is
not unfamiliar, as the tale of Themistocles at Salamis attests. Evidently he
did not go on his mission alone, but took his most trusted attendants. It
is not clear just how much these men knew of Araspas’ motives or how
they could have assisted him—perhaps they were extras to protect him
on his way to and from the enemy’s camp or to add to his prestige once
he arrived there.61
Beyond the Pale
123
59. Xen. Cyr. 6.1.40, once again tŒ tÇn polemÛvn.
60. Xen. Cyr. 6.1.42.
61. It is possible they were to know only the false cover, depending on how !umf¡rein
is construed (Xen. Cyr. 6.1.44: eÞpÆn prñ! tina! “ Õeto !umf¡rein tÒ pr‹gmati)––was it
more conducive to his purposes to mislead them and risk their enmity (due to loyalty to
Cyrus) or to tell them parts of the truth and risk security?

Cyrus and Araspas had arranged a simple recognition signal—a raised
right arm—and the king’s troops were told to receive as friends any
whom they saw displaying it. This point is not mentioned by Xenophon
until he had reached the point in his narrative where the two armies had
come into the same region and Araspas returned. He fell in with Persian
cavalry and was held by them while the news was passed on to Cyrus.
Cyrus at once went to greet him and received him kindly, although all the
others were suspicious because of Araspas’ apparent defection. Herein,
to be sure, lay a danger for returning agents. Araspas’ welcome might
have been very different had a recognition signal not been arranged or
not been disseminated among the men.62
A short debrie‹ng followed immediately. Cyrus bade Araspas to tell
all, neither saying less than the truth nor underrating the enemy. Araspas
prefaced his report with an explanation of why his information should be
trusted and how he obtained it: he had been present and in fact served as
a marshal. In a question-and-answer dialogue, he gave the numbers, for-
mations, and plans of the enemy, together with the varied opinions of
their generals. No mention was made of weaponry, but this is perhaps
because Cyrus had already been briefed on that subject by other spies.63
Based on Araspas’ report, Cyrus organized his own forces and devised a
plan of battle. His information imparted, Araspas slips from the minds of
his king and his storyteller, while they turn their attention to love and
war. After a brief mention that he was honored by Cyrus and other Per-
sians, Araspas does not reappear in the rest of the book. 
As noted earlier in this chapter, the Education of Cyrus was meant as a
124
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
62. Dr. P. Levine (in a conversation with the author on 17 June 1993) told of a prisoner
of war captured and questioned by an American combat intelligence unit in Europe during
World War II. The man answered all queries by saying, “Whiskey.” It was thought that he
wanted a drink, and his interrogators responded ‹rst with understanding, then with impa-
tience. Finally, frustrated, they sent him back to where the other prisoners were being held.
Soon after, one American mentioned the incident as an amusing anecdote while conversing
with his superior, who gasped and bade him to recall the captive. The superior rushed over
and took the captive back to his headquarters. Apparently the captive was in fact a prisoner
who had returned to the German forces to spy, and the word whiskey was the recognition
signal ‹xed for his admittance on his return. Those processing prisoners were not told to be
on the alert for an individual with this password, and it was only by chance that he was rec-
ognized.
For other preparations for a returning spy (Dolon) to be received by pickets, see [Eur.]
Rhesus 523–26.
63. Xen. Cyr. 6.2.10.

didactic, rather than a historical, text. Consequently it re›ects Xenophon’s
theories on how war ought to be managed rather than what Cyrus actu-
ally did. Therefore the story of Araspas, supplemented by remarks on
information gathering found in other sources, provides a fourth-century
lesson on how to carry out information gathering and intelligence. 
There are two extant accounts of fake deserters/fugitives that have
aspirations to historicity. The claims of the ‹rst—the aforementioned
story of Lichas (one of the ‹ve Benefactors at Sparta) and the bones of
Orestes—are rather dubious, and the story itself is probably mythical.64
Once again, however, the method is interesting. Lichas’ cover is arranged
by having the Lacedaemonians make “a pretense of bringing a charge
against him and banishing him.”65 This cover provided a sympathetic
motive for his prolonged stay and need for quarters, while removing the
need for disguise.
An anecdote about Pammenes may have more basis in fact (since the
Theban is found commanding troops in the mid–fourth century, and
since the account lacks the mythical elements of Herodotus), but it is
rather vague in detail. He is said to have sent a fake deserter into the
camp of his enemies to learn their watchword. The deserter was success-
ful and somehow returned to impart it to Pammenes. The general then
launched a night attack and was able to throw his foes into confusion.66
The lack of detail may be a result of a perceived lack of need for it on the
part of Polyaenus: deserters were so common in military campaigns that
no special arrangements needed to be made.
Thus the guise of deserter, probably accompanied by a credible tale of
abuse or disaffection, served in‹ltration agents well. It provided motive
for their presence and obviated the necessity for disguise (e.g., a Lacedae-
monian would not have to pretend he was a Tegean). And since deserters
and traitors were all too common in ancient Greece and were often of
considerable intelligence value to those who received them, a foe would
be likely to accept the agent.
Beyond the Pale
125
64. Hdt. 1.67–68 (cf. Paus. 3.3.6, 11.10). The story was set during the Spartan-Tegean
wars, but the present tense (i.e., mid–‹fth century) is used for such details as the functions
of the agathoergoi.
65. Loeb translation of oã d¢ ¤k lñgou pla!toè ¤peneÛkant¡! oß aÞtÛhn ¤dÛvjan.
66. Polyaenus 5.16.5. Pammenes’ foes were not speci‹ed. Pritchett (2:91–92) showed
that he commanded troops against Persian satraps and against the Phocians—it is probable
that the Phocians are the enemies mentioned since the Persians may not have used pass-
words (cf. Xen. Anab. 1.8.16). 

Diplomatic Covers
Diplomatic activity did, and still does, provide opportunity for espi-
onage. It afforded the advantage of putting the agent in a position to
make inquiries about a foreign state while having a recognized of‹ce.
This reduced risk of exposure and punishment, since such behavior was
to some extent expected as part of the ambassador’s job.67 The corre-
sponding disadvantage was that the other party would be aware that the
agent was operating in the interest of another state. Indeed, envoys were
sometimes made out to be spies by their opponents.68 While the agent
would thus gain some degree of access to information that others, such as
travelers, might not, people would know that he was a foreigner and
would conceal those things that were not in their interest for him to see.
But the fact that the agent was known to be a representative of a foreign
state was not always a disadvantage. This premise is best illustrated by an
example. Suppose a Mytilenaean who knew that his city intended to
revolt from Athens sympathized with the Athenians (perhaps he held
of‹ce in the democracy and feared an oligarchic coup, or perhaps a per-
sonal enemy was involved in the plot). Rather than leaving for Athens
and, in doing so, running the risk of being condemned as a traitor should
the revolt succeed, he might approach an Athenian of‹cial passing
through (perhaps an episkopos) or residing in (a garrison commander or
a proxenos) Mytilene.69
Several examples of spies in the guise of ambassadors merit notice.
One of these is by a neutral party and will be treated in the section on
neutrals later in this chapter. The second example concerns Memnon of
Rhodes, at the time when he planned to attack Leucon, the tyrant of
Bosphorus. Memnon wished to learn the size of the enemy cities and the
number of their inhabitants, so he sent Archibiades to Byzantium in a
trireme as an envoy as if to open discussions regarding political and per-
sonal friendship. With Archibiades he sent Aristonicus of Olynthus, a
musician of such renown that all the inhabitants of the various towns in
126
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
67. It did not eliminate risk altogether. See, e.g., Thuc. 3.70. A distinction is made here
between an ambassador, who might learn information and pass it on to his own people, and
a spy, who goes on an embassy not for the sake of a diplomatic end but to use his role as a
cover for espionage. 
68. Aeschines III (Against Ctesiphon) 82: “if Philip does not send presbeis, he [Demos-
thenes] says he [Philip] disdains our city, yet if he does send them, he says they are spies
[kataskopoi], rather than presbeis.” Cf. Hdt. 3.134.
69. Cf. Thuc. 3.2.3.

which he performed came to hear him. Thus Archibiades got an idea of
the population from the size of the audience.70
In the third example, when presbeis came to Alexander from the
Abian and European Scythians, he sent some of his Companions with
them on the journey back to their homeland, ostensibly on a goodwill
visit, but in fact to acquire information. He particularly sought details on
the nature of the Scythian territory and the numbers, arms, and customs
of its populace. All this information was to be collected for the purpose
of planning a campaign. In the event, a campaign did not materialize—
perhaps in part because of the intelligence gained, since the Scythians
were a formidable foe, as Darius’ ancestors had found to their cost.71
Both missions seem to have been successfully accomplished without
arousing suspicion and are not otherwise notable, except as demonstra-
tions that espionage by agents assuming a diplomatic guise was viable.
Given the constant ›ow of envoys from state to state in the Greek world,
it would be surprising if it was not undertaken fairly often.72
Other In‹ltration Agents
Aside from Xenophon and Polyaenus (and to some extent Aeneas Tacti-
cus), the ancient historians are vague in their descriptions of espionage.
The best-known and attested example of in‹ltration agents—the spies
sent by the Greeks to view Xerxes’ armament—provides only limited
detail.73 The Greeks, having learned that Xerxes intended to invade and
having been informed by unspeci‹ed sources that he was at Sardis with
his army, resolved (presumably at a council) to send spies to Asia to learn
more about the Persian expeditionary force. Three men were entrusted
with this task. Herodotus records neither their names nor their native
states. He says nothing of how they executed their assignment, but he
implies that they operated as a team in Sardis. Perhaps they joined one of
the Greek contingents of Xerxes’ army or assumed the guise of mer-
Beyond the Pale
127
70. Polyaenus 5.44.1. Leucon ruled from 387 to 347; cf. Tod no. 115.
71. Arrian Anab. 4.1.1–2; cf. 4.15.1.
72. See Hdt. 3.17ff. of the Ithyphagoi (“Fisheaters”) who purportedly served Cambyses
as spies on a “goodwill” embassy to Ethiopia. They were especially sought for their knowl-
edge of the Ethiopian language. See also Xen. Anab. 7.4.13 of Bithynians who came down
from the mountains and asked Xenophon to help them obtain a truce with Seuthes. He
agreed; but they did this kata!kop°! §neka. That night they attacked.
73. Hdt. 7.145–48. See also Polyaenus 7.15.2; Plut. Sayings of Kings, Xerxes 3; Suda
s.v. J¡rjh!. 

chants. They had gathered the information they needed when they were
arrested, so it is possible that they were seized as suspected deserters as
they left. It is also possible that the Persians were alerted to the possibil-
ity of their presence, since there were many Greeks who privately collab-
orated with the Persians.
Once caught, the spies were interrogated (probably under torture) by
those whom Herodotus called the strategoi of the land forces. The spies
would probably have been able to give some information about the sym-
pathies and preparations of the Greek city-states, including such items of
interest as the embassy sent to Sicily to seek aid. After they were ques-
tioned, the spies were led off to be killed. While they awaited their fate,
Xerxes was informed of their capture and interrogation. Then follows
the dramatic tale of their deliverance at the king’s command, their tour
through the ranks of the royal army, and their return home bearing
reports of the huge size of the Persian force, which Xerxes calculated
would cow the Greeks into surrender. The story is exciting, but the end-
ing, which resembles a deus ex machina solution to a tragedy, is obvi-
ously not to be taken as typical.74 However atypical its end, the account
does serve to demonstrate the necessity of gathering preliminary infor-
mation before sending out spies—in this case, the Greeks had to ‹rst real-
ize the need to engage spies and then discover where to send them.
The story of Phillidas, a member of the conspiracy led by Charon,
Pelopidas, and Epaminondas against the pro-Spartan government of
Thebes, is indicative of another type of in‹ltration. Phillidas concealed
his revolutionary sentiments and contrived to have himself appointed
secretary to Archias and Philip, the Theban polemarchs.75 During his
time in this of‹ce, he remained in contact with his fellow conspirators
and operated in conjunction with them.76 An information ›ow is implicit
in the story, since the conspirators were able to take advantage of a
128
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
74. Nevertheless it is said to have been imitated by Scipio Africanus (Polyb. 15.5.4ff.;
Front. Strat. 4.7.7; Polyaenus 8.16.8) and Laevinus (cf. F.W. Walbank 2:450 on Polyb.
15.5.4, citing Dion. Hal. 19.11, Zon. 7.3.6, and Eutrop. 2.11). The parallel is too close, as
a group of three spies are again the captives. The idea was picked up by Onasander (10.9).
75. Plut. Pelop. 7.3. Xenophon (Hell. 5.42) portrayed Phillidas as one of the prime
movers of the plot and, before describing how the plot was initiated, mentioned him hold-
ing his position. In this instance I prefer Plutarch’s version to that of Xenophon (although
Plutarch did have a motive to increase the role of Pelopidas at the expense of Phillidas),
since Plutarch’s account is drawn in more detail, whereas Xenophon had less scope for con-
veying the sequence of events involved in the plot’s planning and probably oversimpli‹ed
its early stages for the sake of brevity.
76. Plut. Pelop. 9.2; the term used is !un¡pratte.

drinking party (which Phillidas had proposed) to overthrow the govern-
ment. It may be noted that while the conspirators accomplished their
ambitions, Phillidas was not entirely successful, since he was unable to
tip off the conspirators about Archias’ ‹rst inklings that a plot was
afoot.77
Mythical anecdotes in Pausanias contain information of some small
value to our knowledge of how covert agents gathered information. The
‹rst concerns Dorian spies sent into Sparta, who obtained information
on how to take the city through informal acquaintances struck up with
the indigenous population.78 The second is set during the legendary war
of Oxylus against Elis. While they were en route to Elis, Oxylus’ spies
agreed among themselves not to utter a sound when they reached their
destination. They managed to get into Elis without being noticed, wan-
dered about listening, and then returned to Aetolian lines.79 This latter
example might well be an illustration of the problems dialect posed to
agents in the Greek world. Silence might enable agents to avoid detec-
tion—they could even pretend to be deaf and dumb, although that is
more dif‹cult than it sounds and could eventually make them conspicu-
ous—but it would leave to chance opportunities to get relevant informa-
tion. Otherwise, for agents to assume the guise of natives, they must have
been able to speak in the appropriate dialect. The alternative was to rep-
resent themselves as foreigners speaking a dialect with which they were
familiar and was perceived as friendly by the natives.
Strabo’s account of Corycaean pirates in the Chersonesus would at
‹rst sight seem to be an example of silent spies gathering information
with their ears and eyes alone.80 These men would scatter themselves
among the harbors of the local towns and shadow merchants docked
there to overhear what cargoes they carried and whither they were
bound.81 They would later return to their ships and gather to attack the
merchants on the seas. The pirates, however, were locals and would
Beyond the Pale
129
77. Plut. Pelop. 10.1.
78. Paus. 3.13.5.
79. Paus. 6.23.8; hence the name of a street found its mythical origin: ² õdò! Sivp°!.
80. Strabo 14.1.32, Loeb translation: “we say in a proverb: ‘Well then, the Corycaean
was listening to this,’ when one thinks that he is doing or saying something in secret, but
fails to keep it hidden because of persons who spy on him and are eager to learn what does
not concern them.” Cf. Stephanus Gram. Ethnica (epitome) 402.
81. The agora was another place conducive to eavesdropping: see, e.g., [Demosth.] XI
(In Epist. Phil.) 17; Clearchus frag. 25; Plut. Mor. 519b (which also mentions the
strategeion—cf. Iliad 10.325–27). Cf. also Lee, Information and Frontiers, 174–75,
177–78; Anon. Byz. Peri Strat. 42; Procopius Anec. 16.14.

therefore have no dif‹culty with the dialect. Strabo probably simply
meant that the spies did not actively make inquiries.
In‹ltration agents also obtained information through contact with
individuals sympathetic to their cause. While such sources might well
have been rich in detail, there were at least two dangers attendant on
their use. First, the sympathizer might decide to switch allegiance, or turn
out to be a provocateur, or be under suspicion, and thereby implicate the
agent. Second, the source’s sympathies might color his or her informa-
tion—a problem not unique to people of this sort. The mission of Phry-
nis, a perioikos sent as a kataskopos by the Lacedaemonians to Chios, is
probably an example of the successful use of this mode of information
gathering.82 Since the Athenians were in›uential on Chios (which was,
after all, still a subject state of the Athenian Empire), and since the Chi-
ans were of‹cially enemies of Sparta, Phrynis almost certainly went as a
covert agent.83 Phrynis’ task was to verify that the Chians had as many
ships as their envoys claimed. It is possible that he might do this on his
own, but it is likely that his Chian sympathizers would have taken pains
to show him all he needed to see.
Agents in Place
While a semantic difference between an agent in place and a traitor can
exist, such a distinction was limited to the proxenoi, who inhabited a
narrow zone where passing information on to foreigners was not quite
espionage and where diplomacy was not quite treachery. Agents in place
can be conceived as a subset of traitor. As distinguished from deserters,
they did not change residence. As distinguished from other ‹fth colum-
nists and conspirators, their primary value to their patron was their abil-
ity to convey information.84 Because such activity was (and is) the object
of some very heavy penalties, their role was covert.
130
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
82. Thuc. 8.6.4.
83. Perhaps he went as if from Argos or another neutral or pro-Athenian state of Dorian
dialect. If I were to hazard a guess, it would be that he went as a merchant, since (1) he
would have a plausible reason for being around the docks and (2) perioikoi (at least in the-
ory) carried on all commerce in Sparta, and the most effective disguise is one that incorpo-
rated as much as the individual’s own identity as possible.
84. This is not to say that these others did not have contributions to make. Losada has
done an admirable job of treating ‹fth columns in the Peloponnesian War and has given
some attention to their potential for providing information.

Once again, the earliest examples belong to the realm of myth. Not
atypical is Pausanias’ tale of the Arcadian king Aristocrates, whose loy-
alty was said to have been bought by the Lacedaemonians. He was pres-
ent at a council held by Aristomenes, in which the Messenian put forth
his plans for invading Laconia while the Spartans were campaigning in
his own country. Aristocrates quickly wrote these down and entrusted
them to a slave to bear them to the Spartans. The courier accomplished
his task but was waylaid by Aristocrates’ own men on his return journey,
since Aristocrates had stirred their suspicion by his earlier behavior.
Thus, the Arcadians and Messenians did not dare to carry out their plans,
but they tried and stoned Aristocrates.85
The danger arising from the necessity of covert agents to get messages
to their patrons quickly is brought home in this story, however ‹ctitious
the events may be. The problem is seen again, from another perspective,
in Thucydides’ account of Hermocrates’ deception of Nicias by means of
reports allegedly coming from his spies. Nicias ‹elded a network of
agents in place in Syracuse from at least 415 (and probably far earlier
than that) until his death in 413.86 Gomme proposed that his agents were
drawn from the wealthier Leontini who had become Syracusan citizens in
422 and had remained when the other “malcontents” departed.87 This is
possible, but factions in the Greek cities were common, and the motiva-
tion of Nicias’ agents might have been ascendancy within Syracuse as
easily as a “hankering after an independent Leontini.”88 It would have
been dif‹cult, although by no means impossible, for these people to be
recruited after the Athenians had landed. All the same, Nicias’ position as
proxenos of the Syracusans (and possible business interests in Sicily)
would have provided him a much better opportunity to establish his rela-
tionships with his informers.89 Further, these agents reported not to other
Beyond the Pale
131
85. Paus. 4.22.5–7, set in the seventh century.
86. Thuc. 7.48.2, 73.3; Plut. Nicias 18.6, 21.3.
87. Gomme 4:425–26 on Thuc. 7.48.2.
88. Ibid., citing Thuc. 5.4.3, 7.73.3; Diod. Sic. 13.18.5. For the motives and activities of
‹fth columns, see Losada passim. 
Athenagoras—at least insofar as Thucydides portrayed him—seems to me to be a poten-
tial candidate for inclusion in the group of Nicias’ supporters. While he might not have been
a covert agent (being visibly pro-Athenian in his politics), his attempt to dissuade the Syra-
cusans from paying attention to reports of imminent attack and his efforts to discredit Her-
mocrates make one wonder about his loyalties (see, e.g., Thuc. 6.36.2–4). 
89. In any case, we see in his debate with Alcibiades (as staged by Thucydides) an ex-
ample of the ability of proxenoi to inform their state of residence about their patron state.
For Nicias as proxenos, see Diod. Sic. 13.27.2. For possible business interests, see Green 5. 

Athenian strategoi but to Nicias alone, which suggests that his network
was based on personal ties, rather than a result of his of‹cial status of
strategos. This arrangement appears to have been typical of democracies
and is addressed at the close of this chapter.
The nature of the information supplied by Nicias’ spies was varied—
including economic, diplomatic, military and domestic matters—and
seems to have been consistently reliable.90 That Nicias frequently failed
to make good use of excellent intelligence re›ects far more on his capa-
bility as a general than on the agents themselves. The fate of the spies
after the Syracusan victory is nowhere mentioned, although it is noted
that they were not immediately compromised.91
The historicity of other indications of the use of spies of this type must
be weighed against their rhetorical context. Throughout his speeches,
Demosthenes made allegations against his political adversaries, charging
them with acting treacherously on Philip’s behalf and with passing infor-
mation to the Macedonians.92 It is hard to distinguish slander from fact
when reading Demosthenes, and his charges of maintaining spies—while
by no means implausible—cannot be accepted without reservations, even
though Isocrates did refer to people who sent news to Macedon of the
evil things said about Philip.93 Curiously, Demosthenes was subjected to
similar accusations by his enemy Aeschines, who claimed that he attrib-
uted to dreams those things he learned from spies.94 On another occa-
sion, Demosthenes withheld the name of an informant living in Mace-
don, stating only that he was a man incapable of falsehood; but his
132
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
90. Gomme (4:425–26) had some reservations: “These men, in order to retain the help
of a powerful ally, their only hope, would not have hesitated to deceive Nikias, and perhaps
themselves too, by an exaggerated picture of Syracusan dif‹culties . . . , but Thucydides
does not deny (49.1) that Syracuse was short of money.” Gomme’s admonitions are indeed
generally true of traitors and exiles in general, but most items of information supplied by
Nicias’ agents were corroborated by subsequent events. 
91. Thuc. 7.86.4.
92. See, e.g., Demosth. IV (1 Phil.) 18.
93. Isoc. Epist II (1 to Philip) 14–15; he charged them with exaggerating the calumnies
(no doubt based more upon his suspicions of their accuracy than on real knowledge of their
activity—with people like Demosthenes around, they would have no need to exaggerate).
One might note that in writing to Philip, Isocrates becomes, in effect, his source or agent—
it is possible that the men to whom he referred were no different. 
94. Aeschines III (Against Ctesiphon) 77: “‹rst, having learned through spies—the ones
ran by Charidemus—about the death of Philip, he invented a story of a dream sent to him
by the gods and pretended that he had heard of the matter not from Charidemus but from
Zeus and Athena.”

reticence to name his source might indicate that he was fabricating
reports, as easily as it might indicate that he was making an effort to pro-
tect the identity of an agent in place.95
Neutrals
In the passage from the Cavalry Commander quoted in the opening of
this chapter, Xenophon recommended giving thought before the out-
break of war to the recruitment of peoples friendly to oneself and one’s
opponents. In the ever changing world of Greek alliances, the neutral
parties of the next war might not always be easily discerned. One could
always recruit from as diverse a number of states as possible, and this
would entail a rather extensive network. The maintenance of any sort of
peacetime network, however humble, is interesting in itself and rein-
forces the notion that not all intelligence efforts were entirely extempo-
raneous. 
Unfortunately, no historical examples of neutrals used as covert agents
are preserved. We have only one ‹ctitious example, an anecdote found in
the Education of Cyrus. However, as is so often the case with examples
from Xenophon’s work, it does have much to offer the student of ancient
espionage.96 Xenophon recounts how ambassadors from an Indian king
came to Cyrus to tell him that their ruler had agreed to an alliance, based
on their assessments of Cyrus and his Assyrian foes on their last visit.
Cyrus asked three of them to go to the Assyrians, pretending the Indian
king had decided in their favor, and to report back to Cyrus and their
own king when they had learned what the Assyrians were saying and
doing. The Indians obliged and returned with information on the enemy
generals, their resources and provisions, the types and numbers of their
men (further distinguishing which contingents had arrived and which
were en route), their arms, the place where they were mustering, and
their intent to advance against Cyrus.
The value of such information to any commander is considerable.
Xenophon noted that such high-grade intelligence was to be expected
from such men as the Indian envoys—they did, after all, represent them-
selves to be ambassadors of a nation whose alliance the Assyrians eagerly
Beyond the Pale
133
95. Demosth. II (2 Olynth.) 17. Cf. [Lysias] VIII (Accus. of calumny) 8–9.
96. Xen. Cyr. 6.2.1ff.

courted. It is of equal interest that he contrasted their superb opportunity
with the lot of in‹ltration agents disguised as runaway slaves or the
like.97 He noted, however, that captives told stories similar to that of the
Indians. While this seems to diminish the exceptional nature of their role
(while at the same time providing a lesson in the need of a prudent com-
mander to corroborate information when evaluating it), it ought to be
noted that captives were not available until initial contact had been
made. Thus the Indians provided time for Cyrus to make decisions and
put them into effect.
Other Spies of Unspeci‹ed Types
There are a number of other references to spies of unspeci‹ed types,
which provide little detail on the use of covert agents but possess some
relevance.98 One of them indicates that the Syracusans ‹elded spies at
least as far away as Rhegium99—which should not be a surprise in view
of their interests in southern Italy. These agents brought them news of the
presence of the Athenian ›eet across the straits and served to dispel
doubts of earlier reports of the Athenian expedition that Athenagoras
had inspired. Hermocrates, the bearer of those reports (on the basis of
information apparently obtained from private sources), had come up
with what must have been a bluff—a plan to send a ›eet to Italy.100 He
contended that when the Athenians got wind of such a move—and
apparently he could count on their doing so—they would not dare to
advance further than Corcyra. He thought they would take counsel there
and then send out kataskopoi.101 Since their deliberations and informa-
134
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
97. Xen. Cyr. 6.2.2: “Moreover, while spies disguised as slaves are not able to report
knowledgeably about anything except what the man in the street knows, men such as your-
selves are often able to gain an intimate knowledge even of plans.” The choice of Indian
envoys in this context is quite interesting. This people has no further part in the Cyropae-
dia, so obviously they were cast speci‹cally for this sketch. Why? Is it too far-fetched to
speculate about some tales of espionage in India (which became sophisticated fairly early)
arriving in Greece even before Megasthenes took up residence there in the closing years of
the fourth century?
98. Some, however, merely attest their use. Of these, some are of questionable his-
toricity, e.g., Demosth. XVIII (On the crown) 137, Aeschines III (Against Ctesiphon) 77—
both of which may be mere slander—and other various accusations of espionage made by
these two. See also the D scholia to Iliad 10.207 (of Lacedaemonian spies allegedly sent into
Athens on the advice of Alcibiades, possibly an invention based on Thuc. 6.91.6).
99. Thuc. 6.45.1.
100. Cf. Gomme 4:299 on Thuc. 6.34.4 and Bloedow passim on his intentions.
101. Thuc. 6.34.6.

tion gathering would take time, the Athenians would be compelled to
winter in Corcyra, and the Syracusans would thereby be able to make
more thorough preparations.
This passage brings home the (perhaps obvious) point that espionage
does not grant instant knowledge. Rather, the collection of information
by covert agents, like any other, takes time and is affected by distance,
the nature of a mission, and the modes of communication. Consequently,
informed decisions often consume time. Tangentially, the passage attests
to the use of spies by two democracies. 
General Comments on Covert Agents of All Types
It is curious—indeed decidedly odd—to ‹nd spies operating together
almost as often as alone. By this I mean not merely that more than one
spy was engaged in the same area or on separate but similar missions
(although this did occur) but that they sometimes operated in small
groups.102
Such a practice has its hazards, particularly an increased risk of notice
and exposure. During an exercise in England in World War II, spies in
training were given assignments in a speci‹c area, while the local police
were generally alerted to their presence. In a number of cases, two men
operating together were arrested when one of the two aroused suspicion.
Had the other member of the group not been implicated by association,
he would not have been caught. In other cases, one man, although care-
ful or skillful during searches or interrogation, was implicated because
his associate was not as pro‹cient.103 The results of this exercise would
surely be applicable in the ancient world. Yet even Aeneas Tacticus and
Xenophon had nothing to say about such matters (at least in their extant
works)—perhaps this lesson was not yet learned or, if learned, not open
to public discourse.
Some bene‹ts might be derived from such a practice. Perhaps the phys-
ical presence of allies might stave off loneliness or psychological weak-
Beyond the Pale
135
102. See, e.g., Hdt. 7.145–48; Xen. Anab. 7.4.13; Xen. Cyr. 6.2.1 (and cf. 6.1.44); Paus.
3.13.5, 4.28.7, 6.23.8; Arrian Anab. 4.1.1–2; and possibly Demosth. XVIII (On the crown)
137. There are many examples in which it is not clear whether the spies are operating
together or independently (Thuc. 6.34.6, 6.45.1; Xen. Cyr. 6.2.11; Xen. Cav Com. 4.7–8;
Aristotle Politics 1313b11–16; Aeschines III (Against Ctesiphon) 77 and 82; Clearchus
frag. 25; Strabo 14.1.32; Plut. Dion 28.1; Plut. De curiositate 522f–523a; Eustath.
3.515.16; FGrHist 153F7). 
103. Mendelsohn 24–41, esp. 33ff.

ness. Perhaps agents possessing different ‹elds of expertise might comple-
ment each other’s abilities and process information while still in the ‹eld,
thereby setting new intelligence goals to be pursued. In an era in which
swift communication was not available, the ability of one spy to return to
report important information while the others continued their mission
would have been valuable. Conversely, agents sent independently would
either have to make other arrangements for sending messages back or
return themselves. Yet would not the chance for at least one of three
agents to arrive safely back be better if they were sent separately?
While Pausanias commended Homer’s example of sending out two
kataskopoi together, other—and probably more expert—authorities
point to a danger that spies operating in conjunction might come into
collusion and bring back false reports.104 Polyaenus observed: “Pompis-
cus sent as spies [kataskopoi] men unknown to each other [either men
who were strangers to each other or men who did not know that others
were being sent as spies] lest they come together and become bearers of
false tidings.”105 It is not clear whether the spies were sent together or
individually. The former possibility—though somewhat easier to extract
from the Greek—is somewhat wanting logically. Might it not be better to
send those who were mutually compatible yet held differing views, as in
the case of diplomatic envoys? A lack of familiarity might make people
hesitate to make deals, but known honesty and ‹delity could do the
same. Indeed, one would expect from occasional remarks of Xenophon
(and other anecdotes in Polyaenus himself) that independent reports of
the same news would be perceived as more likely to provide accurate
intelligence.
136
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
104. Paus. 4.28.7. He did not give reasons why he thought Homer’s example admirable.
105. Polyaenus 5.33.6: PompÛ!ko! kata!kñpou! ¦pempen !ndra! gnÇnta! ll®loi!,
ána m¯ !untÛyointo mhd¢ ceud‹ggeloi gÛgnointo. The passage continues (Krentz and
Wheeler, trans.): “He forbid them to converse with anyone in the camp, lest someone might
get to the enemy ‹rst and report their imminent arrival.” The testimony of Polyaenus about
Pompiscus is important for the study of covert agents and counterintelligence. Unfortu-
nately, Pompiscus is not mentioned in other sources, and there is no internal evidence for
his dates, save that he must have lived before the second century a.d.—a date long after our
period. I have taken the liberty of including him on two grounds: (1) Pompiscus is said to
be an Arcadian, and as Prof. M. Chambers pointed out to me, the Arcadians were quite
active in the fourth century. The stories about Pompiscus could thus have their origins in
this era. (2) Prof. E. Wheeler informed me that although a Byzantine writer substituted
Pompeius for Pompiscus in Polyaenus 5.33, it is not likely that he had special information
that enabled him to do so. Indeed, Woelf‹n and Melber’s apparatus criticus admits no alter-
nate readings for either name or ethnic.
Cf. Maurice de Saxe (in Philips 1:292): “Spies should not know one another.”

When the number of agents in a particular group is speci‹ed, it is
either two or three.106 All such examples are of in‹ltration agents.107 The
use of two or three men might have been due simply to the fear that
larger numbers would have been still more conspicuous, but it might also
indicate a relationship between spies and reconnaissance agents. There
are some examples of reconnaissance and surveillance missions under-
taken by three agents.108 Furthermore, besides the obvious point that the
term kataskopos can denote either scout or spy (and hence some sort of
relationship between them, however vestigial), there is the proposed link
between the Lacedaemonian hippeis and covert intelligence, and there is
also Xenophon’s inclusion of an intelligence network among the respon-
sibilities of cavalry commanders.109
But did Xenophon choose to discuss intelligence networks in his Cav-
alry Commander because he thought that these of‹cers were particularly
appropriate recipients of such advice or merely because he thought his
comments were pertinent to any leader? Either option is defensible, and
it is quite possible that the options are not alternatives but comple-
ments.110
Since cavalry were frequently employed for reconnaissance, it would
not be unnatural for their commanders to supervise the gathering of
information by other means. It is possible that the cavalry commanders
acted solely in their own interest, to improve their ability to use their
force effectively; alternatively, they might have been operating as special-
ized subordinate commanders for the bene‹t of others (perhaps the strat-
egoi), as did the skoparkhes and Spartan marshals of the knights did.
In Athens (Xenophon seems to be writing for an Athenian audience)
Beyond the Pale
137
106. Three: Hdt. 7.145; Xen. Cyr. 6.2.1ff. Two: Paus. 4.28.7, commenting on Odysseus
and Diomedes in Iliad 10. Two or three: FGrHist 115F274 (Theopompus). 
107. While the Indian spies sent by Cyrus were perceived by his enemies as neutrals (and
potential allies), from Cyrus’ perspective they had already joined his side.
108. Homer Od. 9.88–90, 10.100; Aen. Tact. 6.2. Cf. Hdt. 7.179.
109. Cf. Luvaas in Handel, Intelligence and Military Operations, 103, who commented
that most Civil War “scouts” were drawn from the cavalry.
110. There is no evidence that Xenophon, although expert in military tactics of all sorts,
was himself appointed hipparkhos, either to the formal of‹ce in Athens or to command of
the cavalry possessed by the Ten Thousand. But it is likely that he served as a cavalryman
in Athens in the late ‹fth century, and his sons were enrolled in that force in the fourth cen-
tury (cf. Krentz, Xenophon: “Hellenika” I-II.3.10, 1). Nevertheless, Xenophon’s admoni-
tion concerning the posting of guards because of the dif‹culty for spies to provide timely
information leads one to believe that his theory was founded on the mistakes and hazards
of practice. His implication that spies were not themselves always reliable or trustworthy
also suggests pathei mathos.

the cavalry commanders kept their of‹ce for only one year and could not
hold it again.111 To set up and run an intelligence network effectively
demands time, resources, and continuity; to do so from scratch every
year would be quite inef‹cient—although this in itself by no means pre-
cludes the possibility. In the interest of continuity, commanders might
pass on their networks to their successors on leaving of‹ce.112 A network
of this sort, based on the authority of the of‹ce rather than on personal
af‹liation, would have the advantage of reducing potential confusion of
identity and authority on the part of agents.113
Xenophon included discourses on the theory and practice of intelli-
gence in other works of a more general nature. He considered clear intel-
ligence fundamental to the effective administration of any command,
whether political or military. It may be, then, that his remarks in the Cav-
alry Commander are an application of a general concern to a particular
situation and are thus accidental, rather than essential, to his description
of the duties of the of‹ce.114 If this is the case, one ought to look for
examples of networks built up by individuals and based on personal con-
nections. 
Nicias’ network in Syracuse ‹ts this description well—the allegiance of
his agents was accorded to him not because he was a strategos (although
the fact that he held such a powerful of‹ce might have won him recogni-
tion and in›uence) but because he was an individual with personal and
diplomatic connections in Sicily. This is easily demonstrated by the fact
138
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
111. During Aristotle’s time two hipparkhoi were elected annually by the assembly in
Athens, each commanding the contingents of ‹ve tribes; a third was sent to Lemnos to com-
mand the cavalry there ([Aristotle] Ath. Pol. 61.4, 61.6; so Plato Laws 756). Earlier, under
the ‹ve thousand, one man held the of‹ce ([Aristotle] Ath. Pol. 31.3). Unlike the strategoi,
the hipparkhoi were not permitted to hold their of‹ce more than once. References to hip-
parkhoi are not limited to Athens: other places include Achaea, Caria (s. III), Cyzicus,
Macedonia (s. I), Orchomenus, Samothrace, Sparta, and Thebes (s. III) (LSJ s.v.). 
112. One may well wonder why one would change of‹cers as soon as they became expe-
rienced, but this phenomenon has parallels in most other democratic institutions in antiq-
uity. Yet, according to Copeland (106n), the CIA rotates its station of‹cers fairly fre-
quently, indeed as often as every two years. Reviewers, such as Constantides (136–38) have
criticized Copeland for inaccuracy; but in this he seems to be acccurate.
113. As noted earlier, there were more than one hipparkhoi in of‹ce at any one time,
and confusion of identity might result. Further, since hipparkhoi often served abroad, it
would have been convenient if news could be passed back to any of the hipparkhoi (or, per-
haps, even to the secretary [grammateus] who served them or to another af‹liate stationed
at the hipparkheion).
114. Indeed the perfect tense of memelhk¡nai could point to a necessity for the individ-
ual to have seen to his intelligence resources before assuming his of‹ce.

that the other Athenian strategoi did not have access to the spies but
learned of their reports through Nicias.115 It is probable that Nicias is not
alone. Others (especially those in democracies) no doubt saw the need for
private sources not only to give guidance to the state but also to further
their own advancement, as Xenophon noted with customary acuity.116
Charidemus, who passed intelligence reports on to Demosthenes, appar-
ently also had a private network of spies due to personal connections
rather than as a representative of Athens. Demosthenes himself may have
had private sources in Macedonia; he certainly would have had them in
Thebes.117 Thucydides portrayed Hermocrates having information not
generally available to his compatriots, but one wonders whether the
depiction is as much artistic as historic.118
The two aspects of of‹cial and personal requirements for intelligence
agents are in a sense complementary: an Attic farmer had little need for
covert intelligence agents (although tips offered sub rosa about prices,
ailments of livestock, and such might be welcome), while an Attic strate-
gos may have had need for them, both to gain of‹ce and to hold it. 
Beyond the Pale
139
115. See, e.g., Plut. Nicias 21, 22.4, 26.1–2 (cf. Thuc. 7.43.1, 7.48.4–49.1, 7.73.3–4).
116. Xen. Mem. 3.6.9–11.
117. Aeschines III (Against Ctesiphon) 77; Plut. Demosth. 22. In this context Demos-
thenes XVIII (On the crown) 172 (also quoted by Starr [36]) is quite pertinent: “the call of
the crisis on that momentous day was not only for the wealthy patriot but for the man who
from ‹rst to last had closely watched the sequence of events and had rightly fathomed the
purposes and the desires of Philip; for anyone who had not grasped those purposes or had
not studied them long beforehand . . . was not the man to appreciate the needs of the hour
or to ‹nd any counsel to offer the people.” 
Semmett (96) has independently anticipated me with regard to the notion of personal
networks, by proposing that Demosthenes possessed one. She also treated private sources
of information (205–11), and her observations have merit. However, her citation (at 206)
of the money spent by Pericles eÞ! tò d¡on (Plut. Per. 23.1) as evidence for this theory is
hampered by a misunderstanding of the context, which is apparently bribery, not espi-
onage. Still, it might be noted that Pericles must have acquired information about the char-
acters of Pleistoanax and Cleandridas and about Lacedaemonian preparations in general
before he made the overture. Cf. Aristoph. Clouds 858–59 and schol. on 859 (FGrHist
70F193 [Ephorus]); Suda s.v. d¡on.
118. E.g., Thuc. 6.34.6, reinforced by the emphatic ¤gÅ of É! ¤gÆ koæv, and Thuc.
6.33.1: peÛyvn ¤mautòn !af¡!terñn ti ¥t¡rou eÞdÆ! l¡gein. Gomme (4:300) credited his
knowledge to merchants, which is possible, but Athenagoras’ charges against him (Thuc.
6.38.1–2) imply that Hermocrates consistently provided information from private (as
Athenagoras would have his listeners believe, “fabricated”) sources. Starr (36) thought that
political leaders like Hermocrates probably had “no special command of speci‹c reports,
but great store of general information from past experience.” In his notes (36 n. 4), he did,
however, acknowledge that Hermocrates appears to have known of Nicias’ opposition to
the expedition.

Chapter 4 
Conveying the Message
The efforts of the sources and agents described in the preceding chapters
would be for naught if they were unable to communicate the information
they had collected. But the conveyance of information is a tricky thing,
involving a number of ‹lters that determine which information makes the
transition from collector to recipient. In its most simple form, the ‹lter is
one of time, for example, condensing the experiences of a two-day recon-
naissance patrol into a ‹ve-minute brie‹ng. But even such apparently
straightforward reports were and are highly complex, involving an inter-
play of semantics, motivations, personalities, and expectations with the
various media of communication.
Thus, before describing how the Greeks transmitted information, it
must ‹rst be noted that sources and agents convey the information that
they feel is newsworthy. There is an editing process intrinsic to human
interpretation of data provided by the environment, and this is extended
to the information provided by one individual to another. Would a scout,
for instance, think it worthy of notice or mention that many of the enemy
had brown hair? That a contingent wore red cloaks? That some carried
bows and slings? That they were men? The information provided is based
on what the informant thinks is pertinent, and the informant may neglect
details whose consequence he or she does not recognize. Red cloaks, for
example, were typical of the Spartans, and if a commander did not know
whether or not the Spartans were committing troops to the aid of his
enemy, information about the color of garments would be of importance
to him. If the scout was aware of neither the custom nor the political sit-
uation, he might not report this detail. If the commander did not think to
ask this speci‹c question, he might then underestimate his opponent or
misjudge the political impact of an engagement.
The problem is further complicated by the fact that different people
have interest and expertise in different ‹elds. While some topics may be
of general interest to all and thus readily passed on as newsworthy, all
140

information gatherers may not be equally capable in differentiating the
pertinent from the peripheral.1 A scout would be more likely to pick up
relevant details about the aforementioned contingent than would, for
instance, a merchant. But a merchant or envoy would be far more useful
when economic or political information was sought. Thus it was neces-
sary to employ as agents individuals best suited to gathering information
of a given sort. Aeneas Tacticus recommended that skopoi be men expe-
rienced in war, both to ensure that information would be reported accu-
rately and to prevent false alarms made in ignorance.2 In the ideal mili-
tary practice of Cyrus, a subordinate of‹cer selected for his experience
and wisdom determined what information was to be passed back by the
scouts to the commander of the vanguard.3 As was mentioned in the sec-
ond chapter, there sometimes existed a degree of specialization among
other types of intelligence agents as well.
An obvious solution to problems of information relevance was for the
commander himself to gather the information, providing, of course, that
the commander was better equipped to interpret data than his agents.
This was, in fact, advised by Xenophon and Onasander, with the sensible
proviso that the commander should not expose himself unnecessarily to
danger.4 Alexander often took the advice and ignored the proviso, and
his actions found precedent on the Attic stage.5 There is mention of par-
ticipants in trials embarking on research themselves, as Lysias claimed to
have done, traveling to Decelea to make inquiries regarding Pancleon’s
Conveying the Message
141
1. Lee (Information and Frontiers, 153–55) provided a good discussion on diffusion of
information and considerations of what comprised newsworthy information, citing
Stephens, A History of News: From the Drum to the Satellite (New York, 1988), 33, for
items of general applicability: “reports of accidents, earthquakes, military expeditions,
sports, weather, death and violations of the law.”
2. Aen. Tact. 6.2.
3. Xen. Cyr. 6.3.6, 12.
4. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.16: “It has long been said that it is good to try, by the use of
kataskopoi, to know the affairs of the enemy. But best of all is for the commander himself
to watch from some safe vantage.” Cf. [Nicephorus] 14.
5. See, e.g., Arrian Anab. 1.20.5; Q. Curtius 8.10.27–30; Demophon in Eur. Children
of Heracles 390–97. Cf. Aesch. Seven Against Thebes 36ff., in which Eteocles relies entirely
on the eyes of the kataskopos. Contrast Rommel (38: “Aus Meldungen von Dritten kann
man meist nicht das entnehmen, was für den eigenen Entschluß wesentlich ist. Man muß
selbst hinfahren und selbst beobachten”) with Handel (Intelligence and Military Opera-
tions, 26, ad loc.), who criticized focus on the tactical level as dysfunctional at higher lev-
els, since commanders such as Rommel were liable to be trapped in details. In an Aris-
totelian manner, Handel (68) thought that for commanders virtue lay in a mean between
the extremes of remote control and personal involvement.

claims to the status of a Plataean.6 Political leaders could and at times did
investigate matters for themselves, as Demosthenes ascertained the The-
ban sentiment while acting as an ambassador in Thebes prior to
Chaeronea, but generally the decision makers—whether ephors, kings,
tyrants, or a collective body—received information rather than sought it.
Reasons are easily called to mind, a monarch simply did not have the
time to see everything everywhere, even if he were reckless enough to face
the risk involved.7 A similar problem applied to small governing bodies,
and large groups could neither feasibly travel together nor reasonably
depend on their members to witness matters outside their normal sphere
of activity. Thus information was normally ‹ltered through the minds of
agents and sources. 
Related to the problem of editing is the selection of intelligence goals.
If agents are asked to gather every detail about a people, irrespective of
relevance to an issue, they will spend much time and effort, with conse-
quent risks and delays, on a task without end. If they are told to pay
attention only to matters within strict parameters (a possible example
might be to ascertain the quantity of baggage attached to a company, so
as to obtain an idea of its range and rate of movement), they might over-
look matters not apparently relevant but nevertheless important to the
problem they are investigating (e.g., if the company commander was ill,
his force might move more slowly or not at all).8 A commander cannot
hope to learn or assimilate every minute detail about his foes—instead,
he must have a degree of detail adequate to his task. To avoid irrelevant
“static” he concentrates on those details that he thinks are important. In
effect, he sets intelligence goals corresponding to his needs and allocates
resources to meet his goals. When Agesilaus fought to defend his city and
Laconia from Epaminondas, he had no need to send scouts to discover
features of terrain since this was his native land. When he campaigned in
Asia Minor, such information was vital. Many intelligence needs, how-
ever, were more or less constant, and a sensible commander would be
able to direct his attention to these needs through reason and experience.
Having determined what information was to be sought and passed on,
the agent or source then had to determine how to effect its transmission.
The following methods were available.
142
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
6. Lysias XXIII (Against Pancleon) 2ff. Cf. Demosth. XXI (Against Meidias) 36.
7. Cf. Xen. Hiero 1.11–12.
8. Such was the case when Darius misinterpreted Alexander’s delay in Cilicia, the cause
of which was actually Alexander’s illness (Plut. Alex. 29.1).

Overt Methods of Communication
Messengers
Angeloi, or messengers, were ubiquitous in the Greek world yet were a
rather nebulous lot.9 In not a few cases envoys (presbeis) and even her-
alds (kerukes) are called angeloi when delivering information. More
often the identities of angeloi were obscure because the act of communi-
cation was thought more important than the actor, so that passive forms
of verbs (e.g., “when it was announced”) were suf‹cient to explain the
movement of information. In a number of cases arrangements might be
made for speci‹c types of individuals (such as horsemen or sailors of light
craft) to act as messengers in an ad hoc manner; exceptionally they might
be appointed to long-term duty as couriers within the structure of a sur-
veillance or reconnaissance detachment or be attached to the staffs of
military commanders.10
The speed with which angeloi could transmit messages was, of course,
far slower than ‹re signals over long distances. Over very short distances,
however, angeloi might make up for lack of swiftness with convenience
of use, especially since a commander would not need to prepare a ‹re or
hoist a ›ag (assuming that high ground was available) and hope that the
intended recipient noticed it in time. They were also useful over very long
distances, when lines of sight were obstructed by geographical features
and when relay stations for visual signals were neither available nor prac-
tical. Angeloi were more ›exible than visual signals, in that prior
arrangements to establish recognizable signals were not necessary. They
could provide superior detail and range of information. They could clar-
ify a message that was not completely understood, or they could furnish
supplementary details.11 They also offered more con‹dentiality than
visual or audible signals, which could be noticed by enemies as well as
Conveying the Message
143
9. A proper discussion of angeloi is a subject ‹t for a detailed study in its own right—
only a few brief notes are given here.
10. For horsemen, see Bugh 11–12, 99. Cf. also Thuc. 8.11; Xen. Hell. 4.3.20, 4.5.7;
Diod. Sic. 15.82.6 (Plut. Ages. 34.4); Diod. Sic. 17.60.7; Arrian Anab. 3.15.1, 5.18.6. For
light vessels, see Plut. Lys. 10.2; Isoc. Epist. VII (To Tim.) 10ff.; Plut. Ages. 15.2. For long-
term duty, see Aen. Tact. 6.6.
11. Aeneas Tacticus (6.4–5) was quite cognizant of the relative merits of visual signal-
ing and couriers and thought swift or horsed messengers were a necessary supplement to
semeia, so that hemeroskopoi could communicate matters which did not lend themselves
well to visual signaling; cf. Isoc. Epist. I (To Dionys.) 3 for comments on clari‹cation. 

recipients. Their operation might be impeded by adverse weather condi-
tions, but it would not be precluded altogether, as might happen with sig-
nals in heavy fog or precipitation or with shouts in the din of battle.12
But angeloi needed physical access to their recipients and might be
unable to slip through a blockade or siege; seas controlled by enemies
were also hazardous. They were susceptible to interception and capture,
in which case information not only failed to reach its intended recipient
but fell into the hands of people who might use it to the disadvantage of
the sender.13 Being only human, angeloi were liable to misunderstanding,
dishonesty, and all the other foibles to which agents and sources were
susceptible; they might even be impersonated. 
In light of such fallibility, some states and commanders had recourse
to the written word. Thucydides treated Nicias’ decision to entrust a mes-
senger with a letter rather than an oral report as somehow exceptional, at
least as far as Athenian practice went in the late ‹fth century, but dis-
patches are well attested in the fourth century.14 The Spartans relied on
written messages for of‹cial correspondence at least as early as the begin-
ning of the ‹fth century. During the Peloponnesian War, they appointed
secretaries (epistoleis) to their naval commanders to handle correspon-
dence with authorities at home and with other commanders.15 Secretaries
144
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
12. For problems arising from vocal commands, see Q. Curtius 4.9.20; Aelian Tactica
25.1–5; Anon. Byz. Peri Strat. 30. Shouting was a resort of necessity when other methods
failed, as when the Syracusans communicated by shouting to each other during the Athen-
ian night attack on Epipolae, there being no other way to signal in the night (Thuc. 7.44.4;
cf. the Tyrians at Arrian Anab. 2.22.4). In what must have been quieter moments, the pass-
ing of commands and watchwords along a chain of command, or through the ranks, was
practiced and advocated—the contexts are before battle or by surveillance agents separated
from their enemies by a river: e.g., Onasander 25.1–3; Arrian Anab. 5.11.2.
13. A picturesque tale in Plutarch’s life of Dion (26.5–10) well illustrates the hazards
chance can throw into the paths of couriers. When Timocrates, Dionysius’ second in com-
mand, learned that Dion had landed in Sicily, he sent an angelos to bear letters to Diony-
sius at Caulonia. This man took meat (for a meal en route) in the same wallet in which he
carried the letters. The smell of the meat attracted a wolf, who carried off the wallet as the
man slept. When he awoke and realized he had lost the wallet, the angelos feared to go to
the tyrant and ›ed. Thus Dionysius did not learn until later, through other sources, of the
threat that Dion posed. Cf. also Demosth. XXXIV (Against Phormio) 8, on the hazards
arising from entrusting a message to a dishonest courier.
14. Thuc. 7.8–10, 7.11.1. 
15. Pritchett 2:46; Szanto “ƒEpistol¡uw,” RE 6 (1909): 202–3; Michell 279–80; Ander-
son 67–68 and 68 n. 7. Anderson noted that Hippocrates, called an epistoleus at Xen. Hell.
1.1.23, reappeared as a harmost at 1.3.5; he is also found at Thuc. 8.99, sending informa-
tion on the prospects of (not) receiving aid from the Phoenician ships. 

(grammateis) are attested serving military commanders in the fourth and
following centuries and had cameo appearances earlier—in the case of
Polycrates’ secretary Maeandrius, as an investigator in his own right.16
Signaling
In his Tactica, Aelian noted the relative advantages and disadvantages of
visual and auditory transmission of commands.17 Further comments on
their strengths and weaknesses in transmitting information in other con-
texts follow.
Fire and Smoke (Pursoi, Phruktoi) 
Legend has it that Palamedes invented signal ‹res and that his father was
the ‹rst to manipulate them to deceive an enemy.18 Fire signals ‹rst
appear in a simile in the Iliad, which describes smoke and ‹re (pursoi)
signals sent up by a beleaguered island town to its neighbors, the former
by day and the latter by night.19 Walbank thought that the earliest evi-
dence of the use of ‹re signals among the Greeks could be dated to 489,
when the Parians, besieged by Miltiades, pretended that the gleam from
a ‹re on Mykonos (not actually intentionally sparked) was a signal from
Datis.20 Technically, the signal was supposed to be from a Persian, but he
is surely correct that signals were in use at the time. The ‹rst tangible his-
torical example of ‹re signaling between Greeks is actually that sent from
Sciathus to Artemisium in 480, regarding a skirmish between Greek and
Persian forces.21
Conveying the Message
145
16. Hdt. 3.123ff. Grammateis might also serve as envoys—see, e.g., Arrian Anab.
3.16.6, 5.24.6.
17. Aelian Tactica 25.1–5. Cf. Anon. Byz. Peri Strat. 30.
18. Hyg. Fab. 105
19. Iliad 18.207–13. Aristarchus is said by Dionysius Thrax to have altered line 207, É!
d' ÷te kapnò! ÞÆn ¤j !teo! to É! d' ÷te pèr ¤pÜ pñnton  riprep¢!. Semmett (41–42)
noted a passage in the Odyssey (10.30) that appeared in a translation as “beacon ‹res.” The
Greek purpol¡onte! lends itself better to translation as “tending camp‹res” than “tending
signal ‹res” when used in this context of shepherds in the hills.
Festivals celebrated with beacon ‹res might indicate traditions preserved from still ear-
lier times, but myth provides shaky foundations for argument. Those interested may, how-
ever, refer to Pausanias (2.25.4–5), who mentioned an Argive festival of bon‹res commem-
orating mythical signals sent to and from two lovers; Frazer (in Pausanias, 3:216–17 ad
loc.) observed that the festival might well have other origins. 
20. F.W. Walbank 2:258 on Polyb. 10.42.7, citing Ephorus (FGrHist 70F63).
21. Hdt. 7.183.

Fire signals were used extensively by watchers and scouts.22 Unlike
other signal types, they did not normally serve to transmit orders but
were instead used to convey simple messages, and they were considered
to be quite valuable in this role.23 Polybius observed that they enabled a
swift response to events and were of great utility in internal security and
warfare. Although he added that signals were less developed in earlier
times (i.e., before the second century), extant examples show that even
then signals served often and well.24
In most cases the presence or lack of a ‹re at an appointed point
suf‹ced to convey a prearranged message (e.g., Memnon’s troops were to
light ‹res when they had scaled the acropolis of Methymne).25 There are
examples of varied signals, each with a speci‹c signi‹cance, but often the
arrangement is ambiguous. According to a scholiast, movements of hos-
tile forces were indicated by moving a ›ame—presumably a torch—back
and forth, those of friendly forces by holding a torch steady.26 All such
signals were limited (in the range of information that they could convey)
to predetermined messages, since there is no indication before the second
century b.c. that signalers could represent letter characters (in the fash-
ion, for instance, of Morse code), which would permit the ›exibility
required for conveying complex or unforeseen events.27 In the ‹rst half of
146
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
22. Hershbell (82ff.) maintained that they were used almost exclusively in war, and I see
no reason to disagree with his assessment.
23. The line between information and command becomes somewhat blurred in some
circumstances (as when a city under attack signals for help—see, e.g., Aen. Tact. 15.1);
what I mean here is that leaders and commanders did not normally issue orders via ‹re sig-
nals to their subordinates. Thuc. 4.111–12 provides a possible (but rather confused) excep-
tion: the signal for the attack of Brasidas’ light-armed troops is alternately called !hmeÝon,
!hmeÝon toè purñ!, and jænyhma. I think the last word, xunthema, provides a solution—it
was a prearranged indication that a previously given command (attack) was now to be car-
ried out.
24. Polyb. 10.43.1–2. 
25. Polyaenus 5.44.3 (ca. 340).
26. Schol. on Thuc. 2.94. Cf. Riepl 59–60; Hershbell 85–86.
27. Polybius’ mechanism (10.45–46) for sending messages (which may never have made
the transition from theory to practice) indicated the positions of each desired letter on
tablets by means of different combinations of torches. Polybius referred to systems invented
after Aeneas by Cleoxenus and Democlitus, which lack other independent attestation.
Democlitus has been dated to the third century or early second century b.c. by Hultsch
(“Demokleitos,” RE 5.1 [1905]: 132); no date is available for Cleoxenus (other than a ter-
minus ante quem implicit in Polybius’ work). For full descriptions of the signaling systems
of Polybius and Aeneas, see Riepl 66–69; Hershbell 86ff. 

the fourth century, Aeneas Tacticus devised a scheme for combining a
water clock with ‹re signals to signal predetermined messages.28 The
sender and recipient had identical water clocks, marked at various levels
with a variety of commonly sent messages. After obtaining the recipients’
attention, the sender would unplug the bottom of the water clock and
hold up a torch until the water level had sunk to the desired inscription.
It is probable that the Greeks had the ability to send a variety of messages
by different types of signals (perhaps combinations of ‹res) by the late
‹fth century: how could the besieged Plataeans otherwise have expected
to be able to confuse Peloponnesian signals by lighting ‹res of their
own?29 There is, furthermore, an appearance of a fair degree of
speci‹city in recorded examples of prearranged ‹re signals. From torches
held up by his blockaded troops, for instance, Alexander of Pherae was
able to learn numbers of Athenian ships setting sail.30
It is not always so easy, however, to separate the historian’s explana-
tion from the imparted message. Did the Peloponnesians learn from ‹re
signals that Athenian ships were approaching from Leucas, or was their
origin a detail assumed by the Peloponnesians or included by Thucydides
by way of explanation?31 In general, Polybius’ criticism of the in›exibil-
ity of the ‹re systems of his precursors seems reasonable enough,
although perhaps exaggerated to establish a contrast to and a need for his
own scheme.32 While systems like those just described could encompass
a wider variety of subjects than the Boolean variable of a simple pyre,
they could not serve to convey news of events for which a prior arrange-
ment had not been made.33 It is likely that they were also unable to con-
vey precise details or large numbers—such information was probably
‹lled in by historians.
The advantage of ‹re signals is their relatively swift operation over
long distances. While Aeschylus’ image of ›ames ›aring in a swift dance
from Troy to Mycenae is poetic, there is no doubt that the more prosaic
Conveying the Message
147
28. For a more complete description, see Polyb. 10.44.
29. Thuc. 3.22.7–8.
30. Polyaenus 6.2.1 (Alexander of Pherae, son of Jason, was tyrant from 369 to 358).
Cf. Anon. Byz. Peri Strat. 8.
31. Thuc. 3.80.2.
32. Polyb. 10.43.6–10.
33. Polyb. 10.45.1. In 43.7–9 he provided an example: if an arrangement had been
made that a ‹re would be lit to indicate the approach of an enemy ›eet, how could one send
a message telling of a rebellion that was unanticipated?

‹res on Salamis, glowing red with warning of a Peloponnesian surprise
attack, were seen in Athens long before it would have been possible for a
weary runner to stumble up to the prytaneis.34 Basic information could
therefore be had very quickly, and although the Athenian reaction to
Brasidas’ advent resembled panic more than preparation, the Pelopon-
nesians withdrew because they hesitated to attack an alerted enemy. The
range of ‹re signals could be considerable: Polybius said they could con-
vey information at distances beyond a four days’ march.35 The ‹res lit by
the Peloponnesians laying siege to Plataea could be seen in Thebes even
on a stormy night, while the ›ashes of pursoi in Boeotia and Phocis were
visible from Mount Tisaion in Thessaly.36 Greek use of relays after the
Aeschylean and Persian fashion is a matter of conjecture in the ‹fth cen-
tury and earlier, but by the fourth century the Athenians possessed an
extensive system of signal and relay towers for effective frontier
defense.37 Alexander of Pherae was likewise said to have had a ‹re-sig-
naling system, in which the aforementioned Mount Tisaion was an
important link.38
Another bene‹t of ‹re signals (and signals in general) was that they
provided a means of communication when siege or other such circum-
stance precluded the use of channels necessitating physical delivery of a
message. Thus ‹fth columns found them suitable for conveying messages
148
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
34. Thuc. 2.94.1. Cf. Aeschylus Ag. 288–313; Riepl 51; Fraenkel 2:156–66. Note also
a tale told by R. Coleman of Emmanuel College, Cambridge (preserved in C. Stray, “Ideol-
ogy and Institution: English Classical Scholarship in Transition,” Annals of Scholarship 10
(1993): 119 and 130 n. 15; this article was brought to my attention by P.G. Naiditch): “A
colonial of‹cer stationed on the farther reaches of the empire, suspecting an imminent
attack by hostile natives in part of his territory, remembered the opening of Aeschylus’
Agamemnon, where the watchman sits on the palace roof at Mycenae waiting for the line
of signal beacons to tell of the sack of Troy and his master Agamemnon’s return home.
Accordingly he ordered his native subordinates to prepare a line of beacons. Unfortunately,
this was at the beginning of the rainy season, and when the enemy attacked, the beacon ‹res
could not be lit.”
35. Polyb. 10.43.3.
36. Thuc. 3.22.7–8; Polyaenus 6.19.2; Polyb. 10.42.7–8, of Philip V (ca. 209 b.c.). F.W.
Walbank (2:258 on Polyb. 10.42.7) noted that Mount Tisaion has been identi‹ed with the
modern Mount Bardhzogia, a hill only 130 meters high; Eliot (30–31) preferred Mount
Chromon, a somewhat higher hill nearby.
37. Ober (196–97) envisioned messages relayed between forts and city by ‹re or smoke
signals; the Limiko Tower apparently included a signaling platform (Ober 147, citing Van-
derpool 242).
38. Polyaenus 6.2.1. Cf. Aen. Tact. 22.2–3; Aristoph. Birds 1158–62.

from within city walls to their allies without.39 But such signals could
also be seen by people other than their intended recipients, who would
therefore be made alert to the traf‹c, even if they did not yet know the
content of the messages.
Most examples of the Greeks using ‹re signals are of communication
by night, and hence ‹res were valued for the visibility of their glow from
afar rather than for their ability to send smoke signals in the manner of,
for instance, some Native American peoples. There are comparatively
few references to smoke signals used by Greeks; they were, naturally
enough, employed only during daylight.40 It seems, however, that long-
distance communication during the day was normally done through
other devices.
Other Signaling Devices (Semeia)
Although other signaling devices, such as ›ags, lack the range and
ef‹cacy of ‹re by night, they served well in daylight and in places where
signal ‹res were impractical (e.g., contexts where mobility was
demanded) or dangerous (especially on ships). Flags were the most com-
mon device and were used on both sea and land.41 There are also a 
couple of famous instances in which shields were used: once allegedly by
an Alcmaeonid to the Persians after the battle of Marathon, once by a
scout ship to Lysander at the opening of the battle of Aegospotami. Both
times the ›ash of a brazen shield indicated an opportunity to attack.42
Semeia of unspeci‹ed types were employed by hemeroskopoi to pass
information swiftly to their commanders, either directly or in relays.43
Conveying the Message
149
39. Thuc. 4.111.1–2; Plut. Alc. 30.2. Note that Aeneas Tacticus (10.26) warned against
allowing people to carry lights at night while their city was besieged, lest somebody signal
to the enemy. Cf. also Hdt. 9.118: when Sestus was besieged by the Athenians, its people
communicated with their besiegers via purgoi upon Artayctes’ ›ight.
40. Iliad 18.207–13. Herodotus (4.196) relates a story he ascribes to the Carchedo-
nians, of traders landing on the shores of Libya using smoke to alert the inhabitants living
near the sea that they had wares available. Quintus Curtius (5.2.7) related that sometime
after the battle of Arbela, Alexander no longer signaled his soldiers to move camp by trum-
pet (since it was not always heard) but instead had a pole set up, on which he had a ‹re lit
to convey his orders— by light during the night, by smoke during the day.
41. Hence, the verb most often used for signaling with semeia is aàrv, which means “to
raise” (LSJ s.vv.  Ûrv I.1, !hmeÝon I.3). 
42. Marathon: Hdt. 6.115, 121, 123 (cf. How and Wells 116 ad loc.); Aegospotami:
Xen. Hell. 2.1.27; Plut. Lys. 10.3, 11.1–2; Polyaenus 1.45.2.
43. Aen. Tact. 6.4: “If there are no places available to scouts where signals can be seen
from the city, there must be relays to receive the signals as raised and pass them on.” 

The information conveyed was quite restricted—commonly a warning of
enemy approach—since semeia normally conveyed their message by their
presence or absence rather than by variations in manner of presenta-
tion.44 There is no indication of a semaphore system or record of ›exi-
bility more complex than three alternate messages: Iphicrates arranged
signals with his scouts to differentiate the approach of an enemy ›eet
from its anchoring.45 More frequently, commanders used semeia to con-
vey simple, prearranged orders—usually to attack—to their ships and
occasionally to land forces when distance did not permit the use of trum-
pets (salpinges).46 Semeia also served to convey by their presence a pre-
determined message to detached military units.47
Trumpets (Salpinges) and Horns (Kerata)
Trumpets are found in military contexts, where they were nearly always
used for conveying commands.48 In one instance Xenophon arranged for
speci‹c meanings for successive signals (and it was not unheard of for
commanders to reassign meanings to signals to deceive a nearby enemy),
but most examples give the impression that commands (e.g., to attack or
to break camp) were represented by generally recognizable patterns.49
Given such a function, it is no surprise that Aeneas Tacticus recom-
mended that the trumpeters camp near the strategoi. It is decidedly odd
to ‹nd a trumpeter up in a tree serving as a lookout.50
Covert Methods of Communication
Allusions to the conveyance of concealed and secret messages date back
to myths of Bellerophon and Palamedes found in epic. There are a few
references, made by historians, to events set in the sixth and ‹fth cen-
150
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
44. Thuc. 4.42.4; Xen. Hell. 1.1.2, 7.2.5.
45. Xen. Hell. 6.2.34. The third message is implicit (“all clear”) and can generally be
assumed to be denoted by the absence of the semeion. In this example, Iphicrates arranged
for heralds to watch for the signals and announce them in the city.
46. By land: Xen. Hell. 4.4.3. By sea: Thuc. 1.49.1, 2.84.1, 2.84.3, 2.90.4, 7.34.4; Xen.
Hell. 2.1.28; Arrian Indica 28.3–4 (Nearchus, shore to sea); Polyaenus 1.48.2. In Persian
use: Hdt. 9.59. Polyaenus (1.48.2) speci‹es the kubernetai as the recipients of naval signals.
47. By land: Thuc. 1.63.2; Q. Curtius 7.11.11; Arrian Anab. 4.19.3; cf. Thuc. 8.95.4.
By sea: Hdt. 8.11; Thuc. 3.91.4; Xen. Hell. 2.1.28, 6.2.30. In Persian use: Hdt. 7.128, 8.7.
48. Save for Xen. Hell. 5.1.8–9, all examples are found in land, rather than sea, warfare.
49. Successive signals: Xen. Anab. 2.2.4. Altered meanings: Polyaenus 5.16.4; cf. Hdt.
6.77, 78; Polyaenus 1.14.1. 
50. Aen. Tact. 22.3; Polyaenus 5.39.1.

turies, as well as the third through second, but the bulk of extant ex-
amples is derived from Aeneas Tacticus’ work on the defense of a city
under siege. This distribution does not indicate that the fourth century
was the zenith of the art of secret communication in antiquity; it is rather
the result of the happy chance that some small part of Aeneas’ writing
has been preserved. The reader should keep in mind that Aeneas, how-
ever much he was caught up by a fascination for his subject, was writing
for the bene‹t of those who must detect and thwart such communica-
tion.51 His advice, therefore, might not represent secret state-of-the-art
techniques.
Before I embark on a consideration of selections from Aeneas’ treatise,
it is worth mentioning one method of keeping messages from being dis-
covered that he neglected, perhaps because it was self-evident: this is,
quite simply, not to write them down. The Greeks were by no means
ignorant of the security advantages of a message quietly passed verbally
over one committed to writing: Xenophon himself explicitly makes the
comparison in the Cavalry Commander.52 Short messages that could be
scratched onto surfaces as small as some of those mentioned could hardly
have been dif‹cult to memorize. A courier was needed in either case.
Why add to the risk of compromise by sending objects that could be
detected?53
Despite the risk involved, there is frequent mention of the conveyance
of secret information in written form. There were some advantages to
this: it reduced the duration of contact between courier and recipient to
the amount of time necessary to pass over the physical form of a message
(in comparison, a verbal brie‹ng would take longer and might be over-
heard). This reduced the likelihood of either or both parties being com-
promised. Better yet, contact might be rendered unnecessary by the drops
described later in this chapter. Written dispatches ensured that the recip-
ient read the actual words of the informant, rather than a courier’s para-
phrase, which would be subject to omission or variation due to forget-
fulness or motive. It also enabled a message to be sent without the bearer
knowing its contents, hence reducing the chance of a breach of security.
A major disadvantage to written text was the possibility of discovery.
Conveying the Message
151
51. Aeneas Tacticus (31.1–35) recorded many more than the few examples here offered
to the reader. 
52. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.9. Cf. Macchiavelli Discorsi 3.6.
53. Mention of messages committed to memory can be found at Arrian Anab.
1.25.9–10 and Q. Curtius 7.2.17–19. Cf. [Plato] 2 Epist. 314b–c.

To circumvent this danger, the Greeks contrived ingenious ways of dis-
guising and concealing documents. Demaratus is said to have informed
the Lacedaemonians of the imminent Persian invasion early in the ‹fth
century by writing his message in ink on wooden tablets and then cover-
ing them with wax, in which messages were normally written.54 Other
incidents predating the mid–fourth century include messages disguised in
the form of wound dressings, earrings, and votive tablets.55 A tattoo hid-
den under a slave’s hair and a bladder bearing ink characters (while serv-
ing to carry oil within a ›ask) were imaginative (and possibly imaginary)
innovations.56 More conventional letters could be concealed in apparel
and sandals.57 Other hiding places are suggested in tales of smuggling
and subterfuge, such as the story that poison to be used on Alexander
was conveyed in a mule’s hoof.58
The above stratagems served to make discovery of communication
dif‹cult but they did not conceal the content of a message should it be
found. Aeneas Tacticus recommended a number of ways of making
writing intelligible only to its desired recipient. Two of them are ciphers
of a sort; the others are codes. A simple cipher substitutes one symbol
for another (e.g., one letter for another), in effect producing an alter-
nate alphabet. In very simple ciphers, such as those described by
Aeneas, the relationship between the symbols is constant: a ‹xed,
unchanging pattern of dots represents each of the vowels in his cipher
described at 31.30–31 (“.” for alpha, “:” for epsilon, etc.). Such a
cipher is not dif‹cult to break, given enough text, even for those who
know nothing of cryptography—it may be meant as a simple, easily
understood example, rather than as a recommendation for actual
152
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
54. Hdt. 7.239; Polyaenus 2.20.1; Justin 2.10.13f. (who attributed the invention to
Hannibal Barcas, 21.6.6); Gellius 17.9.16f. Cf. Aen. Tact. 31.14. 
55. Respectively, Aen. Tact. 31.6 (written on leaves, conveyed to Ephesus; cf. White-
head, Aineias the Tactician, 184 ad loc.), 31.7 (on beaten lead), 31.15 (written in ink on a
votive tablet, which was then whitewashed, painted with an appropriate ‹gure, and placed
at a hero’s shrine; the recipient would remove the paint and the wash by dipping the tablet
in oil).
56. Histiaeus shaved his slave’s head and tattooed his message thereon (Hdt. 5.35; Aen.
Tact. 31.28–29; Polyaenus 1.24.1); the bladder contrivance was described by Aeneas Tacti-
cus at 31.10. Cf. Hdt. 1.123; Polyaenus 7.7.1; Leo Byz. 1.4.
57. Aen. Tact. 31.23, 24; see also Leo Byz. 1.7, 10. T.E. Lawrence (25) mentioned the
use of messages sewn into the sandals of couriers in the correspondence between Feisal and
his father during the Arab revolt. 
58. Arrian Anab. 7.27.2. Cf. Q. Curtius 10.10.14; Plut. Alex. 77.2; Paus. 8.18.4. 

employment.59 Should symbols be devised for every letter, as suggested
in 31.31, ‹nding the key might be much more dif‹cult for a people
unfamiliar with letter frequency or other such deciphering tools.60 Hel-
lenistic papyri have been found in Egypt bearing ciphers of this sort—
some of which were accompanied by their keys. Some were sophisti-
cated enough to have evolved from sequential substitution (which was
the basis for Julius Caesar’s famous cipher).61 A problem, however, is
immediately apparent: if you were a guard and noticed a papyrus writ-
ten with strange symbols or illegible letter combinations among the
baggage of a traveler, would you not suspect some subterfuge? A letter
written in such ciphers would therefore have to be concealed.
Aeneas also describes positional ciphers; these had problems as well. It
has been observed that messages based on the Lacedaemonian skutale
can be made legible by anyone with suf‹cient imagination to try wrap-
ping the lettered strip around rods of various diameters.62 Aeneas’ astra-
Conveying the Message
153
59. I have tested Aeneas’ sample passages (in English) on friends and relatives who
know nothing of cryptography. Five required help; four were successful without assistance.
I must note, however, that this passage is not without problems for editors, and readings of
the message vary—cf. Whitehead, Aineias the Tactician, 190–91 ad loc.
60. Or, I must admit, for myself (although I have done some reading and practice).
When applying for a position in the Special Collections of the UCLA University Research
Library, I was interviewed by Mr. P.G. Naiditch. Some knowledge of Greek was required,
and I was given a copy of an “Antike Inschrift gefunden bei Olympia am 7 Mai 1880” (cf.
Joan Evans, Time and Chance: The Story of Arthur Evans and His Forebears [London,
1943] 231). To my frustration and embarrassment, I found it unintelligible. As Mr. Naid-
itch was looking on, I confessed my bewilderment to him, and he advised me to read the
passage aloud. It quickly became clear that the passage was written in English using the
Greek alphabet. The document was a letter of warning sent by Felix von Luschan to the
“spy” Arthur Evans.
61. Gardthausen Grieschische Palaeographie II.305–6; A.S. Hunt, “A Greek Cryp-
togram,” Proceedings of the British Academy 15 (1929): 127–34. I owe these citations to
Leighton 153.
62. Plutarch’s description of a skutale (Lys. 19.5–7; see also Aulus Gellius 17.9) is as
good as any.
When the ephors send out an admiral or a general, they make two round pieces of
wood exactly alike in length and thickness, so that each corresponds to the other in
its dimensions, and keep one themselves, while they give the other to their envoy.
These pieces of wood they call “scytalae.” Whenever, then, they wish to send some
secret and important message, they make a scroll of parchment long and narrow,
like a leathern strap, and wind it round their “scytale,” leaving no vacant space
thereon, but covering its surface all round with the parchment. After doing this, they
write what they wish on the parchment, just as it lies wrapped about the “scytale”;
and when they have written their message, they take the parchment off, and send it, 

gals and disk are dif‹cult to recognize as encryption devices and afford
somewhat better security due to the abstract nature of the cipher, which
does not rely on written characters.63 A simpler method outlined in his
study calls for marking letters of an ordinary text with tiny dots to indi-
cate which were part of the secret message.64 Thus the message is hidden
from casual observation, while its form is not such as to arouse suspicion
and so requires no further disguise or concealment. The employment of
acrostics (akrostikhidia), in which the ‹rst letter of each line of poetry
spells out a message, is attributed by Diogenes Laertius to a certain
Dionysius Metathemenus (“the Renegade”), a contemporary of Hera-
clides Ponticus (›. 360).65
While ciphers substitute alternate symbols for those symbols that nor-
mally compose words, codes replace words or thoughts with symbols or
other words of different or no meaning (e.g., the code word “Torch” was
used to indicate the 1942 invasion of North Africa). Evidence for the use of
codes by the Greeks rests on a single example, which is a small collection of
signals of limited ›exibility: a treacherous gatekeeper communicated with
his city’s foes by means of the arrangement and number of stones by a
watering hole that he was accustomed to visit. In this way he could convey
the watch, detachment, and position to which he had been assigned.66
154
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
without the piece of wood, to the commander. He, when he has received it, cannot
otherwise get any meaning out of it,—since the letters have no connection, but are
disarranged,—unless he takes his own “scytale” and winds the strip of parchment
about it, so that, when its spiral course is restored perfectly, and that which follows
is joined to that which precedes, he reads around the staff, and so discovers the con-
tinuity of the message. And the parchment, like the staff, is called “scytale,” as the
thing measured bears the name of the measure. (Perrin, trans.) 
It is a matter of some contention whether the skutale served to render messages deci-
pherable or merely as a token of authenticity for the message and its bearer. The present
consensus favors the latter purpose. See, e.g., Michell 273–74; Leopold passim; J. Oehler,
“!kut‹lh,” RE 3, no. A.1 (1927): 691–92. For the contrary opinion, see Reinke 115–16;
Leighton 150–52. There is no adequate explanation, however, why this particular method
would be considered appropriate if con‹dentiality was not a consideration. 
63. I.e., a piece of wood with holes denoting letters, through which string was threaded
successively according to the sequence of letters in the message (Aen. Tact. 31.16–22).
64. Aen. Tact. 31.2; his idea has endured into the twentieth century.
65. Diog. Laert. 5.93; he also mentions parastikhidia in reference to the dramatist
Epicharmus (ca. 550–460), at 8.78. I owe my knowledge of these incidents to Margoliouth
(an intriguing and bizarre article) 2.
66. Aen. Tact. 18.20–21; cf. 18.19, where the presence or absence of a ›ock of wool
indicated whether Temenus ought to attack.

Allusions that require a common background or acquaintance can—
and did—serve to conceal meanings.67 When the Lacedaemonian Hippo-
damus was blockaded by Arcadians in Prasiae, a herald came from
Sparta to speak with him. The Arcadians refused to allow the herald into
Prasiae, but Hippodamus hailed him from the walls. Knowing that the
Arcadians were listening, Hippodamus told the herald to bid the Spar-
tans to deliver his garrison from the woman bound in the temple. The
Arcadians present were puzzled, but the Lacedaemonian herald under-
stood the reference. There hung in a temple in Sparta a picture of famine
personi‹ed and enchained; Hippodamus was telling him that the garrison
was starving and immediate relief was imperative.68 The letter written by
Plato to Dionysius (concerning the exiled Dion and his wife) probably
relied on this form of private circumlocution in those passages “clear to
Dionysius alone.”69
Modes of Delivery
There are a few examples of covert communication by signaling, whether
by ‹re or some other device. These suffered from the same defects, and
bene‹ted from the same advantages, as their overt counterparts. How-
ever, signaling by ‹re or other signs catches the eye, and although the
content of a message might not be apparent, the fact that a message was
sent would be. Attendant on this was a danger that the signaler could be
discovered and captured, as was the case with the Athenian Agoratus’
unnamed elder brother.70 More often, therefore, the agents themselves or
couriers enlisted by them brought covert messages; occasionally arrange-
ments were made for places at which secret messages could be dropped
off or picked up.
Conveying the Message
155
67. Cf. Q. Curtius 6.9.15; Paus. 1.37.3, in which he addressed those who were initiated
into mystery rites as knowing his meaning.
68. Polyaenus 2.15.1 (ca. 364); cf. Athen. 452a.
69. Plato was sent by Dionysius to Dion (then exiled in Athens) to learn whether Dion
would object if he gave Dion’s wife to another man. Not surprisingly, Dion took this ill.
Plato sent a letter that was open in other respects but that was clear to Dionysius alone in
this particular. Plut. Dion 21.1, 21.4; cf. [Plato] 2 Epist. 312d. Cf. Plut. Alex. 7.4–9. Cf.
also the tale about Periander’s response to Thrasybulus’ herald (the roles of the two tyrants
are given variously in Hdt. 5.92 and Aristotle Politics 1284a [3.8.3]). 
70. Lysias XIII (Against Agoratus) 65/67.

Agent
Unless one proposes that Demaratus was a spy (which is rather unlikely),
there are no examples before the Peloponnesian War of spies sending
back information while still operating. Instead, they reported once they
had returned home and their mission was over. This practice enabled
them to give comprehensive information and enabled the recipient of the
news to pose questions and get immediate clari‹cation. There was no
need to have physical evidence of secret communication in the form of
letters and the like, unless by chance the agent needed to supplement his
memory. Since other forms of communication that possessed a similar
capacity for detail were not likely to be more rapid than the agent travel-
ing in person, the information would be relatively timely if the spy
returned immediately after he collected it. The disadvantage to this prac-
tice was that the spy either was not in place for an extended period of
time or, if so, delayed communication until the end of his sojourn.
Traitors at times communicated directly with their new allies. There is
a fragmentary but exciting account of a clandestine meeting in the 
Florence fragment of the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia.
. . . in the temple of Demeter and Kore, which is near the walls . . .
through the wood, he was keeping watch inside. And during this
time he kept silent hidden in the wood. But the Athenian, when he
stood guard, would let down a rope over the wall and make a sign
that he had assumed the watch, either by calling or throwing a
stone. The Myndian, having come out of the wood, would ‹rst take
and keep any note that might have been let down by him; then he
himself would attach another to the rope.71
Courier
Although some of those betraying information to the enemy communi-
cated in person, many (from at least the sixth century) had recourse to
156
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
71. Hell. Oxy. 5.2 (Chambers’ reconstruction of the text): [line 5] [tÒ ne]Ñ tÒ t°!
D®mhtr[o! kaÜ Kñ]rh!, ù[!| ¤gg]ç`!` toÝ! teÛxe!Û<n> ¤!ti [. . . .]ou diŒ t¯n | [ìlh]n ¤gegñnei
th [r¡vn eà]!`v. õ` [d]¢ kata | [toè]ton m¢n xrñno[n ²!u]xÛan eäxen | [¤gkr]æca! aêtòn eÞ!
t¯n ìlhn: ÷te d¢ |10 [kata!]taÛh fælaj õ ƒAyh[naÝ]o!, ¤keÝno! m¢n kayeÜ! êp¢r toè
teÛx[ou!] !p‹rton | ¤poÛh!en n ti !hmeÝon ÷t[i] pareÛlh|fen t¯[n f]ulak®n, µ
fyegj‹meno[! µ lÛ]|yÄ balÅn, õ d¢ Mænd<i>o! ¤jel[yÆn ¤]k t°! |15 ìlh! prÇton m¢n eà ti
grammateÝon | eàh par' ¤keÛnou kayeÛmenon [[te]] ¤l‹m|ban`e`n` kaÜ diefælatt[e]n, ¦[peit]a
d¢ pro[!]|°cen aétò! ’n §teron [tÒ !p‹rtÄ g]ramm[a. There is some debate over whether
Mænd<i>o! is a name or an ethnic and over the location of the city to be betrayed: see Bruce
45–49 on 5.2; McKechnie and Kern; in Hell. Oxy. 131. 

couriers or drops while they remained in their city or in their ranks, as
did the spies of Nicias in the late ‹fth century. The category of couriers
can be further divided into those who knew they were conveying secret
information and those who did not.
Couriers aware of their role were chosen from among those wishing to
send the information or from trusted subordinates. In the former case,
the context was usually treachery; in the latter, it could be treachery or
sensitive of‹cial business (either military or political). The degree of
knowledge possessed by such couriers varied. Accomplices of traitors
would often know a great deal, and the information could be imparted
verbally, as in the case of a man sent by the Theban exiles to Charon
regarding the overthrow of Archias.72 A cavalryman of a besieged city,
who was a member of a ‹fth column intending to betray his people,
sewed a letter into his breastplate and allowed himself to be captured in
a raid outside the walls. In this example, the letter would serve more to
indicate to his captors that he came to them deliberately (rather than
making up a story on the spot that he was on their side all along) than to
‹ll in gaps in his own knowledge, as he was privy to the intended treach-
ery.73 The men purportedly coming from Nicias’ spies in Syracuse called
out their message indiscriminately to Athenian soldiers, who then relayed
it to their generals. This cannot be accepted as indicative of normal pro-
cedure, since at other points it is apparent that Nicias had information
not available to his fellow generals, implying a more limited and secure
channel of communication. Instead, this practice no doubt resulted from
Hermocrates’ fear lest someone realize that his men were not who they
pretended to be.74
Some subordinates would be cognizant of the news they bore. When
Alexander sent Amphoterus to Parmenio in response to information
about Amyntas’ plot, he did not entrust the message to a letter; instead,
Amphoterus memorized it (moreover, he traveled disguised as a
native).75 Sicinnus delivered Themistocles’ message verbally as well.
Other couriers might not know the content of the message they were car-
rying but would be aware that it was of a secret nature. In this camp
Conveying the Message
157
72. Plut. Mor. 516cd; Pelopidas 7.2. This man was personally known to Charon, which
would further aid in both communication and recognition.
73. Aen. Tact. 31.8.
74. Thuc. 7.73.3–4; Plut. Nicias 26.1–2; Diod. Sic. 13.18.4–5. In fairness, it must be
noted that the mode of delivery of Hermocrates’ agents was not considered so outlandish
as to provoke Nicias’ suspicions enough to verify their information by other means.
75. Arrian Anab. 1.25.1ff.

belong the slave of Histiaeus and the couriers who handled Pausanias’
correspondence with the Persians.76
There is no hard evidence that covert couriers were a professional or
even specialized breed, but it is not impossible, since the art of smuggling
was not unfamiliar to the Greeks. Besides the usual clandestine importa-
tion of merchandise and arms, there is reference to “a few men” who
yearly deceived the people of Ilium by smuggling in Locrian maidens
despite Ilium’s every precaution.77
It was also possible to dupe an unsuspecting individual to carry mes-
sages without his or her knowledge or consent. Pharnabazus deceived
Lysander in this way, by agreeing to write a letter absolving him from
charges of misconduct, permitting him to read the letter, and then substi-
tuting another document (identical in form, but damning, rather than
absolving, the Spartan) before Lysander returned to Lacedaemon.78
Aeneas suggested sewing a letter written on thin tin into the sandals of a
messenger and then openly sending him with an innocent letter to the
intended recipient. After delivering his missive, the courier would be
asked to spend the night. While he slept his sandals would be unstitched,
the message retrieved, and a reply enclosed. Later he would return bear-
ing another innocent letter.79
Not all Greek couriers were male; indeed, not all were human. Aeneas
suggested employing women for transporting messages written on metal
strips and disguised as earrings.80 He further noted that dogs carried mes-
158
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
76. One presumes that the message was tattooed on Histiaeus’ slave’s head to keep him
from knowing the message he carried—if not, why not give it verbally (unless he was
thought too stupid to memorize the amount of text that could be written on his skull)? This
story, which embodies the sum of all Greek intelligence activity before Alexander in many
histories of espionage (more on account of its bizarre nature than its pertinence), seems to
me rather suspect, since it entails a considerable delay while the slave’s hair grew back, dur-
ing which somebody might catch sight of the message; more important, Histiaeus’ precari-
ous position might have collapsed in the interval. Cf. Hdt. 5.35; Aen. Tact. 31.28–29;
Polyaenus 1.24.1
Pausanias’ couriers must have had an inkling that treachery was in the cards if the regent
thought it necessary to have them killed on delivery of their message (i.e., he feared loose
tongues). See Thuc. 1.132.5.
77. Aen. Tact. 31.24. Since this custom went on yearly for centuries and the women
faced death if caught, there is every likelihood that the Locrians depended on those smug-
glers who were successful and spurned those who were not. 
78. Plut. Lys. 20.1–4; Polyaenus 7.19.1; Cornelius Nepos Lys. 4.
79. Aen. Tact. 31.4; cf. Leo Byz. 1.5.
80. One wonders, however, whether most women would have been afforded ample
opportunity for travel between city-states.

sages in Epirus and Thessaly.81 Aelian mentions a pigeon used to carry a
note from Elis to Aegina, albeit in a private context.82
Drops
Among the Greeks, drops were originally conceived to meet the demands
of physical access. The earliest example is an ongoing correspondence
between Timoxenus of Scione, the commander of a contingent sent by
Scione to help defend Potidaea, and Artabazus, who was commanding
the Persian forces besieging that city in the early ‹fth century.83 Timox-
enus was working to betray Potideia, and the two communicated via let-
ters wrapped around arrows, which were ‹red into predetermined spots.
The matter was exposed, however, when Artabazus’ arrow missed its
mark and wounded a man; the letter was discovered and brought to the
strategoi. Given this context, the idea may have been of Persian origin,
but it must be noted that a bit earlier Themistocles had left messages on
rocks for the Ionians and their Persian masters to ‹nd.84 Certainly the
Greeks used arrows to carry notes between besieger and besieged from
the time of Cimon, but without the notion of a prearranged drop.85
Aeneas Tacticus developed the idea of drops in the fourth century, but
with a different focus: his primary concern was security. There are prob-
lems inherent in a communication system that calls for personal contact
between agent, courier (if employed), and recipient. The transaction
might be seen, for instance, and suspicion might fall on the parties
involved. Couriers could, and did, betray those who relied on them.
Aeneas showed how the drop method could avoid such dangers.
The letter should be sent to a certain place [. . . by a man known
to the recipient] and it should be indicated to him that a message
has come for him and is in the appointed spot, by the fact that the
man comes into the city and buys or sells something. And by this
Conveying the Message
159
81. Aen. Tact. 31.32.
82. The pigeon bore a message from a victorious competitor at the Olympic Games to
the athlete’s father in Aegina (Aelian VH 9.2; the citation is owed to S. Lewis 42 and 168
n. 104). See also Athenaeus 9.395 and, for Roman uses, Pliny NH 10.53 and Front. Strat.
3.13.7–8.
83. Hdt. 8.128. Cf. Aen. Tact. 31.25–27; Polyaenus 7.33.1.
84. Hdt. 8.19; Plut. Them. 9.2.
85. Plut. Cimon 12.3. In terms of fourth-century perceptions, Aeneas Tacticus did not
link the Timoxenus-Artabazus correspondence (at 31.25–27) directly to his discussion of
drops at 31.14 and 31.31. Cf. Caesar Bell. Gall. 5.48.

method neither does the bearer know to whom the message has
been brought nor will the recipient be known as having the letter.86
The omnipresent shrines to heroes also provided ready receptacles for
messages disguised as votive tablets. This method is quite clever: the
intentions of a foreigner asking directions to a local shrine would not be
suspect. Likewise, frequent trips of a citizen to a shrine would appear
quite innocent. If remarked on, those sending messages in this manner
would be noteworthy only for their apparent piety. Their cover might be
still stronger if the chosen shrine was dedicated to a hero connected with
(or reputedly connected with) their families.87 The danger of this practice
would lie in the possibility that dedications concealing messages might be
stolen and hence never received or, still worse, perceived for what they
were.
Unfortunately, once again the specter of theory versus practice con-
fronts us—we cannot be certain that drops in fact existed or were
employed in the manner described by Aeneas. However, it is certain that
an awareness of the potential of the practice existed in the fourth century,
and such knowledge begs to be put into use.88
Unspeci‹ed
As is typical in the history of intelligence, there are examples of covert
communication that lack indication of method and manner. Among
them is the secret correspondence between Phrynichus and Astyochus.
How did Phrynichus know where to get in touch with Astyochus? What
conveyance did he use for his letters? How did he expect Astyochus to
reply? From the preceding discussion, one would expect that a trusted
160
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
86. Aen. Tact. 31.31, Loeb reconstruction and translation; the text may have a lacuna:
tŒ pempñmena gr‹mmata eà! tina tñpon . . . [êp'  nyrÅpou gnvtoè] tÒ pempom¡nÄ d°lon
gÛgne!yai ¤lyñnto! toè  nyrÅpou eÞ! t¯n pñlin kaÜ pvloèntñ! ti µ Ènoum¡nou, ÷ti ´kei
aétÒ gr‹mmata kaÜ keÝtai ¤n tÒ prorrhy¡nti tñpÄ.
87. It is possible that some degree of impiety might be attached to using shrines for these
purposes (cf. Whitehead, Aineias the Tactician, 187 ad loc.). The degree to which this
would bother the pragmatic (but superstitious) Greeks probably varied according to indi-
vidual nature. 
88. Bankers (trapeziteis), with whom documents might be deposited to be recovered by
another person, might have provided convenient opportunities for drops. A perusal of pri-
vate law cases, however, affords the realization that third parties who accepted documents
were not always above taking advantage of their position for their own ends. Thus they
may have been considered unreliable for covert communication. Yet an individual who
became a banker, either as a profession or as a temporary cover, would be in an excellent
position to aid covert communication by providing a drop. 

courier was employed, but the details of such questions drift, unanswered
and lost, on the shoals of the eighth book of Thucydides.89
The Effect of Communication on Intelligence
It is readily apparent that the highest quality intelligence is of no use
unless it can be communicated to those who have need of it. Yet while
theorists such as Xenophon realized that even the most trustworthy intel-
ligence agents could be thwarted in their attempts to pass on informa-
tion, there is little indication that backup or alternate channels were pre-
pared for agents to ensure that their reports were received. When these
are attested, it is in the context of complementary types of communica-
tion—most often signals and couriers, with the former serving to get a
basic message across swiftly, while the latter provided details when they
arrived later. Instead, the Greeks seem to have trusted receipt of messages
to Hermes, or to have relied on more than one agent, presumably reck-
oning that at least one would manage to get word back in time. While
this might seem indicative of incompetence or negligence and might lead
one to think that the Greeks placed little value on intelligence, one must
remember that the lack of effective fallback communication channels
plagued military operations as late as World War II, when intelligence
was not neglected by most commanders.90
In an age before the “real-time” communication of television, radar,
radio, and the like, there was necessarily a lag between event and
report.91 This lag was potentially dangerous.92 This is particularly true of
military intelligence at tactical and operational levels, when a given piece
Conveying the Message
161
89. Thuc. 8.50–51; see also Plut. Alc. 25.5–10.
90. Handel (Intelligence and Military Operations, 62) noted that the British suffered
from this malady in the earlier campaigns in the North African theater.
91. While there are allusions to cledomancy (news traveling more quickly than techno-
logical means allow), these cannot be taken seriously in discussing the effect of communi-
cation on intelligence. See Pritchett 3:132 for some interesting observations and examples.
92. It has been observed (Lee, Information and Frontiers, 163 and n. 67, citing M. Van
Creveld, Command in War [Cambridge, Mass., 1985], 22), with some justi‹cation, that the
timeliness of information is dependent on the speed of information relative to its subject
matter, as opposed to its absolute speed. Yet it is apparent that the speed of electronic trans-
missions is proportionately far greater to that of the fastest jet than that of a courier to a
marching army. The speed of an army’s advance over long distances has not increased
astronomically over that shown in the ancient world—Alexander’s pace in Asia Minor was
not all that much slower than the Allied breakout through France in 1944. Likewise, the
time necessary to effect political decisions has not necessarily been reduced. While ‹re sig-
nals did convey a message at the speed of light (once they were set up), it has been shown
that these messages were limited in range and utility. 

of information might be obsolete by the time of arrival or might have
arrived too late to allow an effective response. When Brasidas was pres-
suring the people of Amphipolis to surrender their city to him, for exam-
ple, Thucydides was a half day’s sail away. By the time a messenger had
informed Thucydides and he could hasten to the rescue, Brasidas had
persuaded the people to admit him, and so Thucydides missed the oppor-
tunity to thwart the Spartan’s ambitions by a narrow margin.93 For this
reason, the Lacedaemonians declined an alliance with Plataea, since they
realized that they were too far away to be able to respond in time to
requests for aid.94 A cynic might retort that this was a pretense covering
an unwillingness due to other reasons, but in any case the point was
acceptable enough to be proffered as an excuse.
The deleterious effect of slow communication channels might be alle-
viated in military contexts by a commander’s presence among his troops,
where his own senses might afford him information, and where his own
voice could convey his wish. Not a few commanders made their decisions
in this context, but the reduction of reaction time was paid for with the
loss of a coherent picture and by a distraction with immediate detail.
Strategic intelligence was less affected by communication time than
were other types of information, since it tended to retain its value over a
longer period of time. The Athenian dependency on imported grain, for
instance, was well known to the Peloponnesians and remained a constant
factor in their conduct of the war in the Aegean. 
While a lack of technology has been shown to be an impediment to
swift and accurate communication, it does have a curious compensation.
Studies in the business world have shown that the use of the telephone
and of other faceless electronic devices has led to a degree of dislocation
and uncertainty in conversants, since they are cut off from nonverbal
cues and kinesics. In a world in which most political and many military
messages were conveyed face-to-face, these signals would have been
available for recipients to interpret (however unconsciously) when receiv-
ing news. Isocrates would have us believe that more trust was put in the
spoken word than in the written, since there was more scope for empha-
162
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
93. Thuc. 4.104.4–106.4. Gomme 3:579 on Thuc. 4.106.4 maintained that Thucydides
must have arranged a signaling system, since a messenger would not have been able to get
the news to Thucydides so quickly over a distance of ‹fty miles. He added: “If this is cor-
rect, the fact that signaling is not expressly mentioned is of some importance; for it implies
that the use of signals was commoner, and more elaborate, than is generally supposed.”
94. Hdt. 6.108.

sis in delivery, yet his characterization may have been in›uenced more by
rhetoric and excuses for his medium (i.e., letters) than by a desire to
re›ect reality.95
Contextualizing the Message
Receiving the Message
Yet another factor in›uencing the reception of information is the nature
of the political process within a state. There is some variation in detail,
but recipients can be generally classi‹ed according to whether a single
person can make policy decisions or whether such a capability is
accorded to a collective body.96
There is a tendency for agents and sources to be brought directly to
military commanders, tyrants, and kings, after an initial reception by
guards or pickets. This tendency may in part be a result of a
simpli‹cation on the part of our sources, especially in cases where the
name of the commander was used with a verb of learning and where no
further details were provided. Xenophon’s casual commendation of Age-
silaus’ personal interview of deserters both provides evidence for the
practice and implies the existence of contrary custom.97 The guidelines
provided to sentries regarding when the commander may or may not be
disturbed for news probably varied according to individual, but it
appears that a competent leader was expected to be generally available.98
Xenophon with some pride brought attention to his own practice of
receiving any who had news for him, no matter what his personal cir-
Conveying the Message
163
95. Isoc. Epist. I (To Dionys.) 2: “everyone puts more faith in the spoken word than the
written”; cf. V (To Phil.) 25ff.
96. Cf. Starr 32ff.; Riepl 430–31.
97. Xen. Ages. 1.19. Cf. Cyrus personally questioning captives (Xen. Cyr. 6.3.9).
98. This might not be true of the Greeks’ less egalitarian neighbors. Herodotus told how
Deioces was not easy of access, and it is possible that his story has foundations in ‹fth-cen-
tury Persian practice, at least in times of peace (Hdt. 1.99; cf. Plut. Them. 27.2). The ruler
probably did not normally personally interview most sources (e.g., the tale of Xerxes’ inter-
rogation of the captured Greek spies appears to have been contrary to customary proce-
dure), although he might have been more approachable on campaign. Herodotus’ account
(4.96) of Coes son of Erxander is suggestive: Coes was in command of the contingent from
Mytilene accompanying Darius on his expedition into Scythia and had information he
wished to impart to the king. He did not do so, however, until he had satis‹ed himself that
Darius was receptive to others’ suggestions. Charidemus was bolder and less fortunate (Q.
Curtius 3.2.10–19; Diod. Sic. 17.30.4).

cumstances.99 Aeneas Tacticus also warned leaders against postponing
attention to news, and his examples—including the fall of the Cadmeia,
Lampsacus and of Mytilene—are of interest not only in that they censure
the leaders’ failure to respond promptly but also in that they provide evi-
dence that guards and attendants felt free to admit messengers to their
leaders at all times.100
Alexander appears to have been somewhat distanced from informants
by his of‹cers and guards. These men decided whether or not to disturb
the king so that he might hear tidings. When Eurylochus and Epimenes
came with information pertaining to a threat to the king’s life, Ptolemy
and Leonnatus ushered them in and awoke Alexander.101 But Philotas
did not communicate Cebalinus’ report of an assassination plot to the
king, perhaps (as he claimed) because neither it nor the source seemed
credible, or perhaps (as his prosecutors claimed) because he was a partic-
ipant in the plot. He paid for his decision with his life.102 Cebalinus still
hesitated to go directly to Alexander after Philotas put him off, and he
eventually sought Metron as an intermediary. It is evident from the latter
instance that there was a real danger that a king or tyrant might lack crit-
ical information because of precautions taken for his person and because
of the consequent reliance on subordinate agents.
There were three main routes by which information came into a gov-
erning body: through state channels, through the private information
resources possessed by leaders, and through the personal experience and
common knowledge of those possessing a vote. These three routes inter-
sected in one or more governing bodies, and the process resulting in their
synthesis was, in effect, a process of interpretation and evaluation. 
164
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
99. Xen. Anab. 4.3.10: “Two youths ran up to Xenophon while he was having break-
fast; for all knew that it was possible to approach him breaking fast or dining, or wake him
up if he was sleeping, to speak with him if anyone had something to say regarding the war.”
If Diodorus’ account is to be believed, Alexander received news of Philotas’ plot while in the
bath; he reacted at once (Diod. 17.79.5). Cf. Onas. 11.6: “Let [the general] admit everyone
who wants to report anything, whether slave or free, night or day, on the march or in camp,
when resting, bathing, or eating; for those who put things off and are dif‹cult of access, and
bid their subordinates refuse those who come to see them, consequently fail in many and
important matters or are ruined by their neglect; for often informants come at critical
moments, when it is possible to avert something in the nick of time.” See also the practice
and comments of T.E. Lawrence (553).
100. Aen. Tact. 31.33–34, citing Astyanax, tyrant of Lampsacus, and Archias at
Thebes, and alluding to the capture of Mytilene. Cf. Plut. Pelopidas 10.3–4 (not mentioned
in Xen. Hell. 5.4.6–7); Plut. Mor. 596e–f.
101. Q. Curtius 8.6.22ff.
102. Q. Curtius 6.7.16ff.; Diod. Sic. 17.79.1; Arrian Anab. 3.26.2; Plut. Alex. 49.3.

Information appears to have been received by collective bodies accord-
ing to standing parameters of more or less complexity. It is not my task
to attempt reconstructions of the governmental processes of the many
states of the Greek world. Such studies would be most important for
assessments of given states’ mechanisms for evaluation and hence of their
use of intelligence, but they would properly be the scope of whole books.
Here, I will con‹ne myself to a few generalities.
In states governed by collective bodies, procedures existed for receiv-
ing news from representatives of other states, from their own envoys and
agents, and from other informants, domestic or foreign. These were not
con‹ned to ad hoc usages of customary channels but were sometimes
based on established agendas for discussion of continuing concerns.103 In
many states there existed more than one deliberating body, so that initial
reception of information, deliberation, proposals, and decisions might
take place in various bodies depending on the nature of the issue, might
be repeated in more than one body, or might be divided between bodies.
In states such as Sparta, this system might have existed to ensure that ini-
tial evaluation was undertaken by men experienced in politics before the
matter was referred to the Apella for a yes-or-no vote, but in states such
as Athens, in which the membership of the boulé was little more expert
than their counterparts in the ekklesia, the division might have offered
little advantage from the standpoint of evaluation.
Before I go further, the input of the voting citizens, particularly in
those states governed by democracy, ought to be described. It has been
argued, not without reason, that the average citizen of a democratic polis
(like his contemporary counterpart) did not possess an adequate depth or
breadth of knowledge for making decisions on foreign policy.104 Conse-
quently, his vote was elicited through persuasive oratory rather than fac-
tual presentation. This scenario is generally accurate but needs some
quali‹cation. First, the plays of Aristophanes demand from their audi-
Conveying the Message
165
103. In fourth-century Athens, the defense of the khora was customarily included on the
agenda of the kuria, as was border defense on that of the ekklesia ([Aristotle] Ath. Pol.
43.4; Aristotle Rhet. 360a).
104. Cf. Starr 37 and n. 2, citing Demosth. X (4 Phil.) 1 and Thuc. 3.38—good ex-
amples, but I am somewhat wary of the speakers (Demosthenes and Cleon), who had every
motive both to assert the superiority of their own views and to maintain (perhaps falsely,
certainly with bias) that the current policy of the citizens was due to ignorance rather than
prudence. Similar charges might be made of the voting public in the United States and
Canada today; “packaging” and “image” are still quite important in deciding issues. Cf.
Handel, Intelligence and Military Operations, 28–29, on the dif‹culties faced by Mont-
gomery’s intelligence of‹cers when presenting information to him. 

ence a far deeper political awareness than modern popular humor and at
least as much as that found on the editorial pages of newspapers. General
knowledge of the political world would have been absorbed from one’s
own and others’ experiences (including past sessions of the assembly) and
crystallized in a pattern of factual detail, beliefs, and prejudices. Current
information was probably derived from casual conversations, especially
in the agora or at symposia. Second, presbeis, heralds, and messengers
were often introduced to the ekklesia (at least in Athens, and most prob-
ably in other democratic states), which indicates not only that citizens
could listen to information directly from its source but that such an
opportunity was perceived to be valuable.105 Finally, the ability of an
orator to persuade the average citizen must be set against the citizen’s fre-
quent exposure to oratory in assembly and in the courts. The analogy of
a television commercial might be helpful: commercials are effective, and
the more credible or clever or entertaining a commercial is, the more
well-disposed one may feel toward the product it advertises. But the con-
sumer viewing a commercial, while no doubt in›uenced, does not neces-
sarily divorce reason altogether when making a final decision to spend
hard-earned money. The Greek citizen sitting in assembly had a further
advantage over the modern consumer: he heard arguments both for and
against proposals. One should not expect his actions to be dictated solely
by susceptibility to persuasion. Let the model stand, then, with the above
provisions. 
The intersection of the three routes, and the beginning of the process
of interpretation, occurred when an of‹cial response to a piece of infor-
mation was called for. At this point individuals of differing points of
view—unless, by strange chance, all were unanimous in their opinion—
argued for different responses. With respect to the information at issue,
they could argue in two ways: ‹rst, that the information was true, false,
or incomplete; second, that the information ought to be interpreted in a
certain way. Both means could, of course, be used in conjunction; the sec-
ond was more common than the ‹rst.
Arguments for the veracity of information generally consisted of
af‹rmations of the credibility of the source. For example, when dis-
cussing the quality of Philip’s troops, Demosthenes said, “As I myself
have heard from one of those who lived in that very land [Macedonia]—
166
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
105. Such seems to have been the case in Chios, at Thuc. 8.14.2 (cf. Meiggs and Lewis
no. 8).

a man who would never be the sort to lie—they are no better than any-
one else.”106 Those who argued that information was false attempted to
demonstrate the opposite—that the source was not trustworthy or that
the content was improbable (the treatment of the latter often degenerated
into the former). Thucydides portrayed Athenagoras doing both, when
arguing that the Athenian expedition was a myth: “So now that is what
these reports mean—reports that did not arise uncontrived but were fab-
ricated by men who always stir things up. But you, if you consider well,
will reckon the probabilities not looking to what these men report but
from what clever and widely experienced men—as I deem the Athenians
to be—would do.”107 Contradictory reports could also be found, as
when Cleon proclaimed that the situation in Pylos was other than a mes-
senger reported, and as when Nicias and Alcibiades used different, and
sometimes incompatible, items of information to portray contradictory
views of the feasibility of an expedition in Sicily.108 The states of health
of Philip and Alexander were not infrequently subject to contrary
rumors.109
Information depicted as incomplete was handled in a number of ways.
The most popular was to supplement it with facts gleaned from a private
source, as Demosthenes did with his anonymous informant from Mace-
don.110 This tactic both allowed the speaker to reinforce his case with
further facts (real or imagined) and also gave him a claim to special
authority. It is in this role that those who had private networks func-
tioned best, especially when their claim was recognized. Demosthenes,
for instance, when evaluating Philip’s strength before the assembly, dif-
ferentiated the understanding of a casual observer from his own expert
knowledge: he claimed privileged information that the Thessalians had
resolved on actions indicating a break with Philip.111
The same device was also of utility when presenting an interpretation
of an item of information. An excellent example is provided by Brasidas,
who saw his foes’ manner of comportment and called out to his own
Conveying the Message
167
106. Demosth. II (2 Olynth.) 17.
107. Thuc. 6.36.3. 
108. Thuc. 4.27.3, 6.9–19.
109. See, e.g., Arrian Anab. 1.7.3–6.
110. Demosth. II (2 Olynth.) 17. Cf. Lysias VIII (Accusation of calumny) 8–9.
111. Demosth. I (1 Olynth.) 21–22; cf. XVIII (On the crown) 172. Isocrates, when writ-
ing an oration to Philip (V [To Philip] 75), denied that Demosthenes and Philip’s other
detractors had a right to claim exact knowledge; it is evident, however, that Isocrates here
had a motive for so depicting them. 

men: “These men will not withstand us—they show it in the movement
of their spears and heads; when that occurs among men, they rarely with-
stand attackers.”112 Brasidas took a detail observed by all and attached a
meaning to it. He did this to hearten his troops, one suspects, rather than
based on specialized knowledge (in effect, the Athenians did stand up to
the attack, if only for a short while). He was, however, perceived as cred-
ible, being both experienced and valorous. In the event, the perception
was justi‹ed, since he led his men to his death and their victory. 
It often happened that the same information was presented with dif-
ferent interpretations by two parties: in the debates of rival embassies—
such as those of the Corinthians and Corcyrans at Athens or those of the
Corinthians and Athenians at Sparta—there was little or no quibbling
over whether or not events occurred; instead, the signi‹cance and perti-
nence of the events was hotly contested.113 In such cases, the democratic
assembly acted more as a jury in a court case than as a body deliberating
information. In such contexts emotional appeals are most powerful, and
consideration of information was perhaps less a concern than was sym-
pathy with those interpreting it.
Interrogation
Not all informants were willing, and even those who were could be
moved to suppress, alter, or otherwise in›uence the information they
imparted. The interrogator had to develop both a skill enabling him to
sense when another person was withholding information and an ability
to motivate the person to provide it. The ‹rst attribute is dif‹cult to
quantify and seems to be a function of reason and intuition developed
through personal experience. It should be noted, however, that the intel-
ligence evaluator of ancient Greece would often be able to check his
source’s words against his nonverbal communication (e.g., posture, eye
contact), since information was frequently conveyed orally rather than
through writing. The ability to effectively motivate an informant was and
remains the product of keen study of psychology, but often interrogators
resorted to less subtle but effective stimuli, including torture, threats of
torture or violence, rewards or promised rewards, blackmail, and psy-
chological manipulation to loosen the tongues of recalcitrant individuals.
168
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
112. Thuc. 5.10.5. The context is in a military, rather than democratic, setting but the
intent and effect is relevant.
113. Thuc. 1.32–43, 1.68–78.

Torture or threats of death were employed to compel information, to
ensure its accuracy, or to accomplish both these ends. Obviously torture
would only be feasible for sources over which the interrogator had power
of life and death (such as slaves, captives, deserters, and suspected trai-
tors) and would not be applicable to those who could not be harmed due
to law, consequence, or relative power (heralds, allied leaders, etc.).
Agents employed by the interrogator (such as scouts or watchers) could
be punished or even killed for suppressing information or failing to per-
form their duties.114
In Athenian legal practice slaves were forced to undergo torture before
their testimony was admissible in some types of court cases.115 Conse-
quently the ef‹cacy of torture was upheld or questioned by prosecutors
and defendants depending on whether testimony was advantageous or
deleterious to their position. In different contexts Antiphon provided
arguments for both sides: “torture forces people to tell the truth, even if
the result will be death, since the compulsion of the moment overrides all
else”;116 “I need not remind you, I think, that witnesses under torture are
biased in favor of those doing the torturing.”117 In his work on rhetoric,
Aristotle illustrated ways in which evidence obtained from torture could
be upheld or attacked.118
Psychological manipulation was more broadly applicable and often
equally effective. Methods were as varied and enduring as human nature.
For example, the technique of eliciting information while pretending to
Conveying the Message
169
114. Alexander is reported to have had the phulakes guarding the tomb of Cyrus tor-
tured when he learned that the grave had been plundered. He released them when he had
established that they had not been privy to the theft (Arrian Anab. 6.2.11). In this instance,
the torture was applied in the context of a criminal investigation rather than in that of
receiving guards’ reports; hence the example must be taken as exceptional.
115. Slaves were tortured for evidence in those types of trial in which “they deny a theft
or conspire with their masters” (Antiphon 1 Tetr. 3.4). In theory, free citizens could not be
tortured and were protected by a decree passed in the archonship of Scamandrius (Andoc.
On the mysteries 43; cf. Antiphon 1 Tetr. 3.4; Demosth. XXIX [Against Aphobus III] 14,
39). Andocides mentioned (loc. cit.) that this decree was suspended on the motion of a cer-
tain Pisander in the panics concerning the herms and profanations, and examples of its
neglect in other crises are not lacking (see, e.g., Antiphon Murd. Her. 30, 49–50; Plut. Mor.
509a). Cf. Bushala and DuBois on this subject.
116. Antiphon VI (On the choreutes) 25. See also Antiphon I (Against the stepmother)
10; Antiphon 1 Tetr. 2.7; Demosth. XXIX (Against Aphobus III) 5, 11, 37; Lysias On a
wound by premeditation 10, 14; Lycurgus Against Leocrates 28–30.
117. Antiphon V (On the murder of Herodas) 31—the prosecution alone could release
a slave from torture. For the ambiguity see also Q. Curtius 7.2.34 on the confessions of
Philotas.
118. Aristot. Rhet. 1376b–1377a.

be fully informed (called “show of knowledge”) is attested in both the
ancient and modern worlds. An example from a legal case might be
instructive. In the course of investigating his wife’s in‹delity, a certain
Euphiletus took aside his wife’s servant and threatened her with torture
if she did not confess that his wife was having an affair. She refused to
admit that his wife was guilty. But Euphiletus had earlier been told that
Eratosthenes might have been involved, so he pretended he knew the
whole story, mentioning Eratosthenes by name, and gave out that he was
merely establishing corroborating evidence. At this the servant thought
the game was up and provided full details in her confession.119
Examples of interrogation of voluntary informants can be found in
law cases and in literature as well, but Xenophon provided the most
detailed outline of a debrie‹ng in a scene depicting the return of the spy
Araspas in the Education of Cyrus.120 As previously described in chapter
3, this debrie‹ng was rather straightforward: there was an admonition
not to conceal or neglect anything, a statement professing the agent’s
integrity and the means by which he accomplished his mission and gained
access to the information, and a question-and-answer session in which
information was both volunteered and demanded. Aeschylus’ Seven
against Thebes provides a similar, if more stylized, reconstruction of a
debrie‹ng, in this case of an anonymous kataskopos by Eteocles.121
Examples of interrogation of unwilling (or at least involuntary) subjects
are not uncommon but are not generally detailed. The most elaborate is
the poetic account of the questioning of the captive Dolon by Odysseus
in the Iliad. It is roughly similar to the accounts already mentioned. One
might compare briefer anecdotes in Xenophon’s Anabasis, such as cap-
tives questioned about routes and geography.122
170
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
119. Lysias I (On the murder of Eratosthenes) 19. The same device was also used when
interrogating German prisoners of war in World War II. American intelligence of‹cers
would have at their disposal both background information from other sources and identity
documents taken from prisoners (the abbreviations and codes of which they understood bet-
ter than the captives). They used these to impress the Germans with remarks on their past
histories and so give them the impression that in all cases they were merely con‹rming that
which was already known. A variation was to make leading statements, saying, e.g., “We
have learned that your unit was responsible for the execution of ten civilians,” when there
was a suspicion that something of this sort had occurred, to which a prisoner of war  might
reply: “Oh no, sir—only ‹ve” (P. Levine, conversation with the author, 13 June 1993).
120. Cf. Od. 4.630ff., 13.232ff., 16.235ff., 16.460ff.
121. Aeschylus Seven Against Thebes 369–676. This passage has recently been dis-
cussed by H. Roisman (17–36), but in a literary context.
122. Iliad 10.370–459; Xen. Anab. 3.5.14–15, 4.1.22–23. Cf. Hdt. 7.146; Thuc.
8.33.4; Plut. Nic. 30.1.

With some skill, intelligence could be derived from people who did not
realize that they were providing substance of material value—even from
those imparting misinformation. At one point in the odyssey of the Ten
Thousand, the Greeks were encamped by a city on a fertile and lush tract
between the Tigris and a canal. Here a messenger came to Clearchus
from Ariaeus and Artaozus, who were Persians who had formerly fought
for Cyrus (and hence claimed goodwill to the Greeks) but were now in
the army of the Persian king Artaxerxes. The messenger warned
Clearchus to guard the bridge over the Tigris, since Artaxerxes intended
to burn it and thereby cut the Greeks off. At the same time he warned of
a night attack. Clearchus was alarmed, but a young man present pointed
out to him that the stories were inconsistent, since it was in the Persians’
interest to preserve the bridge for their own use if they were to attack.
Clearchus then inquired of the messenger how large the “island” was. On
being told it was extensive, he evaluated what he had been told and per-
ceived the true intent of the Persians: they wished to prevent him from
‹ring the bridge himself and establishing himself in a defensible area in
which he could easily provide for his men.123
Interpreting Messages
Interpretation has more than one denotation, paralleling, if you will, the
problems the Greeks faced when trying to understand information. In
one sense, interpretation refers to the verbal translation of an informant’s
report into language comprehensible to its recipient (e.g., Persian to
Greek). In another, it refers to conveying the signi‹cance of observed or
reported information (e.g., the signi‹cance of an envoy’s demand for
earth and water).
Verbal Translation
Verbal translation is not easy. Abstract concepts can be particularly
dif‹cult to convey, as the Greeks found out to their cost when they
equated libertas and ¤leuyerÛa. Both words can be roughly translated as
“liberty,” but liberty had different parameters to a Roman and a Greek.
Concepts and terms such as hegemony (²gemonÛa) and democracy
(dhmokratÛa) might well have lacked easy equivalents in other tongues,
and Greek might equally have lacked words for foreign concepts. In the
Conveying the Message
171
123. Xen. Anab. 2.4.14–24. To be on the safe side, Clearchus still stationed a guard at
the bridge.

world of diplomacy, this represented a potential problem. It may also
have led to misapprehension in the military sphere (what is a Lacedae-
monian lñxo!?). One can only imagine how exacerbated the problem
was when Alexander was campaigning far to the east and probably had
to make inquiries through two interpreters—one to translate Greek and
Persian, another to translate the local language and Persian—since it was
unlikely that a local could speak Greek.124 Imperfect knowledge of a lan-
guage can only make understanding more dif‹cult. Trivial differences in
syntax can lead to major differences in meaning. There is a story that
when a priest at the oracle of Zeus Ammon intended to address Alexan-
der as “my son” (Î paidÛon), he mistook a neuter for a masculine and so
hailed him as “son of Zeus” (Î paidÛo! = Î paÝ DÛo!).125
The problem of understanding might not have only applied to foreign
tongues: Greek was not uniformly spoken through space or time.126
Besides potential misunderstanding due to dialect, words themselves
could and did change their connotation, as Thucydides described in the
context of stasis.127 Finally, one can no doubt draw from one’s own per-
sonal experience examples of miscommunication between two ›uent
speakers of the same language raised in the same culture.
Those who attempted to bridge language barriers were called
hermeneis. Curiously, their use is not often mentioned in the sources,
even when they would logically have been needed. When present, they
are usually found attached to rulers of considerable status, such as Dar-
ius, Cyrus, Seuthes, and Alexander, or in the service of military com-
manders abroad, as in the case of the Ten Thousand. They are not found
employed by states with collective governments, although there is
implicit evidence that they were available. The letters sent by the Persian
172
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
124. Cf. Engels 339; Arrian Anab. 7.1.5; Arrian Indica 28.5.
125. Plut. Alex. 27.9, an anecdote too good to be true.
126. S. Lattimore has brought to my attention the possibility of cognitive dissonance in
speeches of (1) foreign-born statesmen, such as Dinarchus, who would have been born to a
Doric dialect, speaking Attic Greek (at least, Attic Greek is what we ‹nd in their preserved
speeches) and (2) speakers in court who either delivered speeches composed by a more
gifted orator, or spoke in an Attic dialect when they themselves were of foreign extraction
(e.g., Euxitheus, who probably spoke in the Aeolic dialect yet delivered Antiphon’s On the
Murder of Herodes in ‹ne Attic). I have not been able to ‹nd any indication that suppres-
sion of dialect marred credibility, but certainly orators tried to adapt speeches to their
speakers. In his Rhetoric (1405a8, 1406a15), Aristotle said that one of the bene‹ts of
metaphors and epithets was that they gave a pleasing “exotic air” (tò jenikñn and jenik¯n
poieÝ t¯n l¡jin) to a speaker’s words. 
127. Thuc. 3.82.4.

king to the Lacedaemonians in 425 were not written in Greek, as Thucy-
dides recorded that they were translated by the Athenians when they
were intercepted.128 Gomme has suggested that metics might have served
the Athenians as interpreters, but one must also realize that the Persian
king expected the Lacedaemonians to be able to translate the documents.
When Plutarch described the advent of Persian envoys demanding earth
and water, he included among them a man bilingual in Persian and
Greek.129 It may be, therefore, that embassies were accompanied when
necessary by their own interpreter—motives for this practice, such as
independence, security, and reliability, come to mind easily enough, if
this was in fact the case. Some interpreters attached to rulers are named
in the sources and were individuals of consequence, with a more or less
permanent and professional of‹ce. Those serving generals or private indi-
viduals are not named and were employed on a less of‹cial and more
temporary basis.130 Interpreters must also have been available to mer-
chants and travelers, as they were for Herodotus when he was in
Egypt.131 In a pinch, Greeks could try to convey meanings with gestures
or mien.132
Most interpreters were not ethnic Greeks. Indeed, the Greeks seemed to
have a reluctance to learn a tongue other than their own—Peuces might
have been the only Macedonian in Alexander’s force to learn Persian, and
he did so only after his appointment as satrap.133 Such sentiment was not
Conveying the Message
173
128. Thuc. 4.50.1–3.
129. Plut. Them. 6.2.
130. Interpreters in Herodotus’ stories of the Persian kings, however, tend to be anony-
mous, perhaps because of the ahistorical nature of many of the tales. See, e. g., 1.86, 3.38,
3.140. 
131. Hdt. 2.125.
132. At Anab. 4.5.33 Xenophon records that Greek soldiers communicated with
Armenian boys by signs as if the boys were deaf and dumb; cf. Hdt. 4.113 (Scythians and
Amazons). Quintus Curtius (8.12.9) painted an amusing picture of Alexander encountering
the Indian ruler Omphis. The two were unable to communicate in speech and attempted to
convey goodwill through their countenance (an interpreter was soon found). 
133. Arrian Anab. 6.30.3. It is not certain that Arrian meant that Peuces was unique. He
might have been the only Macedonian considered worthy of mention, and the passage reads
mñno! tÇn llvn Makedñnvn metabalÆn t¯n Mhdik¯n kaÜ fvn¯n t¯n Per!ik¯n ¤kmayÆn
kaÜ t”lla jæmpanta ¤! trñpon tòn Per!ikòn kata!keua!‹meno!, so that it is possible
(although not probable) that the combination is what was singular. In any case, “going
native” drew disapproval (cf. Arrian Anab. 7.6.3). Quintus Curtius (3.12.12) described
Leonnatus speaking with Darius’ mother, apparently with no translator present, but the
account seems ‹ctitious, and in any case mechanics might have been omitted for the sake of
drama. 

evident among their neighbors.134 Consequently Greeks coming into con-
tact with people of other languages were often forced to rely on an inter-
preter who differed from them in ethnic origin.135 This might have been a
disadvantage with respect to availability or ‹delity and security (though
perhaps not, as Greeks seem to have betrayed Greeks as often as anyone
else did). It did have a positive aspect: foreign interpreters could provide
their patrons with additional information about unfamiliar lands and peo-
ple. When an embassy of Persians, formerly allies in Cyrus’ cause, came
up to the Greek leaders, the man interpreting for the Greeks recognized
the brother of their enemy Tissaphernes among them and communicated
his realization that the embassy was not to be trusted.136
There are some instances in which the credibility or loyalty of an inter-
preter was dubious,137 but how could those speaking through him dis-
cern this? Seuthes knew some Greek already and so had some measure of
control over Abrozelmes, but he was probably exceptional in this
regard.138
Explanation of Signi‹cance
On Herodotus’ canvas, the Spartans at Thermopylae—sitting in clusters
or alone, combing their long hair, and lounging at ease on the edge of
ruin—are juxtaposed by a look of perplexity on the face of a Persian
scout. The tidings were no less strange to Xerxes. Numbers and defenses
both scout and king could reckon and despise, but Herodotus’ vignette
demands that Demaratus, an exiled king of Sparta, be present in the
king’s train, so that Xerxes might know (if never really understand) what
these actions meant: his delay was futile, since his opponents would never
surrender but were preparing themselves for death in battle.139
174
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
134. Cf. Hdt. 9.16; Diod. Sic. 17.67.1. Herodotus (2.154) related a story of Psam-
metichus, ruler of Egypt, wherein he gave Egyptian boys to those Greeks who helped him
gain his throne, so that the boys would learn Greek—Herodotus supposed these were the
ancestors of the Egyptian interpreters, who formed a class in Egypt (Hdt. 2.164).
135. The Greek colonists in Asia Minor, Italy, and Sicily must surely have faced dif‹cul-
ties communicating with the indigenous peoples, but no record is left of their solutions to
this problem, which, if not overcome, would have rendered most types of information
sources useless. Instead, most examples come from Xenophon’s account of the Ten Thou-
sand, while the remainder are derived from the campaigns of Alexander and the travels of
Herodotus.
136. Xen. Anab. 2.5.35.
137. Xen. Anab. 7.6.43; Arrian Indica 28.5.
138. Xen. Anab. 7.6.8–9.
139. Hdt. 7.209–10. The incident is referred to in the Suda s.v. (oddly enough) ƒAlogÛa.

Interpretation serves to make information accessible to its recipient.
It is a major step in the progression of information to intelligence.
Needless to say, not all examples are so dramatic, and many acts of
interpretation are unconscious—a yellow sign with a bent arrow, for
example, is immediately interpreted by a driver to signify a curve in the
road ahead. There is a danger, however, in misinterpreting things that
resemble things familiar to us—Americans driving in Canada have been
known to mistake speed limits posted in kilometers per hour for limits
in miles per hour. In the meeting between Alexander and Omphis,
Alexander had at ‹rst thought Omphis came to offer battle, since the
Indian led his troops, as a formal reception, arrayed as if for war. The
Macedonian at once set about preparing for an onslaught, whereupon
Omphis rightly diagnosed Alexander’s misinterpretation and rode for-
ward alone.140
More generally, the meaning of a piece of information is not always
clear when treated in isolation. If a scout returned to tell his comman-
der that a company carried few provisions in its baggage train, this
piece of news could be open to several interpretations. The troops
might have planned a short march that they would complete quickly,
since they would be relatively unencumbered. Another possibility is
that they would march far but slowly, due to the need to forage. A third
is that they expected to ‹nd supplies furnished by friends and sympa-
thizers along their route and would therefore travel quickly and far. If
the commander knew that the people of a nearby city were friendly to
the company’s men, he might favor the third interpretation. He might
also see an opportunity: a delay would cause the company to become
vulnerable to shortages, so he might send peltasts to slow their
progress, or he might contrive obstacles across their expected route. He
might arouse false suspicions and fears among the people of the city
supplying provisions, or he might undertake some other action to
exploit the information.
The above collation and interpretation of information is a crude and
simple example of intelligence. Not surprisingly, most matters were far
more complex in both number of variables and possible interpretations.
Perhaps in consequence the Greeks invested considerable time and energy
in interpretation and evaluation. 
Conveying the Message
175
140. Q. Curtius 8.12.8.

Verisimilitude and Validation
Credibility in classical Greece was governed by perceptions of individu-
als, rather than by a ‹xed hierarchy of agents or sources. Demosthenes
once said that captives were more trustworthy than other sources, since
they had no interests of their own to further.141 While it is true that cap-
tives were taken or questioned to verify information provided by other
sources and that they were especially vulnerable to retribution if they
were proved deceitful, one might well imagine Demosthenes saying 
otherwise if it was in his interest to speak contrary to the testimony of a
captive. More indicative of ancient practice is the sentiment attributed to
Agesilaus, who claimed that when he heard praise or blame spoken of a
man, he sought information on the speaker before believing the
words.142 The criteria for credibility were essentially threefold: character,
access, and motive.
Perceptions of the character of the informant were crucial, as is illus-
trated in efforts to uphold or demolish on this basis the testimony of wit-
nesses in law cases.143 Sian Lewis has already done an admirable job of
delineating the various factors in›uencing assessment of character, such
as social class, ethnicity, gender, and reputation, leaving me only the task
of adding that white hair also led an air of authority to words. For ex-
ample, Lysias noted that he sought the eldest Plataean when making
inquiries about the status of a certain Pancleon, who claimed to be from
that polis.144
Access to information was also important and could mitigate antipa-
thy aroused by less than desirable character traits, at least for a while.
Alcibiades, for instance, was valued by the Spartans because of his inti-
macy with Athenian capabilities and machinations; hence his previous
excesses were for a time overlooked. Eyewitnesses were, sensibly enough,
thought more trustworthy than those who had heard of events by
hearsay. Iphicrates, for example, was suspicious of reports of the death of
Mnasippus that came to him en route to Corcyra in 373, since they were
not from eyewitnesses. He thought the reports were meant to deceive
176
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
141. Demosth. X (4 Phil.) 32.
142. Plut. Mor. 208d; cf. Xen. Ages. 11.4.
143. See, e.g., Lysias XXVI (On the scrutiny of Evander) 21ff.
144. Lysias XXIII (Against Pancleon) 5. Cf. Iliad 1.250–74; Isoc. VI (Archidamus) 4. 

him.145 Similar assessments can be found in the programmatic statements
of Thucydides, who further points out that even those present at the same
event remember things differently.146 Alexander and Xenophon also per-
ceived the need to establish how the source or agent obtained informa-
tion. Alexander questioned a prisoner as to whether he knew of a path
around the Susian Rocks by hearsay or personal observation; the latter
was esteemed as the more certain type of knowledge.147 Xenophon’s
methods are probably re›ected in his descriptions of Cyrus, who asked of
his ally how he knew that a large force of the enemy was a‹eld against
him, and who was pleased to learn that his ally’s information was
con‹rmed by many people coming with different versions of the same
story.148 Knowledge about the source was especially of use when dealing
with people of limited experience. On his trek back from India, Alexan-
der sent men ahead to ‹nd out how far distant the ocean lay. His men
questioned some locals downriver, who told them they had never heard
of such a body of water, but who mentioned that on the third day of their
voyage downstream the Macedonians would reach bitter water. The
scouts correctly deduced that the bitter water was saltwater and that the
ocean was close. They recognized that the knowledge of the people they
had encountered was incomplete due to isolation.149
While agents entrusted with information gathering rarely had need to
justify their communication of information, the motivations of sources
were usually carefully considered. People with interests at stake
demanded cautious treatment. If you were seeking to purchase a home,
you would be more likely to believe what your sister tells you of a house
she visited than what you hear from its owner, even though the latter’s
knowledge would be far more comprehensive. So, too, the Greeks nor-
mally exercised caution in the cases of exiles appealing for aid or traitors
Conveying the Message
177
145. Xen. Hell. 6.2.31. Cf. Thuc. 3.29.1–2: Prof. Lattimore (conversation with the
author, 27 May 1994) observed that in this passage Thucydides seems to mock Alcidas for
his tardy efforts to verify reports of the fall of Mytilene. Cf. also Hutchinson (48 on Aesch.
Seven Against Thebes 41), who noted that in drama personal observation on the part of
messengers heightened their claim to veracity, citing also Aesch. Persians 266 (cf. 513) and
Soph. Antigone 1192f.; he further distinguished autopsy from report, citing Eur. Heracles
847f.
146. Thuc. 1.22.3. Cf. Xen. Hell. 6.5.45.
147. Q. Curtius 5.4.10.
148. Xen. Cyr. 2.1.3–4.
149. Q. Curtius 9.9.6. 

rationalizing their treachery. Those allies thought to be serving the inter-
est of their state at another’s expense might also be suspect, as Nicias bit-
terly observed of the Egestaeans.150 While the Greeks at Salamis thought
Aristides more trustworthy than Themistocles, they were still not con-
vinced of the Persian encirclement until told by non-Athenian sources,
when a Tenian ship deserted to them with the news.151 In the legal arena,
motives, or lack thereof, of the participants in court cases were of con-
stant concern. In one instance, Lysias alleged that Agoratus adopted the
pretense of being an unwilling informer so that he might appear more
trustworthy.152
Besides unconscious editing or bias due to self-interest, outright fabri-
cation and misinformation had to be reckoned with. Misinformation and
fake deserters were largely successful, not because the Greeks were igno-
rant of the possibility that informants could deceive them (quite the con-
trary), but because most were less than systematic in verifying informa-
tion. Xenophon and Alexander were exceptions—albeit not infallible
ones—to this rule; the Lacedaemonians were better than most.153 Other
states and individuals were not always negligent, but they were not con-
sistently prudent. 
How did the Greeks distinguish fact from ‹ction? One method used
well by Xenophon and Alexander was to seek the same information from
more than one individual.154 These commanders habitually questioned a
number of prisoners at once or in succession and furnished themselves
with two or more guides when possible.155 More than one type of source
or agent was sometimes sought—Xenophon, for example, mentioned
that information on the king’s army provided by deserters was con‹rmed
178
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
150. Thuc. 6.12.1, cf. 6.8.2. 
151. Hdt. 7.80–82; Plut. Them. 12.7.
152. Lysias XIII (Against Agoratus) 19.
153. Some examples: Hdt. 1.152; Thuc. 6.46. Cf. Xen. Hell. 4.4.7ff.: Praxitas, the
Lacedaemonian polemarch at Sicyon, was approached by Pasimelus and Alcimenes, both
Corinthians whom he had previously known and trusted, regarding secretly admitting his
troops into Corinth. Upon his arrival, he had doubts and sent a man ahead to check out
affairs inside the gates; the man was shown that all was as promised. Cf. the Corinthians’
allegation that it was in the Lacedaemonian character to mistrust even that which seems
certain (Thuc. 1.70.3).
154. Cf. Kautiliya’s acceptance of an item of information if the same report was derived
from three sources (Chakraborty 44). 
155. See, e.g., Q. Curtius 9.2.5–6. Pompiscus was said to have sent spies out separately
from each other to get independent reports for the same reason (Polyaenus 5.33.6). Cf.
Polyb. 14.3.7: Scipio questioned his kataskopoi and compared their reports.

by prisoners after battle.156 Likewise information provided by indigenous
peoples was checked against those of prisoners (and found wanting) by
Alexander. Other cases include the con‹rmation of reports from scouts
by captives, from captives by scouts, from spies by captives, from envoys
by state investigations, and from deserters by personal investigation. In
court, the weight of evidence could be increased by appeals to indepen-
dent corroboration through investigation.157 It must be noted that two or
more sources could at once be false or mistaken and that while compari-
son of reports was conducive to better intelligence, it was not a guaran-
tee of it. Neglect of the practice, however, left a commander or ruler vul-
nerable, as Nicias became when he did not bother to con‹rm information
ostensibly from his spies by the employment of scouts.
Another method was to undertake an independent investigation. Such
investigations were carried out in response to information that either
derived from a source that was in some way dubious or demanded action
of especially serious consequence. When Nicias learned from his Sicilian
foes of the fate of Demosthenes’ contingent, he found the news incredible
and asked for a truce to send back a horseman to verify it.158 Alexander
had a similar reaction when he heard (the source is unspeci‹ed) that Dar-
ius’ army was behind him, but he nevertheless sent companions to Issus
in a thirty-oar ship to investigate the report and found it to be true.159
Investigations could also be commissioned by a state either before it com-
mitted itself to an enterprise or to settle disputed information. Curiously,
there is no mention of any of‹cial investigation ‹nding matters different
from those reported, even when, as in the case of the Athenians sent to
check on the stories of the Egestaeans, the ‹rst source had imparted false
information.160
The price of investigation is time. Although the Lacedaemonians were
not often deceived by false information, their habit of investigating
information frequently caused delays and led to missed opportunities.
Passage of time also increased the chance of Sparta’s opponents discov-
ering and countering matters held suspended until veri‹cation. Such was
the case when the Athenians learned of secret negotiations between the
Conveying the Message
179
156. Xen. Anab. 1.7.13; see also Xen. Cyr. 6.1.25.
157. See, e.g., [Lysias] Accusation of calumny 8.9.
158. Thuc. 7.83.1.
159. Arrian Anab. 2.7.2; cf. Arrian Anab. 4.24.9. See also Plut. Phocion 25; Plut. Mor.
188d.
160. Thuc. 6.8.2.

Lacedaemonians and Chians (regarding the latter’s revolt from Athens)
during the interval necessary for the Spartan agent Phrynis to ascertain
whether the Chian negotiators had accurately represented the situation
on their island.161
The Greeks evaluated reports in light of their own expectations, which
were in›uenced not only by general knowledge arising from previous
experience and observation but also by prejudice and sentiment. By way
of example, David Lewis’ analysis of in›uences on the Spartan assembly
might be summarized. He noted a hostility to commanders (and possibly
ambassadors) who stepped out of line, impatience with diplomatic
maneuvering in cases that seemed straightforward, and a tendency to
bear grudges and maintain prejudices. The Spartans could also be
in›uenced by sentiment and appeals to uphold liberty and to ful‹ll their
duties.162 Such characteristics were not atypical of other poleis, though
there is some variation: in Athens, for instance, one could try to discredit
an opponent by depicting him as rich, having oligarchic leanings, and
thus hostile to the democracy.
We mortals are reluctant to believe that which we do not wish to
believe, and the Greeks were no exception to this malady. The Athenians
were more vulnerable than most: when news came to them—from a
number of independent sources—that Mytilene was planning to revolt,
they at ‹rst refused to acknowledge such a possibility, putting their faith,
as Thucydides said, in the wish that it might not be true.163 Likewise the
fate of the Sicilian expedition met with incredulity at Athens, even
though soldiers who had themselves escaped told the story in grim
detail.164 The ekklesia’s enduring capacity for this sort of self-deception
was a theme harped on by Demosthenes and Aristophanes (although the
orator’s assessment might be based more on petulance than observation,
since the Athenians were reluctant to believe what he wanted them to
believe).165 Individuals suffered from similar delusion: since Phocion
trusted Nicanor, he did not believe reports against him until Nicanor was
actually running trenches around the Piraeus.166
180
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
161. Thuc. 8.6.4.
162. D. Lewis 111–12; his nn. 25–35 provide a number of examples drawn from Thucy-
dides and Xenophon. 
163. Thuc. 3.3.1.
164. Thuc. 8.1.1.
165. Demosth. XIX (On the embassy) 23–24; Aristoph. Knights, e.g., passim.
166. Plut. Phoc. 32.5. Alexander disbelieved messengers telling him of Harpalus’ ›ight
(Plut. Alex. 41.8) and, apparently, of Philotas’ treason (Arrian Anab. 3.26.1).

The effect of such reluctance was to increase the time interval between
information and action. In the case of the Mytilene revolt, the delay pre-
vented any opportunity to forestall the revolt or nip it in the bud. By the
time the Athenians opened their eyes to the situation, the Mytilenaeans
had prepared themselves for a con›ict. The eventual suppression of the
revolt cost the Athenians lives and resources.
While wishful thinking and cautious investigation caused delays in
processing information, fear and insecurity could lead to a state of irra-
tionality in which people precipitously acted on uncon‹rmed reports. It
has been generally noted that people tend to believe reports that con‹rm
their fears and that these reports are often exaggerated.167 The witch-
hunt arising from popular reaction to the mutilation of the herms is a
case in point—Thucydides remarked with some bitterness that the Athe-
nians, in their state of suspicion, did not test informers, and that in their
trust of rascals, they imprisoned good men.168 Individuals could also be
susceptible to paranoia, especially tyrants and kings. Arrian noted that
even Alexander became quick to credit accusations toward the end of his
life, and the deaths of Clitus and Parmenio arose from passion based on
insecurity.169 One would expect the Lacedaemonians, who lived in con-
stant dread of a helot revolt, to be particularly subject to precipitous
actions, but the evidence that exists contradicts this notion. When Pausa-
nias was charged by a helot informer of plotting rebellion, the allegations
were not considered suf‹cient in themselves to bring action against a
regent of royal blood.170 The conspiracies of Cinadon and the Neo-
damades were handled with ef‹ciency rather than the panics and furors
characteristic of Athens. Perhaps such emotional restraint re›ects the
Spartan character; perhaps they possessed a degree of practice and profi-
ciency in dealing with threats to their security; perhaps the in›uence of
fear was countered by their customary caution and attention to
veri‹cation.
Conveying the Message
181
167. Cf. Q. Curtius 9.2.12ff., in which passage Alexander was depicted as warning his
men of a tendency to exaggerate in reports regarding enemy and terrain. A parallel can be
found in the tales of Chaeras, who, having escaped the Four Hundred and come to Samos,
exaggerated and falsi‹ed the situation in Athens (Thuc. 8.74.3), playing on the fears of the
sailors. 
168. Thuc. 6.53.2.
169. Arrian Anab. 7.4.3.
170. Thuc. 1.132.5.

Identity and Recognition
A major factor in evaluating information was the perceived character of
the source, and Sian Lewis has made a convincing case for the impor-
tance of recognition as a criterion for credibility.171 She discusses at some
length how an individual’s identity—personal, social, political, or eth-
nic—is intertwined with the news the individual bears. It remains here,
then, to take up some points to complement her discussion, speci‹cally
how an unknown or unremarked individual, as many of the sources of
information were, was recognized and so assumed an identity. A brief
survey of some mechanical means to afford recognition, licitly or not, fol-
lows.
Military Devices
Recognition devices used in military contexts tended to be visual—for
example, emblems on shields, whitened helmets, or ›ags on ships.172 Like
any other device, they were susceptible to imitation or misinterpretation.
On one occasion, a Messenian force deceived the Elians (who were
friendly with Sparta at the time) by bearing shields marked with Lacedae-
monian lambdas and so gained admittance into their city.173 In rare
instances, the lack of a device could signify identity to those aware of its
signi‹cance, while causing confusion to an opponent relying on recog-
nizing accustomed markings.174
Military Watchwords or Passwords (Sunthemata)
Sunthemata,175
broadly speaking, were agreed on signals. More
speci‹cally, they were short verbal or nonverbal signs contrived by com-
manders to enable their men to recognize friendly troops and be recog-
nized in turn. Consequently they enabled men to prepare for action
against an enemy and refrain from action against a friend, and in turn
they prevented panics.176 They were particularly valuable when men of
182
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
171. S. Lewis 81ff.
172. According to Anderson (18, including a range of examples), national emblems
replaced personal ones in the ‹fth and fourth centuries. When the Phocians painted them-
selves white with gypsum, they may have done so to make themselves recognizable to their
friends by night as much as to inspire terror in their foes (Hdt. 8.27).
173. Paus. 4.28.5–6.
174. Polyaenus 3.11.11 (of Chabrias).
175. Variants of different dialects include !uny®mata, !u!!®mata, and juny®mata.
176. Aen. Tact. 4.5–6, 25.1. Although all examples are found in the context of military
operations, they do have potential application to clandestine activity. 

varied dialects or backgrounds were operating together or when men of
similar dialects and backgrounds were on opposing sides of a con›ict.
The lack of such a sign could hamper—or even prevent—coherent action,
as in the mythical case of the Messenians who, since they lacked a sun-
thema, were unable to recognize each other and therefore failed to
counter a Lacedaemonian in‹ltration by night. They were forced to await
dawn, and by then the Lacedaemonians had consolidated their posi-
tion.177
A name of a deity or hero was often chosen as a sunthema. Sometimes
the name had a meaning applicable to the participants (e.g., “Athena”
was chosen on account of Athena’s common connection to Seuthes and
Xenophon) or the context (e.g., Aeneas suggested “Hermes Dolios” for a
mission involving craft).178 In this way the sunthema would be easily
remembered. Aeneas further warned against using a word or name that
might be misremembered in another form (as in the case of “Dioskouroi”
and “Tyndaridai”) and against using one peculiar to a dialect when
troops of varied backgrounds were present.179 The sunthema was passed
twice (going, then returning—almost certainly to ensure that it was cor-
rectly communicated) along a line of soldiers after they were drawn up,
before battle was joined.180 Guards in a city were informed of the night’s
watchword after the gates were locked.181 No doubt the timing was
determined in both cases by the realization that earlier publication would
afford deserters an opportunity to impart the sunthema to the enemy.
Conveying the Message
183
177. Paus. 4.21.4.
178. Xen. Anab. 7.3.39; Aen. Tact. 24.15. The deities mentioned are (1) Ares/Enualios
(Aen. Tact. 24.2); (2) Apollo Huperdexios, Phoibos ([Eur.] Rhesus 521, 573); (3) Artemis
Agroteras (Aen. Tact. 24.15); (4) Athene (Xen. Anab. 7.3.39), Athene/Pallas (Aen. Tact.
24.2); (5) Hebe [MSS, Roscher: Hera] (Hdt. 9.98); (6) Helios (Aen. Tact. 24.15); (7) Her-
mes Dolios (Aen. Tact. 24.15), Hermes Philios (Polyaenus 3.9.21); (8) Nike (Xen. Anab.
1.8.16—possibly not the deity); (9) Poseidon (Aen. Tact. 24.16); (10) Selene (Aen. Tact.
24.15); and (11) Zeus Soter (Xen. Anab. 1.8.16, 6.5.25, [7.3.34]; Aen. Tact. 24.16). The
heroes are (1) Herakles (Aen. Tact. 24.15), Herakles Hegemon (Xen. Anab. 6.5.25; cf.
4.8.25); (2) Dioskouroi/Tyndaridai (Aen. Tact. 24.1, 14). Other words include
xiphos/enkheridion and lampas/phos (Aen. Tact. 24.2).
Aeneas Tacticus referred to “common names, which all use” at 24.15, implying wide-
spread, if not conventional, practice in the fourth century, an odd indication of lack of
imagination on the part of the frequently inventive Greeks. 
179. Aen. Tact. 24.1–2. Cf. the example of Athenodorus, who erred in this respect (Aen.
Tact. 24.14).
180. For the double trip down the lines, see Xen. Anab. 1.8.16; Xen. Cyr. 3.3.58,
7.1.10.
181. Aen. Tact. 20.5; cf. Xen. Anab. 7.3.34. Aeneas tantalizes us with the promise of
further information in his lost Stratopedeutike and Paraskeuastike.

Sunthemata are ‹rst attested at the battle of Mycale in 479.182 By the
fourth century their use had developed considerably, probably as a result
of measures to repair their weaknesses. Passwords were liable to be over-
heard by the enemy, especially when bandied about in a confused situa-
tion. During their night attack on Epipolae, the Athenians fell into disor-
der and called out their password to each other with enough frequency
and volume that the Syracusans caught on and used their knowledge to
their advantage.183 With ‹ascoes such as this in mind, later commanders
used countersigns (parasunthemata). Aeneas recommended that these be
other words, a noise in conjunction with a question, or merely a gesture
(visibility permitting), such as taking off a cap or shifting the position of
a spear.184
Naturally enough, sunthemata were the object of information gather-
ing. Patrols and scouts could be captured and interrogated by an
enemy—for this reason Aeneas, apparently following the practice of 
Iphicrates, suggested that they be given different passwords.185 The
184
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
182. Hdt. 9.98. One wonders whether Leotychidas gave out the true password, since he
could have no con‹dence that at least one Ionian would not communicate it to his Persian
masters. The example in the Rhesus (“Phoibos” at 521, 573) is no doubt indicative of clas-
sical practice rather than Mycenaean, and no password is mentioned in the tenth book of
the Iliad. The use of sunthemata may have been peculiarly Greek. It is noteworthy that
Cyrus did not know what his Greek troops were doing when they passed along their sun-
thema (Xen. Anab. 1.8.16). Diodorus (11.10.2) links the Persian confusion at Thermopy-
lae to their inability to recognize each other or use a password. The passage is ambiguous:
it is not clear whether they were hampered by being unable to use a password they pos-
sessed or by not having a password to use. In any case, Herodotus makes no mention of this
and it is hard to see how a password would have helped in the melee.
183. Thuc. 7.44.4. Athenian confusion was exacerbated by their Argive (i.e., Dorian)
allies striking up a paean as they entered battle, since the Athenians imagined the singers
were Syracusans (who were also of Dorian extraction).
184. Aen. Tact. 25.2–4; cf. 24.17 and Whitehead, Aineias the Tactician, 168–69 on
24.13. Note the dof‹ng (or donning) of a cap as a signal to begin the revolt of the Parthenii.
Onasander (26) went further and advocated the reliance on gestures to the exclusion of
words; he found this especially useful in the case of allies speaking different languages.
Onasander also observed that passwords should be given even when the possibility of com-
bat was remote, to prevent confusion.
Since sunthemata could also be discovered by foes in the guise of friendly patrols,
Aeneas Tacticus (24.19) recommended that each party should be able to demand a recog-
nition signal from the other. It might still have been possible in an open area for a disguised
patrol to learn the password and either ›ee or kill the guards, but in a besieged city (the con-
text for Aeneas’ work) guards atop the walls could not be easily killed and would be able
to notify their commander and change the sunthema by the time a ›eeing enemy could
return in force.
185. Aen. Tact. 6.7, 24.16; cf. 26.1.

Messenians were said to have captured and tortured one Nicon of
Pherae, a pirate, and extracted from him a promise to betray Pherae to
them, which he did by gaining them admittance by the sunthema.186 As I
noted earlier, deserters were no doubt a concern, as were spies:
Pammenes of Thebes sent a spy disguised as a fake deserter to learn his
enemies’ sunthema.187
Given the Greek capacity for inventiveness, it should come as no sur-
prise to ‹nd that sunthemata were manipulated in other ways. There is a
story of a certain Akoues having a sunthema that was no sunthema—his
men were to kill anybody who asked for one, since by asking he unwit-
tingly revealed that he was an enemy.188 On another occasion, the Spar-
tan Cleandridas, to sow suspicion in his enemy’s ranks, had his herald
announce that any enemy who knew his sunthema would be spared.189
Iphicrates told his men to spare any opponent offering their sunthema, so
that they would be enheartened by the expectation of aid from a (imagi-
nary) ‹fth column.190 Finally, Diocles constantly changed his sunthema
so that his men would stay in their ranks, thinking the enemy nearby.191
Tokens (Sumbola) and Seals (Sphagides)
Sumbola, or tokens, are attested in mercantile transactions and in diplo-
macy.192 They served as credentials, allowing any bearer of the token to
be recognized as operating on behalf of one of the parties agreeing to the
arrangement. There is no evidence for their use in covert operations, but
it would not be surprising if the Greeks realized their applications to this
‹eld. Stolen or forged sumbola might also be useful in support of covers. 
Sphagides, or seals, were employed as marks of authenticity and
provenance on letters and documents, incidentally preserving their con-
Conveying the Message
185
186. Polyaenus 2.35.1.
187. Polyaenus 5.16.5. Cf. Polyaenus 3.13.1 (of Chares), in which spies were caught
since they were unable to give the correct sunthema on demand.
188. Polyaenus 1.11.1.
189. Polyaenus 2.10.1; cf. Hdt. 9.98.
190. Polyaenus 3.9.21.
191. Polyaenus 5.29.1.
192. For an example of a mercantile transaction, see Hdt. 6.86, and How and Wells
98–99 ad loc. For the use of sumbola in diplomacy, see Tod no. 139 (ca. 367), lines 18–25:
“Let the boulé also make sumbola for use with the king of the Sidonians, so that the demos
of the Athenians might recognize them if the king of the Sidonians should send somebody
when he needed something of our city, and so that the king of the Sidonians might recog-
nize them whenever the demos of the Athenians should send somebody to him.” A similar
provision was made for Orontes, in IG II2 207b–c (ca. 348). 

tents from prying eyes. Lucian of Samasota outlined a couple of methods
(and hinted at many more) used in antiquity for defeating the ef‹cacy of
seals, which may have occurred to the Greeks of the era under study. The
‹rst was to heat a needle, remove the seal by melting the wax underneath
it with the needle’s point, then reseal the document after reading it.193
The second was to make an impression of the seal, using a type of plaster
(kollurion) made from Bruttian pitch, asphalt, ground gypsum, wax, and
mastich. This concoction was warmed and then applied to a seal previ-
ously wetted with saliva, to take a mold. The mixture hardened rapidly
and could be used to duplicate the seal. A similar result could apparently
be obtained from a mixture of marble dust and paper glue. Although the
methods may have varied, the Greeks of the ‹fth century could likewise
defeat seals, since Pausanias’ courier made a counterfeit seal so that he
could investigate the documents he carried without fear of being
caught.194 An ability to defeat seals in this manner could be of consider-
able use not only to those seeking information but also in the realms of
counterintelligence and misinformation.195
Disguise, Covers, and Pretense
While there are examples of people engaged in secret dealings resorting
to recognition devices, these devices were hardly covert and could hardly
have been reasonably expected not to arouse suspicions. In one example,
a party preparing to betray Megara anointed themselves with oil so that
their Athenian accomplices would recognize them. The plot did not run
as smoothly as planned, and the anointed ones were rather conspicuous
among their fellow citizens.196 In another instance, reeds were carried as
tokens of support for a conspiracy among mutinous Peloponnesian sol-
diers stationed on Chios. When their commander, Eteonicus, saw what
186
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
193. Lucian Alexander of Abonoteichus 21; the following examples are taken from the
same section. He alluded to Celsus’ descriptions of other means, and Harmon (204–5 n. 1
ad loc.) observed that Hippolytus’ Refutation 4.34 also contained material on this subject,
evidently drawn from earlier sources. See also Demosth. XXXII (Against Zenothemis) 28.
194. Thuc. 1.132.5; Thucydides uses the form para!hmhn‹meno! for his act. ShmeÝa
para!hmeÝa (counterfeit seals) are attested in Plato Comicus (s. V/IV) 77; see LSJ s.v.
para!hmeÝon.
195. Cf. Diod. Sic. 16.52.6–7; Polyaenus 6.48.1: when Mentor (probably Mentor of
Rhodes, ›. med. s. IV) got Hermaeus under his control, he wrote letters in Hermaeus’ name
using his captive’s signet ring.
196. Thuc. 4.68.4.

was going on, he slew a man carrying a reed and let it be known that the
man perished because of his token.197
It is not unreasonable to propose that covert devices or signals were
used at some time or other by covert agents, since in the Education of
Cyrus Xenophon gave an example of how a returning spy might signal
his true allegiance to his master’s troops. In this case, he merely extended
his right hand—perhaps in the manner of the parasunthemata previously
mentioned.198
Since Athena did not deign to alter the appearances of Odysseus’ dis-
tant heirs, they tended to rely more on wits than physical disguise. This is
not to say that disguises were never used, but usually they were props
designed to lend credence to a cover, rather than attempts to render an
individual’s identity unrecognizable.199 There are stories of people don-
ning the garb of beggars, hunters, peasants, or foreign peoples when
engaged in some crafty enterprise or another.200 Generally, however, the
use of material disguises does not overlap with the gathering of informa-
tion. There are no exceptions to this rule that can make claims to his-
toricity, although Xenophon’s allusions to scouts disguised as brigands
and to spies disguised as runaway slaves are worth noting as indications
of a potential link.201 There is no reliable evidence of a long-term imper-
sonation of another person by a Greek.202
Of more concern to Greek covert agents was the establishment and
maintenance of credibility through a cover story. Sometimes a basic
cover could be implicit in an assumed role—that of an envoy or mer-
chant, for example. Those agents assuming such covers would be obliged
to know about the trade they professed, but to some extent the pretext
Conveying the Message
187
197. Xen. Hell. 2.1.1.
198. Xen. Cyr. 6.3.13.
199. Exceptions to this general rule occur in cases in which a wanted fugitive tried to
conceal his identity lest he be recognized and arrested (see, e.g., Polyaenus 5.42.1, of
Charimenes). Cf. Paus. 5.4.7–8.
200. Beggars: Od. 4.244ff., etc.; Parke and Wormell no. 527 (legend of Temo); Lycur-
gus Against Leocrat. 86 (legend of Codrus, who is also alluded to as being in peasant’s
dress). Hunters: Paus. 4.12.9; cf. Hdt. 1.123 (Polyaenus 7.7.1; Leo Byz. 1.4).
Peasants/farmers: Plut. Pelopidas 9.1. Locals: Arrian Anab. 1.25.9 (of Amphoterus); cf. Q.
Curtius 7.2.17–19 (of Polydamas). Prisoners: Aen. Tact. 24.4. Stratagems involving don-
ning foreign apparel: Polyaenus 2.16.1 (cf. Front. Strat. 2.3.13), 3.9.59, 5.44.5; Front.
Strat. 2.5.15, 3.2.3. Stratagems using foreign ships: Polyaenus 2.11.1 (cf. Front. Strat.
1.4.12).
201. Xen. Cyr. 2.4.23, 6.2.11.
202. Cf. Hdt. 3.61–69 (of the false Smerdis). 

for their presence was supplied by the cover: the Bithynian kataskopoi on
embassy to the Ten Thousand, for instance, were ostensibly present to
arrange for a truce and thus were permitted into the Greek camp.203
Those agents wishing to pose as deserters needed more individualized
explanations for their motives. These explanations seem to have been
derived, sensibly enough, from justi‹cations made by real deserters and
traitors for their defection and championship of their new allies (one
might recall the manipulative and rather tedious list presented by Alcibi-
ades to the Spartans).204 These include persecution, penalties, and other
assorted grievances. When done well, the covers were backed up by prior
arrangements on the part of a state or commander. There are tales of the
Spartan ephors arranging sham trials and exiles of individuals, who
would thenceforth act secretly on their behalf.205 The most effective cov-
ers were no doubt ones that could use as much of the agent’s real-life
story as possible. Odysseus was a skillful liar in part because he managed
to intertwine a mix of reality with fantasy when weaving his fantastic
tales.206 Xenophon applied Homer’s example to his own guidelines for
espionage. He portrayed Cyrus taking advantage of real circumstances
and real grievances against his subordinate Araspas, by making a secret
reconciliation and sending Araspas out in the guise of a fugitive from
Cyrus’ wrath.207 Ad hoc exploitations of mistaken identity are occasion-
ally found (e.g., Macedonian guards stationed on Chios pretended to be
Pharnabazus’ guards when they realized that his ally, their enemy, Aris-
tonicus had not heard of Pharnabazus’ defeat),208 but our only examples
belong to the realm of stratagems rather than to intelligence. 
In some such instances there was no need to pretend to be anyone
else—the cover was effected by a judicious presentation of misinforma-
tion. When Artaxerxes’ captain Mithradates rode up to Clearchus, he did
not attempt to conceal his identity or the fact that he was a Persian—such
would be a futile task. Instead he pretended to be sympathetic to their
plight and to be concerned lest he be seen speaking with them.209 Thus he
tried to establish an identity which would accord him credibility. In this
188
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
203. Xen. Anab. 7.4.13.
204. Thuc. 6.92.1–3. Cf. Thuc. 8.50.2–5; Xen. Cyr. 4.6.2–4.
205. Hdt. 1.68 (of Lichas), Polyaenus 2.26.1 (of Sthenippus).
206. Od. passim, esp. 13.256, 14.199, 19.165, 24.266, 24.303.
207. Xen. Cyr. 6.1.31ff.
208. Q. Curtius 4.5.19–21.
209. Xen. Anab. 3.3.2. Cf. Thuc. 4.67.3; Paus. 2.26.3; Plut. Ages. 24.4; Arrian Anab. 1.25.3.

he failed, but his method was essentially sound and widely practiced, in
his day and ours.
The preceding comments cannot and do not pretend to adequately
present a whole ‹eld of study. They are, if you will, an attempt to com-
municate some of the problems the Greeks faced when communicating,
and the effect these must have had on intelligence.
Conveying the Message
189

Chapter 5 
Counterintelligence
As the shield is a practical response to the spear, so counterintelligence is
to intelligence. Just as it is in the interest of a state to enhance its ability
to in›uence events through the use of intelligence, it is in its interest to
deny a similar ability to its opponents. The measures taken to accomplish
this end fall within the nebulous boundaries of the discipline now known
as counterintelligence.1
Was such a shield employed by the ancients? In general, yes—
although, as with intelligence, this response must be quali‹ed in degree
according to state, circumstance, and era. Assessments are, however,
somewhat complicated by the use of stereotypes and propaganda by the
ancients. Members of democratic states (i.e., the Athenians, who have
left us a lion’s share of evidence) tended then—and still tend—to wish to
conceive of their societies as open and free and of subjects of other forms
of government as liable to scrutiny and censorship. In his funeral oration,
Pericles declared that the Athenians “hold our city open to all and never
withhold, by the use of expulsion decrees, any fact or sight that might be
exposed to the sight and pro‹t of an enemy. For on the whole we trust in
our own courage and readiness to the task, rather than in contrivance
and deception.”2 Demosthenes similarly characterized the Athenians:
“You think that freedom of speech, in every other case, ought to be
shared by everyone in the polis, to such an extent that you grant it even
to foreigners and slaves, and one might see many servants among us able
to say whatever they wish with more freedom than citizens in some other
190
1. Some de‹nitions of counterintelligence follow. R. Godson (1): “At a minimum, how-
ever, CI can be de‹ned as the identi‹cation and neutralization of the threat posed by for-
eign intelligence services, and the manipulation of these services for the manipulator’s
bene‹t.” Dulles (123): “The classical aims of counterespionage are ‘to locate, identify and
neutralize’ the opposition.” U.S. Marine Corps art. 104c: “Counterintelligence is that
aspect of intelligence activity which is devoted to destroying the effectiveness of inimical
foreign intelligence activities and to protection of information against espionage, individu-
als against subversion, and installations or materiel against sabotage.” 
2. Thuc. 2.39.

states.”3 Other comments by Nicias, Demosthenes, and Demades have
characterized the Athenian democracy as less adept than other forms of
government in detecting traitors and spies.4
Adcock and Mosley thought it unlikely that the democracies of the
ancient Greeks were able to deliberate in secret, because of the nature of
their decision-making process.5 Their observation has merit (and may be
applicable to oligarchies as well), and there is no doubt that democracies
were not able to keep secret all things that they might wish. Faction and
accident, if nothing else, were suf‹cent to ensure that matters raised in
the boulé, much less the ekklesia, would not be discussed only within the
borders of Attica. But attempts were made to circumvent this problem,
some of which were successful. The real problem here is that the values
inherent to democracies and the premises on which rest a determination
of policy by a vote of informed citizens demand an idealized society that
keeps no secrets. Such societies did not and do not exist on any large
scale, however democratic the societies may aspire to be. A parallel might
be found in the United States, which tries to balance personal freedom
against national security, while upholding the image of a free and open
society. Although there are striking examples of display and ingenuous-
ness on the part of individuals and states, such claims to a society
untainted by the shadow of Big Brother rest more on political machina-
Counterintelligence
191
3. Demosth. IX (3 Phil.) 3.
4. Thuc. 6.11.7; Demosth. XVIII (On the crown) 149; Demades On the twelve years
frag. 46.
5. Adcock and Mosley 170. Cf. Dulles 8. It appears, e.g., that no attempt was made to
keep metics or strangers from witnessing the departure of the Athenian expeditionary
force when it set out for Sicily (Thuc. 6.30.2). One might conjecture that the Athenians
saw the futility of trying to keep quiet an expedition of this magnitude, especially since it
required calling up men from the katalogos—a lengthy process in ‹fth-century Athens (see
Ober 96)—and the concentration of many ships and much material in areas that could not
be conveniently shut off from the eyes of merchants coming into the city. However, the
Athenians may have wanted the Syracusans to know too well the magnitude of the force
being brought to bear on them. Similar motives may apply to the congress of Pelopon-
nesian allies at Lacedaemon, if indeed Thucydides’ account bears resemblance to reality
and is not a piece of drama (Thuc. 1.72; but cf. 1.79). It is possible that the Lacedaemoni-
ans wanted the Athenians to learn that many of the Peloponnesians desired war and so
realize that the Lacedaemonians were also willing to contest the Athenian bid for
supremacy with force of arms. In a related passage, Archidamus voiced his hopes that
when the Athenians learned of the Peloponnesian preparations, they might be more will-
ing to back down (Thuc. 1.82.3; possibly also at Xen. Hell. 5.1.33). Cf. Isoc. VI (Archi-
damus) 77. Wright (108) alleged that a similar game was played by the Russians with the
British during the Suez crisis.

tions and idealized self-perceptions than on the realities indicated by
example, as will be seen in this chapter.
Subjects
The following does not purport to be a comprehensive list of types of
information that were concealed in classical Greece, as it neglects private
matters for the sake of public and does not treat such secrets as those
associated with religious ritual or mystery cults. The three subjects
described here are those best attested in the sources. The ‹rst two, inci-
dentally, correspond to the types of information most frequently sought. 
Military Plans and Movements
Xenophon included in topics for consideration by a military commander
“how you might learn your enemy’s affairs and how he might least be
able to learn yours.”6 Examples of counterintelligence in military opera-
tions are numerous, and it was widely if tacitly acknowledged that coun-
terintelligence was an integral part of military practice, even though some
paid more heed to its importance than others.
Recorded efforts to protect information are most commonly associ-
ated with military movements (and hence intentions to make move-
ments), especially those of a tactical nature aimed at achieving advantage
through surprise. Most examples come from the ‹fth century and later,
although the use of ambushes and surprise attacks in archaic and earlier
times necessitates at least some measures to conceal the presence of
troops.7 The practice of protecting information about military disposi-
tions and numbers is widely attested among the Greek peoples.8
192
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
6. Xen. Cyr. 1.6.43.
7. See, e.g., Iliad 1.227, 13.277; Odyssey 14.217; Polyaenus 1.15; Paus. 4.5.8. Cf.
Pritchett 2:161, 164–69, 180–83 (tables 3–5, 7). Ambushes depended either on a lack of
enemy information-gathering efforts or on counterintelligence efforts, in the form of con-
cealment or other devices or both. Pritchett (2:188) has argued that the ‹rst option is to be
preferred. He is quite right in some particular examples, but see the discussion of recon-
naissance in chap. 1.
8. The following are a small sample. Athenians: e.g., Alcibiades (Xen. Hell. 1.1.15), Iphic-
rates (Polyaenus 3.9.8, 3.9.19), Phocion (Plut. Phoc. 15.1ff.), and Thrasylus (Polyaenus
1.47.1). Corinthians: see, e.g., Thuc. 4.8. Lacedaemonians: e.g., Agesilaus (Xen. Ages. 6.6),
Alcotas (Xen. Hell. 5.4.56), Chalcideus (Thuc. 8.14.1), Mindarus (Thuc. 8.99.1). Macedo-
nians: e.g., Alexander (Arrian Anab. 2.9.1, 6.6.4; Q. Curtius 3.10.3). Syracusans: e.g.,
Dionysius (Polyaenus 5.2.12; Leo Byz. 7.1); cf. Hermocrates (Thuc. 6.72.5). Thebans: e.g., 

Preparations for large-scale expeditions, which employed allied con-
tingents, were most dif‹cult to conceal and did not normally go unno-
ticed, since a summons would have to be sent to the allied states, and
since the time elapsed for muster and travel would be adequate for news
to arrive well before the troops. The invasions of Sicily by the Athenians,
of Attica by the Peloponnesians, of Boeotia by the Lacedaemonians, and
of Laconia by the Boeotians (in all examples accompanied by allies) did
not achieve complete surprise, and it does not appear that any measures
were taken to conceal report of their advent—quite the contrary, in some
instances. The objectives of the expeditions might be obscured through
disinformation (e.g., by Agesilaus in Asia Minor), but in most instances
deception on this scale was simply not feasible.
Expeditions undertaken by a single state, independent of its allies, are
another matter. Since no publication beyond the borders of the state was
required, and since the time needed for muster was considerably less, a
state could hope to achieve surprise and therefore might make efforts to
realize its hope. The Athenians, for example, tried to launch a surprise
attack on the rebellious Mytilene and, to prevent news of their intent pre-
ceding them, incarcerated the crews of Mytilenaean ships in the Piraeus.
Their hopes were disappointed, however, when a sailor escaped and has-
tened home to tell of their plans. A more successful outcome may be
found in Phocion’s march on Megara.
Sparta, in this ‹eld at least, proved more adept than its contempo-
raries. Not for naught did Thucydides complain that he was unable to
learn the numbers of Lacedaemonian troops at the (‹rst) battle of Man-
tineia because of the secrecy inherent to their constitution.9 Information
concerning military plans, losses, and numbers was handled carefully.
Thucydides mentioned that when the Lacedaemonians sent an army
a‹eld under Agis in 419, their allies, although they supplied substantial
contingents, were not aware of their destination. Indeed, even Thucy-
dides was unable to discover what Agis’ intent was, since the king turned
Counterintelligence
193
Neocles (Paus. 9.1.6); cf. Epaminondas (Xen. Hell. 7.5.8) and the decree concerning the
Athenian exiles under arms (Xen. Hell. 2.4.2; Dinarchus Against Demosthenes 25; Plut.
Pelopidas 6.4), Thracians: e.g., Seuthes (Xen. Anab. 7.3.36).
9. Thuc. 5.68.2. Thucydides’ observation is more or less applicable to Spartan policy in
the era under study and perhaps derives from the character instilled in their youths. From
childhood, Spartans heard such sayings as “Out through these doors no word travels” at
their sussitia (Plut. Lyc. 12.5; Mor. 236f) and such anecdotes as that of a boy who allowed
a fox to rip open his stomach rather than reveal its presence (Plut. Mor. 234a–b). They
spent time in the krupteia, the secrets of which are still preserved.

back at the Laconian frontier when the omens were not favorable.10
According to Pausanias, the Spartans habitually concealed the numbers
of their dead by collecting them together with those of their allies.
Epaminondas compelled them to gather their fallen separately after the
battle of Leuctra, so that the magnitude of their loss would be apparent
to all.11 The fate of two thousand helots who were allegedly killed by the
Spartans is still not known.12
Secret Negotiations, Plots, and Betrayals
Plots and betrayals demand secrecy by their very nature—the punishment
for treason among the Greeks was death, and hence conspirators staked
all on secrecy. At times individual traitors or a ‹fth column within a city
sought to enter into negotiations with another polis hostile to their gov-
ernment, since outside aid was often required to accomplish a coup d’é-
tat. The invoked polis often (but not always) perceived that it was to its
own interest to keep negotiations secret, since their revelation risked the
failure of the plot, possible loss of face, and at times the danger of open
war.13 States also tried to conceal the existence or the content of diplo-
matic activity from other states when acting contrary to existing agree-
ments.14
Information Affecting Morale
It seems to have been accepted practice, extending back at least as far as
the Odyssey, for a commander to withhold from his men foreshadowings
of danger when he feared the knowledge would turn them from his will.15
Andocides expressed the sentiment thus: “to lead most men into dangers,
194
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
10. Thuc. 5.54.1.
11. Pausanias 9.13.11–12. Cf. Plut. Mor. 193b.
12. We do not know whether the story is true or based on Athenian propaganda—
Thucydides (4.80.3–4) is vague on details and date. But cf. Hdt. 4.146.2; How and Wells
347 ad loc.
13. E.g., the Lacedaemonians negotiated with the Thasians, unbeknownst to the Athe-
nians, in time of peace, ca. 464 (Thuc. 1.101.1–2), and with the Chians (Thuc. 8.7.1; of
which only a few Chians were cognizant at Thuc. 8.9.3) during the Peloponnesian War.
Relations between a ‹fth column and its external patron could be revealed by either party
for the sake of advantage: cf. Diod. Sic. 11.48.6–8, 15.3.5.
14. Thuc. 4.22.3; 5.27.2.
15. Od. 12.165, 223. 

[a general] must keep them in the dark or deceive them.”16 Eteonicus and
Agesilaus withheld news of the defeats at Arginusae and Cnidus from
their troops lest they be disheartened, and they claimed victory instead.
Nicias wanted neither his own men nor the enemy to learn that he con-
templated retreat after the final disastrous harbor battle.17 Such policies
naturally extended to a concern lest the enemy be enheartened: Pericles
advised the Athenians, who were suffering plague and con‹nement as a
result of his policies, to conceal their troubles from the Lacedaemonians.
At a later date, the Spartans did not want the Athenians to learn the extent
of their unease after their men were captured at Pylos.18
Methods
Information was protected in a number of ways: by limiting the number
of people handling matters best kept secret; by acting on decisions before
report of them could reach an opponent; by maintaining some control
over the movement of citizens, metics, and foreigners; by instituting mea-
sures and legislation to monitor suspect elements of one’s own populace,
while discouraging and frustrating efforts of enemy agents and sources
through counterintelligence agents; by disrupting enemy communication;
and by disseminating false information.
Limiting Access to Information
Macchiavelli once commented that “when the number of accomplices in
a conspiracy exceeds three or four, it is almost impossible for it not to be
discovered, either through treason, imprudence, or carelessness.”19 In the
Greek world, in which the ‹delity of an ally or compatriot was all too
often ephemeral, there was a realization that the greater the number of
people who knew any given piece of information was, the more likely it
was that an enemy would know of it also. This problem was especially
prevalent in democracies and oligarchies, since many people participated
Counterintelligence
195
16. Andocides On the Peace 34; cf. 33.
17. Xen. Hell. 1.6.36, 4.3.14; Thuc. 7.48.1. Cf. Alexander’s suppression of reports of
the ambush and slaughter of Menedemus’ force (including threats directed against any sur-
vivor who spoke of the defeat); see Q. Curtius 7.7.39. Word of the death of Cimon seems
also to have been suppressed (Plut. Cimon 19.1).
18. Thuc. 2.64.6, 4.41.3.
19. Macchiavelli Discorsi 3.6.

in the decisions of such governments. A solution was to select a few indi-
viduals who would have full authority to act on behalf of the state with-
out the need to refer matters to the demos or to other oligarchs. As obvi-
ous as this solution appears, it was not one that sat comfortably among
peoples who lived in fear of tyrants and who attempted to prevent any
one individual from obtaining too much power. Nevertheless, it was
enacted at times. When Corinthian envoys, dissatis‹ed with the state of
affairs following the Peace of Nicias, went behind the backs of the
Lacedaemonians to Argos, they advised the Argives to select a few men
with whom other states might negotiate alliances. The purpose of this
selection was to enable matters to be considered without the people’s
cognizance, lest the Lacedaemonians learn of the dealings from an indi-
vidual who did not favor the alliances.20 The Argives took the Corinthi-
ans’ advice and appointed twelve men with whom a state might make a
treaty. This measure did not entirely conceal their machinations from the
Lacedaemonians, since it was necessary to generally publish the measure
to the Greek states who might wish alliance.21 But their arrangement
apparently succeeded in keeping under wraps speci‹c details of, for
example, the Argive treaty with the Mantineans.22
In Athens sensitive matters might be handled by the boulé rather than
the ekklesia to enhance the security of information by restricting dissem-
ination. Although there is some evidence for this practice, there are not
suf‹cient grounds to argue that it was general policy.23 Examples perti-
nent to the problem are limited to the ‹fth and fourth centuries.
Diodorus spoke of secret meetings of the boulé to hear Themistocles’
schemes to rebuild Athens’ walls and, on a later occasion, to consider the
disposition of Sicily should it be conquered. His accounts are not else-
where con‹rmed.24 Andocides told the Athenians that his efforts on their
196
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
20. Thuc. 5.27.2.
21. Thuc. 5.28.1; at 5.30.1 the Spartans were also aware that the Corinthians had been
the instigators of the device.
22. Thuc. 5.29.1–2: its ef‹cacy is suggested by Thucydides’ characterization of other
Peloponnesian states, who seem to have felt incompletely informed and to have thought
that the Mantineans knew something they did not.
23. Wallace (109) proposed that the knowledge of the location of secret tombs (one
might recall that of Oedipus mentioned in Sophocles’ Oedipus at Colonnus) was con‹ned
to the Areopagites; this body did not, however, determine policy in the manner of the boulé
and ekklesia.
24. Diod. Sic. 11.39.4–5, 13.2.6. Such meetings are not mentioned in Thuc. 1.90ff. or
6.8ff. (although it might be argued that Nicias’ wish to deliberate matters privately re›ected
a concern for security, it is more likely that he was equivocating). Cf. Plut. Arist. 22.2;
Them. 20.1–2.

behalf were not to be discussed openly in the ekklesia, but he assured
them that his measures were approved of by the boulé.25 In another
speech, he refers to the boulé’s secret decision to make arrests in the
witch-hunt of 415.26 Demaenetus made a secret agreement with the
Athenian boulé to take a trireme and visit Conon at the time when
Conon was ‹ghting for the king of Persia against the Lacedaemonians, to
whom Athens owed obligations under their treaty. The populace soon
learned of this arrangement, no doubt through a leak from the boulé. The
bouletai feigned ignorance in the face of outrage, while the people, fear-
ing the risk of war with Sparta, sent word of the affair to Milon, the
Lacedaemonian harmost on Aegina.27 The Athenians attempted to limit
to the boulé and ambassadors knowledge of their negotiations with
Philip II regarding Amphipolis and Pydna. As Demosthenes noted, their
efforts were unsuccessful.28
The last two examples illustrate that the security derived from limiting
the number of parties to con‹dential information to ‹ve hundred would
be minimal, since among such a large number of individuals (chosen by
lot, at that) would be at least one who would let slip the secret. As Aristo-
phanes joked about his fellow Athenians: “And he said that the women
don’t reveal the least of the secrets of the Thesmophoria, but you and I
always do this when we sit in council.”29
Commanders serving most Greek states did not normally feel an obli-
gation to give advance notice of their plans to their men. Indeed, the con-
trary seems likely to have been general practice.30 An open vote on
whether to retreat was apparently a real possibility for the Athenian
expeditionary force in Sicily, but this was exceptional, even among the
Athenians.31 Alexander habitually restricted to trusted commanders
those admitted to his councils—only in exceptional cases were matters
Counterintelligence
197
25. Andocides On His Return 21; see also 3, 19, 20. 
26. Andocides On the Mysteries 45; cf. MacDowell 94 ad loc.
27. Hell. Oxy. 9.1–3. McKechnie and Kern (in Hell. Oxy. 132 ad loc.) observed, “the
narrative reveals that secret diplomatic dealings could take place in Athens in spite of the
democratic government.” Cf. Aristoph. Knights 647–50.
28. Scholion on Demosth. II (2 Olynth.) 6; cf. Harding 61–62.
29. Aristoph. Assemblywomen 442–44.
30. Cf. Onas. 10.22: if a general has secret plans, he must not tell anyone, only a few
high commanders if necessary, before he is on the scene of action. Cf. also Xen. Anab.
1.3.6, 21.
31. The general meeting of the Ten Thousand after the murder of their commanders is
another exception, hardly to be taken as typical (Xen. Anab. 3.1.15ff.).

handled openly before his men.32 Not only were the ranks kept in the
dark, but the number of of‹cers cognizant of future operations could be
limited for security. Among the reasons given by Hermocrates to the
Syracusans for entrusting the command of their troops to fewer generals
was that whatever ought to be kept secret would be better concealed by
a few than by ‹fteen.33 Miltiades asked the Athenians for resources to
carry out a military expedition without telling them his intent, and at the
time the request was not seen as unreasonable. The most sensible expla-
nation for such a reaction was a recognition of a need for information
security.34
Anticipating Reports
In some circumstances the ancients realized that an information leak was
bound to occur despite attempts to prevent it. The assemblies of the
democracies and oligarchies, in particular, were vulnerable in this way,
as I mentioned earlier. In such cases, a state could try to deny its oppo-
nent time to respond effectively to the news they would certainly receive.
When the Megarians made a secret appeal to Athens for help against a
faction that would betray them to Philip II, Phocion feared that the Boeo-
tians would anticipate the Athenians in sending aid if they knew the cir-
cumstances in time. He therefore called the ekklesia early in the morning,
announced the message, and led the Athenians to Megara immediately
after a decree was passed.35 The Boeotians were not always on the receiv-
ing end of other peoples’ devices: the Theban Neocles acted similarly. He
knew that the Plataeans watched for general assemblies of the Boeotians,
since they were familiar with the Boeotian habit of doing business in long
meetings of the whole people. Wishing to take Plataea by surprise, he
called the Thebans to come to assembly in arms and marched out at
once.36
198
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
32. See, e.g., Q. Curtius 6.8.1. Cf. Q. Curtius 4.13.3; Arrian Anab. 2.6.1, 3.9.3; Plut.
Alex. 39 (= Plut. Mor. 180d, 332f, 340a).
33. Thuc. 6.72.5. The Syracusans approved his proposal. Polyaenus (1.42.1) gave an
analogous story of Gylippus, who arranged to have his plans leaked to the enemy so that he
could pretend outrage and demand sole command on the grounds that more than one gen-
eral made security untenable. Cf. also Xen. Anab. 6.1.18; Thuc. 8.9.2.
34. Hdt. 6.132. Another alternative, practiced by the Argives when they wished to sup-
port the Messenians without arousing Lacedaemonian ire, was to avoid a public decision
and leave a course of action available to private citizens (Paus. 4.10.1).
35. Plut. Phocion 15.1.
36. Paus. 9.1.6.

This measure of going immediately from decision to action, while suc-
cessful in both of the preceding examples, has a defect: if anyone saw the
citizens of a city going to assembly armed, he would realize something
was afoot, even if he lacked details. Perhaps it was effective in the ‹rst
case since Boeotian intelligence agents or sources would have been likely
to await the results of an assembly to learn these details, as they would be
at a loss as to why the Athenians were preparing a military force (had
they not waited, they might have drawn the erroneous conclusion that
the Athenians were intending to march north against Boeotia). In the sec-
ond case, it was combined with a successful attempt to circumvent
Plataean lookouts. In any event, rapid movement of military forces, as
was typical of great commanders such as Jason of Pherae and Alexander,
served a similar purpose, in that an army might be on hand before news
of its advent.
Hence military commanders delayed transmission of orders until the
last minute, as Onasander suggested: “[the general] must tell no one
beforehand against what place or for what purpose he is leading his
army, unless he considers it necessary to warn some of the higher of‹cers
in advance.”37 Mindarus, a half millennium earlier, was following the
same tenets when he waited until the last minute before giving his men
orders to put to sea, so that his move would not be known to the Athe-
nians on Samos.38
Conversely, a delay between decision and action, even in clandestine
arrangements, increased the chances of word reaching the wrong ears.
The protracted nature of the secret negotiations between the Chians and
the Lacedaemonians, for example, allowed the Athenians ample oppor-
tunity to become aware of them. Although the Athenians were unable to
forestall the Chian revolt, they were at least able to harass and delay
Peloponnesian naval forces that were to be sent east.39
Controls on Contact with Foreigners
States attempted to regulate foreigners and travel to a degree varying
according to polity and circumstance. Generally speaking, the less secure
a state felt, because of external or internal threats, the more it tended to
be strict in applying controls. It is not always easy, however, to discern to
Counterintelligence
199
37. Onas. 10.22, Loeb (Illinois Greek Club) translation and text.
38. Thuc. 8.99.1.
39. Thuc. 8.9–10.

what extent this security was for the sake of moral or constitutional
health and to what extent it was for the sake of protecting information.
Restrictions on Travel 
During time of peace there was relatively free intercourse between states.
People traveled freely, even for extended periods of time.40 The four great
Hellenic festivals saw visitors from all over the Greek world. Although
wars could and did upset their attendance and performance, the truces
that attended them normally held good. Aeneas Tacticus wrote that citi-
zens should not be allowed to leave without of‹cial permission (in the
form of a token), but it is probable that such strictures were applied only
during times of tension, if not open war—his work, after all, concerns a
city under siege.41
The apparent exception, of course, was Sparta. In the truce between
the Lacedaemonians and Athenians in 424, Athenian garrisons on the
perimeter of Peloponnesian-controlled territory were expressly forbidden
to mix with the population outside their walls.42 But the primary purpose
of this provision was not to dam information ›ow but to con‹ne Athen-
ian actions and to prevent them from inciting helots to revolt. According
to Plutarch, Lycurgus did not allow Spartans themselves to travel lest
they be corrupted and destabilize their state.43 It cannot be said with cer-
tainty that travel was altogether forbidden but it is entirely possible that
it was regulated.44 There is a note in Isocrates that Lacedaemonian citi-
zens ‹t for military service could not leave the country without the con-
sent of those in of‹ce.45 The motive is not entirely clear in the last case
but may be associated with the Lacedaemonian practice of sending its
men abroad as mercenaries in the fourth century.46 In any event,
200
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
40. Apparently unrestricted policies: Hdt. 1.68, 7.214. The stories of sages such as
Solon and Lycurgus are predicated on the assumption that possibilities for unhindered
travel existed; the careers of Herodotus and Xenophon imply similar opportunities. Cf.
Xen. Symp. 4.31.
41. Aen. Tact. 10.8. For sumbola, see chap. 4.
42. Thuc. 4.118.4.
43. Plut. Lyc. 27.3.
44. There is evidence for a law prohibiting Heraclids from settling in a foreign country,
attested in Plut. Agis and Cleomenes 11, and possibly implicit in Hdt. 6.70. There is no indi-
cation, however, that the Spartans forbade travel lest their citizens reveal information best
kept secret; rather, they did so to prevent their citizens from being corrupted. See Xen. Lac.
Pol. 14.4; Plut. Mor. 238e; Plut. Lyc. 27. Cf. Aristoph. Birds 1012. 
45. Isoc. XI (Busiris) 18.
46. Cf. Pritchett 2:97.

Lacedaemonians were present at the Olympic Games as spectators as
well as competitors, and a variety of remarks in Plutarch mention Spar-
tans abroad.47
All Hellenic states restricted travel at the outbreak of war.48 Hyperides
recalled a law against metics leaving Athens in wartime; similar controls
would have been placed on citizens.49 Some states, such as Cius and Ery-
thrae, granted freedom of movement to honored foreigners in both peace
and war. It is not clear whether they were being accorded the rights of cit-
izens or given privileges beyond that status. Since one of the honorees,
Athenodorus, was also granted exemption from taxation, and since
another, Mausolus of Mylasa, satrap of Caria, was a man of considerable
note, the latter alternative is preferable.50 In time of war, even movement
within a state could be restricted by the enactment of curfewlike mea-
sures. According to the Suda, the seer Diopithes introduced a law forbid-
ding anyone from the city to remain in the Piraeus beyond a certain time
of night, under penalty of death.51
Restrictions on Foreigners
In the small poleis so characteristic of Hellenic life, the presence of
strangers would be readily noted. Even large cities, such as Athens, were
a conglomerate of smaller subcommunities, whose members could iden-
tify those who did not belong.52 In military units, commanders could
catch spies by calling a drill and arresting anyone who lacked an assigned
place in the ranks.53 Covert intelligence operations were correspondingly
Counterintelligence
201
47. Anecdotes place Spartan spectators at the Olympic and even the Panathenaic festi-
vals. See, e.g., Plut. Mor. 235cd; cf. Plut. Lyc. 16.3, 24.3. Herodotus (5.63) mentioned
Spartans coming to Delphi both on public and private journeys. 
48. Cf. Hdt. 1.67.
49. Hyperides Against Athenogenes 29; cf. 33. Athenogenes left Athens during the war
with Philip, just before Chaeronea, and moved to Troezen, and therefore was tried under a
law that stated that a man who moved in wartime should be indicted and summarily
arrested if he returned. 
50. Tod no. 149 (post-360): Athenodorus, an Athenian mercenary, and his descendants
were honored by Cius with atelia (as opposed to isotelia) and the right of “sailing in and
out [without harm and] without treaty, both in peace and in war” (lines 7–8). Mausolus
and his descendants were awarded proxenia in addition by Erythrae (Tod no. 155, ca.
357–355). Cf. Tod no. 186 (Antigonus by Priene); Harding no. 28B (Idrieus by Erythrae);
more generally Harding no. 117 (=SIG 273, between the peoples of Miletus and Sardis).
51. Connor 116–17, citing Suda s.v. DiopeÛyh!, ¤pit®deuma. Diopithes was himself
caught doing so unintentionally and dragged off to court.
52. Aristoph. Thesm. 596ff.
53. Polyaenus 3.13.1 (of Chares), 5.28.2 (of Theognis).

dif‹cult, and some types of counterintelligence were relatively simple.
Strangers passing themselves off as citizens or members of a military
force could be detected simply by not being known. They might more
easily assume the role of newly established metics, but this population
was often regulated.54 Foreigners often faced some degree of limitation
on their freedom, the extent of the limits naturally varying according to
the internal and international atmospheres. Athens, for example, has
been characterized as rather open to visitors in times of peace, at least
according to Thucydides’ Pericles and the evidence implicit in such ex-
amples as the presence of a Syracusan troop-master in the city in 421.55
But as tension increased, the city’s policy grew more strict: for instance,
when suspicious of Potidaean ‹delity, the Athenians forbade their Poti-
daean “allies” to admit Corinthian magistrates.56 In time of war, extreme
measures were taken: at the opening of the Peloponnesian War, the Athe-
nians arrested all Boeotians in Attica, and they later cast the Aeginetans
from their island.57 An inscription from the Attic town of Eleusis, dated
to the opening of the Peloponnesian War, mandates that no foreigners—
not even deserters—could be received.58
The last mentioned incidents give rise to the question of expulsions of
foreigners (xenelasiai) and their application to counterintelligence. The
Lacedaemonians have often been charged with recourse to such prac-
tices, but the extent and purpose of their use of expulsion acts was
respectively exaggerated and misrepresented by Athenian propaganda.
Xenelasia was directed against corruption rather than intelligence,
although it could have had a collateral effect in disrupting information
›ow.59 It could also have made the relationship between a domestic ‹fth
column and a sympathetic foreign power more dif‹cult, and hence it
could have reduced the ef‹cacy of traitors as informants. Failing this, it
would have forced traitors to use covert means of communication.
Expulsion acts could be instituted to preserve physical as well as moral
202
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
54. Tod p. 119.
55. Thuc. 2.39.1; Xen. Symp. 2.1. Some religious secrets were vigorously kept, and for-
eigners were excluded from some rites (see, e.g., [Demosth.] LIX [Against Neaera] 79–83;
Wallace 108–9 ad loc.).
56. Thuc. 1.56.2.
57. Thuc. 2.6.2, 2.27.1.
58. IG I3 58.
59. Cf. Allmand (in Neilson and McKercher, 40 and n. 35): during the Hundred Years’
War, the English parliament on more than one occasion demanded that Bretons be expelled
to preserve secrecy. 

security and can be associated with fear of sabotage: in the case of the
Boeotians just mentioned, there are allusions in Aristophanes to appre-
hensions lest they burn the facilities in the Piraeus.60 Expulsions of for-
eigners, by individual or type, were not unknown in other states. Aristo-
tle’s ›ights from Athens in 348 and 323 no doubt owe something to his
Macedonian background.61 Further, there is a general feeling in the com-
ments of Aeneas Tacticus that periodic expulsions of foreigners are a
hygienic practice, undertaken out of prudence, to enhance security.62
Other measures could be instituted by a state to control the admit-
tance of foreigners and to monitor them during their stay. Aristo-
phanes spoke of a token (alternately called a sphagis and a sumbolon)
that was obtained at the gates to the city from the commander of the
guard. This could be demanded of foreigners to verify their right to be
present.63 Aeneas Tacticus accorded public of‹cials the duty of regis-
tering the names and lodgings of visitors. Mention of the use of tokens
in his preceding sentence may apply here also.64 Envoys of hostile or
potentially hostile states, although admitted for the sake of maintain-
ing diplomatic channels, might be kept apart from the general populace
during their stay, to prevent communication.65 Aeneas further advo-
cated a general policy whereby trusted citizens were assigned to ambas-
sadors and whereby ambassadors would be limited to discourse with
these alone.66 His advice might be limited in application to his context
(a city under siege), but it seems to rest on the more sociable practice of
envoys and notable visitors being entertained by prominent members
of a community.67 Even when formal controls were not in place, there
Counterintelligence
203
60. Connor 117, citing Aristoph. Knights 475ff. and adding: “The same fear is men-
tioned in Frogs 359ff. In Acharnians 715ff. Aristophanes jokes about Boeotian plots to set
the naval yard a‹re. All these passages are jesting treatments of a very real anxiety.” See
also Dinarchus Against Philocles 1–2; Hyperides For Lyc. frag. IIIa (IV).
61. Cf. McKechnie 152, with nn. 124 and 125. See also Demosth. XIX (On the False
Embassy) 331. 
62. Aen. Tact. 10.10.
63. Aristoph. Birds 1213 (sphagis), 1214 (sumbolon).
64. Aen. Tact. 10.9. On the basis of this passage, Whitehead (“Lakonian Key,” 268)
suggested that the “Laconian key” (mentioned in Aristoph. Thesm. 423 and schol. ad loc.),
which locked a door from without, rendering it impossible to open from within, alluded to
a form of house arrest of foreigners practiced in Sparta.
65. Aen. Tact. 10.11; cf. Thuc. 2.12.1–2. Cf. Thuc. 5.84.3 and, for late antique ex-
amples, Lee, Information and Frontiers, 167–68.
66. Aen. Tact. 10.11.
67. See, e.g., Xen. Oecon. 2.5; Xen. Mem. 1.2.61.

seemed to be a general interest in keeping tabs on anyone socializing
with foreigners.68
Provision was apparently made for attendance of religious festivals
and access to the oracle of Apollo at Delphi even in time of war. Aristo-
phanes mentioned that Athenians wishing to go to Delphi during the
Peloponnesian War had to ask for passage from the Boeotians, through
whose territory their route lay.69 The mechanics of this application could
be a problem: how would an Athenian obtain permission from the Boeo-
tians without being admitted into Boeotia, yet how could he be admitted
into Boeotia without ‹rst gaining permission? Some arrangement with a
third party might have solved this dilemma, or perhaps application was
made via a herald, who possessed immunity. 
The religious festivals, which provided an excellent opportunity for
information gathering, must have made counterintelligence correspond-
ingly dif‹cult, and there is no evidence for monitoring of contact between
individuals of mutually hostile states. Even regional festivals allowed
admittance to a state during a war (without provisions for a truce). There
is mention of visitors to the Gymnopaedia while most of the Spartan men
were abroad at Leuctra, although it is hardly likely that Theban tourists
were admitted into the city at that time.70
Attempts to control the contact between citizens and foreigners could
impede the mobility of agents and reduce the availability of sources in
time of war. Consequently, states would be relatively ignorant of their
opponents’ affairs or would be compelled to compensate by using avail-
able means more extensively (e.g., heralds), by using different types of
informants (e.g., captives), or by relying on covert collection (e.g., spies).
Counterintelligence Agents
The term counterintelligence agent is here used to denote those who dis-
rupted the activity of intelligence agents or sources. In a few cases indi-
viduals were assigned the task of capturing or killing enemy intelligence
agents. Patrols were sent to capture enemy scouts, and guards were
posted to prevent deserters. Pompiscus, an Arcadian, was said to have
made access to his camp dif‹cult for enemy kataskopoi by fortifying the
main roads and denuding them of cover, while patrolling the byways to
204
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
68. Hyperides For Euxenippus 22.
69. Aristoph. Birds 188–89.
70. Plut. Ages. 29.2.

capture those avoiding the roads.71 When important decisions were being
made, Alexander posted mounted guards at the entrance to the camp and
had nearby roads patrolled by cavalry to prevent messages being sent.72
Practical precautions were also suggested by Aeneas Tacticus. These
included posting dogs outside the city walls and controlling passage out
of the gates.73 Sentries may have acted as an obstacle to desertion or
betrayal, although Xenophon’s description of small groups of men scat-
tered through the dark to ambush would-be deserters probably re›ects
theory more than practice.74 Men or ships posted as watchers were vul-
nerable in turn, and Xenophon advocated setting ambushes for these as
well.75
The bulk of counterintelligence activity, however, was a by-product of
a need for security against treachery. To this end informers were encour-
aged in many states. The employment of these individuals is relevant to
the conduct of both intelligence and counterintelligence, insofar as they
provided information to the government by revealing traitors and, in
doing so, put an end to the activity of those who often provided infor-
mation to hostile foreign powers.
Losada has commented on the success of security measures against
‹fth columns in the Peloponnesian War but has also noted that of ‹ve
plots discovered by their prospective victims, four were revealed by indi-
viduals who were party to the plot, rather than by people outside the plot
discovering it through vigilance or accident.76 As I mentioned earlier, it
was (and remains) very dif‹cult to keep secrets when the number of indi-
viduals privy to the secret exceeded three or four. Hence it is no surprise
that conspirators were the most common informers. These were further
able to provide a degree of detail unavailable from other sources.77
Losada’s small sample is indicative of the larger context, and it is fair
to say that democracies and oligarchies relied most heavily on volun-
teered information rather than on agents commissioned to monitor the
Counterintelligence
205
71. Polyaenus 5.33.1, 33.5. Cf. [Nicephorus] Campaign Org. 12.
72. Q. Curtius 6.8.18. Cf. Aen. Tact. 22, 24; Onas. 26.1–2; Q. Curtius 7.2.28.
73. Aen. Tact. 22.7, 22.14, 22.20, 28.2; see also 23.1–3, 23.5, 29, 31.35, 40.5, and
Polyaenus 3.9.51.
74. Xen. Cyr. 4.5.5. Cf. Polyaenus 2.22.4; Anon. Byz. Peri Strat. 7.
75. Xen. Cav. Com. 4.10.
76. Losada 116; cf. 113. Five of ten plots mentioned by Thucydides were uncovered; the
source of information about the ‹fth plot is not recorded.
77. See, e.g., Hdt. 8.132; Thuc. 4.68.6, 6.74.1; Xen. Hell. 3.3.4. Cf. Hdt. 3.71; Thuc.
1.20.2, 6.57.2. Charon, e.g., realized that Archias’ information did not come from a fellow
conspirator, because of its vague nature (Plut. Pelop. 10.1).

populace.78 Provocateurs were not altogether absent but were more char-
acteristic of tyrannies. All polities encouraged contributions from
informers. Encouragement took the forms of promises of rewards, on the
one hand, and the exacting of oaths and inculcation of the concept of
duty, on the other. It might have also manifested itself in penalties for not
informing, should people fail to report their knowledge of a plot.79
At least some of the peoples subject to Athens in the ‹fth century were
bound by oath to denounce any revolutionary activity.80 Their adherence
to these oaths was reinforced by the more tangible presence of episkopoi,
proxenoi, phrourarkhoi, and the like. There may have been a similar
arrangement during the Lacedaemonian hegemony, since the Athenians
were quick to inform the Spartan harmost on Aegina of Demaenetus’
machinations lest they be considered implicated by their silence. Other
authorities sometimes sought to instill a similar sense of obligation; hence
sycophants often tried to give to their prosecutions the aura of public
duty.81
Rewards included money for free people, freedom, and sometimes
money for slaves. The amount of the reward could be ‹xed (and pub-
lished), or it might be a percentage of the property of the accused.82 In
either case, the rewards could amount to substantial sums of money. It
was not uncommon for immunity (adeia) to be accorded to an informant
who was himself involved in a conspiracy, in return for comprehensive
information about a plot’s purpose and membership. Immunity could be
extended to a participant in a plot but not to the instigator, and was pro-
visional based on the veracity of the information. Those who provided
information judged to be false, whether on the basis of other evidence or
political expediency, did not meet happy ends.83
Informers were common in the ‹fth and fourth centuries and probably
earlier as well, since informers and sycophants are mentioned (at least in
206
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
78. However, there were institutions that investigated treachery: e.g., the Areopagus at
Athens had the right of zetesis in cases of prodosia (Wallace 113).
79. Cf. Plut. Mor. 222a.
80. Tod no. 42; cf. the Thasian decree (Meiggs and Lewis no. 18). In the Mytilene
Debate (Thuc. 3.46.6), Diodotus advocated a careful watch on the allies to forestall revolts
rather than chastising the rebellious population after the event. 
81. Isoc. III (Nicocles) 53; Demosth. XVII (On the crown) 22–23.
82. Cf. Xen. Anab. 2.2.20 (a talent of silver); Aen. Tact. 10.3, 10.15 (which includes a
provision for the physical display of the money on an altar or temple in the agora).
83. See, e.g., Xen. Anab. 2.5.24–26, when Clearchus and Tissaphernes agreed to turn
over informants telling—quite truthfully—of bad faith; cf. Q. Curtius 10.9.9.

Athens) from the time of Solon.84 They laid charges before magistrates
(kings, tyrants, and fairly high-level of‹cials, like strategoi and archons)
or engaged in prosecution themselves. Intermediaries appear in the
sources only when their behavior affected the information ›ow, although
in less open societies their presence can be taken for granted. It is improb-
able that a cobbler, for instance, would be able to get an immediate inter-
view with a tyrant without some sort of screening process. The channels
through which an informant’s report ›owed could be rather circuitous:
the plot to deliver Boeotian cities into the hands of the Athenian generals
Hippocrates and Demosthenes was reported by Nicomachus, a Phocian
from Phanotis, to the Lacedaemonians, who in turn communicated the
information to the Boeotians in time for the latter to intervene and pre-
vent the uprising.85
In addition to informers, tyrants recruited and maintained provoca-
teurs, such as those working for Hieron and the Dionysii in Syracuse. Ad
hoc measures to test erstwhile friends on their ‹delity were undertaken
by people under other constitutions as well: Iphicrates, for instance, was
said to have sent men disguised as Lacedaemonians into Chios to dis-
cover those who welcomed them. He arrested and sent to Athens those
who received the imposters.86 Agents could be recruited for speci‹c tasks
involving clandestine investigation of suspect elements. The leader of the
popular party in Argos, learning from an unspeci‹ed source of an immi-
nent oligarchic coup, won over two men of the opposite party to work
for him covertly while he openly treated them as enemies. In secret he
learned the oligarchs’ plans from them and, on the night of the attempt,
he called the ekklesia to stand in arms by tribe and so prevented the oli-
garchs from carrying out their coup.87 I have given other examples of
such agents in chapter 3.
Finally, there were men like Demosthenes—there is no ‹tting category
for their role, save perhaps the notions associated with the term loose
cannon—who fostered a certain paranoia over the presence of foreign
spies and domestic traitors. Their efforts were not a function of the
of‹ces they held but were guided by private concerns and ambitions.
Counterintelligence
207
84. Losada 113 and n. 349. 
85. Thuc. 4.89.1–2. Cf. Thuc. 8.73.4; Plut. Pelopidas 9.3, 10.3–4.
86. Polyaenus 3.9.58; Front. Strat. 4.7.23. On the private level, but perhaps of equal
pertinence to counterintelligence in its speci‹c sense, is the advice of Isocrates (I [to Demon-
icus] 24–25), who advocated testing friends by con‹ding harmless information as if it were
secret.
87. Aen. Tact. 11.7.

Demosthenes in particular was a self-appointed spy catcher and was
censured, even mocked, by his political opponents for what they charac-
terized as frenzied witch-hunts. Aeschines, his bitter enemy, declaimed,
“I say nothing of his deceitful [perhaps “forged”] letters and arrests of
spies and torture sessions on ‹ctitious charges—as if I, and some others
wanted to bring about revolution in the city.”88 Aeschines’ mockery does
not lack backing in the speeches of other orators and in the words of
Demosthenes himself.89
Dinarchus attacked Demosthenes on the
grounds that he “brought into the assembly held just the other day an
informer whom he had prepared with false statements to say that people
were plotting to damage the docks.”90 The incident, if indeed it is the
same one, appeared to Demosthenes in a different light. 
You all remember Antiphon, the man who was struck from the reg-
ister, and came back to Athens after promising Philip that he would
set ‹re to the dockyard. When I had caught him hiding at Piraeus,
and brought him before the assembly, this malignant fellow
[Aeschines] raised a huge outcry about my scandalous and un-
democratic conduct in distress and breaking into houses without a
warrant and so procured his acquittal. Had not the Council of the
Areopagus learned of the matter, and seeing that you had made an
inopportune blunder, conducted an investigation of the man,
arrested him and brought him to court a second time, the vile trai-
tor would have slipped out of your hands and eluded justice, being
smuggled out of the city by our bombastic phrase-monger. As it
was, you put him on the rack and then executed him.91
In the life of Demosthenes, once ascribed to Plutarch, there is further
mention that he arrested Anaxilas of Oreus, who had been his guest-
friend, and had him tortured as spy. Although Anaxilas, under torture,
did not admit to espionage, Demosthenes proposed a decree that he be
handed over to the Eleven for execution.92 Interpretation of Demos-
thenes’ action is rather dif‹cult—he may have been attempting political
208
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
88. Aeschines III (Against Ctesiphon) 225; cf. 82.
89. Indeed Demosthenes (XVIII [On the crown] 21) called Aeschines and Philocrates
Philip’s spies, possibly because he characterized his political opposition as traitors and
hence spies. 
90. Dinarchus Against Demosthenes 94–95.
91. Demosth. XVIII (On the crown) 132, Loeb translation. Cf. Wallace 113–15 ad loc.
92. [Plut.] Mor. 848a (“arresting him, he tortured him as a spy”). 

housecleaning under the guise of his concern for the security of the state,
yet Aeschines (and later Dinarchus) had every motive for wishing Demos-
thenes’ actions to appear in the worst light possible. In any event, these
fourth-century free-for-alls show that counterespionage was a lively
issue.
Finally, it is curious to note that the appearance of an ability to detect
traitors could itself be a deterrent to treachery, as evidenced by a story in
Polyaenus, in which a man announced publicly that he knew an infal-
lible way to discover plots. He was summoned by Dionysius, who bade
him reveal his method. The man insisted on telling him in private. Upon
the dismissal of all others, he advised Dionysius to pretend that he indeed
had a sure way of apprehending traitors, so that all would shrink from
treachery out of fear.93 Nicocles appears to have aimed at provoking a
similar response in his subjects when warning them, “Let none of you
imagine that even what he secretly thinks in his own heart will be hidden
from me.”94 But, more practically, Thucydides cynically observed that
while much credit was given to those who had the intellectual prowess
and, presumably, the sources that enabled them to detect plots, when the
intelligent passively relied on their ability to anticipate unrest, they were
destroyed by those of meaner wit but greater activity.95
Disruption or Interception of Communication
While Plutarch wanted to believe that the Athenians would not open
Philip II’s private correspondence to his wife, he had to admit that such
restraint could not be expected of all.96 If, indeed, the Athenians
refrained from breaking open that letter, they had no compunctions
about reading others. Even Philip had cause to complain that they way-
laid his herald and read out the captured letters in the ekklesia.97 In fact,
such evidence as exists implies that the Athenians were fairly adept at get-
Counterintelligence
209
93. Polyaenus 5.2.3; cf. Plut. Mor. 175f (Sayings of kings, Dionys. 8); Stob. 3.42.
94. Isoc. III (To Nicocles) 51, Loeb translation.
95. Thuc. 3.82.5, 83.2, 83.4, 87.3; cf. 6.38.2.
96. Plut. Mor. 799e, Loeb translation: “And I do not believe that the Thebans either, if
they had obtained control of their enemies’ letters, would have refrained from reading
them, as the Athenians, when they captured Philip’s mail-carriers with a letter addressed to
Olympias, refrained from breaking the seal and making known an affectionate private mes-
sage of an absent husband to his wife.”
97. Philip Epist. 2 (in Demosthenes’ corpus).

ting their hands on other people’s messages and messengers, perhaps
because of their control of the sea for much of the ‹fth and fourth cen-
turies.98
These incidents are by no means isolated, nor can all be attributed
solely to the chances of war. Reconnaissance forces are sometimes men-
tioned as responsible for the capture of documents, which is probably
due to their role in seeking captives for interrogation.99 A number of mes-
sages fell into unintended hands because their bearers held allegience to a
third party above loyalty to the correspondents, sought personal gain by
turning over the documents, or both. Such was the case with the courier
of the treacherous regent Pausanias.100 Third parties, perhaps having
learned how easy it would be to frame somebody by simulated corre-
spondence, seem to have been cautious in receiving defecting couriers
and sought independent con‹rmation. A return to the story of Pausanias
illustrates this: the ephors arranged to overhear Pausanias acknowledge
his guilt in a conversation contrived by the courier. In other circum-
stances, couriers were ordered to deliver the message as directed by its
sender and then return with a reply that would con‹rm the correspon-
dent’s complicity.101
Many citations are vague on details of the capture. Xenophon
recorded the celebrated letter of Hippocratus, that was sent to inform his
Lacedaemonian compatriots, “Our ships are lost. Mindarus is dead. Our
men starve. We don’t know what to do,” but was intercepted by the
Athenians. However, Xenophon left us to speculate exactly how and
210
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
98. Some examples: Thuc. 2.67ff., 3.35.1, 4.50.1–3. Besides these, there is indirect tes-
timony to the existence of measures taken to intercept messages in countermeasures used,
by inference, to circumvent them—that is, devices invented to convey information without
detection. 
99. Some examples: (1) Plut. Lys. 28.2; (2) the capture of tablets bearing the Syracusan
catalogue by Athenian triremes sent ahead to scout Syracuse’s harbor (Plut. Nicias 14.5);
and (3) the capture of a Mardian messenger sent by the satrap of Damascus to Alexander
(with secret overtures) by Parmenio’s scouts (Q. Curtius 3.13.2). In some cases, the attri-
bution to scouts is implicit: it is entirely possible that the cavalry who captured a courier
conveying an appeal from Selinus to Hamilcar and brought him to Gelon were scouts, since
cavalry often ful‹lled this role (Diod. Sic. 11.21.4–5). 
100. Thuc. 1.132.5; Diod. Sic. 11.45.2ff. (cf. Hdt. 5.32). Cf. Hdt. 6.4; Xen. Anab.
1.6.3.
101. Aen. Tact. 31.9: During a siege a man was sent into the city with a message for a
traitor, but instead he went to the archon of the city, to whom he gave the letters; the
archon told him to deliver the letters and bring back a reply. Upon receiving the reply, the
archon summoned the traitor and convicted him with his own seal.

where the Athenians got their hands on it.102 One must also rely on con-
jecture with regard to Parmenio’s letter to his sons, the letters of Darius
intended for distribution among Alexander’s troops, and those of
Demades urging action against Antipater.103
Private correspondence could also be subjected to interception and
scrutiny. Aeneas Tacticus called for an episkopesis (perhaps best trans-
lated “censorship” here) of outgoing and incoming letters.104 The con-
text suggests that this practice would be continuous in peace and war;
hence the creation of a new of‹ce or an alteration of an existing one
might be desirable. There is no other evidence for such an of‹ce, and it
may be that his theory did not become practice, but it is possible that a
state would not wish to advertise its use of censorship on inscriptions for
reasons of image or ef‹cacy or both. Ad hoc measures to monitor com-
munication were instituted by Alexander, who arranged for letters writ-
ten by his troops to be opened and read to discern their sentiments. The
Sicilian and Cypriot tyrants surely did likewise.105 The sources are silent
concerning regulation of private correspondence of soldiers, but some
effort may have been taken to oversee this channel of communication,
which could compromise security. 
The interception of messages represented not only a facet of counter-
intelligence (in that intelligence ›ow was subject to interruption) but also
one of intelligence, since the information contained in dispatches could
prove of great value to their captors. In the case of Theban scouts who
intercepted a dispatch from Lysander to King Pausanias, the Boeotians
were able to act quickly enough to prepare a strong force at Haliartus,
where Lysander met his death ‹ghting. Captured documents could be
exploited in other ways to strengthen one’s own position or damage
another’s. The letters of Darius and Parmenio mentioned earlier might be
examples of such a practice. The framing of Dion with a letter allegedly
sent to the Carthaginians, captured, and presented to Dionysius is prob-
Counterintelligence
211
102. Xen. Hell. 1.1.23. This was an of‹cial dispatch, presumably on a skutale.
103. Respectively, Q. Curtius 6.9.13, 4.10.16; Arrian Anab. 2.14.5–6; Plut. Demosth.
31.3–4 (a letter from Demades to Perdiccas); Plut. Phocion 30.5–6 (from Demades to
Antigonus). Cf. Polybius 5.28.4.
104. Aen. Tact. 10.6. Aeneas intended thereby to prevent contact between citizens and
exiles, but such controls would have also affected other channels of communication of
information.
105. Q. Curtius 3.7.14–15, 7.2.36; Diod. Sic. 17.80; Polyaenus 4.3.19; Just. 12.5. Cf.
Polyaenus 7.20.1.

ably an example as well.106 Conversely, disinformation could be effected
by arranging for specially contrived documents to fall into enemy hands.
Attempts were also made to disrupt other modes of communication,
either by forestalling or by “jamming” their transmission. Interdiction
seems to have been a matter of general policy (at least by the fourth cen-
tury), at times carried out by night watchmen and enforced by stiff penal-
ties.107 A notable instance of “jamming” was the Plataean confutation of
signal ‹res lit by their Peloponnesian besiegers. The Plataeans had
planned an escape attempt but realized that should they break through
their besiegers, they would still have to deal with enemy reinforcements
sent for from Thebes. Therefore they prepared beacons in advance, so
that when the Peloponnesians tried to signal for aid, the Plataeans were
able to light the beacons and thus confuse transmission of any mes-
sages.108
Other Devices and Legislation
Legislation
Most legislation pertinent to counterintelligence was enacted to thwart
treachery (prodosia). Prodosia encompassed espionage along with other
forms of treason and ‹fth-column activity. Those found guilty under
these laws were executed; spies of foreign states were subject to the same
penalty as domestic traitors. A clause prohibiting the reception of desert-
ers was incorporated among the terms of the truce between the Lacedae-
monians and Athenians in 423.109 It would be interesting to know
whether the two parties abided by their agreement. If nothing else, the
treaty would make desertion a yet riskier undertaking in the mind of a
soldier, since he could not have con‹dence that he would not be returned
by his new patrons, particularly if his presence brought them no particu-
lar advantage. There are no indications, however, that deserters who
claimed to have information were ever turned away unheeded by the 
212
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
106. Plut. Dion 14.4–7. 
107. Aen. Tact. 10.26; Lysias Against Agorat. 65/67. 
108. Thuc. 3.22.7 (÷pv! !af° tŒ !hmeÝa t°! fruktvrÛa! toÝ! polemÛoi! Â kaÜ m¯
bohyoÝen). Cf. Polyaenus 6.19.2. Naturally, the troops in Thebes were aware that some-
thing was up, but their response was less well directed than it might otherwise have been.
Cf. Riepl 73 for an analysis of how this might have worked.
109. As recorded in Thuc. 4.118.7 (“neither you nor we are to receive deserters during
this time, neither free nor slave”). Cf. IG3 58 (Attic, ca. 430): “it is forbidden [to receive
any] xenos [into one’s house, not even a suppliant or an auto]molos.”

people whom they approached. Those who suffered their desertion estab-
lished severe punishments. An Athenian decree concerning those who
›ed to Deceleia mandates that should they be caught returning, they
could be taken by any Athenian to the Thesmothetae, who would in turn
hand them over to be executed.110
In an exceptional case, the communication of a speci‹c item of intelli-
gence was prohibited by law. A decree passed by the Thebans, often
lauded by Athenian orators of the fourth century, mandated that the
Thebans were to ignore anyone (i.e., any Athenian rebel) passing through
their country under arms. This decree was enacted to prevent informa-
tion concerning the muster in Boeotia (of the Athenians opposed to the
Thirty) from reaching the Thirty or the Lacedaemonians.111 One won-
ders how effective such a decree could be, since the mere fact that it was
enacted would be an indication that some game was afoot and would
hardly prevent a Laconophile from tipping off the Spartans. It must be
noted, however, that the Thirty did not lead out their troops until too
late, after Phyle was seized—perhaps they had not taken the threat seri-
ously.
Internment
During time of war, a commander had license to arrest and detain any-
one who might conceivably be able to pass on information of his move-
ments or plans. Such was the intent of the Athenians when they interned
the crews of the ships of their Lesbian allies while preparing a surprise
attack on Mytilene.112 Alexander proved more successful when he sent
troops against a Mallian town with orders not to engage but to prevent
anyone from escaping lest they tell their compatriots that the Macedo-
nians were at hand.113 Armies on the march made no effort to distinguish
between likely and unlikely security risks—instead, those who fell in with
them were seized indiscriminately, as when Alcibiades and Chalcideus
sailed to Chios.114 Likewise Seuthes led his force with cavalry that
Counterintelligence
213
110. Lycurgus Against Leocrates 120–21. Cf. [Aristotle] Ath. Pol. 3.5; Front. Strat.
4.1.17.
111. See, e.g., Dinarchus Against Demosthenes 25; Plut. Pelopidas 6.4. Cf. Xen. Hell.
2.4.2.
112. Thuc. 3.3.4.
113. Arrian Anab. 6.6.4.
114. Thuc. 8.14.1. At a later date Alcibiades, upon arrival at Proconnesus, took into
custody all the vessels in the harbor, even small ones, so that nobody could reveal the size
of his own force to the enemy; he had a proclamation made to the effect that anyone caught
sailing across the strait would be killed (Xen. Hell. 1.1.15). Cf. Amm. Marc. 29.4.4.

detained everyone it met lest someone escape to warn his foes.115
Xenophon was particularly impressed with this precaution and improved
on it in his Education of Cyrus, in which Cyrus, attempting to surprise
the Armenians, sent men ahead in the guise of brigands to capture any
Armenians on the army’s route, to prevent them from spreading news of
his advent.116
Concealment and Distraction
Concealment is attested most often in the military sphere, especially on
tactical levels. It frequently manifested itself in ambushes over the entire
range of the period under discussion, but it was also useful in achieving
tactical advantage through unexpected movement. Agesilaus was praised
by Xenophon for habitually concealing his army’s movements, so that his
enemy often did not know where he was or whither he went.117 Move-
ments by night or behind a screening body of troops or terrain and even
smoke screens were used by Greek commanders and their opposite num-
bers among the Carthaginians.118 Troop numbers were also concealed or
misrepresented.119 By the fourth century, all such measures were advo-
cated as basic security and affected campaigning. Xenophon commended
Epaminondas, for instance, for pitching camp within the walls of Tegea,
since his actions would be less visible to his enemies, while it was pos-
sible for Epaminondas to observe them, since they were camped in the
open.120
While concealment of information is an impediment to an opponent’s
ability to make intelligent decisions, its employment is liable to arouse
suspicions. Although it is not always easy to detect a lack of information
and understand its signi‹cance, it is certainly possible for an astute
observer to be prompted to ask questions such as “Why am I not able to
learn the whereabouts of the Athenian ›eet?” and “Where did his light-
armed troops go to?” or even “Why do the Spartans wish to conceal
this?” Such thoughts lead naturally to further inquiry and speculation,
which might compromise the counterintelligence effort. Indeed, Timoc-
214
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
115. Xen. Anab. 7.3.36. Onasander (39.4) suggested this as standard operating proce-
dure.
116. Xen. Cyr. 2.4.15–23. 
117. Xen. Ages. 6.6.
118. Xen. Ages. 6.6; Arrian Anab. 2.9.1, 2.9.3; Polyaenus 2.3.13, 3.3.13, 3.3.14, 3.9.8,
5.10.5. Cf. Thuc. 5.8; Q. Curtius 4.9.15. Cf. also Anderson 217–18 and n. 84.
119. Polyaenus 1.47.1, 3.9.19.
120. Xen. Hell. 7.5.8.

rates aroused suspicions of treachery because he would not share com-
mon quarters with his compatriots when participating in an embassy to
the Thebans, and he was executed on the belief that he did this to conceal
secret negotiations and corruption.121 Thus although concealment in
itself can be effective, its utility could be enhanced by complementary
devices, such as misinformation and distraction. These devices, by con-
cealing actual plans and actions beneath apparent explanations or
demonstrations (particularly those appealing to an opponent’s expecta-
tions and prejudices), could deter hostile parties from properly consider-
ing the implications of whatever preparations they might detect.
Distraction entails the provision of an opportunity for an opponent to
divert his attention and resources to an activity other than the one con-
cealed. The Corinthians, for example, demonstrated with warships sta-
tioned opposite the Athenian ›eet at Naupactus, while secretly preparing
to send troop carriers to Sicily.122 The Corinthians knew that Naupactus
was of considerable importance to the Athenians, who used it as a base
to observe and hinder Peloponnesian movements west through the gulf.
The Corinthians reasoned, soundly as events proved, that the potential
threat of their ›eet would divert Athenian attention from their other
preparations. 
Other Comments on Methods
Information on an opponent’s intelligence efforts facilitated a counterin-
telligence response, both in general strategy and in particulars. In the for-
mer case, it was essential to know what an enemy was actively seeking to
learn and what types of agents he was employing, so that counterintelli-
gence resources could be allocated where they were most needed, and so
that measures taken to conceal, distract, or misinform the foe would be
as effective as possible. A ‹tting example, if one of somewhat tenuous
historicity, is the story of the Persians sent by Darius at the instigation of
Democedes to reconnoiter the Greek coasts. Upon reaching Taras,
Democedes jumped ship and persuaded Aristophilides, the Tarantine
king, to arrest the Persians as kataskopoi. While the whole affair is
described as a collusion between Democedes and Aristophilides to enable
the former to escape back to his native Croton, nevertheless the Persians
Counterintelligence
215
121. Xen. Hell. 7.1.38.
122. Thuc. 7.19.5.

were in fact kataskopoi, and their reconnaissance was compromised and
only partially successful.123 Other measures included sealed orders and
spot security checks on these.124 There are also a fair number of examples
of efforts to withhold information that lack clari‹cation as to the method
used. Xenophon mentioned, for instance, that Alcotas, a Lacedaemonian
guarding Oreus, took care lest the Thebans learn that he had manned
ships for an ambush. No indication was made of how Alcotas achieved
this.125
Disinformation
Disinformation complements concealment by providing one’s opponent
with a false perception of one’s intentions. It further hinders the efforts of
agents seeking reliable information, both by the immediate consequences
of providing false information to decision makers and by the long-term
demands it exacts due to the necessity to verify information. 
Disinformation entails both outright falsehood and the presentation of
the truth in a way that compels the listener to draw an erroneous conclu-
sion or encourages an action bene‹cial to the deceiver.126 It was
employed against enemies to gain advantage, especially in military con-
texts to lull their awareness and so heighten surprise, to lower their
morale, to detach their allies, and to prevent or provoke movements.127
The deception of an enemy did not seem to pose ethical dilemmas for
216
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
123. Hdt. 3.136.
124. Polyaenus 5.2.12; Leo Byz. Strat. 7.1. Cf. Polyaenus 4.7.2.
125. Xen. Hell. 5.4.56.
126. To denizens of the twentieth century the distinction between these two forms of
deceit is perhaps arbitrary. There is, however, an interest in Greek literature in how far one
can bend the truth until it breaks, which re›ects a distinction in their society. In the Ho-
meric Hymn to Hermes (274–77, 368–86), e.g., the god Hermes seems to swear an oath
denying that he stole Apollo’s cattle, but he is only describing an oath he might swear, and
he presents his case to Zeus in words that are technically true but meant to mislead. His
efforts, though detected, afford amusement and admiration rather than censure.
127. To heighten surprise: e.g., Aen. Tact. 23.3. To affect morale: e.g., Xen. Cav. Com.
5.8: “To instill fear in one’s enemies, one does such things as fake ambushes, fake rein-
forcements, and false information. Enemies are especially con‹dent when they learn of
dif‹culties and bother among the other side.” Cf. similar sentiments attributed to Iphicrates
by Polyaenus (3.9.32). To detach allies: e.g., Plut. Dion 27.2. To affect movements: e.g.,
Aen. Tact. 23.7–11. Cf. also Dulles 145: “Its [deception’s] best known use is in wartime or
just prior to the outbreak of war, when its main purpose is to draw enemy defenses away
from a planned attack, or to give the impression that there will be no attack at all, or sim-
ply to confuse the opponent about one’s plans and purposes.” Collateral effects on evalua-
tion will be discussed shortly.

the Greeks, particularly in military operations.128 They were hardly more
hesitant to deceive their own soldiers than they were to mislead their ene-
mies. Andocides accepted this practice as standard operating procedure,
and even the moralizing Xenophon sanctioned its use when aimed at the
general good.129 It might be argued that concealment of danger was more
common than outright fabrications, but the former does imply the lat-
ter.130
Disinformation has some important implications for a study of intelli-
gence. First, the instigator of a leak had to be able to count on his foe’s
willingness and ability to collect information, since for his plan to suc-
ceed, some effort on the enemy’s part was necessary. It would be futile—
and perhaps bad for morale—to circulate disinformation at home and
abroad if it could not provoke a desired response in a victim who was
unable to discover it. The instigator had to have some knowledge of
which channels of information were ›owing at a given time, so as to
ensure that the disinformation effort was placed appropriately.131 Addi-
tionally, anyone conveying disinformation by leak or agent must have
suf‹cient knowledge about his foes to anticipate their response to the
news. An example from Polyaenus may illustrate this: Iphicrates, while
still in Mytilene, was said to have circulated that his men were to collect
shields to send to Chian slaves. This move was calculated to pressure the
Chians into supporting him, and indeed it succeeded in doing so. Had
Iphicrates not known that the Chians lived in constant dread of a slave
revolt, it is hardly probable that this idea would have occurred to him.132
While such knowledge hardly required elaborate information gathering,
his assessment also relied on information about relative strengths and
capabilities (what if the Chians had been strong enough to exact retribu-
tion?) and on an awareness that Chian agents or sympathizers would be
present on Lesbos to report his rumor. Alternatively, if the means for
such an operation had not been obviously at his disposal, the disinfor-
mation would not have been credible. Therefore it can be expected that
Counterintelligence
217
128. Xen. Mem. 4.2.15, 16. Cf. Thuc. 4.86.6; Xen. Ages. 11.4. The Greeks were not the
only ones to use misinformation: see, e.g., Hdt. 9.89; Xen. Anab. 2.4.14–25 (of Persians; cf.
Polyaenus 2.2.4); Plut. Timoleon 19.4–6; Polyaenus 5.10.3 (of Carthaginians).
129. Andoc. On the Peace 33–34; Xen. Mem. 4.2.17. Cf. Onas. 23.1–2.
130. See Xen. Hell. 1.6.36 (Polyaenus 1.44.1), 4.3.14 (Plut. Ages. 17.2–3); Plut. Pelop.
10.2.
131. Cf. Isoc. I (To Demonicus) 33.
132. Polyaenus 3.9.23 (ca. 391); cf. Athen. 265d–266e for corroboration of Chian fears
of slave revolts. 

commanders had need of good intelligence on their opponents, supple-
mented by adequate knowledge of their opponent’s information-gather-
ing practices.133
Effective disinformation also demanded an ability to withhold true
information that could expose the lie. There was a greater degree of
con‹dentiality possible when information was communicated to a single
person—had not Eteonicus been privately informed of the Lacedaemon-
ian defeat at Arginusae, he would not have been able to suppress this
report and bid the messengers to deliver false news of victory to his
men.134 Such con‹dentiality was much more dif‹cult to maintain in col-
lective bodies because of varied individual interest, carelessness, or fac-
tion on the part of their members (even smaller bodies, such as the ‹ve
ephors at Sparta, were not always in agreement, and security was less
than airtight).135 There was correspondingly less ability to manipulate
the populace by withholding or publishing news.136
Having introduced the prerequisites of misinformation, it remains to
turn to the subject itself. Disinformation took a variety of forms, but
these can be generally placed into categories based on the manner of
delivery: the leak and the agent.
Leaks
While the Greeks may not have known a word corresponding to our
twentieth-century conception of a leak, they were familiar enough with
the idea.137 Most leaks seemed to have been arranged by the instigator
discussing his (false) plans openly or perhaps employing men to spread
the word throughout his camp, in the expectation that someone would
218
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
133. Cf. Dulles 145–46: “As a strategic maneuver, deception generally requires lengthy
and careful preparation. Intelligence must ‹rst ascertain what the enemy thinks and what
he expects, because the misleading information which is going to be put into his hands must
be plausible and not outside the practical range of plans that the enemy knows are capable
of being put into operation. Intelligence must then devise a way of getting the deception to
the enemy.”
134. Xen. Hell. 1.6.36; for a similar story of Agesilaus, see 4.3.14. 
135. See, e.g., Thuc. 1.134.2.
136. So Adcock and Mosley (181), whose reasoning is good as far as it goes (“News was
not carried exclusively or most quickly along of‹cial channels. Therefore there was no
opportunity for it to be digested by an of‹cial body which could prepare its release and
manipulate public opinion”) but incomplete in that it does not consider security measures. 
137. CeudaggelÛa, in Xen. Cav. Com. 5.8, almost attains this meaning, but the word is
elsewhere used in its literal sense.

desert to the enemy or that a spy would be present. Since deserters were
endemic to Greek warfare, the expectation was a real one.138 Such was
probably the course of events when Alcibiades, Antalcidas, and Alexan-
der deceived their respective foes.139 Making an announcement to a pop-
ular assembly also worked well—which is, to be sure, a measure of the
dif‹culty of keeping real information from the enemy in democratic
forms of government. Aeneas Tacticus suggested using this method for
leaking fabricated plans for night attacks to the enemy to divert them
from their own intended actions. He might have been alluding to the
example of Iphicrates, who used this tactic against the Thebans.140 A
rather crude alternative was to speak so loudly that a nearby enemy
would overhear—such was the ploy ascribed to Pelopidas, who arranged
for a horseman to ride up to him near the walls of a town, announcing
loudly that the town’s ally had fallen.141 Hardly more sophisticated were
Alexander’s measures to deceive Porus’ watchers: he had a small contin-
gent pretend to be his whole army by making a lot of noise and commo-
tion, while he moved his main force to attack elsewhere, thereby gaining
tactical surprise—herein the kinship between concealment and demon-
stration is quite close.142 Stock stratagems included such devices as light-
ing more or less ‹res to deceive the enemy as to one’s numbers and mak-
ing withdrawals while leaving ‹res lit behind. Signals observed by an
enemy could also be used to denote the opposite of what the foe expected
through prior experience, as in the cases of Cleomenes and Pompiscus.143
Occasionally appearances were manipulated when contact with repre-
sentatives of other states was expected, as when the Egestaeans gave vis-
iting Athenian envoys an impression of great wealth by gathering all their
tableware of precious metals together and transferring the lot to each
house that hosted them as if it was the property of each rather than
all.144 Letters containing false information were allowed to fall into
enemy hands on occasion.
Counterintelligence
219
138. Cf. Polyaenus 1.17, 1.42.1; see also Onas. 10.22–24, and chap. 1.
139. Alcibiades at Byzantium (Plut. Alc. 31.2–3), Antalcidas at Abydus (Xen. Hell.
5.1.25ff.; Polyaenus 2.24.1), Alexander at the Hydaspes (Arrian Anab. 5.10.1; cf. Q. Cur-
tius 6.8.15). 
140. Aen. Tact. 9.1–3; Polyaenus 3.9.20. Cf. Paus. 9.12.
141. Polyaenus 2.4.1: Pelopidas also arranged for smoke to billow up in the direction of
the allied town, as con‹rmation of the report; cf. Front. Strat. 3.8.2, in which the deception
was further supported by prisoners dressed in the manner of the townspeople. 
142. Q. Curtius 8.13.18ff.
143. Hdt. 6.78; Polyaenus 1.14.1, 5.33.2.
144. Thuc. 6.46; Polyaenus 6.21.1.

Agesilaus was a master of subtle and elaborate deception. Not only
did he employ the tried-and-true method of deliberately circulating false
information within his camp, but he made preparations consistent with
this, so that his opponents would receive varied and independent evi-
dence all pointing to the same erroneous conclusion. When campaigning
against Tissaphernes in Asia Minor, he mustered men and sent word to
those cities en route to Caria to stock markets. In doing so, he manipu-
lated the expected indications of an attack and its directions, which large
armies must make due to logistic necessity, and relied on Tissaphernes’
spies or on deserters and captives from his own army to convey informa-
tion that would logically be sought by his foe. When Tissaphernes moved
to defend Caria, Agesilaus invaded Phrygia.145 Agesilaus used the same
method against the Thebans, when he wished to lure them from their
defense of the pass at Scolus. He again gave orders for markets to be pre-
pared, this time in Thespiae, and further indicated that all embassies
should await him there; the Thebans moved to guard the pass to Thes-
piae, while he marched unhindered through Scolus.146
There are only two examples of this type of disinformation before the
second half of the Peloponnesian War. This could indicate (1) that the
Greeks were not so ef‹cient at gathering information that an attempt to
circulate false information in the hope of it being reported back to an
opponent was feasible, and/or (2) that the possibility of such a subtle
form of deception was not yet realized, or (3) that examples occurring
before the birth of historical writing were lost due to secrecy or neglect.
The second possibility seems to be the most likely, since the Greeks per-
ceived an active effort, via an agent, as normal operating procedure; the
story of besieged Miletus (if true) seems more of an ad hoc response to an
unforeseen opportunity.147
220
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
145. Xen. Hell 3.4.11–12; Xen. Ages. 1.14–16; Plut. Ages. 9.2, 10.1; Polyaenus 2.1.9.
For other examples of the collection of foodstuffs as an indication of an army’s muster or
route, see Hdt. 7.25; Xen. Cyr. 6.2.11. Cf. Frederick the Great 126 (“look for the enemy’s
supply depots”), 347–48; Maurice de Saxe (291): “They [spies] should be placed every-
where, among the of‹cers, the generals, the sutlers, and especially among purveyors of pro-
visions, because their stores, magazines, and other preparations furnish the best intelligence
concerning the real designs of the enemy.”
146. Xen. Hell. 5.4.48; Polyaenus 2.1.11.
147. Hdt. 1.20, 23 (ca. 611): When the besieged Milesians learned from Periander of a
future embassy from Alyattes, they arranged a show of conspicuous consumption for his
herald to witness. On learning of the apparent prosperity of the Milesians, Alyattes
despaired of his siege. Cf. Polyaenus 6.47.1; Front. Strat. 3.15.6.

Agents
If a leader could not count on an enemy intelligence agent being on hand
to report disinformation back to his employer, he could send one of his
own men to accomplish the task.148 Particularly reliable men were sought
for such a role, and one can imagine that the risks they faced were con-
siderable should their reports be revealed as lies.149 The agent’s ‹rst
problem was to get access to the foe, then win acceptance and trust. As
Dulles put it, “He cannot simply turn up with dramatic military infor-
mation and expect to be believed unless he can explain his motive and
how he got his information.”150 The most common cover employed by
such agents, as with spies, was that of a deserter: it provided a familiar
context for gaining admittance, it eliminated the need to fabricate
another identity, and it lent itself well to a cover story built around a
motive.
The ‹rst (more or less) historical use of this manner of disinformation
by a Greek is credited to Solon, who sent a fake deserter to Salamis with
the story that the Athenian women were celebrating a festival on a given
night apart from the city. He thus lured his foes into an ambush, when
beardless youths disguised as women turned on their Megarian
assailants.151 Numerous other examples occur in Polyaenus.152 One of
Counterintelligence
221
148. He could also undertake it himself, but this was not so common (delegation being
the better part of valor, no doubt). Themistocles took the Spartans for a ride with his
denials that the walls of Athens were being rebuilt, but he was practicing his deceits amidst
friends (if heavy–handed ones) rather than enemies (Thuc. 1.91.3–7; Diod. Sic. 11.39ff.;
Plut. Them. 19.1–2). Cf. Alcibiades at Thuc. 8.81.3. Aristarchus apparently did not seek to
delegate the task when he tricked the Athenian garrison at Oenae into relinquishing their
camp (Thuc. 8.98.1); this is no doubt due to his reliance on his of‹ce of strategos to lend
authority to his words.
149. Individuals so employed are called “trusted” (pi!tñ!) at Thuc. 6.64.2 and Plut.
Solon 8.4. They had better be, since they were quite likely to be caught. Sun Tzu classi‹ed
such men as “death agents”—i.e., serving with the expectation of eventual execution by the
enemy.
150. Dulles (146–48) described such agents, including, among more modern examples,
the man from Catana sent by the Athenians to deceive the Syracusans (Thuc. 6.64).
151. Plut. Solon 8.4; cf. Polyaenus 1.20.2, 1.48.1, 2.12.1. Earlier examples (Polyaenus
1.9, 1.15) are mythical. 
152. In our period: Polyaenus 4.2.21 (Philip II; cf. Front. Strat. 1.4.13), 5.33.4 (Pomp-
iscus), 5.44.2 (Memnon). Unfortunately these cannot be con‹rmed by other sources (except
the story of the Persian Zopyrus [Polyaenus 7.13.1; cf. 7.12.1 of Sitalces], which is attested
in Hdt. 3.153ff.; Diod. Sic. 10.19.2–4; Just. 1.10.15; Front. Strat. 3.34; Plut. Sayings of
Kings, Darius 4; Leo Byz. 2.3), but they are worthy of mention on the grounds that they
may be derived from sources lost to us. Cf. Vergil Aeneid 2.57–198.

these is of special interest in that there was an attempt to corroborate the
report of the fake deserter: when the Lacedaemonians were short of pro-
visions, Agis sent fake deserters to tell the (unspeci‹ed) enemy that a
large army was on its way to reinforce his troops. Not only did Agis back
up their story by having his men make noises consistent with the report,
but he thought to have a number of (ostensibly) independent sources all
bearing the same tidings.153
The Athenians, while in Sicily, sent to Syracuse a Catanaean whom the
Syracusans thought sympathetic to them. He told them that the Atheni-
ans spent the nights in the city away from their arms and that if the Syra-
cusans came, there were many in Catana who would join them. The Syra-
cusan generals were careless, failed to check into the man’s story, and
eagerly took the bait. While their forces were marching to Catana, the
Athenians sailed by night, landed at the Olympeium near Syracuse, and
consolidated their position as their foes began the weary trek back.154 By
the end of the struggle in Sicily, the Syracusans were able to even the
score. After they had in›icted a crushing blow on the Athenians at sea,
the Athenians prepared to move their land forces to safety. The Syracu-
sans were not about to interrupt their victory celebrations to prevent
them. But their general, Hermocrates, was aware that Nicias had agents
in Syracuse, so he sent some of his companions to the Athenian camp.
These men called out names of Athenian of‹cers as if they had been sent
from Nicias’ agents, bidding them to tell their general that the roads were
guarded. Nicias failed to verify the report, since he thought it came from
a reliable source. The delay ended in disaster.155
In addition to the use of fake deserters and impersonation, a comman-
der might allow an enemy to capture some of his men who were primed
with incorrect information. Xenophon portrayed Cyrus devising such a
scheme in the theoretical context of the Education of Cyrus. The context
was as follows: Cyrus had won the allegiance of Gadatas, an Assyrian
of‹cer still among his people. He planned to have Gadatas and his com-
222
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
153. Polyaenus 1.46.1.
154. Thuc. 6.64–66. Plutarch (Nicias 16.2) credited Nicias with the scheme, while
Thucydides made a vague reference to the Athenian strategoi. One wonders whether
Lamachus, who was characterized as brave but not overly imaginative, would have had the
idea; Alcibiades had already ›ed (although Polyaenus 1.40.5 attributed the ruse to him). Cf.
Diod. Sic. 13.6.2–3; Front. Strat. 3.6.6. Both Dulles (145) and Plutarch (loc. cit.) com-
mended the maneuver.
155. Thuc. 7.73; Plut. Nicias 26.1–2; Diod. Sic. 13.18.3–5; Front. Strat. 2.9.7;
Polyaenus 1.43.2.

mand admitted into a stronghold that Cyrus wanted to possess, so that
the traitor could overcome the garrison and deliver the stronghold to the
Persians. Cyrus devised thus: he gave some of his men word that he
planned to attack the stronghold, and he arranged for them to be cap-
tured by Gadatas. Gadatas then had the captives interrogated in front of
witnesses, and on the basis of their information, he was sent to reinforce
the stronghold; he thereafter betrayed it as planned.156 There are merci-
fully few examples of such callousness toward one’s own men, and one
presumes that the practice was rare, although couriers were now and
again deliberately allowed to fall into enemy hands: Philip II, when the
Athenians and Thebans held a pass against him, sent a contrived letter to
Macedon, as if he had learned of a Thracian revolt and intended to
march on Thrace. He sent the courier through the narrows, where the
strategoi Chares and Proxenus captured both man and letter; the strate-
goi thought the letter genuine and moved their force, thereby freeing the
pass.157 It is further conceivable that soldiers were told what they might
tell the enemy if captured, yet this was probably avoided for the sake of
morale and security.
Other Forms of Disinformation
To this point the focus has been on disinformation in military contexts,
since it is easier to perceive its presence and study its effect. In the politi-
cal realm things become nebulous, due in part to the clash of personali-
ties and ideals rather than arms. Rhetoric pervades politics, and it manip-
Counterintelligence
223
156. Xen. Cyr. 5.3.1–2, 15. The verb ba!anÛzv is used for the interrogation, which
implies the use of torture (but does not necessitate it, as the word comes to denote thor-
oughness of investigation rather than method); cf. LSJ s.v. II.1 and II.2.
157. Polyaenus 4.2.8 (cf. Front. Strat. 1.4.13). Cf. Polyaenus 3.9.57: When two thou-
sand mercenaries deserted to the Lacedaemonians, Iphicrates was said to have contrived
fake secret orders to their leaders, bidding them to seize opportunities to betray the Spar-
tans. Iphicrates then sent them, knowing that the letters would fall into the hands of the
Lacedaemonian road guards (Parke 52–53 proposed that this event might have taken place
while Iphicrates was stationed near Corinth, during the years 393–389). Forged letters (and
other documents) were of course used for a variety of purposes, among them fraud, slander,
and manipulation (see, e.g., Demosth. XXV [Against Aristogeiton 1] 50; Diod. Sic.
17.39.1–3. Cf. Polyaenus 4.8.3; Polyb. 5.38.2ff.). There is one example I cannot refrain
from mentioning: Anaximenes, taken no doubt with odium philologicum, devised a method
to blacken the name of his enemy Theopompus. He wrote a scathing history of Athens,
Thebes, and Laconia imitating Theopompus’ manner and style. He then signed it in
Theopompus’ name and distributed it around the cities. The story is found in Pausanias
(6.18.5) and is, perhaps, too good to be true.

ulates information by its very nature. Are those who employ it engaged in
disinformation? Did Pericles (or Thucydides) intend to deceive his listen-
ers when he distorted truth in the funeral oration, or did Isocrates in his
Panathenaicus? Were the Athenians who spoke against aggressive action
against the Macedonians really Philip’s agents or victims of mud slung all
too vigorously by Demosthenes? It is dif‹cult to distinguish sincerity of
belief from fabrication, and in any case this is not a treatise on psychol-
ogy or rhetoric. Suf‹ce it to say that disinformation was and is subtle and
pervasive, in the sense that information is manipulated or suppressed
according to the goals of the individuals who present it.
Besides deliberate disinformation, there are many examples of reports
or rumors that proved to be unfounded. These might be due to wishful
thinking, fear, partisanship, prejudice, misunderstanding, or any combi-
nation of the many factors that in›uence people to accept information
that is not true.158 Furthermore, the dictates of chance could be such that
even the data before one’s eyes cannot always be trusted: at one point in
the Corinthian War a group of Lacedaemonian cavalry dismounted and
took up shields left by routed Sicyonians. They fell on the Argives, who
saw the sigmas on the shields and did not realize their danger until it was
too late.159
The Greeks manipulated their opponents (and allies also, for that mat-
ter) by means of true information as well as false. A case in point is the
scheme of Themistocles to force the Greeks to ‹ght at Salamis.160
Themistocles felt it was in the Athenians’ best interest, and incidentally
that of the other Greeks as well, to ‹ght the Persians in the narrows,
while the other Greeks preferred not to risk a battle from which there
could be no viable retreat should they be defeated. Unable to win over his
compatriots with arguments, Themistocles sent an agent (various
accounts give various details) to Xerxes with the (quite true) news that
the Greeks were divided among themselves and planned to slip away.
This information, as Themistocles had anticipated, encouraged Xerxes to
surround the Greeks and plan an attack for the following morning to put
an end to their naval strength once and for all. Thus the Greeks soon dis-
covered that they were unable to ›ee and were faced with no alternative
224
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
158. See, e.g., Thuc. 6.52.1–2, 6.104, 8.66.3. 
159. Xen. Hell. 4.4.10.
160. Aeschylus Persians 355; Hdt. 8.75, 87; Diod. Sic. 11.17.1; Plut. Them. 12.3; Plut.
Arist. 9.4; Plut. Mor. 185bc; Polyaenus 1.30.3; Front. Strat. 2.2.14; etc. Cf. Hdt. 8.110;
Plut. Them. 16.4.

but to ‹ght. Had Salamis ended with a Persian victory, Themistocles’
name would have been a byword for treachery among the Greek peoples.
As it was, he emerged covered with glory.161
The effect of disinformation extends beyond the immediate success or
failure of a particular application. Its memory endures in its victims’
(and, to some extent, the perpetrators’) minds, so that when they later
receive other items of information, their ability to judge and evaluate
data will be at once enhanced and hindered by their experience.162 It will
be enhanced in that they will be more likely to question appearances and
less prone to fall for subsequent misinformation. It will be hindered in
that they will hesitate to act on real and valuable information and so lose
opportunities or even—as in the case of Tissaphernes mentioned ear-
lier—be so suspicious of information that they will err by acting on the
assumption that it was intended to deceive.
Broadly speaking, the Greeks’ characterization of the prevalence and
ef‹cacy of counterintelligence was in›uenced by their perception of
power structure. In military contexts, it was assumed that secrecy was a
necessary ingredient for surprise and that counterintelligence measures
were a prerequisite for secrecy. In a democracy, counterintelligence was
seen as antithetical to individual freedom. Governments in which power
was held by few or one were thought to rely for stability on an ability to
detect secrets and conspiracies among the populace while withholding
their own secrets from foreigners.
Counterintelligence
225
161. Cf. the manner in which the Athenian Phrynichus handled a tricky situation result-
ing from his correspondence with Astyochus, the Spartan navarch, during the Pelopon-
nesian War (Thuc. 8.50–51).
162. Cf. Dulles 151–52; Handel, Intelligence and Military Operations, 41 (giving as an
example Wavell’s hesitation in crediting the fact that Crete was in fact the target of immi-
nent German airborne attack, rather than a diversion or ruse).

Conclusion
The manner in which the Greek states obtained and processed informa-
tion was subject to a number of variables, of which the most important
were era, perception of security, and political structure. Assessing infor-
mation-gathering efforts before the ‹fth century (and indeed before the
Peloponnesian War) is quite dif‹cult, due to a scarcity of relevant con-
temporary material. Later periods may not be well documented but they
are better documented. Therefore, the relative paucity of examples of
information gathering in earlier periods may be caused by the distribu-
tion of source material.1 Nevertheless, many of the examples attributed
to the earlier period are derived from late authors, such as Plutarch and
Pausanias, and hence may be anachronistic. There are indications that
between the eighth century and the middle of the fourth, an awareness of
the importance of information gathering increased, along with an inter-
est in its application, which reached its height at the hands of such men
as Xenophon, Aeneas Tacticus, and Alexander. There was a correspond-
ing tendency for information-gathering processes to become more sys-
tematic over time, but this was a function of political development rather
than chronological evolution. 
Patterns of Information Flow and Processing
Perception of security had considerable in›uence on the vigor with which
the Greeks pursued their information-gathering needs, and it had some
impact on the relative importance of various channels. In general, the
more secure a state felt, the less attention it paid to information gather-
ing; hence the ›ow structure (such as it was) became dominated by rela-
226
1. Fewer types of agents and sources are attested in Homer than, e.g., in Thucydides, but
this may re›ect difference in genre as much as difference in practice, except for the absence
of mercenaries and proxenoi (who are ‹rst attested in the sixth and late seventh centuries,
respectively).

tively passive collection (e.g., listening to tales of news from abroad told
by merchants), while active efforts (e.g., spies) were neglected. This could
be true even in time of war, when one would expect the belligerents to
have every interest in being alert—a case in point is the Athenian failure
to anticipate, or even guard against, Spartan naval threats to the Piraeus
in the Peloponnesian and Corinthian Wars. The contexts of war and
peace were, however, marked by somewhat different characteristics.
Some channels and sources (especially military ones—e.g., reconnais-
sance agents and captives) might be inactive in times of peace, while oth-
ers (e.g., envoys, merchants) would be more important. In wartime, these
roles would shift (e.g., envoys would be less common and no longer able
to operate without heralds, while reconnaissance agents would come into
play). Exceptions naturally occurred, especially in that uncomfortable
gray area where war was not yet violent but peace was hardly tranquil. 
With regard to foreign affairs, there was no real conceptual distinction
between military and political intelligence—indeed, the latter seems to
have been encompassed by the former. It is certainly true that there were
mechanical differences involved in gathering and processing types of
information that we might today distinguish as political or military.
These were re›ected in the different types of agents and sources
employed and to some extent, in military contexts, in a tendency toward
centralized command and delegation of the supervision of agents. In
states in which there existed a division of political and military author-
ity—fourth-century Athens, for instance—mechanical differences could
combine with different ‹elds of expertise and different ambitions to cre-
ate some sort of practical disjunction. But again there is little evidence for
a contemporary conceptual distinction between the political and military
spheres.2 Further, when political and military power were in the hands of
a single individual, any distinction between the two types of intelligence
was not terribly meaningful. There was a fair bit of overlap, even when
the combination of powers was far from complete or not formally recog-
nized, as in the cases of Pericles in the mid–‹fth century and Agesilaus in
the early fourth.
Perceptions of domestic insecurity stemmed principally from fear of
potential ‹fth columns within a state’s populace or of revolts of a subject
population. As the numbers of exiles increased in the late ‹fth and fourth
centuries, these fears were expanded to encompass plots originating out-
Conclusion
227
2. Cf. Plut. Phocion 7.3.2. 

side the walls as well as those within. The types of mechanisms employed
to deal with such threats were dictated more by constitutional structure
than by circumstance. In brief, democracies relied on legislation backed
by private activity on the part of informers and sycophants, together with
some oversight bodies. These existed as early as the prototypical democ-
racy of Solon in the sixth century. An ad hoc arrangement for ‹elding
covert agents in democratic Argos may have other unrecorded parallels.
Measures taken by oligarchies are less well attested but seem to be simi-
lar to those of democracies. However one might classify the government
of Sparta, it is fairly certain that it featured a force dedicated to internal
security, augmented by informers and ad hoc engagements of covert
agents. Some monarchies and many tyrannies also boasted organized net-
works operating covertly among the populace. No such organizations are
attested before Hiero’s in the early ‹fth century, but it is possible that the
sixth-century tyrants had similar arrangements.3
More generally, there was a clear difference in the way different forms
of government handled and evaluated information. The distinction
between oligarchy and democracy here (as elsewhere) was somewhat
blurred—the principal factor was whether authority rested in the hands
of one man (herein called a “centralized command”; see ‹g. 1), or in
those of more than one (herein called a “diffused command”; see ‹g. 2). 
A centralized command was typi‹ed by a spiderlike array of informa-
tion channels, all leading, sometimes through various intermediaries, to a
central authority.4 This arrangement held a number of advantages over
diffused commands, since the same individual possessed both a complete
intelligence picture and an ability to act unilaterally on it.5 Thus those
228
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
3. I am not arguing that these organizations were characteristic of all tyrannies. Pisis-
tratus, e.g., seems to have survived without one (although he might not have been thrown
out of Athens twice if he had possessed adequate information-gathering resources). 
4. Intermediaries were more common between the decision maker and those agents that
gathered tactical information. In general these intermediaries (other than messengers) were
found more often in later periods than earlier. Specialized subordinate of‹cers with intelli-
gence duties, such as Democrates son of Temnus (in effect, a reconnaissance skoparkhos of
the Ten Thousand) and Laomedon (Alexander’s of‹cer in charge of captives), appeared
occasionally from the late ‹fth century onward. Delegation of authority to leaders of sur-
veillance detachments seems to have been more or less constant over time. If anything,
Greeks of later periods seem to have been more haphazard in this respect than the Myce-
naeans.
5. With incidental variations, charts similar to that in ‹g. 1 might be constructed depict-
ing the information ›ow to Dionysius the Elder (derived principally from Diodorus Siculus,
supplemented by Aristotle and Plutarch), the Lacedaemonian “general staff” centered on a
king on campaign (Hdt. 6.57; Xen. Lac. Pol. 13.1, 3, 7; cf. Thuc. 5.66.3–4; Pritchett

authorities possessing centralized information ›ows enjoyed the ability
to respond to intelligence quickly (in a few cases, perhaps, too quickly).6
In general, centralized commands tended to be constant over relatively
long periods, which enabled individuals to acquire and improve arrange-
ments for information ›ow. Their ef‹cacy was, naturally enough, deter-
mined by the abilities and capabilities of the commander.
Conclusion
229
2.36–38), Xenophon’s network centered on a hipparkhos (Xen. Cav. Com. passim), his
program for Cyrus’ model command (Xen. Cyr. 6.1–4), and Aeneas Tacticus’ system cen-
tered about the commander of besieged forces (Aen. Tact. 22.2–3). Earlier tyrants and
monarchs, for whom evidence is scant, seem likely to ‹t the same pattern.
6. Isoc. III (Nicocles) 22: monarchies have every advantage in war, including the ability
to forestall and mislead their enemies. Cf. Demosth. XVIII (On the crown) 235.5 (of Philip
II); Plut. Mor. 782c (of Dionysius I).
Fig. 1. Information flow to a centralized command: Alexander the Great
(in the context of a campaign—i.e., normally, 336–323). (Derived princi-
pally from Arrian and Quintus Curtius, with additions from Diodorus
Siculus and Plutarch.)

In diffused commands, there existed a separation between spheres or
levels of authority, with lines of communication between them.7 One
might be tempted to draw a distinction between political and military
authorities, but again the differentiation between strategic and tactical
intelligence (with operational intelligence lying in a hazy middle ground)
more accurately re›ects ancient practice. “Political” authorities, such as
the Athenian ekklesia, made decisions on the conduct of war at the
strategic and operational levels (deciding, for example, the size of the
expeditionary force sent by the Athenians to Sicily in 415). They did not
normally, however, directly interfere with tactical decisions in the mili-
tary sphere. “Military” leaders might make political decisions at tactical
levels (e.g., Agesilaus declined to grant an audience to Theban envoys
before he received news of the disaster that befell the Spartans at
Lechaeum). Few military leaders, however, were authorized to make
strategic commitments on behalf of their states. Not unnaturally, author-
ity in the operational and tactical realms tended to be subordinated to
their strategic counterpart, and thus military commanders were obliged
to keep their states informed through dispatches or other arrangements.
In many cases, more than one commander led forces at any one time,
either on separate or on joint enterprises—such as the command of the
Athenian expedition to Sicily, which was (initially) split between Nicias,
Alcibiades, and Lamachus. Hence there was a need for information ›ow
along levels as well as across them.
An all-too-common problem with diffused commands was a lack of
two essential ingredients: clear delineation of authority and excellent
communication between decision makers. Imperfect arrangements varied
in their impact on the ability of decision makers to act effectively on intel-
ligence. In some cases, the same quantity or quality of intelligence was
not available to each party—in the aforementioned example of the
Athenian expedition sent to Sicily in 415, the Athenian strategoi in Sicily
possessed tactical and operational intelligence to a far greater degree than
did the Athenians at home, while the latter might have been in better
touch with the overall strategic situation. The time lag for communica-
tion between Athens and Sicily could only have hampered effective
230
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
7. Structures similar to that in ‹g. 2 can be found particularly (but not only) in other
democracies, which range from the chaotic “allied” command during the Persian Wars
(480/79) to more hierarchical and ordered examples, such as Astyochus’ command in the
Aegean early in the late ‹fth century.

action, since the decision makers on either side of the Ionian Sea would
be reacting to messages whose relevance was likely to have been over-
taken by subsequent events. Even without time lag, communication
could be a problem. Returning again to the example of Nicias in Sicily,
one can see that both the disaster at Epipolae and the failure to order a
timely evacuation were caused by Nicias’ failure to share with his fellow
Conclusion
231
Fig. 2. Information flow into a diffused comand: the Athenians and the
Sicilian Expedition (415–413). (Based principally on Thucydides and
Plutarch.)

commanders the extent and nature of the intelligence he had acquired
from his personal network.8 This communication failure was caused by
personal interest that, combined with other forms of partisanship, hin-
dered, far more often than aided, effective application of intelligence.9
Differences in perspectives might have been supposed to enhance evalua-
tion and decision making, but in practice they commonly resulted in
con›ict or unhappy compromises. 
A Question of Application
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate channels through which information could and
did ›ow to decision makers, but they describe ›ows that were aggregates
over extended periods. At speci‹c points in time, relatively fewer chan-
nels would be ›owing simultaneously. Frequently, circumstance dictated
which agents and sources would be available, and hence scholars have
been led to believe that the Greeks applied themselves to information
gathering and intelligence in an ad hoc manner.10 While applicable in
some instances, the picture this model presents does not do justice to
actual practice. 
The problem might be best explained in terms of an analogy to meth-
ods of irrigation. A farmer might, with much labor and expense, contrive
a permanent irrigation system from a water source to all his ‹elds.
Although requiring maintenance, the system would serve continuously.
Alternatively, he might rig a pipeline from the water source to a point in
his ‹elds that he sees needs water, irrigate it, then dismantle or move the
pipes when the job is done. He might merely divert natural channels here
and there and so achieve a degree of success dependent on terrain. Or he
might devote his efforts to other problems and hope that water will
somehow wend its way to where it is needed.
232
Information Gathering in Classical Greece
8. Nicias spoke against the night attack on Epipolae, since his agents led him to believe
that the best policy for the Athenians was to wait, because the Syracusans were exhausted
by the war and disgruntled with Gylippus. Due to his concern for the security of his sources,
he was vague in communicating this intelligence to his colleagues, who attributed his state-
ments to cowardice. They went ahead with the attack against his will and met with disaster
(Plut. Nicias 21). Thucydides (7.43.1) passed over this dispute, simply noting that Demos-
thenes persuaded Nicias. 
9. An exception might be the contrivances of Themistocles at Salamis.
10. Cf. Adcock and Mosley 174; Gerolymatos, Espionage, 4, 15; Starr 28. There are
only two notable exceptions: (1) the proxenos-episkopos relationship of the Athenian
Empire, discussed by Meiggs (Athenian Empire), Gerolymatos (Espionage), and Balcer
(“Athenian Episkopos”); and (2) Alexander’s intelligence system, discussed by Engels. 

Similarly, an authority might establish permanent and coherent
arrangements to ensure that information ›ow was reliable and timely.
Such a practice was found most often among tyrants and fairly frequently
among monarchs and military commanders on campaign. In such cases,
the demand for information was constant, so that real threats might be
countered. Thus the requisite expenditure could be justi‹ed. In some tac-
tical applications, such as coherent and elaborate networks of watchers,
democracies and oligarchies had recourse to such measures as often as
did other more centralized forms of government. With the possible
exception of watchers, the incidence of such arrangements increased over
time.
The second method, that of employing agents and sources as need
arose, was fairly common, particularly with “political” agents, such as
envoys and heralds, and in most cases with spies recruited from one’s
own populace for speci‹c missions in foreign territory. It required some
sense of direction and effort and sometimes featured a degree of special-
ization on the part of the agents involved. It remained in practice
throughout the period in question.
The third and fourth methods were forms of adaptation to opportu-
nity commonly practiced in all eras. Their difference was more one of
aspect than one of essence, since informers, deserters, and to some extent
captives naturally fell into both categories. However, those individuals
and states who saw ‹t to encourage informers and deserters, and to make
efforts to procure captives for questioning, can be differentiated from
those who did not. The former would belong to the third category; the
latter would belong to the fourth, since little effort was required on the
part of the recipient of the news, aside from making oneself available and
spending the time necessary to listen to a report. 
These four methods were naturally used in conjunction with each
other. And one would expect a decision maker who made extensive
arrangements for receiving information not to overlook that which pre-
sented itself as a gift on his doorstep (although this could happen).
Ef‹cacy
It is time to face the fundamental question—how well did all this work?
Generally speaking, the more energy an individual or state put into
obtaining, communicating, and evaluating information, the better the
result was. Good intelligence, handled skillfully, enabled people and
Conclusion
233

states to maximize military and political efforts, on all levels. In some
instances good intelligence prevented action that would probably have
led to failure. In some cases it provided opportunity for effective action.
It by no means guaranteed success in any endeavor, even as it does not
today. In some situations excellent intelligence was of no use, since its
possessor lacked the means to act on an opportunity or to prevent a dis-
aster. Indecision or undue expenditure of time on evaluation also wasted
opportunities.
Conversely, neglect of information gathering or intelligence did not
necessitate disaster, but it courted it. Given a strong enough position, the
Greeks could and did succeed with very poor intelligence. Poor evalua-
tion of reports might merely result in wasted effort, but it could also
mean defeat and death. One scorned the use of information-gathering
agents at one’s own peril, and one neglected their reports at great risk.
For the most part, the Greeks heeded the need for information and
intelligence on basic levels throughout the classical period. Although
there are a number of harebrained schemes recorded in our sources, one
rarely ‹nds instances when hares initiated aggression against lions. No
consistently successful military commander failed to heed the importance
of intelligence, and while some great statesmen, like Pericles, put their
bets on the wrong horse, their policies were effective insofar as they were
based not only on imagination but on a practical awareness and evalua-
tion of reality.
234
Information Gathering in Classical Greece

Appendixes 


237
Verbs
Objects
-aÞ!y‹nomai
-many‹nv
-puny‹nomai
Total
Opponent’s military movea
27.7
10.3
14.9
16.7
Opponent’s military prep./intentb
7.8
3.6
8.5
7.0
Opponent’s military circumstancec
5.1
9.0
7.1 
7.1
Opponent’s diplomatic activity, policy
2.7
2.0
2.9
2.6
Other information re opponentd
1.6
3.3
7.7
5.0
Total
38.4
Another’s military movea
3.9
1.7
1.2 
2.0
Another’s military prep./intentb
0.8
3.0 
1.6
1.8
Another’s military circumstancec
2.7
6.3 
5.3
5.0
Another’s diplomatic activity, policy
10.6
8.0
5.9
7.6
Other information re anotherd
10.9
22.6 
22.6
19.8
Total
36.2
Own military circumstancec
15.2
13.6
8.1
11.3
Other information re selfd
5.5
10.9 
4.1
6.4
Total
17.7
Plot
4.7
1.7
2.4
2.7
Geography
0.8
4.0
7.7
5.0
Total
7.7
a Includes location, attack, revolt.
b Includes technological innovations (takes priority over military move when both applica-
ble).
c Includes numbers, tactics, outcomes of battles (battle outcomes are entered in “own military
circumstance” when the focus of the import of the information is domestic and in “opponent’s”
or “another’s” when foreign), and general activity.
d Includes identity, internal situation, activity, and information unspecified elsewhere.
Appendix A
Objects of Verbs of Learning
(distribution by percentage in selected authors)

This survey does not purport to be a complete list of every occurrence of
all verbs. Instead, it catalogues their use with respect to matters of pub-
lic, as opposed to private or academic, concern. Thus historians and ora-
tors were selected over philosophers, and inscriptions were generally pre-
ferred to poets. The authors chosen were Homer, Herodotus,
Thucydides, Xenophon (all works save the Memorabilia, Symposium,
and Apology), Andocides, Lysias, Demosthenes (orations I–XIX),
Aeschines, Aristotle (the Politics only), and Arrian (the Anabasis and the
Indica only); inscriptions on the Packard Humanities Institute disk (to
the end of the fourth century) were also included. Arrian was admitted
despite his late date, because of the necessity of covering the era of
Alexander.
The verbs chosen were aÞ!y‹nomai, many‹nv, and puny‹nomai (and
their compounds). Other verbs also can denote learning (e.g., koæv,
eêrÛ!kv, õr‹v, thr¡v), but the ‹rst mentioned were preferred because
they are more often used in the context of public inquiry and reception of
information. ƒAgg¡llv and similar verbs denoting communication (often
of information concerning public affairs) are also pertinent but are left to
another study. Citations without application to the focus of this study are
not included in the chart; of these, many examples of puny‹nomai con-
cern interpretation of myth and ritual, while many of many‹nv concern
skills and knowledge of the dead (the latter in epitaphs on inscriptions).
The totals are -aÞ!y‹nomai, 16 (of 272; the remaining 256 are included in
the table in this appendix); -many‹nv, 137 (of 438; 301 are included in
the table); -puny‹nomai, 94 (of 602; 508 are included in the table). The
total number of examples in the survey was 1,312, of which 1,065 are
recorded in the table.
The objects of verbs of learning are fairly consistent over time.1 The
variation in emphasis seems to arise principally from the focus of indi-
vidual writers. In the Odyssey, for instance, there are many inquiries cat-
egorized as “other information about another” because of such themes as
Telemachus’ quest to learn of his father, while in the Iliad military mat-
ters are dominant. As one would expect, diplomatic concerns are treated
more by Demosthenes and Aeschines. Examples found in Arrian’s narra-
tive are heavily in›uenced by the context of Alexander’s expedition—
hence military and geographic concerns are relatively heavily repre-
sented; the same can be said of books 7 through 9 of Herodotus.
238
Appendixes
1. The frequency of particular verbs does, however, vary over time: aÞ!y‹nomai, for
instance, is quite rare before the late ‹fth century.

Appendix B 
Types of Kataskopoi 
(according to archaic and classical terminology)
Also Called
Role
Primary Sphere of Operation
“Eyes” 
1. episkopoi, ophthalmoi
official or semiofficial investigators
external or within empire (strategic)
2. skopoi, prodromoi
vanguards (groups up to ca. 1,000)
external (tactical, operational)
3. skopoi
reconnaissance (teams ca. 10–30)
external (tactical, operational)
All those below subjected to torture if caught
4. episkopoi (Homer only)
espionage/covert reconnaissance (2–3)
external (tactical, operational)
5. pseudautomoloi, etc.
disguised/dissimulating spies
external (any)
All those below could be recruited from women as well as men
“Ears”
6. ota, otakoustai
provocateurs, professional informants
internal, rarely external
Others
7. prodotai, etc.
traitors (modern “agents in place”)
internal, for a foreign power


Glossary
Adeia: immunity from harm, a privilege accorded to heralds
Angelos, angeloi: messenger
Automolos, automoloi: deserter
Boulé: a council. In some oligarchies, it consisted of the ruling elements
and exerted considerable authority. In democracies, it was elected by
vote or lot to take care of daily business and to prepare an agenda for
the ekklesia. In Athens, it was responsible for admitting foreign
envoys, screening proposals, and running background checks on can-
didates for of‹ce.
Chresmologos, chresmologoi: collector and distributor of oracles
Ekklesia: the meeting of citizens of a polis as a polical entity. In demo-
cratic states, it was the ultimate sovereign body, made up of all citi-
zens, deciding on all matters of policy and administration, and electing
magistrates. Its political clout in other forms of government varied. In
Sparta, it was called the Apella and could not deliberate issues but
voted yes or no on matters put before it by the council (Gerousia). 
Ephebos, epheboi: a youth who has come of age and is ful‹lling his mili-
tary duty, typically on the frontier
Ephoros, ephoroi: “overseer;” a magistrate in Dorian states. In Sparta
there were ‹ve, elected annually, who exercised executive powers.
Episkopos, episkopoi: In Homeric times: a scout, overseer, or spy. In the
Athenian Empire: a roving of‹cial appointed by the boulé to check on
the administration of the subject “allies.”
Epistoleus, epistoleis: letter writer, secretary; sometimes a particular
of‹ce attached to a general or magistrate
Grammateus, grammateis: secretary; often elected and attached to a gov-
ernmental body or a general
Harmost: Spartan of‹cial sent to states within Sparta’s sphere of
in›uence during her hegemony (404–371), sometimes commanding a
garrison.
241

Helot: state-owned slave or serf in Laconia and Messenia
Hemeroskopos, hemeroskopoi: “day-observer,” typically stationed in an
observation post to keep an area under surveillance 
Hermeneus, hermeneis: translator
Hippeus, hippeis: literally, a horse-man. It can be used either of cavalry,
or of a social class having little to do with horses. In Sparta, three hun-
dred men who comprised an elite ‹ghting force. Cf. the English
“knight.”
Kataskopos, kataskopoi: scout or spy 
Kerux, kerukes: herald. Some had purely ceremonial functions; from the
‹fth century they were used by military forces for of‹cial communica-
tions with enemies
Mantis, manteis: a diviner, who interprets signs to predict the future
Ota (normally in the plural): “ears,” usually those engaged in domestic
espionage
Otakoustes, otakoustai: “eavesdropper,” again, usually somebody
engaged in domestic espionage
Peltast: light infantry, typically armed with javelins and unarmored
except for a small shield, often used for skirmishing, protecting ›anks,
‹ghting on rough terrain, and scouting
Perioikos, perioikoi: literally, “dweller-about;” often in reference to
those in Laconia who were neither citizens nor slaves but engaged in
commercial activities forbidden to citizens
Peripolarkhos, peripolarkhoi: commander of the peripoloi (below)
Peripolos, peripoloi: patrol; in Athens, the ephebes served as peripoloi on
the frontiers
Philia: tie of personal friendship
Phrourarkhos, phrourarkhoi: garrison commander
Phulax, phulakes: guard; often a night watchman
Potagogeus, potagogides (prosagogeus in the Attic dialect): domestic
spies and provocateurs in Syracuse
Presbus, presbeis: literally: old man; envoy
Presbeutes, presbeutai: envoy
Prodromos, prodromoi: advanced guard, vanguard
Proxenos, proxenoi: consul; a citizen of one state appointed by another
as its of‹cial friend and agent on its behalf 
Prutanis, prutaneis: in Athens, a section of the Boulé, comprising ‹fty
men who acted as a committee to prepare business and receive envoys
242
Glossary 

Pseudautomolos, pseudautomoloi: fake-deserter, either acting as a spy or
a disinformation agent
Psilos, psiloi: unarmored or light-armored troops, often archers or
slingers
Skiritai (normally in plural): a unit of the Lacedaemonian army, of about
six hundred men, from the Arcadian district of Skiritis; they were
often used as nightwatchmen
Skoparkhos (or skoparkhes): commander of skopoi
Skopos, skopoi: generic term for observer or scout
Skutale: wooden rod around which a strip of leather was wrapped;
lengthwise on the strip was written a message that, when unwound,
became illegible until wrapped around the recipient’s rod
Strategos, strategoi: an elected magistrate whose duties included com-
mand of military forces or, simply, a commander of army or ›eet
Glossary
243


Selected Bibliography
Greek Intelligence
Balcer, J. “The Athenian Episkopos and the Achaemenid ‘King’s Eye.’” AJP 98
(1977): 252–63.
Engels, D. “Alexander’s Intelligence System.” CQ 30 (1980): 327–40.
Fichtner, D.P. “Intelligence Assessment in the Peloponnesian War.” Studies in
Intelligence 38 (1994): 59–64.
Gerolymatos, A. Espionage and Treason: A Study of the Proxenia in Political and
Military Intelligence Gathering in Classical Greece. Amsterdam, 1986.
Hunt, A.S. “A Greek Cryptogram.” Proceedings of the British Academy 15
(1929): 127–34.
Kroll, W. “Kolax.” RE 11, no. 1 (1921): 1069–70.
Lammert. “Kat‹!kopo!.” RE 10, no. 2 (1919): 2485.
Lewis, S. News and Society in the Greek Polis. Chapel Hill, 1996.
Losada, L.A. The Fifth Column in the Peloponnesian War. Leiden, 1972. 
Papalas, A. “Dracanum Icaria.” Onomata 9 (1984): 55–64.
Pekáry, T. “Nachrichtenwesen” and “Spionage.” In Lexikon der alten Welt.
Stuttgart, 1965.
Richmond, J.A. “Spies in Ancient Greece.” Greece and Rome 45 (1998): 1–18.
Semmet, R. “Intelligence Activity in the Classical World.” Master’s thesis,
Wright State University, 1984.
Sheldon, R.M. “Tradecraft in Ancient Greece.” International Journal of Intelli-
gence and Counterintelligence 3 (1988): 39–47.
Starr, C.G. Political Intelligence in Classical Greece. Leiden, 1974.
Intelligence: Varia
Applegate, Lt. Col. R. Scouting and Patrolling. Boulder, 1980.
Austin, N.J.E., and N.B. Rankov. Exploratio: Military and Political Intelligence
in the Roman World from the Second Punic War to the Battle of Adrianople.
London and New York, 1995.
Bauer, J.B. “Aut Male‹cus aut Alieni Speculator.” Biblische Zeitschrift 22
(1978): 109–15.
Chakraborty, G. Espionage in Ancient India from the Earliest Times to the
Twelfth Century A.D. Calcutta, 1990.
245

Chandler, Lt. Col. S., and Col. R.W. Robb. Front–Line Intelligence. Washington,
D.C., 1946.
Cimbala, S.J., ed. Intelligence and Intelligence Policy in a Democratic Society.
New York, 1987.
Constantinides, G. Intelligence and Espionage: An Analytical Bibliography.
Boulder, 1983.
Drinkwater, J.F. “The Pagan Underground, Constantius II’s Secret Service, and
the Survival and the Usurpation of Julian the Apostate.” In Studies in Latin
Literature and Roman History, ed. C. Deroux, vol. 3, 348–87. Brussels, 1979.
Dulles, A. The Craft of Intelligence. New York, 1963. Reprint, Boulder, 1985.
Dvornik, F. The Origins of Intelligence Services. New Brunswick, N.J., 1974.
Gauld, W. “Vegetius on Roman Scout–Boats.” Antiquity 64 (1990): 402–6.
Gichon, M. “Military Intelligence in the Roman Army.” Historia-Einzelschr. 60
(1989): 154–70.
Handel, M. I. War, Strategy, and Intelligence. London, 1989.
———, ed. Intelligence and Military Operations. London, 1990.
———. Leaders and Intelligence. London, 1987.
———. Strategic and Operational Deception in the Second World War. London,
1987.
Heymont, I. Combat Intelligence in Modern Warfare. Harrisburg, Pa., 1960.
Kemp, P. “An Eighteenth-Century Turkish Intelligence Report.” International
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 16 (1984): 497–506.
Lee, A.D. Information and Frontiers: Roman Foreign Relations in Late Antiq-
uity. Cambridge, 1993.
———. “Embassies as Evidence for Movement of Military Intelligence between
the Roman and Sasanian Empires.” In The Defence of the Roman and Byzan-
tine East, eds. P. Freeman and D. Kennedy, BAR Intl. 297, vol. 2, 455–61.
Oxford, 1986.
———. “Procopius, Justinian, and the Kataskopoi.” CQ 39 (1989): 569–72.
Leighton, A.C. “Secret Communication among the Greeks and Romans.” Tech-
nology and Culture 10, no. 2 (1969): 139–54.
Mendelsohn, J., ed. Covert Warfare. Vol. 2, The Spy Factory and Secret Intelli-
gence. New York, 1989.
Neilson, K., and B.J.C. McKercher, eds. Go Spy the Land: Military Intelligence
in History. Westport, Conn., 1992.
Ovadiah, A. “The Relief of the Spies from Carthage.” JET 24 (1974): 210–13.
Pattenden, T. “The Byzantine Early Warning System.” Byzantion 53 (1983):
258–99.
Pforzheimer, W. Bibliography of Intelligence Literature: A Critical Annotated
Bibliography of Open Source Literature. 8th ed. Washington, D.C., 1985.
Reinke, G. “Nachrichtenwesen.” RE 16 (1935): 1496–1541.
Richardson, M.A. “Julius Caesar’s Use of Intelligence.” Master’s thesis, Defense
Intelligence College, 1984.
Riepl, W. Das Nachrichtenwesen des Altertums mit besonderer Rücksicht auf die
Römer. Leipzig, 1913. Reprint, New York, 1972.
246
Bibliography 

Schwien, Col. E. Combat Intelligence: Its Acquisition and Transmission. Wash-
ington, D. C., 1936.
Sheldon, R.M. “Tinker, Tailor, Caesar, Spy: Espionage in Ancient Rome.” Ph.D.
diss., University of Michigan, 1987.
———. “The Ancient Imperative: Clandestine Operations and Covert Action.”
International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence. 10, no. 3
(1997): 299–315.
Simonyan, R.G., and S.V. Grishin. Tactical Reconnaissance: A Soviet View.
Trans. CIS Multilingual Section, Translation Bureau, Secretary of State
Department. Ottawa, Canada, 1990. Originally published as Razvedka v boiu
(Moscow, 1980).
Sinnigen, W. “Chiefs of Staff of the Secret Service.” Byz. Zeit. 57 (1964): 78–105.
———. “Origins of the Frumentarii.” Memoirs of the American Academy in
Rome 27 (1962): 213–24.
———. “The Roman Secret Service.” CJ 57 (1961): 65–72.
———. “Two Branches of the Late Roman Secret Service.” AJPh 80 (1959):
238–54.
U.S. Department of the Army. Collection Management and Synchronization
Planning (FM 34–2). Washington, D.C., 1994.
———. Combat Intelligence (FM 30–5). Washington, D.C., 1971.
———. Counterintelligence Agent (FM 30–97B). Washington, D.C., 1978.
———. Counterintelligence Agent (MOS 97B). Washington, D.C., 1978.
———. Infantry Ri›e Platoon and Squad (FM 7–8). Washington, D.C., 1992.
———. Intelligence Analysis (FM 34–3). Washington, D.C., 1990.
———. Intelligence Analyst (MOS 96B). Washington, D.C., 1978.
———. Interrogator (FM 30–96C). Washington, D.C., 1977.
———. Tactical Deception (*FM 90–2). Washington, D.C., 1978.
U.S. Marine Corps. Intelligence (FM 2–1). Washington, D.C., 1980.
Veit, C.T., and M.D. Callero. A Method for Measuring the Value of Scout/
Reconnaissance. Santa Monica, 1995.
Wagner, Col. A.L. The Service of Security and Information. Kansas City, 1893.
Reprint, 1903.
Wilensky, H. Organizational Intelligence: Knowledge and Policy in Government
and Industry. New York, 1967.
Wright, P. Spycatcher: The Candid Autobiography of a Senior Intelligence
Of‹cer. New York, 1987.
General Background
Adcock, F.E. The Greek and Macedonian Art of War. Berkeley, 1957.
Adcock, F.E., and D. Mosley. Diplomacy in Ancient Greece. New York, 1975. 
Allison, J.W. Power and Preparedness in Thucydides. Baltimore, 1989.
Anderson, J. Military Theory and Practice in the Age of Xenophon. Berkeley,
1970.
Andrewes, A. The Greek Tyrants. London, 1956.
Bibliography
247
−

Arrian. Anabasis Alexandri, Indica. Trans. P. Brunt. Cambridge, Mass., 1976–
83. Reprint, 1983–89.
———. Anabasis of Alexander and Indica. Trans. E.J. Chinnock. London, 1893.
———. T¡xnh Taktik‹ (Tactical Handbook) and …Ektajiw katŒ ƒAlanÇn (The
Expedition against the Alans). Ed. and trans. J.G. DeVoto, Chicago, 1993.
Atkinson, J.E. A Commentary on Q. Curtius Rufus’ Historiae Alexandri Magni,
Books 3 and 4. Amsterdam, 1980.
Austin, M.M. “Greek Tyrants and the Persians.” CQ 40 (1990): 289–306.
Austin, N.J.E. Ammianus on Warfare: An Investigation into Ammianus’ Military
Knowledge. Latomus 165. Brussells, 1979.
Badian, E. “The Death of Parmenio.” TAPA 91 (1960): 324–38.
Balcer, J.M. “Imperial Magistrates in the Athenian Empire.” Historia 25 (1976):
257–87.
Baldes, H. Xenophons Kyropädie als Lehrbuch der Taktik. Programm. Birken-
feld, 1847.
Barkan, I. Capital Punishment in Ancient Athens. Chicago, 1935. Reprint, with
Sycophancy in Athens, by J. Lofberg, New York, 1979.
Baslez, M. L’étranger dans la Grèce antique. Paris, 1984.
Bekker, I. Anecdota graeca. 3 vols. Berlin, 1814–21.
Berve, H. Das Alexanderreich auf prosopographischer Grundlage. Munich,
1926. Reprint, New York, 1973.
Billows, R.A. Antigonos the One–Eyed and the Creation of the Hellenistic State.
Berkeley, 1990.
Bloedow, E. “Hermocrates’ Strategy against the Athenians.” AHB 7 (1993):
115–24.
Boedeker, D. “The Two Faces of Demaratus.” Arethusa 20 (1987): 185–201.
Borza, E.N. “Alexander’s Communications.” Ancient Macedonia 2 (1977):
295–303.
———. Travel and Communications in Classical Times: A Guide to the Evi-
dence. University Park, Penn., 1969.
Bosworth, A. Conquest and Empire: The Reign of Alexander the Great. Cam-
bridge, 1988.
———. A Historical Commentary on Arrian’s History of Alexander. Vols. 1–2.
Oxford, 1980–85.
Brown, T. “Aeneas Tacticus, Herodotus, and the Ionian Revolt.” Historia 30
(1981): 385–93.
Bruce, A. An Historical Commentary on the “Hellenica Oxyrhynchia.” London,
1967.
Buckler, J. The Theban Hegemony, 371–362. Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
Bugh, G.R. The Horsemen of Athens. Princeton, 1988.
Bushala, E.W. “Torture of Non–Citizens in Homicide Investigations.” GRBS 9
(1968): 61–68.
Carawan, E.M. “Eisangelia and Euthyna: The Trials of Miltiades, Themistocles,
and Cimon.” GRBS 28 (1987): 167–208.
248
Bibliography 

———. “Erotesis: Interrogation in the Courts of Fourth-Century Athens.” GRBS
24 (1983): 209–26.
Carey, C. “A Note on Torture in Athenian Homicide Cases.” Historia 37 (1988):
241–45.
Cary, M. A History of the Greek World from 323 to 146 B.C. London, 1932.
Chadwick, J. The Mycenaean World. Cambridge, 1976.
Chantraine, P. Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque. Paris, 1968–83.
Chase, G.H. The Shield Devices of the Greeks in Art and Literature. Cambridge,
Mass., 1902.
Chatzeioannou, K. „H ƒArxaÛa Kæpro! eÞ! tŒ! „EllhnikŒ! Phg‹!. Vol. 1.
Leukosia, 1971. Reprint, 1985.
Chroust, A. “Treason and Patriotism in Ancient Greece.” Journal of the History
of Ideas 15 (1954): 280–88.
Clausewitz, C. von. Vom Kriege. Ed. W. Hahlweg. Bonn, 1972.
Cole, J. “Alexander Philhellene and Themistocles.” L’Antiquité classique 47
(1978): 37–49.
Connor, W. “Two Notes on Diopeithes the Seer.” CP 58 (1963): 115–18.
Cook, J.M. The Persian Empire. London, 1983.
Cooley, W.D., ed. Larcher’s Notes on Herodotus. London, 1844. 
Cooper, G. “Thuc. 8.33.3–4 and the Use of Torture by the Spartans Astyochus
and Pedaritus during Interrogations at Erythrae in the Late Fall of 412.” In
Studi in onore di Anthos Ardizzoni, ed. E. Livrea and S. Privitera, Filologia e
Critica 25, 223–29. Milan, 1978.
Cozzoli, U. Propriatà fondiaria ed esercito nello stato Spartano dell’ età classica.
Rome, 1979.
Daskalakes, A.B. Problèmes historiques autour de la bataille des Thermopyles.
Paris, 1962.
Delbrück, H. History of the Art of War within the Framework of Political His-
tory. Vol. 1. Trans. W.J. Renfroe, Jr. Westport, Conn., 1975. Originally pub-
lished as Geschichte der Kriegskunstsim Rahmen der politischen Geschichte.
Berlin, 1920.
Demosthenes. Olynthiacs. Ed. E.I. McQueen. Bristol, 1986.
Dennis, G., ed. and trans. Three Byzantine Military Treatises. Washington, D.C.,
1985.
Diels, H. Antike Technik. Leipzig, 1914.
Dilke, O.A.W. Greek and Roman Maps. Ithaca, 1985.
Dilts, M., ed. Scholia Demosthenica. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1983–86.
Donaldson, G. “Signalling Communications and the Roman Imperial Army.”
Britannia 19 (1988): 349–56.
Dorjahn, A.P. “Anticipation of Arguments in Athenian Courts.” TAPA 66
(1935): 274–95. 
———. “Smokescreens in Ancient Warfare.” CB 35 (1959): 33.
———. “Some Ancient Military Stratagems.” CB 36 (1960): 61–63.
Dover, K.J. Aristophanes “Clouds.” Oxford, 1970.
DuBois, P. Torture and Truth. New York, 1991.
Bibliography
249

Ducrey, P. Le traitement des prisonniers de guerre dans la Grèce antique. Paris,
1968.
Edmonds, J.M. The Fragments of Attic Comedy. 3 vols. Leiden, 1957–61.
Edmunds, L. Chance and Intelligence in Thucydides. Cambridge, Mass., 1975.
Ekman, E. Zu Xenophons Hipparchikos. Uppsala, 1933.
Eliot, C.W.J. “On the Location of Mt. Tisaion.” In Classical Contributions: Stud-
ies in Honor of Malcolm Francis McGregor, ed. G.S. Shrimpton and D.J.
McCargar, 27–31. Locust Valley, N.Y., 1981.
Errington, R.M. Philopoemen. Oxford, 1969.
Flaumenhaft, M. “The Undercover Hero: Odysseus from Dark to Daylight.”
Interpretation 10 (1982): 9–41.
Fontenrose, J. The Delphic Oracle. Berkeley, 1978.
Fornara, C.W. Translated Documents of Greece and Rome. Vol. 1, Archaic
Times to the End of the Peloponnesian War. Cambridge, 1983.
Foucault, J.-A. de. “Histiée de Milet et l’esclave tatoué.” REG 80 (1967):
181–86.
Fraenkel, E. Aeschylus. “Agamemnon.” 3 vols. Oxford, 1950.
Frank, D. “The Power of Truth: Political Foresight in Thucydides’ Account of the
Sicilian Expedition (6.32–42).” Prudentia 16 (1984): 99–107.
Frazer, J.G. Pausanias’ “Description of Greece.” 6 vols. London, 1913.
Frederick the Great (Frederick II Hohenzollern). Frederick the Great in “The Art
of War.” Ed., trans. J. Luvaas. NewYork, 1966.
Frost, F. Plutarch’s “Themistocles:” A Historical Commentary. Princeton, 1980.
Fuller, Maj. Gen. J.F.C. Generalship, Its Diseases, and Their Cure: A Study of the
Personal Factor in Command. London, 1933.
Garlan, Y. “Sunthemata.” BCH 100 (1976): 299–308.
Gauthier, P. Symbola: Les étrangers et la justice dans les cités grecques. Nancy,
1972. 
Georgiadou, A. “A Philological and Historical Commentary on the Life of Pelop-
idas by Plutarch.” Ph.D. diss., University of Illinois, 1990.
Gerolymatos, A. “Ekphantos of Thasos: An Example of the Political Use of the
Athenian ProjenÛa.” Anc. World 15 (1987): 45–48.
———. “Fourth-Century Boeotian Use of Proxenia in International Relations.”
In La Béotie antique. Paris, 1985.
———. “The Proxenia of Alexander I of Makedonia.” LCM 11 (1986): 75–76.
Gershevitch, I. “The False Smerdis.” Acta Antiqua Academiae Scientiarum Hun-
garicae 27 (1979): 337–51.
Gianotti, G.F. “Senofonte, L’ordinamento politico degli Spartani.” La città
antica. V. Palermo, 1990. 
Gillis, D. “Collaboration with the Persians.” Historia–Einzelschr. 34. Wies-
baden, 1979.
Gomme, A.W. Essays in Greek History and Literature. Oxford, 1937. 
Gomme, A.W., A. Andrewes, and K.J. Dover. A Historical Commentary on
Thucydides. 5 vols. Oxford, 1956–81.
250
Bibliography 

Graf, D. “Medism: Greek Collaboration with Achaemenid Persia.” Ph.D. diss.,
University of Michigan, 1979.
Graham, A.J. Colony and Mother City in Ancient Greece. Manchester, 1964.
Reprint, 1971.
———. “Pre–colonial Contacts: Questions and Problems.” In Greek Colonists
and Native Populations, ed. J.-P. Descoeudres. Oxford, 1990.
Graux, C. Les Textes grecs. Paris, 1886.
Green, P. Armada from Athens. London, 1971.
Grif‹th, G. Mercenaries of the Hellenistic World. Cambridge, 1935.
Gschnitzer, F. “Proxenos.” RE supp. 13 (1973): 629–739.
Hamilton, J. Plutarch, “Alexander”: A Commentary. Oxford, 1969.
Hansen, M. Apagoge, Endeixis, and Ephegesis against Kakourgoi, Atimoi, and
Pheugontes: A Study in the Athenian Administration of Justice in the Fourth
Century B.C. Odense, 1976.
Harding, P. Translated Documents of Greece and Rome. Vol. 2, From the End of
the Peloponnesian War to the Battle of Ipsus. Cambridge, 1985. Reprint,
1989.
Harmon, A.M. Lucian. Vol. 4. Cambridge, Mass., 1925.
Harvey, D. “Dona Ferentes: Some Aspects of Bribery in Greek Politics.” HPTH
6 (1985): 76–117.
Hasebroek, J. Trade and Politics in Ancient Greece. New York, 1965. Originally
published as Staat und Handel im alten Griechenland (Tübingen, 1928).
Hassig, R. Aztec Warfare. Norman, Okla., 1988.
Heckel, W. “Alexander at the Persian Gates.” Athenaeum 58 (1980): 168–74.
———. The Marshals of Alexander’s Empire. New York, 1992. 
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. Ed. V. Bartoletti. Leipzig, 1959.
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. Ed. and trans. P. McKechnie and S. Kern. Warminster,
1988.
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. Ed. M. Chambers. Stuttgart, 1993.
Herman, G. Ritualized Friendship and the Greek City. Cambridge, 1987.
Hershbell, J.P. “The Ancient Telegraph.” In War and Literacy in Communica-
tions Arts in the Ancient World, ed. E.A. Havelock and J.P. Hershbell. New
York, 1978.
Herter, H. “Freiheit und Gebundenheit des Staatsmannes bei Thukydides.”
Rhein. Mus. 93 (1950): 133–53.
Hill, G. A History of Cyprus. Vol. 1. Cambridge, 1949.
Hommel, H. “Peripoloi.” RE 19 (1938) 852–55.
Hornblower, S. A Commentary on Thucydides. 2 vols. to date. Oxford,
1991–96.
How, W.W., and J. Wells. A Commentary on Herodotus. Oxford, 1912. Reprint,
1968.
Hude, C., ed. Scholia in Thucydidem ad optimes codices collata. Leipzig, 1927.
Hunter, V.J. Policing Athens: Social Control in the Attic Lawsuits, 420–320 B.C.
Princeton, 1994.
———. Thucydides: The Artful Reporter. Toronto, 1973.
Bibliography
251

Hutchinson, G.O. Aeschylus. “Septem contra Thebas.” Oxford, 1985.
Jackson, D. “A New Look at the Manuscripts of Xenophon’s Hipparchicus.” CQ
40 (1990): 176–86.
Jacoby, F. Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker. 3 vols. Leiden, 1923–58.
Jeanmaire, H. “La Kryptie Lacédémonienne.” REG 26 (1913): 121–50.
Kaibel, G., ed. Comicorum Graecorum Fragmenta. Berlin, 1899. Reprint, 1958.
Karavites, P. “Diplomatic Envoys in the Homeric World.” Revue internationale
des droits de l’antiquite 34 (1987): 41–100.
Keegan, J. A History of Warfare. New York, 1993.
Kelly, T. “The Spartan Skut‹lh.” In The Craft of the Ancient Historian: Essays
in Honor of C.G. Starr, ed. J. Eadie and J. Ober. Lanham, 1985.
Kennedy, G. The Art of Persuasion in Greece. Princeton, 1963.
Kienast, D. “Presbeia.” RE supp. 13 (1973): 499–628.
Knorringa, H. Emporos: Data on Trade and Trader in Greek Literature from
Homer to Aristotle. Amsterdam, 1926.
Köchly, H. Griechische Kriegsschriftsteller. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1853–55.
Köchly, H., and W. Rüstow. Geschichte des griechischen Kriegwesens. Aarau,
1852.
Krentz, P. Xenophon, “Hellenika” I–II.3.10. Warminster, 1989.
———. Xenophon, “Hellenika” II.3.11–IV.2.8. Warminster, 1994.
———, and E.L. Wheeler, trans. Polyaenus, “Stratagems of War.” Chicago,
1994.
Laix, R.A. de. Probouleusis at Athens: A Study of Political Decision Making.
Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1973.
Lateiner, D. “The Historical Method of Herodotus.” Phoenix supp. 23. Toronto,
1989.
———. “Nonverbal communication in the Histories of Herodotus.” Arethusa 20
(1987): 83–119.
Lawrence, T.E. Seven Pillars of Wisdom. New York, 1926.
Lazenby, J. The Spartan Army. Warminster, 1985.
Legon, R.P. Megara: The Political History of a Greek City-State to 336 B.C.
Ithaca, 1981.
Legrand, P.E. Quo animo Graeci divinationem adhibuerint. Paris, 1898.
Leopold, J. “De Scytala Laconica.” Mnemosyne 28 (1900): 365–91.
Leutsch, E., and F.G. Schneidewin, eds. Corpus Paroemiographorum Graeco-
rum. Hildesheim, 1965.
Lewis, D. Sparta and Persia. Leiden, 1977.
Liebeschuetz, W. “Thucydides and the Sicilian Expedition.” Historia 17 (1968):
289–306.
Lintott, A.W. “Megara and Athens: Thucydides and the Motivation for Trea-
son.” C&M. 30 (1969): 245–57.
———. Violence, Civil Strife, and Revolution in the Classical City, 750–330 B.C.
London, 1982.
Lofberg, J. Sycophancy in Athens. Chicago, 1917. Reprint, with Capital Punish-
ment in Ancient Athens, by I. Barkan, New York, 1979.
252
Bibliography 

Londey, P. “Greek Colonists and Delphi.” In Greek Colonists and Native Popu-
lations, ed. J.–P. Descoeudres. Oxford, 1990.
Lonis, R. Les usages de la guerre entre grecs et barbares des guerres mediques au
milieu du IVe s. avant J.–C. Paris, 1969.
Luck, H. von. Panzer Commander: The Memoirs of Colonel Hans von Luck.
New York, 1989.
Lung, Col. Hoang Ngoc. Intelligence. U.S. Army Center of Military History,
Indochina Monographs. Washington D.C., 1982.
MacDonald, B. “The Import of Attic Pottery to Corinth and the Question of
Trade during the Peloponnesian War.” JHS 102 (1982): 113–23.
MacDowell, D. Spartan Law. Edinburgh, 1986.
Machiavelli, N. The Art of War. Ed. N. Wood. Trans. E. Farneworthe. New
York, 1965.
———. “The Prince” and the “Discourses.” Trans. M. Lerner. New York, 1950.
Macrakis, A. “Comparative Economic Values in the Iliad: The Oxen–Worth.” In
Studies Presented to Sterling Dow on His Eightieth Birthday, ed. A.L. Boege-
hold et al. GRBS Monograph 10, 211–15. Durham, 1984.
Manville, P.B. “Aristagoras and Histiaios: The Leadership Struggle in the Ionian
Revolt.” CQ 27 (1977): 80–91.
Marco, B. Studi e testi di storia antica. Vol. 2, La difesa di una città assediata
(“Poliorketika”). Pisa, 1990.
Margoliouth, D.S. “The Use of the Cipher in Greek Antiquity.” Baconiana 23
(1938): 1–12.
Marinovich, L. Le mercenariat grec au IVe siècle avant notre ère et la crise de la
polis. Trans. J. Garlan and Y. Garlan. Paris, 1988.
Marschall, T. Untersuchungen zur Chronologie der Werke Xenophons. Munich,
1928.
Masterman, J.C. The Double-Cross System in the War of 1939–45. New Haven,
1972.
McKechnie, P. Outsiders in the Greek Cities in the Fourth Century B.C. London,
1989.
McNab, A. Bravo Two Zero. New York, 1993.
Meiggs, R. The Athenian Empire. Oxford, 1972.
———. “A Note on Athenian Imperialism.” CR 63 (1949): 9–12.
Meiggs, R., and D. Lewis, ed. A Selection of Greek Historical Inscriptions to the
End of the Fifth Century B.C. Oxford, 1969.
Merriam, A. “Telegraphings among the Ancients.” CR 5 (1891): 338. Originally
published in Papers of the Archaeological Institute of America, Classical
Series 3, no. 1 (1890): 1–32. 
Merry, B. Anatomy of the Spy Thriller. Montreal, 1977.
Michell, H. Sparta. To Krypton tes Politeias ton Lakedaimonion. Cambridge,
1952.
Missiou–Ladi, A. “Coercive Diplomacy in Greek Interstate Relations.” CQ 37
(1987): 336–45.
Monceaux, P. Les proxénies grecques. Paris, 1886.
Bibliography
253

Montgomery, H. The Way to Chaeronea: Foreign Policy, Decision–Making, and
Political In›uence in Demosthenes’ Speeches. Bergen, 1983.
Mosley, D. “Envoys and Diplomacy in Ancient Greece.” Historia-Einzelschr. 22
(1973): 1–95. 
Munn, M. The Defense of Attica: The Dema Wall and the Boiotian War of
378–375 B.C. Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1993.
Murnaghan, S. Disguise and Recognition in the Odyssey. Princeton, 1987.
Murray, H. “Two Notes on the Evaluation of Nicias in Thucydides.” Bulletin of
the Institute of Classical Studies 8 (1961): 33–46.
Nauck, A. ed. Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta. Leipzig, 1889. Reprint, rev. B.
Snell, Hildesheim, 1983.
Newman, W.L. “The Politics” of Aristotle. 3 vols. Oxford, 1887–1902.
Nortwick, T. van. “Penelope as Double Agent: Odyssey 21.1–60.” CW 77
(1983/84): 24–25.
Notopoulos, J. “Thucydides’ Prñgnvsiw and the Oracles.” Classical Weekly 39
(1945/46): 29–30.
Ober, J. Fortress Attika. Leiden, 1985.
Ostwald, M. “The Athenian Legislation against Tyranny and Subversion.”
TAPA 86 (1955): 103–28.
Palmer, L.R. The Interpretation of Mycenaean Greek Texts. Oxford, 1963.
Panagopoulos, A. Captives and Hostages in the Peloponnesian War. Amsterdam,
1989.
———. “Fugitives and Refugees in the Peloponnesian War.” Episthmonikh
Epethriw thw filosofikhw Sxolhw tou Panepisthmiou Ayhnvn 27 (1979/80):
247–96.
Parca, M.G. “Ptocheia,” or, Odysseus in Disguise at Troy: P. Köln VI 245.
Atlanta, 1992.
Parke, H.W. Greek Mercenary Soldiers from the Earliest Times to the Battle of
Ipsus. Oxford, 1933.
Parke, H.W., and D.E.W. Wormell. The Delphic Oracle. 2 vols. Oxford, 1956.
Parker, R. “Greek States and Greek Oracles.” In Crux: Essays in Greek History
Presented to G.E.M. de Ste. Croix on His Seventy-Fifth Birthday, ed., P.A.
Cartledge and F.D. Harvey, 298–326. London, 1985.
Pearson, L. “The Prñfasiw of Desertion.” CQ 36 (1986): 262–63.
Peremans, W. “Thucydide, Alcibiade et l’expédition en Sicile.” L’Antiquité clas-
sique 25 (1956): 331–44.
Perlman, S. “A Note on the Political Implications of the Proxenia in the Fourth
Century b.c.” CQ 8 (1958): 185–87.
———. “On Bribing Athenian Ambassadors.” GRBS 17 (1976): 223–33.
Pernée, L. “Quand l’intelligence est en défaut.” REG 92 (1979): 552–54.
Pétit, T. “Presence et in›uence perses à Chypre.” In Achaemenid History, ed. H.
Sancisi–Weerdenburg and A. Kuhrt, vol. 6:161–78. Leiden, 1991.
Philips, Brig. Gen. T.R. Roots of Strategy. 3 vols. Harrisburg, Penn., 1985.
Plowden, A. The Elizabethan Secret Service. New York, 1991.
Pope, H. Foreigners in Attic Inscriptions. Philadelphia, 1947.
254
Bibliography 

Posner, E. Archives in the Ancient World. Cambridge, Mass., 1972.
Pritchett, W.K. The Greek State at War. 5 vols. Berkeley and Los Angeles,
1971–91.
Rawlings, H. “Giving Desertion as Pretext: Thucydides VII,13.2.” CP 73 (1978):
134–36.
Reinke, E. “Classical Cryptography.” CJ 58 (1962): 113–21.
Reyes, A.T. Archaic Cyprus: A Study of the Textual and Archaeological Evi-
dence. Oxford, 1994.
Rhodes, P.J. The Athenian Boule. Oxford, 1972.
———. A Commentary on the Aristotelian “Athenaion Politeia.” Oxford, 1981.
Roberts, J.T. Accountability in Athenian Government. Madison, Wis., 1982.
Robertson, N. “False Documents at Athens: Fifth-Century History and Fourth-
Century Publicists.” Historical Re›ections 3 (1976): 3–25.
Roisman, H. “The Messenger and Eteocles in the Seven against Thebes.” L’An-
tiquité classique 59 (1990): 17–36. 
Roisman, J. The General Demosthenes and His Use of Military Surprise. Histo-
ria–Einzelschr. 78. Wiesbaden, 1993.
———. “The Image of the Political Exile in Archaic Greece.” Anc. Soc. 15–17
(1984–86): 23–32.
Rommel, E. Krieg ohne Haß. Heidenheim, 1950.
Russell, F. “A Note on the Athenian Defeat at Notium.” AHB 8 (1994): 35–37.
Rutherford, W.G. Scholia Aristophanica. London, 1896.
Salmone, S. “Tactical and Strategic Literature: Tradition and Novelty in the Hip-
parkhikos.” Maia 38 (1986): 197–205.
Sanders, L.J. Dionysius of Syrcause and Greek Tyranny. London, 1987.
Schaefer, H. “Xenelasia.” RE 9, no. 2 (1967): 1436–38.
Schneider, C. Information und Absicht bei Thukydides: Untersuchung zur Moti-
vation des Handelns. Hypomnemata 41. Göttingen, 1974.
Schulthess, R. “GrammateÝw.” RE 7 (1912): 1708–80.
Seager, R.J. “Agesilaos in Asia: Propaganda and Objectives.” LCM 2 (1977):
183–84.
Shepherd, R., ed. and trans. Polyaenus. “Stratagems of War.” London, 1793.
Reprint, Chicago, 1974.
Sherwin–White, S.M. “Hand–Tokens and Achaemenid Practice.” Iran 16 (1978):
183.
Singor, H. “Sparta, Tegea en het gebeente van Orestes (Hdt. 1,66–68).” Lampas
20 (1987): 182–203.
Snodgrass, A. Arms and Armour of the Greeks. London, 1967.
Spence, I. The Cavalry of Classical Greece: A Social and Military History.
Oxford, 1993.
———. “Perikles and the Defence of Attika.” JHS 110 (1990): 91–109.
Stadter, P., ed. The Speeches in Thucydides. Chapel Hill, 1973.
Ste. Croix, G.E.M. “The Alleged Secret Pact between Athens and Philip II con-
cerning Amphipolis and Pydna.” CQ 57 (1963): 110–19.
Bibliography
255

Steiner, D. The Tyrant’s Writ: Myths and Images of Writing in Ancient Greece.
Princeton, 1994.
Strauss, B. “The Cultural Signi‹cance of Bribery and Embezzlement in Athenian
Politics: The Evidence from the Period 403–386 b.c.” Anc. World 11 (1985):
67–74.
Stylianou, P.J. The Age of the Kingdoms: A Political History of Cyprus in the
Archaic and Classical Periods. Nicosia, 1989.
Suidas. Ed. A. Adler, Stuttgart, 1928–38. Reprint, 1967–71.
Thomas, R. Literacy and Orality in Ancient Greece. Cambridge, 1992.
———. Oral Tradition and Written Records in Athens. Cambridge, 1989. 
Thompson, W.E. “Athenian Leadership: Expertise or Charisma?” In Classical
Contributions: Studies in Honor of Malcolm Francis McGregor, ed. G.S.
Shrimpton and D.J. McCargar. Locust Valley, N.Y., 1981.
Tod, M.N. A Selection of Greek Historical Inscriptions. 2 vols. Oxford,
1933–48.
Tomlinson, R.A. Argos and the Argolid from the End of the Bronze Age to the
Roman Occupation. Ithaca, 1972.
Toynbee, A. Some Problems in Greek History. London, 1969.
Tracy, S. “The Beacon Fire in the Agamemnon.” CQ 36 (1986): 257–60.
Tritle, L.A. Phocion the Good. London, 1988.
Tuplin, C. “Aeneas Tacticus Poliorketika 18.8.” LCM 1 (1976): 127–31.
———. “The Administration of the Persian Empire.” In Coinage and Admin-
stration in the Athenian and Persian Empires, ed. I. Carradice. Oxford, 1987.
———. “Xenophon and the Garrisons of the Achaemenid Empire.” Archaeolo-
gische Mitteilungen aus Iran 20 (1987): 167–245.
Vanderpool, E. “Roads and Forts in Northwestern Attica.” California Studies in
Classical Antiquity 11 (1978): 227–45.
Vattuone, R. “Problemi spartiani: La congiura di Cinadone.” Rivista storica 
dell’antichità 12 (1982): 19–52.
Vegetius. Epitoma rei militaris. Ed. and trans. L. Stelten. New York, 1990.
Ventris, M., and J. Chadwick. Documents in Mycenaean Greek. 2d ed. Cam-
bridge, 1973.
Voigtlander, E.N. von. The Bisitun Inscription of Darius the Great, Babylonian
Version. London, 1978.
Walbank, F.W. A Historical Commentary on Polybius. 3 vols. Oxford, 1957–79.
Walbank, M.B. Athenian Proxenies of the Fifth Century B.C. Toronto, 1978.
Wallace, R. The Areopagus Council, to 307 B.C. Baltimore, 1985. Reprint, 1989.
Weil, R. “Histoire et intelligence chez Thucydide.” L’Information littéraire 19
(1967): 201–3.
Westermann, W. “On Inland Transportation and Communication in Antiquity.”
Political Science Quarterly 43 (1928): 364–87.
Westlake, H.D. “Hermocrates the Sicilian.” Bulletin of the John Rylands Library
41 (1958): 246.
———. “Hermocrates the Syracusan.” Revue bénédictine 41 (1958–59): 237–68.
——— “Nicias in Thucydides.” CQ 35 (1941): 58–65.
256
Bibliography 

———. “Phrynichos and Astyochos (Thucydides VIII.50–1).” JHS 76 (1956):
99–104.
———. Thessaly in the Fourth Century B.C. London, 1935.
Whitehead, D. “The Lakonian Key.” CQ 40 (1990): 267–68.
———, ed. and trans. Aineias the Tactician “How to Survive Under Siege.”
Oxford, 1990.
Wiesehöfer, J. “Zypern unter persischer Herrschaft.” In Achaemenid History, ed.
H. Sancisi–Weerdenburg and A. Kuhrt, 4:239–52. Leiden, 1990. 
Wilson, J. Athens and Corcyra: Strategy and Tactics in the Peloponnesian War.
Bristol, 1987.
Wood, N. “Xenophon’s Theory of Leadership.” C&M 25 (1964): 47–60.
Worley, L.J. Hippeis: The Cavalry of Ancient Greece. Boulder, 1994.
Worthington, I. A Historical Commentary on Dinarchus: Rhetoric and Conspir-
acy in Later Fourth-Century Athens. Ann Arbor, 1992. 
Xenophon. Le commandant de la cavalerie. Ed. E. Delebecque. Paris, 1973.
Yon, M. “Chypre entre la Grèce et les perses.” Ktema 6 (1981): 49–56.
Bibliography
257


Abrozelmes, 174
Abydus, 93
Acarnania, Acarnanians, 74, 102,
119, 120
acrostics, 154
adeia, 63, 70–71, 206
Aegina, Aeginetans, 68, 159, 197, 202
Aelian, 159
Aeneas Tacticus, 24, 27, 28, 29, 32,
34, 36, 70, 127, 135, 141, 147,
150, 151, 164, 183, 200, 203, 219,
226
Aeschines, 64, 96, 208, 209
Aetolia, Aetolians, 58, 102
Agathocles, 53
agathoergoi, 118
agents in place, 130–33
Agesilaus II, 17, 49, 50, 91, 93, 142,
163, 176, 193, 195, 214, 220, 227,
230
Agis II, 193, 222
Agoratus, 155, 178
Agrianians, 84
aikhmalotoi. See captives
Akoues, 185
Alcibiades, 93, 101, 123, 167, 188,
213, 219, 230
Alcmaeonids, 149
Alcotas, 216
Alexander I (son of Amyntas), 77–79
Alexander III (the Great), 15, 16, 18,
19, 21, 26, 29, 36, 40, 42, 44, 46,
48, 53, 54, 57, 58, 61, 64, 73, 75,
84, 97, 99, 114–15, 127, 141, 152,
157, 164, 167, 172, 173, 175, 177,
178, 179, 181, 197, 199, 205, 211,
213, 219, 226
Alexander (of Abonotichus), 88
Alexander (of Pherae), 147, 148
allies, 59, 83–87
Alyattes, 85, 89
Ambracia, Ambraciots, 74
Amphipolis, 13, 35, 162, 197
Amphoterus, 157
Amyntas, 50, 54, 84
Anaktes, 108, 110–13
Anaxilas of Oreus, 208
Andocides, 66, 194, 196, 217
angeloi. See messengers
Antalcidas, 65, 219
Antigone, 114
Antigonus the One-Eyed, 22, 26, 51,
53
Antipater, 100, 115, 211
Antiphon, 169, 208
Apsephio, 50
Araspas, 123–26, 170, 188
Aratus, 30–31, 33
Arcadia, Arcadians, 59, 100, 131,
155, 204
Archebius, 25
Archias (bounty-hunter), 100
Archias (hierophant of Athens), 85
Archias (Spartan-backed ruler of
Thebes), 85, 128–29, 157
Archibiades, 126
Archidamus, 99
Areopagus, Areopagites, 87, 108, 
208
Arginusae, 196, 219
259
Index

Argos, Argives, 66, 72, 119, 196, 207,
224, 228
Ariaeus, 171
Aristagoras, 69
Aristander, 42
Aristides, 178
Aristocrates, 131
Aristomenes, 42, 131
Aristonicus, 126
Aristophanes, 81, 91, 165, 180, 197,
203, 204
Aristophilides, 215
Aristotle, 98, 101, 112, 169, 203
Armenia, Armenians, 214
Artabazus, 159
Artaozus, 171
Artaxerxes, 54, 188
Artemisium, 25
Asia, Asia Minor, 18, 87, 69, 127,
142, 193, 220
Assyria, Assyrians, 133, 222
Astyochus, 44, 160
Athenagoras, 134, 167
Athenodorus, 201
Athens, Athenians, 21, 31, 34, 38–39,
40, 44, 47, 57, 58, 60, 64, 65, 66,
67, 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77,
79, 87, 88, 89, 90, 93, 94, 99, 100,
101, 119, 121, 130, 132, 134, 137,
144, 147, 148, 156, 157, 162, 165,
166, 167, 168, 169, 173, 176, 178,
179, 180, 181, 184, 186, 190, 191,
193, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 201,
202, 204, 206, 207, 208, 209, 212,
213, 215, 219, 221, 222, 223, 224,
227, 230 
Attica, 27, 38
audible signals, 143
Aulon, Aulonians, 117
Autariates, 84
automoloi. See deserters
Babylon, 97
bematistai, 99
binding, 59
Bithynia, Bithynians, 189
Boeotia, Boeotians, 57, 77, 148, 193,
198, 199, 202, 203, 204, 207. See
also Thebes
Bosphorus, 126
boulé, 47, 71, 88, 165, 196, 197
Brasidas, 34, 35, 57, 58, 76, 148,
162, 167, 168
burial mounds, 25
Byzantium, 126
Callias, 64
Callipus, 113
Cambyses, 76
captives, 4, 42–49, 57, 59, 66, 120,
169, 170, 176, 178–79, 210, 223,
227
Caria, Carians, 87, 201, 220
Carthage, Carthaginians, 53, 77, 211,
214
Caryaeans, 59
Carystus, 81
Cassander, 54
Catana, 13, 222
cavalry, 13, 15–19, 37, 47, 124, 137,
213; British, 22
cavalry commanders, 137–38
Cebalinus, 164
Celaenae, 75
censorship, 211
Cephalus, 81
Chaeronea, 93
Chalcideus, 213
Chalcidians, 58, 84
Chaleum, 77
Chalybians, 45
Chares, 223
Charidemus, 60, 61, 139
Charon, 128, 157
Cheirisophus, 59
Chersonesus, 129
Chios, Chians, 57, 89, 130, 180, 186,
199, 207, 213, 217
chresmologoi, 91
Cilicia, 44
260
Index 

Cimon, 48, 159
Cinadon, 116–17, 181
ciphers, 152–54
Cius, 201
Cleandridas, 185
Clearchus (of Lacedaemon), 60, 72,
74, 171, 188
Clearchus (of Soli), 109
Cleomantis, 89
Cleomenes I, 69, 219
Cleomenes III, 119–20
Cleon, 13, 167
clients, 85
Clitus, 84, 181
codes, 154
Codrus, 89
communication (covert), 150–61;
agents, 156; ciphers, 152–54; codes,
154; couriers, 156–59; drops,
159–60
communication (interception and jam-
ming), 209–12
communication (overt), 140–50
concealment, 214
Conon, 197
control of‹cers, 112
Corcyra, Corcyrans, 68, 80, 134, 168,
176
Corinth, Corinthians, 33, 61, 66, 69,
101, 168, 196, 202, 215
Corycaeans, 129
Cotyorans, 83
Cotys, 60
counterintelligence, 190–225; agents
204–9; controls on contact with for-
eigners, 199–204; legislation,
212–13; methods, 195–216; subjects,
192–95. See also disinformation
couriers, 47, 143–45, 155–59, 161,
210, 223
covers, 186–89
Cranon, 35
Craterus, 114–15
Criton, 100
Ctesias, 97
Cynaetha, 36
Cyprus, Cypriots, 107–14, 211
Cyrus the Great, 16, 19, 43, 122–24,
141, 177, 188, 214, 222
Cyrus the Younger, 53, 54, 58, 60,
101, 171, 172, 174
Darius I, 108
Darius III, 18, 44, 127, 172, 179,
211, 215
Deceleia, 52, 141
Delphi, 85, 89, 204
Demades, 191, 211
Demaenetus, 197, 206
Demaratus, 152, 156, 174
Democedes, 215
Democrates, 19, 21, 22, 45, 46
Demosthenes (orator), 47, 60, 64, 67,
68, 69, 81, 82, 91, 95–96, 100,
107, 132, 139, 142, 166–67, 176,
180, 190–91, 207–9, 224
Demosthenes (strategos), 102, 179
Demoteles, 119–20
Dercylidas, 87
deserters, 4, 44, 49–54, 58, 66, 120,
130, 163, 169, 178, 179, 185, 202,
204, 212, 219, 221; fake deserters,
45, 53, 104, 105, 106, 122–25,
178, 222
Dianias, 35
Dinarchus, 208, 209
Diocles, 185
Dion, 113, 155, 211
Dionysius I, 101
Dionysius II, 109, 155, 211
Dionysius (I or II), 108, 113, 114,
207, 209
Dionysius Metathemenus, 154
Diopithes, 201
disinformation, 216–25; agents,
221–23; leaks, 218–20
distraction, 214–15
diviners. See manteis
documents, 47, 93–98
dogs, 29, 30, 31, 51, 206
Index
261

dokimasia, 87
Dolon, 43, 170
Dorylaeum, 35
drops, 157–60
Ecbatana, 97
Ecdelus, 30
Egestaeans, 67, 179, 219
Egypt, Egyptians, 40, 173
Eira, 29
ekklesia, 69, 165–68, 180, 196–98,
207, 209, 230
Eleusis, 38, 202
Elis, Elians, 129, 159, 182
emblems, 182
envoys, 63–70, 127, 141, 144, 167,
173, 179, 196, 227, 233
Epaminondas, 16, 36, 50, 86, 128,
142, 194, 214
ephebes, 38, 119
ephors, 115–17, 142, 188, 210, 218
Epimenes, 164
Epipolae, 184, 231
Epirus, 159
episkopesis. See censorship
episkopoi, 88, 121, 206
epistoleis, 144
Eretria, 76
ereunetai, 109
Erigyius, 42
Erythrae, Erythraeans, 44, 201
espionage, 6, 15, 48, 87, 105–39,
212. See also spies
Eteonicus, 186, 195, 218
Euboea, 25
Eumenes I, 22, 26, 53
Eumolpides, 71
Euphiletus, 170
Eurylochus, 164
Euxenippus, 90
Evagoras, 112
evaluation of information, 166–68,
174–81
exetastai, 87
exiles, 85–86, 177
“Eyes” and “Ears of the King,”
110–11, 121
‹re signals, 143, 145–49
›ags, 149–50, 182
foreigners, 202–3
Gadatas, 222
gatekeepers, 34
Gaugamela, 16, 22
Gelon, 25, 47
geographers, 99
Gerginoi, 108–12
Glaucias, 84
goats, 30
grammateis, 96, 145
guards, 11, 13, 24, 27–38, 115, 163
guides, 54–59, 178
Gymnias, 58
Haliartus, 47, 211
Hebryzelmes, 69
Hecatonymus, 83
Hegelochus, 76
hegemones. See guides
helots, 57, 117, 119, 181, 194
hemeroskopoi, 11, 22–27, 29, 37, 149
Heraclea, 67
Heraclides Ponticus, 154
heralds, 26, 47, 70–76, 143, 155,
166, 169, 204, 209, 227, 233
Hermeias, 47
hermeneis. See interpreters
Hermocrates, 68, 131, 134, 139, 157,
198, 222
Herodas, 92
Herodotus, 38, 77, 79, 173
hetairai, 109
Hicetas, 61
Hiero, 107, 114, 228
Hieron, 207
hippagretai, 117–18
hippeis, 117–19, 121, 137
Hippocrates, 207
Hippocratus, 210
262
Index 

Hippodamus, 155
Histiaeus, 158
Homer, 70; Iliad, 25, 27, 43;
Odyssey, 76, 122, 194
horns, 150
hostages, 59, 85–86
Hyperides, 90, 201
Illyria, Illyrians, 119, 120
India, Indians, 53, 133, 175, 177
indigenous peoples. See locals
informers, 205–6
intelligence failure, 12
intelligence network, 108
interception of messages, 144, 209–12
interpreters, 88, 171–74
interrogation, 168–71
investigations, 87–88, 107, 179
Iphicrates, 18, 26, 36, 176, 184, 185,
207, 217, 219
Ischolaus, 34
Isocrates, 162, 200, 224
itinerants, 98–99
Iulis, 80
Jason, 81, 199
Julius Caesar, 153
kataskopoi, 11–24, 33, 44, 54, 87,
103–39, 170, 188, 204, 215
kerkouroi, 73
kerukeion, 71
kerukes. See heralds
Kerykes, 71
kodon, 30, 33–34
kolakes, 108, 114
krupteia, 119–21
Lacedaemon, Lacedaemonians, 13,
20, 28, 34, 36, 39, 41, 50, 56, 57,
59, 64, 65, 66, 69, 71, 72, 73, 81,
86, 87, 89, 90, 93, 99, 101,
115–21, 125, 129, 130, 131, 137,
140, 144, 152, 153, 155, 158, 162,
165, 168, 173, 174, 176, 178, 179,
180, 181, 182, 188, 193, 194, 195,
196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204,
206, 207, 210, 212, 213, 216, 218,
224, 227, 228, 230
Laconia, Laconians, 29, 31, 57,
115–21, 132, 143
Lamachus, 230
Lampsacus, 49, 163
Langarus, 84
Laomedon, 45
Leandrias, 86
Leocrates, 93
Leonnatus, 164
Leontini, 61, 131
Leosthenes, 61
Leotychidas, 51
Lesbos, Lesbians, 213
Leucas, 147
Leucon, 126
Leuctra, 86, 101, 194, 204
Libyans, 52
Lichas, 118, 125
light-armed troops, 15–19
locals, 54–60, 79
Locris, Locrians, 58, 158
Lucian, 88
Lycon, 67
Lycurgus (of Sparta), 89, 200
Lydia, Lydians, 75
Lysander, 149, 158, 211
Lysias, 50, 65, 92, 141, 178
Lysimachus, 35
Macedonia, Macedonians, 22, 61, 65,
84, 98, 115, 132, 139, 166, 167,
173, 175, 203, 213, 223
Maeandrius, 145
Maedi, 84
Manitas, 87
manteis, 39–42
Mantinea, Mantineans, 16, 193, 196
Mantitheus, 50
Mardonius, 72, 77
Mausolus, 87, 201
Mazaeus, 18
Index
263

Medosades, 65
Megara, Megarians, 39, 57, 72, 186,
193, 198, 221
Melesippus, 74
Memnon of Rhodes, 126, 146
Menidas, 18
Mentor, 47
mercenaries, 34, 45, 60–62
merchants, 54, 92–93, 105, 106, 141,
227
messengers, 58, 70, 143–45
Messenia, Messenians, 29, 58, 89,
131, 182, 183, 185
metics, 201
Metron, 165
Miletus, Milesians, 58, 75, 85, 220
Milon, 197
Miltiades, 198
Mindarus, 199
Mithradates, 188
Mnasippus, 176
Mnasitheus, 30
Molossians, 82
Mount Tisaion, 148
Mycale, 51, 184
Mycenae, Mycenaeans, 12, 24, 25, 70
Mylasa, 87
Myndian, 156
Mytilene, Mytileneans, 79, 164, 180,
181, 193, 213, 217
Nabas, 77
Neocles, 198
neutrals, 105–6, 133–34
Nicanor, 180
Nicarchus, 100
Nicias (herald of Philip II), 47
Nicias (son of Niceratus), 40, 43, 76,
82, 131–32, 138, 139, 144, 157,
167, 179, 191, 195, 222, 230, 
231
Nicocles, 30, 112, 209
Nicomachus, 207
Nicon, 185
nuktophulakes. See guards
observation posts, 26–27
observers, 6, 10, 11, 12, 17, 22, 23,
24–27, 32, 137, 143
Odysseus, 12, 73, 105, 170, 188
Oebalus, 89
Olympias, 54
Olynthus, Olynthians, 60
Omphis, 175
Onasander, 48, 50, 141, 199
oracles, 88–91
Oreus, 216
ota, 108, 112. See also spies
otakoustai, 103, 107, 108, 112. See
also spies
Oxylus, 129
Pagae, 57
Palamedes, 150
Pammenes, 125, 185
Pancleon, 141, 176
parasunthemata, 184, 187. See also
sunthemata
Parmenio, 157, 181, 211
Parthenii, 116
passwords. See sunthemata
patrols, 4, 38–39, 184
Pausanias (author), 194
Pausanias (Spartan regent), 78, 158,
181, 210
Pedaritus, 44
Pellenean, 36
Pelopidas, 85, 86, 128, 219
Peloponnesus, Peloponnesians, 58, 89,
93, 147, 148, 162, 186, 193, 199,
212
Periander, 85, 89
Pericles, 190, 195, 202, 224, 227
perioikoi, 57, 105, 130
peripolarkhoi, 38. See also patrols
peripoloi, 11, 24, 38–39
Persepolis, 96, 97
Persia, Persians, 22, 44, 45, 46, 50,
58, 61, 65, 72, 74, 77, 96, 111,
112, 114, 124, 148, 150, 152, 159,
171–74, 175, 188, 215, 223, 224
264
Index 

Peuces, 173
peuthenes, 108
Phalinus, 72, 99
Phanocritus, 81
Pharnabazus, 158
philia, 70
Philip II, 47, 65, 69, 81, 86, 95, 98,
132, 166–67, 198, 208, 209, 223
Philip (Theban polemarch), 128
Phillidas, 96, 128–29
Philocrates, 67
philosophers, 98
Philotas, 114, 164
Phliasians, 56
Phocion, 181, 194, 199
Phocis, Phocians, 58, 67, 148, 207
Phoenicia, 92
phrourarchoi, 206
phrouroi. See guards
phruktoi. See ‹re signals
Phrygia, 219
Phrynichus, 38, 160
Phrynis, 105, 130, 180
phugotheres, 100
phulakes. See guards
Phylarchus, 120
pickets. See guards
Piraeus, 180, 193, 201, 203, 208, 227
pirates, 129
Plataea, Plataeans, 23, 35, 39, 73, 74,
78, 142, 147, 148, 162, 198, 212
Plato, 99, 155
plots, 5, 107, 118, 194, 205, 206
Plutarch, 109
Polemon, 54
Polyaenus, 127, 136
Polybius, 1, 86, 120, 147
Polycrates, 76, 145
Polydamas, 81
Pompiscus, 136, 204, 219
Porus, 219
potagogides, 107–9, 112, 115. See
also spies
Potidaea, Potidaeans, 34, 159, 202
Prasiae, 56, 155
presbeis. See envoys
prisoners. See captives
prisons, 54
prodosia, 77, 212
prodromoi, 11, 15, 16. See also recon-
naissance
Promalanges, 108–12
prophulakes, 27, 29. See also guards
prosagogides. See potagogides
proxenoi, 70, 76–83, 88, 121, 130,
131, 206
Proxenus, 223
pseudautomoloi. See deserters
psiloi. See light-armed troops
Ptolemy I, 51, 53, 164
pursoi. See ‹re signals
puthioi, 90
Pylos, 24, 52, 87, 167, 195
Pythion, 57
reconnaissance, 4, 6, 10–22, 27, 30,
44, 46, 47, 60, 62, 73, 103–4, 121,
137, 141, 143, 146, 169, 174, 175,
179, 184, 187, 210, 227
rewards, 56, 168, 206
Rhegium, 39, 134
Rhodes, 93
Rome, Romans, 54, 88
Salamis (Cyprian), 108ff.
Salamis (Saronic), 50, 148, 178, 221,
224
Samos, 199
Sardis, 97, 127
sarissophoroi, 15
Scione, 159
Scolus, 220
Scythians, 42, 127
seals, 185–86, 203
Selinus, 47
Sellasia, 120
semeia, 149–50
sentries. See guards
Seuthes, 21, 33, 65, 172, 174, 183,
213
Index
265

Sicily, Sicilians, 18, 66, 67, 68, 128,
131, 138, 167, 179, 180, 193, 196,
197, 211, 215, 222, 230
Sicinnus, 157
Sicyon, Sicyonians, 30, 224
signals, signaling, 26, 145–50, 155,
161, 182, 219
Silanus, 41
Sinope, Sinopeans, 83, 93
Skiritai, 13, 20, 28
skoparkhes or skoparkhos, 26, 137
skopoi. See reconnaissance; observers;
spies
skutale, 117, 153
slaves, 57, 100, 169, 187
smoke screens, 214
Solon, 221, 228
songs (of guard duty), 34
Sparta, Spartans. See Lacedaemon,
Lacedaemonians
Spartiates, 28, 74, 117
Sphacteria, 31
sphagis. See seals
spies, 11, 103–39, 156, 157, 170,
179, 185, 187, 201, 204, 208, 212,
219, 221, 227, 233; agents in place,
130–33; categorization, 103–6;
diplomatic covers, 126–27; domes-
tic, 107–21; fake deserters, 122–25;
further notes on methods, 135–39;
in‹ltration agents, 106–30; neu-
trals, 133–34. See also communica-
tion (covert); covers
strategoi, 26, 40, 48, 87, 96, 128,
132, 137, 138, 207, 223
Strophacus, 58
sumbola, 185, 203
sunthemata, 27, 125, 182–85
surveillance. See guards; observers
sycophants, 99, 100
Syracuse, Syracusans, 13, 21, 39, 43,
47, 48, 54, 66, 75, 76, 82, 92, 101,
104, 107, 108, 109, 112, 113, 114,
131, 132, 134, 135, 138, 157, 184,
198, 202, 207, 222
Taenarum, 61, 62
Talthybiadae, 71
tamiai, 87
Taras, 76, 215
Technon, 30
Tegea, 118, 214
Tenos, Tenians, 50, 178
Ten Thousand, 19, 48, 58, 59, 60, 67,
72, 82, 171, 172, 188
Thasos, Thasians, 121
Thebes, Thebans, 18, 23, 36, 47, 50,
52, 57, 58, 59, 64, 68, 82, 86, 96,
125, 128, 142, 148, 157, 198, 204,
212, 213, 215, 216, 219, 220, 223,
230
Themistocles, 51, 123, 157, 159, 178,
196, 224
Theocles, 42
theopropoi, 90
Thermopylae, 52, 174
Thespiae, 220
Thessaly, Thessalians, 35, 57, 58,
148, 159, 167
Thrace, Thracians, 19, 65, 223
Thucydides, 6, 13, 38, 43, 58, 70, 80,
91, 139, 144, 147, 162, 167, 172,
177, 193, 209
Timasion, 21
Timesitheus, 82
Timocrates, 215
Timoleon, 61
Timoxenus, 159
Tiribazus, 45, 67
Tissaphernes, 57, 58, 60, 69, 72, 98,
100, 174, 220
torture, 43, 44, 129, 168–69, 170,
208
traitors, treachery, 28, 85, 105, 112,
130, 157, 169, 177, 205, 209, 
212
translators, 171–74
trierarchs, 54
trumpets, 150
tyrants, 62, 107, 111, 113, 114, 115,
143, 164, 206, 207, 211, 228
266
Index 

watchers, watchmen. See guards;
observers
watches, 28, 29, 36, 51
watch ‹res, 33
watchwords. See sunthemata
water clock, 29
xenia, 70, 85
Xenocrates, 30
xenoi, 28, 70
Xenophon, 11, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22,
26, 27, 28, 32, 33, 39, 41, 43, 45,
46, 48, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 72,
92, 93, 98, 104, 106, 122, 123,
127, 133, 135, 136, 139, 141, 150,
151, 161, 162, 170, 177, 178, 183,
187, 188, 192, 205, 210, 214, 217,
222, 226; Anabasis, 6, 43, 99, 170;
Cavalry Commander, 6, 21, 104–5,
122, 137–38, 151; Education of
Cyrus, 6, 26, 28, 29, 41, 59, 105,
106, 122, 124, 133, 170, 187, 214,
222; Hellenica, 6, 99; Memorabilia,
6, 98, 99
Xerxes, 51, 96, 127, 128, 174, 
224
Yauna, 97
zeteseis, 87
Index
267

