
Information Technology 
and Organizational 
Learning 
Managing Behavioral Change 
in the Digital Age 
Third Edition 


Information Technology 
and Organizational 
Learning 
Managing Behavioral Change 
in the Digital Age 
Third Edition 
Arthur M. Langer

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
©  2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-7575-5 (Paperback)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-138-23858-9 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable 
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot 
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication 
and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any 
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information stor-
age or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copy-
right.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that 
provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a 
photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice:  Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at 
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com 
and the CRC Press Web site at 
http://www.crcpress.com 

v
Contents
Fore word	
xi
Acknowled g ments 	
xiii
Author 	
xv
Introduction	
xvii
Chap ter 1	
The “R avell” Corp or ation	
1
Introduction	
1
A New Approach	
3
The Blueprint for Integration	
5
Enlisting Support 	
6
Assessing Progress	
7
Resistance in the Ranks	
8
Line Management to the Rescue	
8
IT Begins to Reflect	
9
Defining an Identity for Information Technology	
10
Implementing the Integration: A Move toward Trust and 
Reflection	
12
Key Lessons 	
14
Defining Reflection and Learning for an Organization 	
14
Working toward a Clear Goal 	
15
Commitment to Quality 	
15
Teaching Staff “Not to Know” 	
16
Transformation of Culture 	
16
Alignment with Administrative Departments	
17
Conclusion	
19

vi
Contents
Chap ter 2	
The IT D ilemma	
21
Introduction	
21
Recent Background	
23
IT in the Organizational Context	
24
IT and Organizational Structure	
24
The Role of IT in Business Strategy	
25
Ways of Evaluating IT	
27
Executive Knowledge and Management of IT	
28
IT: A View from the Top	
29
Section  1: Chief Executive Perception of the Role of IT	
32
Section  2: Management and Strategic Issues	
34
Section  3: Measuring IT Performance and Activities	
35
General Results	
36
Defining the IT Dilemma	
36
Recent Developments in Operational Excellence	
38
Chap ter 3	
Technology as a Variable and Resp onsive 
O rg aniz ational Dynamis m	
41
Introduction	
41
Technological Dynamism	
41
Responsive Organizational Dynamism	
42
Strategic Integration	
43
Summary	
48
Cultural Assimilation	
48
IT Organization Communications with “ Others” 	
49
Movement of Traditional IT Staff	
49
Summary	
51
Technology Business Cycle	
52
Feasibility	
53
Measurement	
53
Planning	
54
Implementation	
55
Evolution	
57
Drivers and Supporters	
58
Santander versus  Citibank 	
60
Information Technology Roles and Responsibilities	
60
Replacement or Outsource	
61
Chap ter 4	
O rg aniz ational Le arning Theories and 
Technology	
63
Introduction	
63
Learning Organizations	
72
Communities of Practice	
75
Learning Preferences and Experiential Learning	
83
Social Discourse and the Use of Language	
89
Identity	
91
Skills	
92

vii
Contents
Emotion	
92
Linear Development in Learning Approaches	
96
Chap ter 5	
Manag ing O rg aniz ational Le arning and 
Technology	
109
The Role of Line Management	
109
Line Managers	
111
First-Line Managers	
111
Supervisor	
111
Management Vectors	
112
Knowledge Management	
116
Ch ange Management 	
120
Change Management for IT Organizations	
123
Social Networks and Information Technology	
134
Chap ter 6	
O rg aniz ational Tr ansformation and the 
Bal an ced S corecard	
139
Introduction	
139
Methods of Ongoing Evaluation	
146
Balanced Scorecards and Discourse	
156
Knowledge Creation, Culture, and Strategy	
158
Chap ter 7	
Virtual Te ams and Outsourcing	
163
Introduction	
163
Status of Virtual Teams	
165
Management Considerations	
166
Dealing with Multiple Locations	
166
Externalization	
169
Internalization	
171
Combination	
171
Socialization	
172
Externalization Dynamism	
172
Internalization Dynamism	
173
Combination Dynamism	
173
Socialization Dynamism	
173
Dealing with Multiple Locations and Outsourcing	
177
Revisiting Social Discourse	
178
Identity	
179
Skills	
180
Emotion	
181
Chap ter 8	
Synerg istic Union of IT and 
O rg aniz ational Le arning	
187
Introduction	
187
Siemens AG	
187
Aftermath	
202
ICAP	
203

viii
Contents
Five Years Later	
224
HTC	
225
IT History at HTC	
226
Interactions of the CEO	
227
The Process	
228
Transformation from the Transition	
229
Five Years Later	
231
Summary	
233
Chap ter 9	
Forming a C yber S ecurit y Culture	
239
Introduction	
239
History	
239
Talking to the Board	
241
Establishing a Security Culture	
241
Understanding What It Means to be Compromised	
242
Cyber Security Dynamism and Responsive Organizational 
Dynamism	
242
Cyber Strategic Integration	
243
Cyber Cultural Assimilation	
245
Summary	
246
Organizational Learning and Application Development	
246
Cyber Security Risk	
247
Risk Responsibility	
248
Driver /Supporter Implications	
250
Chap ter 10	 D ig ital Tr ansformation and Chang es in 
C onsumer Behavior	
251
Introduction	
251
Requirements without Users and without Input	
254
Concepts of the S-Curve and Digital Transformation 
Analysis and Design 	
258
Organizational Learning and the S-Curve	
260
Communities of Practice	
261
The IT Leader in the Digital Transformation Era	
262
How Technology Disrupts Firms and Industries	
264
Dynamism and Digital Disruption	
264
Critical Components of “ Digital”  Organization 	
265
Assimilating Digital Technology Operationally and Culturally	
267
Conclusion	
268
Chap ter 11	 Integ r ating G ener ation Y E mployees to 
Acceler ate Compe titive Advantag e	
269
Introduction	
269
The Employment Challenge in the Digital Era	
270
Gen Y Population Attributes	
272
Advantages of Employing Millennials to Support Digital 
Transformation	
272
Integration of Gen Y with Baby Boomers and Gen X	
273

ix
Contents
Designing the Digital Enterprise	
274
Assimilating Gen Y Talent from Underserved and Socially 
Excluded Populations	
276
Langer Workforce Maturity Arc	
277
Theoretical Constructs of the LWMA	
278
The LWMA and Action Research	
281
Implications for New Pathways for Digital Talent	
282
Demographic Shifts in Talent Resources	
282
Economic Sustainability	
283
Integration and Trust	
283
Global Implications for Sources of Talent	
284
Conclusion	
284
Chap ter 12	 Toward Best Pr actices	
287
Introduction	
287
Chief IT Executive	
288
Definitions of Maturity Stages and Dimension Variables in 
the Chief IT Executive Best Practices Arc	
297
Maturity Stages	
297
Performance Dimensions	
298
Chief Executive Officer	
299
CIO Direct Reporting to the CEO	
305
Outsourcing	
306
Centralization versus Decentralization of IT	
306
CIO Needs Advanced Degrees	
307
Need for Standards	
307
Risk Management	
307
The CEO Best Practices Technology Arc	
313
Definitions of Maturity Stages and Dimension Variables in 
the CEO Technology Best Practices Arc	
314
Maturity Stages	
314
Performance Dimensions	
315
Middle Management	
316
The Middle Management Best Practices Technology Arc	
323
Definitions of Maturity Stages and Dimension Variables in 
the Middle Manager Best Practices Arc	
325
Maturity Stages	
325
Performance Dimensions	
326
Summary	
327
Ethics and Maturity	
333
Chap ter 13	 Con clusions	
339
Introduction	
339
G los sary	
357
Referen ces 	
363
Inde x	
373


xi
Foreword
Digital technologies are transforming the global economy. Increasingly, 
firms and other organizations are assessing their opportunities, develop-
ing and delivering products and services, and interacting with custom-
ers and other stakeholders digitally. Established companies recognize 
that digital technologies can help them operate their businesses with 
greater speed and lower costs and, in many cases, offer their custom-
ers opportunities to co-design and co-produce products and services. 
Many start-up companies use digital technologies to develop new prod-
ucts and business models that disrupt the present way of doing busi-
ness, taking customers away from firms that cannot change and adapt. 
In recent years, digital technology and new business models have dis-
rupted one industry after another, and these developments are rapidly 
transforming how people communicate, learn, and work.
Against this backdrop, the third edition of Arthur Langer’ s 
Information Technology and Organizational Learning  is most welcome. 
For decades, Langer has been studying how firms adapt to new or 
changing conditions by increasing their ability to incorporate and use 
advanced information technologies. Most organizations do not adopt 
new technology easily or readily. Organizational inertia and embed-
ded legacy systems are powerful forces working against the adoption 
of new technology, even when the advantages of improved technology 
are recognized. Investing in new technology is costly, and it requires 

xii
Foreword
aligning technology with business strategies and transforming cor-
porate cultures so that organization members use the technology to 
become more productive.
Information Technology and Organizational Learning  addresses these 
important issues— and much more. There are four features of the new 
edition that I would like to draw attention to that, I believe, make 
this a valuable book. First, Langer adopts a behavioral perspective 
rather than a technical perspective. Instead of simply offering norma-
tive advice about technology adoption, he shows how sound learn-
ing theory and principles can be used to incorporate technology into 
the organization. His discussion ranges across the dynamic learning 
organization, knowledge management, change management, com-
munities of practice, and virtual teams. Second, he shows how an 
organization can move beyond technology alignment to true technol-
ogy integration. Part of this process involves redefining the traditional 
support role of the IT department to a leadership role in which IT 
helps to drive business strategy through a technology-based learn-
ing organization. Third, the book contains case studies that make the 
material come alive. The book begins with a comprehensive real-life 
case that sets the stage for the issues to be resolved, and smaller case 
illustrations are sprinkled throughout the chapters, to make concepts 
and techniques easily understandable. Lastly, Langer has a wealth of 
experience that he brings to his book. He spent more than 25 years 
as an IT consultant and is the founder of the Center for Technology 
Management at Columbia University, where he directs certificate and 
executive programs on various aspects of technology innovation and 
management. He has organized a vast professional network of tech-
nology executives whose companies serve as learning laboratories for 
his students and research. When you read the book, the knowledge 
and insight gained from these experiences is readily apparent.
If you are an IT professional, Information Technology and Organi­
zational Learning  should be required reading. However, anyone who 
is part of a firm or agency that wants to capitalize on the opportunities 
provided by digital technology will benefit from reading the book.
Charles C. Snow 
Professor Emeritus, Penn State University
Co-Editor, Journal of Organization Design 

xiii
Acknowledgments 
Many colleagues and clients have provided significant support during 
the development of the third edition of Information Technology and 
Organizational Learning. 
I owe much to my colleagues at Teachers College, namely, Professor 
Victoria Marsick and Lyle Yorks, who guided me on many of the the-
ories on organizational learning, and Professor Lee Knefelkamp, for 
her ongoing mentorship on adult learning and developmental theo-
ries. Professor David Thomas from the Harvard Business School also 
provided valuable direction on the complex issues surrounding diver-
sity, and its importance in workforce development.
I appreciate the corporate executives who agreed to participate 
in the studies that allowed me to apply learning theories to actual 
organizational practices. Stephen McDermott from ICAP provided 
invaluable input on how chief executive officers (CEOs) can success-
fully learn to manage emerging technologies. Dana Deasy, now global 
chief information officer (CIO) of JP Morgan Chase, contributed 
enormous information on how corporate CIOs can integrate tech-
nology into business strategy. Lynn O’ Connor Vos, CEO of Grey 
Healthcare, also showed me how technology can produce direct mon-
etary returns, especially when the CEO is actively involved.
And, of course, thank you to my wonderful students at Columbia 
University. They continue to be at the core of my inspiration and love 
for writing, teaching, and scholarly research.


xv
Author 
Arthur M. Langer, EdD,  is professor of professional practice 
of management and the director of the Center for Technology 
Management at Columbia University. He is the academic direc-
tor of the Executive Masters of Science program in Technology 
Management, vice chair of faculty and executive advisor to the dean 
at the School of Professional Studies and is on the faculty of the 
Department of Organization and Leadership at the Graduate School 
of Education (Teachers College). He has also served as a member of 
the Columbia University Faculty Senate. Dr. Langer is the author 
of Guide to Software Development: Designing & Managing the Life 
Cycle.  2nd Edition (2016), Strategic IT: Best Practices for Managers 
and Executives  (2013 with Lyle Yorks), Information Technology and 
Organizational Learning  (2011), Analysis and Design of Information 
Systems  (2007), Applied Ecommerce  (2002), and The Art of Analysis  
(1997), and has numerous published articles and papers, relating 
to digital transformation, service learning for underserved popula-
tions, IT organizational integration, mentoring, and staff develop-
ment. Dr. Langer consults with corporations and universities on 
information technology, cyber security, staff development, man-
agement transformation, and curriculum development around the 
Globe. Dr. Langer is also the chairman and founder of Workforce 
Opportunity Services (www.wforce.org), a non-profit social venture 

xvi
Author 
that provides scholarships and careers to underserved populations 
around the world.
Dr. Langer earned a BA in computer science, an MBA in 
accounting/finance, and a Doctorate of Education from Columbia 
University.

xvii
Introduction
Background
Information technology (IT) has become a more significant part of 
workplace operations, and as a result, information systems person-
nel are key to the success of corporate enterprises, especially with 
the recent effects of the digital revolution on every aspect of business 
and social life (Bradley & Nolan, 1998; Langer, 1997, 2011; Lipman-
Blumen, 1996). This digital revolution is defined as a form of “ dis-
ruption.”  Indeed, the big question facing many enterprises today is, 
How can executives anticipate the unexpected threats brought on by 
technological advances that could devastate their business? This book 
focuses on the vital role that information and digital technology orga-
nizations need to play in the course of organizational development 
and learning, and on the growing need to integrate technology fully 
into the processes of workplace organizational learning. Technology 
personnel have long been criticized for their inability to function as 
part of the business, and they are often seen as a group outside the 
corporate norm (Schein, 1992). This is a problem of cultural assimila-
tion, and it represents one of the two major fronts that organizations 
now face in their efforts to gain a grip on the new, growing power of 
technology, and to be competitive in a global world. The other major 

xviii
Introduction
front concerns the strategic integration of new digital technologies 
into business line management.
Because technology continues to change at such a rapid pace, the 
ability of organizations to operate within a new paradigm of dynamic 
change emphasizes the need to employ action learning as a way to 
build competitive learning organizations in the twenty-first century. 
Information Technology and Organizational Learning  integrates some 
of the fundamental issues bearing on IT today with concepts from 
organizational learning theory, providing comprehensive guidance, 
based on real-life business experiences and concrete research.
This book also focuses on another aspect of what IT can mean to 
an organization. IT represents a broadening dimension of business life 
that affects everything we do inside an organization. This new reality is 
shaped by the increasing and irreversible dissemination of technology. 
To maximize the usefulness of its encroaching presence in everyday 
business affairs, organizations will require an optimal understanding 
of how to integrate technology into everything they do. To this end, 
this book seeks to break new ground on how to approach and concep-
tualize this salient issue— that is, that the optimization of information 
and digital technologies is best pursued with a synchronous imple-
mentation of organizational learning concepts. Furthermore, these 
concepts cannot be implemented without utilizing theories of strategic 
learning. Therefore, this book takes the position that technology liter-
acy requires individual and group strategic learning if it is to transform 
a business into a technology-based learning organization. Technology-
based organizations  are defined as those that have implemented a means 
of successfully integrating technology into their process of organiza-
tional learning. Such organizations recognize and experience the real-
ity of technology as part of their everyday business function. It is what 
many organizations are calling “ being digital.” 
This book will also examine some of the many existing organi-
zational learning theories, and the historical problems that have 
occurred with companies that have used them, or that have failed 
to use them. Thus, the introduction of technology into organizations 
actually provides an opportunity to reassess and reapply many of the 
past concepts, theories, and practices that have been used to support 
the importance of organizational learning. It is important, however, 
not to confuse this message with a reason for promoting organizational 

xix
Introduction
learning, but rather, to understand the seamless nature of the relation-
ship between IT and organizational learning. Each needs the other to 
succeed. Indeed, technology has only served to expose problems that 
have existed in organizations for decades, e.g., the inability to drive 
down responsibilities to the operational levels of the organization, and 
to be more agile with their consumers.
This book is designed to help businesses and individual manag-
ers understand and cope with the many issues involved in developing 
organizational learning programs, and in integrating an important 
component: their IT and digital organizations. It aims to provide a 
combination of research case studies, together with existing theories 
on organizational learning in the workplace. The goal is also to pro-
vide researchers and corporate practitioners with a book that allows 
them to incorporate a growing IT infrastructure with their exist-
ing workforce culture. Professional organizations need to integrate 
IT into their organizational processes to compete effectively in the 
technology-driven business climate of today. This book responds to 
the complex and various dilemmas faced by many human resource 
managers and corporate executives regarding how to actually deal 
with many marginalized technology personnel who somehow always 
operate outside the normal flow of the core business.
While the history of IT, as a marginalized organization, is rela-
tively short, in comparison to that of other professions, the problems 
of IT have been consistent since its insertion into business organiza-
tions in the early 1960s. Indeed, while technology has changed, the 
position and valuation of IT have continued to challenge how execu-
tives manage it, account for it, and, most important, ultimately value 
its contributions to the organization. Technology personnel continue 
to be criticized for their inability to function as part of the business, 
and they are often seen as outside the business norm. IT employees 
are frequently stereotyped as “ techies,”  and are segregated in such a 
way that they become isolated from the organization. This book pro-
vides a method for integrating IT, and redefining its role in organiza-
tions, especially as a partner in formulating and implementing key 
business strategies that are crucial for the survival of many companies 
in the new digital age. Rather than provide a long and extensive list of 
common issues, I have decided it best to uncover the challenges of IT 
integration and performance through the case study approach.

x x
Introduction
IT continues to be one of the most important yet least understood 
departments in an organization. It has also become one of the most 
significant components for competing in the global markets of today. 
IT is now an integral part of the way companies become successful, 
and is now being referred to as the digital arm of the business. This 
is true across all industries. The role of IT has grown enormously in 
companies throughout the world, and it has a mission to provide stra-
tegic solutions that can make companies more competitive. Indeed, 
the success of IT, and its ability to operate as part of the learning 
organization, can mean the difference between the success and failure 
of entire companies. However, IT must be careful that it is not seen as 
just a factory of support personnel, and does not lose its justification 
as driving competitive advantage. We see in many organizations that 
other digital-based departments are being created, due to frustration 
with the traditional IT culture, or because they simply do not see IT 
as meeting the current needs for operating in a digital economy.
This book provides answers to other important questions that have 
challenged many organizations for decades. First, how can manag-
ers master emerging digital technologies, sustain a relationship with 
organizational learning, and link it to strategy and performance? 
Second, what is the process by which to determine the value of using 
technology, and how does it relate to traditional ways of calculating 
return on investment, and establishing risk models? Third, what are 
the cyber security implications of technology-based products and 
services? Fourth, what are the roles and responsibilities of the IT 
executive, and the department in general? To answer these questions, 
managers need to focus on the following objectives:
•	 Address the operational weaknesses in organizations, in 
terms of how to deal with new technologies, and how to bet-
ter realize business benefits.
•	 Provide a mechanism that both enables organizations to deal 
with accelerated change caused by technological innovations, 
and integrates them into a new cycle of processing, and han-
dling of change.
•	 Provide a strategic learning framework, by which every new 
technology variable adds to organizational knowledge and 
can develop a risk and security culture.

x xi
Introduction
•	 Establish an integrated approach that ties technology account-
ability to other measurable outcomes, using organizational 
learning techniques and theories.
To realize these objectives, organizations must be able to
•	 create dynamic internal processes that can deal, on a daily 
basis, with understanding the potential fit of new technologies 
and their overall value within the structure of the business;
•	 provide the discourse to bridge the gaps between IT- and non-
IT-related investments, and uses, into one integrated system;
•	 monitor investments and determine modifications to the life 
cycle;
•	 implement various organizational learning practices, includ-
ing learning organization, knowledge management, change 
management, and communities of practice, all of which help 
foster strategic thinking, and learning, and can be linked to 
performance (Gephardt & Marsick, 2003).
The strengths of this book are that it integrates theory and practice 
and provides answers to the four common questions mentioned. Many 
of the answers provided in these pages are founded on theory and 
research and are supported by practical experience. Thus, evidence of 
the performance of the theories is presented via case studies, which 
are designed to assist the readers in determining how such theories 
and proven practices can be applied to their specific organization.
A common theme in this book involves three important terms: 
dynamic , unpredictable , and acceleration . Dynamic  is a term that rep-
resents spontaneous and vibrant things— a motive force. Technology 
behaves with such a force and requires organizations to deal with its 
capabilities. Glasmeier (1997) postulates that technology evolution, 
innovation, and change are dynamic processes. The force then is tech-
nology, and it carries many motives, as we shall see throughout this 
book. Unpredictable  suggests that we cannot plan what will happen 
or will be needed. Many organizational individuals, including execu-
tives, have attempted to predict when, how, or why technology will 
affect their organization. Throughout our recent history, especially 
during the “ digital disruption”  era, we have found that it is difficult, 
if not impossible, to predict how technology will ultimately benefit or 

x xii
Introduction
hurt organizational growth and competitive advantage. I believe that 
technology is volatile and erratic at times. Indeed, harnessing tech-
nology is not at all an exact science; certainly not in the ways in which 
it can and should be used in today’ s modern organization. Finally, I 
use the term acceleration  to convey the way technology is speeding up 
our lives. Not only have emerging technologies created this unpre-
dictable environment of change, but they also continue to change it 
rapidly— even from the demise of the dot-com era decades ago. Thus, 
what becomes important is the need to respond quickly to technology. 
The inability to be responsive to change brought about by technologi-
cal innovations can result in significant competitive disadvantages for 
organizations. 
This new edition shows why this is a fact especially when examining 
the shrinking S-Curve. So, we look at these three words— dynamic, 
unpredictable, and acceleration— as a way to define how technology 
affects organizations; that is, technology is an accelerating motive 
force that occurs irregularly. These words name the challenges that 
organizations need to address if they are to manage technological 
innovations and integrate them with business strategy and competi-
tive advantage. It only makes sense that the challenge of integrating 
technology into business requires us first to understand its potential 
impact, determine how it occurs, and see what is likely to follow. 
There are no quick remedies to dealing with emerging technologies, 
just common practices and sustained processes that must be adopted 
for organizations to survive in the future.
I had four goals in mind in writing this book. First, I am inter-
ested in writing about the challenges of using digital technologies 
strategically. What particularly concerns me is the lack of literature 
that truly addresses this issue. What is also troublesome is the lack 
of reliable techniques for the evaluation of IT, especially since IT 
is used in almost every aspect of business life. So, as we increase 
our use and dependency on technology, we seem to understand less 
about how to measure and validate its outcomes. I also want to 
convey my thoughts about the importance of embracing nonmon-
etary methods for evaluating technology, particularly as they relate 
to determining return on investment. Indeed, indirect and non-
monetary benefits need to be part of the process of assessing and 
approving IT projects.

x xiii
Introduction
Second, I want to apply organizational learning theory to the field 
of IT and use proven learning models to help transform IT staff into 
becoming better members of their organizations. Everyone seems to 
know about the inability of IT people to integrate with other depart-
ments, yet no one has really created a solution to the problem. I find 
that organizational learning techniques are an effective way of coach-
ing IT staff to operate more consistently with the goals of the busi-
nesses that they support.
Third, I want to present cogent theories about IT and organiza-
tional learning; theories that establish new ways for organizations to 
adapt new technologies. I want to share my experiences and those of 
other professionals who have found approaches that can provide posi-
tive outcomes from technology investments.
Fourth, I have decided to express my concerns about the valid-
ity and reliability of organizational learning theories and practices as 
they apply to the field of IT. I find that most of these models need to 
be enhanced to better fit the unique aspects of the digital age. These 
modified models enable the original learning techniques to address 
IT-specific issues. In this way, the organization can develop a more 
holistic approach toward a common goal for using technology.
Certainly, the balance of how technology ties in with strategy is 
essential. However, there has been much debate over whether tech-
nology should drive business strategy or vice versa. We will find that 
the answer to this is “ yes.”  Yes, in the sense that technology can affect 
the way organizations determine their missions and business strate-
gies; but “ no”  in that technology should not be the only component 
for determining mission and strategy. Many managers have realized 
that business is still business, meaning that technology is not a “ sil-
ver bullet.”  The challenge, then, is to determine how best to fit tech-
nology into the process of creating and supporting business strategy. 
Few would doubt today that technology is, indeed, the most signifi-
cant variable affecting business strategy. However, the most viable 
approach is to incorporate technology into the process  of determin-
ing business strategy. I have found that many businesses still formu-
late their strategies first, and then look at technology, as a means to 
efficiently implement objectives and goals. Executives need to better 
understand the unique and important role that technology provides 
us; it can drive business strategy, and support it, at the same time.

x xiv
Introduction
Managers should not solely focus their attention on generating 
breakthrough innovations that will create spectacular results. Most 
good uses of technology are much subtler, and longer-lasting. For this 
reason, this book discusses and defines new technology life cycles 
that blend business strategy and strategic learning. Building on this 
theme, I introduce the idea of responsive organizational dynamism  as 
the core theory of this book. Responsive organizational dynamism 
defines an environment that can respond to the three important 
terms (dynamic, unpredictable, and acceleration). Indeed, technology 
requires organizations that can sustain a system, in which individu-
als can deal with dynamic, unpredictable, and accelerated change, as 
part of their regular process of production. The basis of this concept 
is that organizations must create and sustain such an environment to 
be competitive in a global technologically-driven economy. I further 
analyze responsive organizational dynamism in its two subcompo-
nents: strategic integration and cultural assimilation, which address 
how technology needs to be measured as it relates to business strategy, 
and what related social– structural changes are needed, respectively.
Change is an important principle of this book. I talk about the 
importance of how to change, how to manage such change, and why 
emerging technologies are a significant agent of change. I support 
the need for change, as an opportunity to use many of the learning 
theories that have been historically difficult to implement. That is, 
implementing change brought on by technological innovation is an 
opportunity to make the organization more “ change ready”  or, as we 
define it today, more “ agile.”  However, we also know that little is 
known about how organizations should actually go about modifying 
existing processes to adapt to new technologies and become digital 
entities— and to be accustomed to doing this regularly. Managing 
through such periods of change requires that we develop a model that 
can deal with dynamic, unpredictable, and accelerated change. This is 
what responsive organizational dynamism is designed to do.
We know that over 20% of IT projects still fail to be completed. 
Another 54% fail to meet their projected completion date. We now sit 
at the forefront of another technological spurt of innovations that will 
necessitate major renovations to existing legacy systems, requiring that 
they be linked to sophisticated e-business systems. These e-business 
systems will continue to utilize the Internet, and emerging mobile 

x xv
Introduction
technologies. While we tend to focus primarily on what technology 
generically does, organizations need urgently to prepare themselves 
for the next generation of advances, by forming structures that can 
deal with continued, accelerated change, as the norm of daily opera-
tions. For this edition, I have added new sections and chapters that 
address the digital transformation, ways of dealing with changing 
consumer behavior, the need to form evolving cyber security cultures, 
and the importance of integrating Gen Y employees to accelerate 
competitive advantage.
This book provides answers to a number of dilemmas but ultimately 
offers an imbricate cure for the problem of latency in performance and 
quality afflicting many technologically-based projects. Traditionally, 
management has attempted to improve IT performance by increasing 
technical skills and project manager expertise through new processes. 
While there has been an effort to educate IT managers to become 
more interested and participative in business issues, their involvement 
continues to be based more on service than on strategy. Yet, at the 
heart of the issue is the entirety of the organization. It is my belief that 
many of the programmatic efforts conducted in traditional ways and 
attempting to mature and integrate IT with the rest of the organiza-
tion will continue to deliver disappointing results.
My personal experience goes well beyond research; it draws from 
living and breathing the IT experience for the past 35 years, and 
from an understanding of the dynamics of what occurs inside and 
outside the IT department in most organizations. With such experi-
ence, I can offer a path that engages the participation of the entire 
management team and operations staff of the organization. While 
my vision for this kind of digital transformation is different from 
other approaches, it is consistent with organizational learning theo-
ries that promote the integration of individuals, communities, and 
senior management to participate in more democratic and vision-
ary forms of thinking, reflection, and learning. It is my belief that 
many of the dilemmas presented by IT have existed in other parts of 
organizations for years, and that the Internet revolution only served 
to expose them. If we believe this to be true, then we must begin 
the process of integrating technology into strategic thinking and 
stop depending on IT to provide magical answers, and inappropriate 
expectations of performance. 

x xvi
Introduction
Technology is not the responsibility of any one person or depart-
ment; rather, it is part of the responsibility of every employee. Thus, 
the challenge is to allow organizations to understand how to modify 
their processes, and the roles and responsibilities of their employees, 
to incorporate digital technologies as part of normal workplace activi-
ties. Technology then becomes more a subject and a component of 
discourse. IT staff members need to emerge as specialists who par-
ticipate in decision making, development, and sustained support of 
business evolution. There are also technology-based topics that do 
not require the typical expertise that IT personnel provide. This is 
a literacy issue that requires different ways of thinking and learning 
during the everyday part of operations. For example, using desktop 
tools, communicating via e-mail, and saving files and data, are inte-
gral to everyday operations. These activities affect projects, yet they 
are not really part of the responsibilities of IT departments. Given 
the knowledge that technology is everywhere, we must change the 
approach that we take to be successful. Another way of looking at this 
phenomenon is to define technology more as a commodity, readily 
available to all individuals. This means that the notion of technology 
as organizationally segregated into separate cubes of expertise is prob-
lematic, particularly on a global front. 
Thus, the overall aim of this book is to promote organizational 
learning that disseminates the uses of technology throughout a busi-
ness, so that IT departments are a partner in its use, as opposed to 
being its sole owner. The cure to IT project failure, then, is to engage 
the business in technology decisions in such a way that individuals 
and business units are fundamentally involved in the process. Such 
processes need to be designed to dynamically respond to technology 
opportunities and thus should not be overly bureaucratic. There is a 
balance between establishing organizations that can readily deal with 
technology versus those that become too complex and inefficient.
This balance can only be attained using organizational learning 
techniques as the method to grow and reach technology maturation.
Overview of the Chapters
Chapter  1 provides an important case study of the Ravell Corporation 
(a pseudonym), where I was retained for over five  years. During this 

x xvii
Introduction
period, I applied numerous organizational learning methods toward 
the integration of the IT department with the rest of the organiza-
tion. The chapter allows readers to understand how the theories of 
organizational learning can be applied in actual practice, and how 
those theories are particularly beneficial to the IT community. The 
chapter also shows the practical side of how learning techniques can 
be linked to measurable outcomes, and ultimately related to business 
strategy. This concept will become the basis of integrating learning 
with strategy (i.e., “ strategic learning” ). The Ravell case study also 
sets the tone of what I call the IT dilemma, which represents the 
core problem faced by organizations today. Furthermore, the Ravell 
case study becomes the cornerstone example throughout the book and 
is used to relate many of the theories of learning and their practical 
applicability in organizations. The Ravell case has also been updated 
in this second edition to include recent results that support the impor-
tance of alignment with the human resources department.
Chapter  2 presents the details of the IT dilemma. This chapter 
addresses issues such as isolation of IT staff, which results in their 
marginalization from the rest of the organization. I explain that while 
executives want technology to be an important part of business strat-
egy, few understand how to accomplish it. In general, I show that 
individuals have a lack of knowledge about how technology and busi-
ness strategy can, and should, be linked, to form common business 
objectives. The chapter provides the results of a three-year study of 
how chief executives link the role of technology with business strat-
egy. The study captures information relating to how chief executives 
perceive the role of IT, how they manage it, and use it strategically, 
and the way they measure IT performance and activities.
Chapter  3 focuses on defining how organizations need to respond 
to the challenges posed by technology. I analyze technological dyna-
mism in its core components so that readers understand the different 
facets that comprise its many applications. I begin by presenting tech-
nology as a dynamic variable  that is capable of affecting organizations 
in a unique way. I specifically emphasize the unpredictability of tech-
nology, and its capacity to accelerate change— ultimately concluding 
that technology, as an independent variable, has a dynamic effect on 
organizational development. This chapter also introduces my theory 
of responsive organizational dynamism, defined as a disposition in 

x xviii
Introduction
organizational behavior that can respond to the demands of tech-
nology as a dynamic variable. I establish two core components of 
responsive organizational dynamism: strategic integration  and cultural 
assimilation . Each of these components is designed to tackle a specific 
problem introduced by technology. Strategic integration addresses the 
way in which organizations determine how to use technology as part 
of business strategy. Cultural assimilation, on the other hand, seeks 
to answer how the organization, both structurally and culturally, will 
accommodate the actual human resources of an IT staff and depart-
ment within the process of implementing new technologies. Thus, 
strategic integration will require organizational changes in terms of 
cultural assimilation. The chapter also provides a perspective of the 
technology life cycle so that readers can see how responsive organi-
zational dynamism is applied, on an IT project basis. Finally, I define 
the driver and supporter functions of IT and how these contribute to 
managing technology life cycles.
Chapter  4 introduces theories on organizational learning, and 
applies them specifically to responsive organizational dynamism. I 
emphasize that organizational learning must result in individual, and 
organizational transformation, that leads to measurable performance 
outcomes. The chapter defines a number of organizational learning 
theories, such as reflective practices, learning organization, communi-
ties of practice, learning preferences and experiential learning, social 
discourse, and the use of language. These techniques and approaches 
to promoting organizational learning are then configured into various 
models that can be used to assess individual and organizational devel-
opment. Two important models are designed to be used in responsive 
organizational dynamism: the applied individual learning wheel and 
the technology maturity arc. These models lay the foundation for my 
position that learning maturation involves a steady linear progression 
from an individual focus toward a system or organizational perspec-
tive. The chapter also addresses implementation issues— political 
challenges that can get in the way of successful application of the 
learning theories.
Chapter  5 explores the role of management in creating and sustain-
ing responsive organizational dynamism. I define the tiers of middle 
management in relation to various theories of management partici-
pation in organizational learning. The complex issues of whether 

x xix
Introduction
organizational learning needs to be managed from the top down, 
bottom up, or middle-top-down are discussed and applied to a model 
that operates in responsive organizational dynamism. This chapter 
takes into account the common three-tier structure in which most 
organizations operate: executive, middle, and operations. The execu-
tive level includes the chief executive officer (CEO), president, and 
senior vice presidents. The middle is the most complex, ranging from 
vice president/director to supervisory roles. Operations covers what is 
commonly known as “ staff,”  including clerical functions. The knowl-
edge that I convey suggests that all of these tiers need to participate in 
management, including operations personnel, via a self-development 
model. The chapter also presents the notion that knowledge manage-
ment is necessary to optimize competitive advantage, particularly as 
it involves transforming tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge. I 
view the existing theories on knowledge management, create a hybrid 
model that embraces technology issues, and map them to responsive 
organizational dynamism. Discussions on change management are 
included as a method of addressing the unique ways that technol-
ogy affects product development. Essentially, I tie together respon-
sive organizational dynamism with organizational change theory, by 
offering modifications to generally accepted theories. There is also a 
specific model created for IT organizations, that maps onto organi-
zational-level concepts. Although I have used technology as the basis 
for the need for responsive organizational dynamism, I show that the 
needs for its existence can be attributed to any variable that requires 
dynamic change. As such, I suggest that readers begin to think about 
the next “ technology”  or variable that can cause the same needs to 
occur inside organizations. The chapter has been extended to address 
the impact of social networking and the leadership opportunities it 
provides to technology executives.
Chapter  6 examines how organizational transformation occurs. 
The primary focus of the chapter is to integrate transformation theory 
with responsive organizational dynamism. The position taken is that 
organizational learning techniques must inevitably result in orga-
nizational transformation. Discussions on transformation are often 
addressed at organizational level, as opposed to focusing on individual 
development. As in other sections of the book, I extend a number 
of theories so that they can operate under the auspices of responsive 

x x x
Introduction
organizational dynamism, specifically, the works of Yorks and Marsick 
(2000) and Aldrich (2001). I expand organizational transformation 
to include ongoing assessment within technology deliverables. This 
is accomplished through the use of a modified Balanced Scorecard 
originally developed by Kaplan and Norton (2001). The Balanced 
Scorecard becomes the vehicle for establishing a strategy-focused and 
technology-based organization.
Chapter  7 deals with the many business transformation projects 
that require outsource arrangements and virtual team management. 
This chapter provides an understanding of when and how to consider 
outsourcing and the intricacies of considerations once operating with 
virtual teams. I cover such issues as management considerations and 
the challenges of dealing in multiple locations. The chapter extends the 
models discussed in previous chapters so that they can be aligned with 
operating in a virtual team environment. Specifically, this includes 
communities of practice, social discourse, self-development, knowl-
edge management, and, of course, responsive organizational dyna-
mism and its corresponding maturity arcs. Furthermore, I expand the 
conversation to include IT and non-IT personnel, and the arguments 
for the further support needed to integrate all functions across the 
organization.
Chapter  8 presents updated case studies that demonstrate how my 
organizational learning techniques are actually applied in practice. 
Three case studies are presented: Siemens AG, ICAP, and HTC. 
Siemens AG is a diverse international company with 20 discrete 
businesses in over 190 countries. The case study offers a perspec-
tive of how a corporate chief information officer (CIO) introduced 
e-­business strategy. ICAP is a leading international money and secu-
rity broker. This case study follows the activities of the electronic trad-
ing community (ETC) entity, and how the CEO transformed the 
organization and used organizational learning methods to improve 
competitive advantage. HTC (a pseudonym) provides an example of 
why the chief IT executive should report to the CEO, and how a 
CEO can champion specific projects to help transform organizational 
norms and behaviors. This case study also maps the transformation of 
the company to actual examples of strategic advantage.
Chapter  9 focuses on the challenges of forming a “ cyber security”  
culture. The growing challenges of protecting companies from outside 

x x xi
Introduction
attacks have established the need to create a cyber security culture. 
This chapter addresses the ways in which information technology 
organizations must further integrate with business operations, so 
that their firms are better equipped to protect against outside threats. 
Since the general consensus is that no system can be 100% protected, 
and that most system compromises occur as a result of internal expo-
sures, information technology leaders must educate employees on 
best practices to limit cyberattacks. Furthermore, while prevention is 
the objective, organizations must be internally prepared to deal with 
attacks and thus have processes in place should a system become pen-
etrated by third-party agents.
Chapter  10 explores the effects of the digital global economy on 
the ways in which organizations need to respond to the consumeriza-
tion of products and services. From this perspective, digital transfor-
mation involves a type of social reengineering that affects the ways in 
which organizations communicate internally, and how they consider 
restructuring departments. Digital transformation also affects the 
risks that organizations must take in what has become an accelerated 
changing consumer market.
Chapter  11 provides conclusions and focuses on Gen Y employ-
ees who are known as “ digital natives”  and represent the new supply 
chain of talent. Gen Y employees possess the attributes to assist com-
panies to transform their workforce to meet the accelerated change in 
the competitive landscape. Most executives across industries recog-
nize that digital technologies are the most powerful variable to main-
taining and expanding company markets. Gen Y employees provide a 
natural fit for dealing with emerging digital technologies. However, 
success with integrating Gen Y employees is contingent upon Baby 
Boomer and Gen X management adopting new leadership philoso-
phies and procedures suited to meet the expectations and needs of 
these new workers. Ignoring the unique needs of Gen Y employees 
will likely result in an incongruent organization that suffers high 
turnover of young employees who will ultimately seek a more entre-
preneurial environment.
Chapter  12 seeks to define best practices to implement and sus-
tain responsive organizational dynamism. The chapter sets forth a 
model that creates separate, yet linked, best practices and maturity 
arcs that can be used to assess stages of the learning development 

x x xii
Introduction
of the chief IT executive, the CEO, and the middle management. I 
discuss the concept of common threads , by which each best practices 
arc links through common objectives and outcomes to the responsive 
organizational dynamism maturity arc presented in Chapter  4. Thus, 
these arcs represent an integrated and hierarchical view of how each 
component of the organization contributes to overall best practices. A 
new section has been added that links ethics to technology leadership 
and maturity.
Chapter  13 summarizes the many aspects of how IT and organi-
zational learning operate together to support the responsive organi-
zational dynamism environment. The chapter emphasizes the specific 
key themes developed in the book, such as evolution versus revolu-
tion; control and empowerment; driver and supporter operations; and 
responsive organizational dynamism and self-generating organiza-
tions. Finally, I provide an overarching framework for “ organizing”  
reflection and integrate it with the best practices arcs.
As a final note, I need to clarify my use of the words information 
technology, digital technology,  and technology.  In many parts of the book, 
they are used interchangeably, although there is a defined difference. 
Of course, not all technology is related to information or digital; some 
is based on machinery or the like. For the purposes of this book, the 
reader should assume that IT and digital technology are the primary 
variables that I am addressing. However, the theories and processes 
that I offer can be scaled to all types of technological innovation.

1
1
The “Ravell” Corporation
Introduction
Launching into an explanation of information technology (IT), 
organizational learning, and the practical relationship into which I 
propose to bring them is a challenging topic to undertake. I choose, 
therefore, to begin this discussion by presenting an actual case study 
that exemplifies many key issues pertaining to organizational learn-
ing, and how it can be used to improve the performance of an IT 
department. Specifically, this chapter summarizes a case study of 
the IT department at the Ravell Corporation (a pseudonym) in New 
York City. I was retained as a consultant at the company to improve 
the performance of the department and to solve a mounting politi-
cal problem involving IT and its relation to other departments. The 
case offers an example of how the growth of a company as a “learn-
ing ­organization”—one in which employees are constantly learning 
during the normal workday (Argyris, 1993; Watkins & Marsick, 
1993)—­utilized reflective practices to help it achieve the practical stra-
tegic goals it sought. Individuals in learning organizations integrate 
processes of learning into their work. Therefore, a learning organiza-
tion must advocate a system that allows its employees to interact, ask 
questions, and provide insight to the business. The learning organiza-
tion will ultimately promote systematic thinking, and the building 
of organizational memory (Watkins & Marsick, 1993). A learning 
organization (discussed more fully in Chapter  4) is a component of 
the larger topic of organizational learning.
The Ravell Corporation is a firm with over 500 employees who, 
over the years, had become dependent on the use of technology to 
run its business. Its IT department, like that of many other compa-
nies, was isolated from the rest of the business and was regarded as 
a peripheral entity whose purpose was simply to provide technical 
support. This was accompanied by actual physical isolation—IT was 

2
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
placed in a contained and secure location away from mainstream 
operations. As a result, IT staff rarely engaged in active discourse 
with other staff members unless specific meetings were called relat-
ing to a particular project. The Ravell IT department, therefore, was 
not part of the community of organizational learning—it did not 
have the opportunity to learn along with the rest of the organiza-
tion, and it was never asked to provide guidance in matters of gen-
eral relevance to the business as a whole. This marginalized status 
resulted in an us-versus-them attitude on the part of IT and non-IT 
personnel alike. 
Much has been written about the negative impact of marginal-
ization on individuals who are part of communities. Schlossberg 
(1989) researched adults in various settings and how marginal-
ization affected their work and self-efficacy. Her theory on mar-
ginalization and mattering is applied to this case study because of 
its relevance and similarity to her prior research. For example, IT 
represents similar characteristics to a separate group on a college 
campus or in a workplace environment. Its physical isolation can 
also be related to how marginalized groups move away from the 
majority population and function without contact. The IT direc-
tor, in particular, had cultivated an adversarial relationship with his 
peers. The director had shaped a department that fueled his view of 
separation. This had the effect of further marginalizing the posi-
tion of IT within the organization. Hand in hand with this form of 
separatism came a sense of actual dislike on the part of IT personnel 
for other employees. IT staff members were quick to point fingers 
at others and were often noncommunicative with members of other 
departments within the organization. As a result of this kind of 
behavior, many departments lost confidence in the ability of IT to 
provide support; indeed, the quality of support that IT furnished 
had begun to deteriorate. Many departments at Ravell began to hire 
their own IT support personnel and were determined to create their 
own information systems subdepartments. This situation eventually 
became unacceptable to management, and the IT director was ter-
minated. An initiative was begun to refocus the department and its 
position within the organization. I was retained to bring about this 
change and to act as the IT director until a structural transforma-
tion of the department was complete.

3
The “Ravell” Corporation
A New Approach
My mandate at Ravell was initially unclear—I was to “fix” the 
­problem; the specific solution was left up to me to design and imple-
ment. My goal became one of finding a way to integrate IT fully into 
the organizational culture at Ravell. Without such integration, IT 
would remain isolated, and no amount of “fixing” around this issue 
would address the persistence of what was, as well, a cultural prob-
lem. Unless IT became a true part of the organization as a whole, 
the entire IT staff could be replaced without any real change having 
occurred from the organization’s perspective. That is, just replacing 
the entire IT staff was an acceptable solution to senior management. 
The fact that this was acceptable suggested to me that the knowledge 
and value contained in the IT department did not exist or was mis-
understood by the senior management of the firm. In my opinion, 
just eliminating a marginalized group was not a solution because I 
expected that such knowledge and value did exist, and that it needed 
to be investigated properly. Thus, I rejected management’s option and 
began to formulate a plan to better understand the contributions that 
could be made by the IT department. The challenge was threefold: to 
improve the work quality of the IT department (a matter of perfor-
mance), to help the department begin to feel itself a part of the orga-
nization as a whole and vice versa (a matter of cultural assimilation), 
and to persuade the rest of the organization to accept the IT staff as 
equals who could contribute to the overall direction and growth of the 
organization (a fundamental matter of strategic integration).
My first step was to gather information. On my assignment to the 
position of IT director, I quickly arranged a meeting with the IT 
department to determine the status and attitudes of its personnel. 
The IT staff meeting included the chief financial officer (CFO), to 
whom IT reported. At this meeting, I explained the reasons behind 
the changes occurring in IT management. Few questions were asked; 
as a result, I immediately began scheduling individual meetings with 
each of the IT employees. These employees varied in terms of their 
position within the corporate hierarchy, in terms of salary, and in 
terms of technical expertise. The purpose of the private meetings was 
to allow IT staff members to speak openly, and to enable me to hear 
their concerns. I drew on the principles of action science, pioneered 

4
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
by Argyris and Schö n (1996), designed to promote individual self-
reflection regarding behavior patterns, and to encourage a produc-
tive exchange among individuals. Action science encompasses a range 
of methods to help individuals learn how to be reflective about their 
actions. By reflecting, individuals can better understand the outcomes 
of their actions and, especially, how they are seen by others. This was 
an important approach because I felt learning had to start at the indi-
vidual level as opposed to attempting group learning activities. It was 
my hope that the discussions I orchestrated would lead the IT staff to 
a better understanding than they had previously shown, not only of 
the learning process itself, but also of the significance of that process. 
I pursued these objectives by guiding them to detect problem areas in 
their work and to undertake a joint effort to correct them (Argyris, 
1993; Arnett, 1992). 
Important components of reflective learning are single-loop and 
double-loop learning. Single-loop learning requires individuals to 
reflect on a prior action or habit that needs to be changed in the future 
but does not require individuals to change their operational proce-
dures with regard to values and norms. Double-loop learning, on the 
other hand, does require both change in behavior and change in oper-
ational procedures. For example, people who engage in double-loop 
learning may need to adjust how they perform their job, as opposed to 
just the way they communicate with others, or, as Argyris and Schö n 
(1996, p. 22) state, “the correction of error requires inquiry through 
which organizational values and norms themselves are modified.”
Despite my efforts and intentions, not all of the exchanges were 
destined to be successful. Many of the IT staff members felt that the 
IT director had been forced out, and that there was consequently 
no support for the IT function in the organization. There was also 
clear evidence of internal political division within the IT department; 
members openly criticized each other. Still other interviews resulted 
in little communication. This initial response from IT staff was disap-
pointing, and I must admit I began to doubt whether these learning 
methods would be an antidote for the department. Replacing people 
began to seem more attractive, and I now understood why many man-
agers prefer to replace staff, as opposed to investing in their transfor-
mation. However, I also knew that learning is a gradual process and 
that it would take time and trust to see results.

5
The “Ravell” Corporation
I realized that the task ahead called for nothing short of a total cul-
tural transformation of the IT organization at Ravell. Members of the 
IT staff had to become flexible and open if they were to become more 
trusting of one another and more reflective as a group (Garvin, 2000; 
Schein, 1992). Furthermore, they had to have an awareness of their 
history, and they had to be willing to institute a vision of partnering 
with the user community. An important part of the process for me 
was to accept the fact that the IT staff were not habitually inclined to 
be reflective. My goal then was to create an environment that would 
foster reflective learning, which would in turn enable a change in 
individual and organizational values and norms (Senge, 1990).
The Blueprint for Integration
Based on information drawn from the interviews, I developed a pre-
liminary plan to begin to integrate IT into the day-to-day operations 
at Ravell, and to bring IT personnel into regular contact with other 
staff members. According to Senge (1990), the most productive learn-
ing occurs when skills are combined in the activities of advocacy and 
inquiry. My hope was to encourage both among the staff at Ravell. The 
plan for integration and assimilation involved assigning IT resources 
to each department; that is, following the logic of the self-dissemina-
tion of technology, each department would have its own dedicated IT 
person to support it. However, just assigning a person was not enough, 
so I added the commitment to actually relocate an IT person into each 
physical area. This way, rather than clustering together in an area of 
their own, IT people would be embedded throughout the organiza-
tion, getting first-hand exposure to what other departments did, and 
learning how to make an immediate contribution to the productiv-
ity of these departments. The on-site IT person in each department 
would have the opportunity to observe problems when they arose—
and hence, to seek ways to prevent them—and, significantly, to share 
in the sense of accomplishment when things went well. To reinforce 
their commitment to their respective areas, I specified that IT person-
nel were to report not only to me but also to the line manager in their 
respective departments. In addition, these line managers were to have 
input on the evaluation of IT staff. I saw that making IT staff offi-
cially accountable to the departments they worked with was a tangible 

6
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
way to raise their level of commitment to the organization. I hoped 
that putting line managers in a supervisory position, would help build 
a sense of teamwork between IT and non-IT personnel. Ultimately, 
the focus of this approach was to foster the creation of a tolerant and 
supportive cultural climate for IT within the various departments; an 
important corollary goal here was also to allow reflective reviews of 
performance to flourish (Garvin, 1993).
Enlisting Support 
Support for this plan had to be mustered quickly if I was to create an 
environment of trust. I had to reestablish the need for the IT func-
tion within the company, show that it was critical for the company’s 
business operations, and show that its integration posed a unique 
challenge to the company. However, it was not enough just for me 
to claim this. I also had to enlist key managers to claim it. Indeed, 
employees will cooperate only if they believe that self-assessment and 
critical thinking are valued by management (Garvin, 2000). I decided 
to embark on a process of arranging meetings with specific line man-
agers in the organization. I selected individuals who would represent 
the day-to-day management of the key departments. If I could get 
their commitment to work with IT, I felt it could provide the stimulus 
we needed. Some line managers were initially suspicious of the effort 
because of their prior experiences with IT. However, they generally 
liked the idea of integration and assimilation that was presented to 
them, and agreed to support it, at least on a trial basis.
Predictably, the IT staff were less enthusiastic about the idea. Many 
of them felt threatened, fearing that they were about to lose their 
independence or lose the mutual support that comes from being in a 
cohesive group. I had hoped that holding a series of meetings would 
help me gain support for the restructuring concept. I had to be care-
ful to ensure that the staff members would feel that they also had an 
opportunity to develop a plan, that they were confident would work. 
During a number of group sessions, we discussed various scenarios of 
how such a plan might work. I emphasized the concepts of integra-
tion and assimilation, and that a program of their implementation 
would be experimental. Without realizing it, I had engaged IT staff 
members in a process of self-governance. Thus, I empowered them 

7
The “Ravell” Corporation
to feel comfortable with voicing new ideas, without being concerned 
that they might be openly criticized by me if I did not agree. This pro-
cess also encouraged individuals to begin thinking more as a group. 
Indeed, by directing the practice of constructive criticism among 
the IT staff, I had hoped to elicit a higher degree of reflective action 
among the group and to show them that they had the ability to learn 
from one another as well as the ability to design their own roles in the 
organization (Argyris, 1993). Their acceptance of physical integration 
and, hence, cultural assimilation became a necessary condition for 
the ability of the IT group, to engage in greater reflective behavior 
(Argyris & Schö n, 1996).
Assessing Progress
The next issue concerned individual feedback. How was I to let each 
person know how he or she was doing? I decided first, to get feedback 
from the larger organizational community. This was accomplished 
by meeting with the line managers and obtaining whatever feed-
back was available from them. I was surprised at the large quantity 
of information they were willing to offer. The line managers were not 
shy about participating, and their input allowed me to complete two 
objectives: (1) to understand how the IT staff was being perceived in 
its new assignment and (2) to create a social and reflective relation-
ship between IT individuals and the line managers. The latter objec-
tive was significant, for if we were to be successful, the line managers 
would have to assist us in the effort to integrate and assimilate IT 
functions within their community.
After the discussions with managers were completed, individual 
meetings were held with each IT staff member to discuss the feedback. 
I chose not to attribute the feedback to specific line managers but rather 
to address particular issues by conveying the general consensus about 
them. Mixed feelings were also disclosed by the IT staff. After convey-
ing the information, I listened attentively to the responses of IT staff 
members. Not surprisingly, many of them responded to the feedback 
negatively and defensively. Some, for example, felt that many technology 
users were unreasonable in their expectations of IT. It was important for 
me as facilitator not to find blame among them, particularly if I was to 
be a participant in the learning organization (Argyris & Schö n, 1996).

8
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Resistance in the Ranks
Any major organizational transformation is bound to elicit resistance 
from some employees. The initiative at Ravell proved to be no excep-
tion. Employees are not always sincere, and some individuals will 
engage in political behavior that can be detrimental to any organiza-
tional learning effort. Simply put, they are not interested in partici-
pating, or, as Marsick (1998) states, “It would be naï ve to expect that 
everyone is willing to play on an even field (i.e., fairly).” Early in the 
process, the IT department became concerned that its members spent 
much of their time trying to figure out how best to position themselves 
for the future instead of attending to matters at hand. I heard from 
other employees that the IT staff felt that they would live through my 
tenure; that is, just survive until a permanent IT director was hired. It 
became difficult at times to elicit the truth from some members of the 
IT staff. These individuals would skirt around issues and deny making 
statements that were reported by other employees rather than con-
front problems head on. Some IT staff members would criticize me in 
front of other groups and use the criticism as proof that the plan for 
a general integration was bound to fail. I realized in a most tangible 
sense that pursuing change through reflective practice does not come 
without resistance, and that this resistance needs to be factored into 
the planning of any such organizationally transformative initiative.
Line Management to the Rescue
At the time that we were still working through the resistance within 
IT, the plan to establish a relationship with line management began 
to work. A number of events occurred that allowed me to be directly 
involved in helping certain groups solve their IT problems. Word 
spread quickly that there was a new direction in IT that could be 
trusted. Line management support is critical for success in such trans-
formational situations. First, line management is typically comprised 
of people from the ranks of supervisors and middle managers, who are 
responsible for the daily operations of their department. Assuming 
they do their jobs, senior management will cater to their needs and 
listen to their feedback. The line management of any organiza-
tion, necessarily engaged to some degree in the process of learning 

9
The “Ravell” Corporation
(a “learning organization”), is key to its staff. Specifically, line manag-
ers are responsible for operations personnel; at the same time, they 
must answer to senior management. Thus, they understand both exec-
utive and operations perspectives of the business (Garvin, 2000). They 
are often former staff members themselves and usually have a high 
level of technical knowledge. Upper management, while important 
for financial support, has little effect at the day-to-day level, yet this is 
the level at which the critical work of integration and the building of 
a single learning community must be done.
Interestingly, the line management organization had previously 
had no shortage of IT-related problems. Many of these line managers 
had been committed to developing their own IT staffs; however, they 
quickly realized that the exercise was beyond their expertise, and that 
they needed guidance and leadership. Their participation in IT staff 
meetings had begun to foster a new trust in the IT department, and 
they began to see the possibilities of working closely with IT to solve 
their problems. Their support began to turn toward what Watkins and 
Marsick (1993, p. 117) call “creating alignment by placing the vision 
in the hands of autonomous, cross-functional synergetic teams.” The 
combination of IT and non-IT teams began to foster a synergy among 
the communities, which established new ideas about how best to use 
technology.
IT Begins to Reflect
Although it was initially difficult for some staff members to accept, 
they soon realized that providing feedback opened the door to the 
process of self-reflection within IT. We undertook a number of exer-
cises, to help IT personnel understand how non-IT personnel per-
ceived them, and how their own behavior may have contributed to 
these perceptions. To foster self-reflection, I adopted a technique 
developed by Argyris called “the left-hand column.” In this technique, 
individuals use the right-hand column of a piece of paper to transcribe 
dialogues that they felt had not resulted in effective communication. 
In the left-hand column of the same page, participants are to write 
what they were really thinking at the time of the dialogue but did not 
say. This exercise is designed to reveal underlying assumptions that 
speakers may not be aware of during their exchanges and that may be 

10
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
impeding their communication with others by giving others a wrong 
impression. The exercise was extremely useful in helping IT personnel 
understand how others in the organization perceived them.
Most important, the development of reflective skills, according to 
Schö n (1983), starts with an individual’s ability to recognize “leaps 
of abstraction”—the unconscious and often inaccurate generalizations 
people make about others based on incomplete information. In the 
case of Ravell, such generalizations were deeply entrenched among its 
various personnel sectors. Managers tended to assume that IT staffers 
were “just techies,” and that they therefore held fundamentally differ-
ent values and had little interest in the organization as a whole. For 
their part, the IT personnel were quick to assume that non-IT people 
did not understand or appreciate the work they did. Exposing these 
“leaps of abstraction” was key to removing the roadblocks that pre-
vented Ravell from functioning as an integrated learning organization.
Defining an Identity for Information Technology
It was now time to start the process of publicly defining the identity 
of IT. Who were we, and what was our purpose? Prior to this time, 
IT had no explicit mission. Instead, its members had worked on an 
ad hoc  basis, putting out fires and never fully feeling that their work 
had contributed to the growth or development of the organization as 
a whole. This sense of isolation made it difficult for IT members to 
begin to reflect on what their mission should or could be. I organized 
a series of meetings to begin exploring the question of a mission, and I 
offered support by sharing exemplary IT mission statements that were 
being implemented in other organizations. The focus of the meetings 
was not on convincing them to accept any particular idea but rather to 
facilitate a reflective exercise with a group that was undertaking such 
a task for the first time (Senge, 1990).
The identity that emerged for the IT department at Ravell was dif-
ferent from the one implicit in their past role. Our new mission would 
be to provide technical support and technical direction to the organi-
zation. Of necessity, IT personnel would remain specialists, but they 
were to be specialists who could provide guidance to other depart-
ments in addition to helping them solve and prevent problems. As 
they became more intimately familiar with what different departments 

11
The “Ravell” Corporation
did—and how these departments contributed to the organization as a 
whole—IT professionals would be able to make better informed rec-
ommendations. The vision was that IT people would grow from being 
staff who fixed things into team members who offered their expertise 
to help shape the strategic direction of the organization and, in the 
process, participate fully in organizational growth and learning.
To begin to bring this vision to life, I invited line managers to 
attend our meetings. I had several goals in mind with this invita-
tion. Of course, I wanted to increase contact between IT and non-IT 
people; beyond this, I wanted to give IT staff an incentive to change 
by making them feel a part of the organization as a whole. I also got 
a commitment from IT staff that we would not cover up our prob-
lems during the sessions, but would deal with all issues with trust 
and honesty. I also believed that the line managers would reciprocate 
and allow us to attend their staff meetings. A number of IT indi-
viduals were concerned that my approach would only further expose 
our problems with regard to quality performance, but the group as 
a whole felt compelled to stick with the beliefs that honesty would 
always prevail over politics. Having gained insight into how the rest of 
the organization perceived them, IT staff members had to learn how 
to deal with disagreement and how to build consensus to move an 
agenda forward. Only then could reflection and action be intimately 
intertwined so that after-the-fact reviews could be replaced with peri-
ods of learning and doing (Garvin, 2000).
The meetings were constructive, not only in terms of content issues 
handled in the discussions, but also in terms of the number of line 
managers who attended them. Their attendance sent a strong message 
that the IT function was important to them, and that they under-
stood that they also had to participate in the new direction that IT 
was taking. The sessions also served as a vehicle to demonstrate how 
IT could become socially assimilated within all the functions of the 
community while maintaining its own identity.
The meetings were also designed as a venue for group members to 
be critical of themselves. The initial meetings were not successful in 
this regard; at first, IT staff members spent more time blaming oth-
ers than reflecting on their own behaviors and attitudes. These ses-
sions were difficult in that I would have to raise unpopular questions 
and ask whether the staff had truly “looked in the mirror” concerning 

12
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
some of the problems at hand. For example, one IT employee found 
it difficult to understand why a manager from another department 
was angry about the time it took to get a problem resolved with his 
computer. The problem had been identified and fixed within an hour, 
a time frame that most IT professionals would consider very respon-
sive. As we looked into the reasons why the manager could have been 
justified in his anger, it emerged that the manager had a tight deadline 
to meet. In this situation, being without his computer for an hour was 
a serious problem.
Although under normal circumstances a response time of one hour 
is good, the IT employee had failed to ask about the manager’s par-
ticular circumstance. On reflection, the IT employee realized that 
putting himself in the position of the people he was trying to support 
would enable him to do his job better. In this particular instance, had 
the IT employee only understood the position of the manager, there 
were alternative ways of resolving the problem that could have been 
implemented much more quickly.
Implementing the Integration: A Move toward Trust and Reflection
As communication became more open, a certain synergy began to 
develop in the IT organization. Specifically, there was a palpable rise 
in the level of cooperation and agreement, with regard to the over-
all goals set during these meetings. This is not to suggest that there 
were no disagreements but rather that discussions tended to be more 
constructive in helping the group realize its objective of providing 
outstanding technology support to the organization. The IT staff 
also felt freer to be self-reflective by openly discussing their ideas and 
their mistakes. The involvement of the departmental line manag-
ers also gave IT staff members the support they needed to carry out 
the change. Slowly, there developed a shift in behavior in which the 
objectives of the group sharpened its focus on the transformation of 
the department, on its acknowledgment of successes and failures, and 
on acquiring new knowledge, to advance the integration of IT into 
the core business units.
Around this time, an event presented itself that I felt would allow 
the IT department to establish its new credibility and authority to 
the other departments: the physical move of the organization to a 

13
The “Ravell” Corporation
new location. The move was to be a major event, not only because 
it ­represented the relocation of over 500 people and the technologi-
cal infrastructure they used on a day-to-day basis, but also because 
the move was to include the transition of the media communications 
systems of the company, to digital technology. The move required 
tremendous technological work, and the organization decided to 
perform a “technology acceleration,” meaning that new technology 
would be introduced more quickly because of the opportunity pre-
sented by the move. The entire moving process was to take a year, and 
I was immediately summoned to work with the other departments in 
determining the best plan to accomplish the transition.
For me, the move became an emblematic event for the IT group at 
Ravell. It would provide the means by which to test the creation of, 
and the transitioning into, a learning organization. It was also to pro-
vide a catalyst for the complete integration and assimilation of IT into 
the organization as a whole. The move represented the introduction 
of unfamiliar processes in which “conscious reflection is … necessary 
if lessons are to be learned” (Garvin, 2000, p. 100). I temporarily 
reorganized IT employees into “SWAT” teams (subgroups formed 
to deal with defined problems in high-pressure environments), so 
that they could be eminently consumed in the needs of their com-
munity partners. Dealing with many crisis situations helped the IT 
department change the existing culture by showing users how to bet-
ter deal with technology issues in their everyday work environment. 
Indeed, because of the importance of technology in the new location, 
the core business had an opportunity to embrace our knowledge and 
to learn from us.
The move presented new challenges every day, and demanded 
openness and flexibility from everyone. Some problems required that 
IT listen intently to understand and meet the needs of its commu-
nity partners. Other situations put IT in the role of teaching; assess-
ing needs and explaining to other departments what was technically 
possible, and then helping them to work out compromises based on 
technical limitations. Suggestions for IT improvement began to come 
from all parts of the organization. Ideas from others were embraced 
by IT, demonstrating that employees throughout the organization 
were learning together. IT staff behaved assertively and without fear 
of failure, suggesting that, perhaps for the first time, their role had 

14
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
extended beyond that of fixing what was broken to one of helping 
to guide the organization forward into the future. Indeed, the move 
established the kind of “special problem” that provided an opportunity 
for growth in personal awareness through reflection (Moon, 1999).
The move had proved an ideal laboratory for implementing the 
IT integration and assimilation plan. It provided real and important 
opportunities for IT to work hand in hand with other departments—
all focusing on shared goals. The move fostered tremendous cama-
raderie within the organization and became an excellent catalyst for 
teaching reflective behavior. It was, if you will, an ideal project in 
which to show how reflection in action can allow an entire organiza-
tion to share in the successful attainment of a common goal. Because 
it was a unique event, everyone—IT and non-IT personnel alike—
made mistakes, but this time, there was virtually no finger-pointing. 
People accepted responsibility collectively and cooperated in finding 
solutions. When the company recommenced operations from its new 
location—on time and according to schedule—no single group could 
claim credit for the success; it was universally recognized that success 
had been the result of an integrated effort.
Key Lessons 
The experience of the reorganization of the IT department at Ravell 
can teach us some key lessons with respect to the cultural transforma-
tion and change of marginalized technical departments, generally.
Defining Reflection and Learning for an Organization 
IT personnel tend to view learning as a vocational event. They gener-
ally look to increase their own “technical” knowledge by attending 
special training sessions and programs. However, as Kegan (1998) 
reminds us, there must be more: “Training is really insufficient as a 
sole diet of education—it is, in reality a subset of education.” True 
education involves transformation, and transformation, according to 
Kegan, is the willingness to take risks, to “get out of the bedroom of 
our comfortable world.” In my work at Ravell, I tried to augment this 
“diet” by embarking on a project that delivered both vocational train-
ing and education through reflection. Each IT staff person was given 

15
The “Ravell” Corporation
one week of technical training per year to provide vocational develop-
ment. But beyond this, I instituted weekly learning sessions in which 
IT personnel would meet without me and produce a weekly memo of 
“reflection.” The goal of this practice was to promote dialogue, in the 
hope that IT would develop a way to deal with its fears and mistakes 
on its own. Without knowing it, I had begun the process of creating 
a discursive community in which social interactions could act as insti-
gators of reflective behavior leading to change.
Working toward a Clear Goal 
The presence of clearly defined, measurable, short-term objectives 
can greatly accelerate the process of developing a “learning organiza-
tion” through reflective practice. At Ravell, the move into new physi-
cal quarters provided a common organizational goal toward which 
all participants could work. This goal fostered cooperation among IT 
and non-IT employees and provided an incentive for everyone to work 
and, consequently, learn together. Like an athletic team before an 
important game, or even an army before battle, the IT staff at Ravell 
rallied around a cause and were able to use reflective practices to help 
meet their goals. The move also represented what has been termed an 
“eye-opening event,” one that can trigger a better understanding of a 
culture whose differences challenge one’s presuppositions (Mezirow, 
1990). It is important to note, though, that while the move accelerated 
the development of the learning organization as such, the move itself 
would not have been enough to guarantee the successes that followed 
it. Simply setting a deadline is no substitute for undergoing the kind 
of transformation necessary for a consummately reflective process. 
Only as the culmination of a process of analysis, socialization, and 
trust building, can an event like this speed the growth of a learning 
organization.
Commitment to Quality 
Apart from the social challenges it faced in merging into the core 
business, the IT group also had problems with the quality of its out-
put. Often, work was not performed in a professional manner. IT 
organizations often suffer from an inability to deliver on schedule, 

16
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and Ravell was no exception. The first step in addressing the qual-
ity problem, was to develop IT’s awareness of the importance of the 
problem, not only in my estimation but in that of the entire company. 
The IT staff needed to understand how technology affected the day-
to-day operations of the entire company. One way to start the dia-
logue on quality is to first initiate one about failures. If something was 
late, for instance, I asked why. Rather than addressing the problems 
from a destructive perspective (Argyris & Schö n, 1996; Schein, 1992; 
Senge, 1990), the focus was on encouraging IT personnel to under-
stand the impact of their actions—or lack of action—on the company. 
Through self-reflection and recognition of their important role in the 
organization, the IT staff became more motivated than before to per-
form higher quality work.
Teaching Staff “Not to Know” 
One of the most important factors that developed out of the process 
of integrating IT was the willingness of the IT staff “not to know.” 
The phenomenology of “not knowing” or “knowing less” became the 
facilitator of listening; that is, by listening, we as individuals are better 
able to reflect. This sense of not knowing also “allows the individual 
to learn an important lesson: the acceptance of what is, without our 
attempts to control, manipulate, or judge” (Halifax, 1999, p. 177). The 
IT staff improved their learning abilities by suggesting and adopting 
new solutions to problems. An example of this was the creation of a 
two-shift help desk that provided user support during both day and 
evening. The learning process allowed IT to contribute new ideas to 
the community. More important, their contributions did not dramat-
ically change the community; instead, they created gradual adjust-
ments that led to the growth of a new hybrid culture. The key to 
this new culture was its ability to share ideas, accept error as a reality 
(Marsick, 1998), and admit to knowing less (Halifax, 1999).
Transformation of Culture 
Cultural changes are often slow to develop, and they occur in small 
intervals. Furthermore, small cultural changes may even go unnoticed 
or may be attributed to factors other than their actual causes. This 

17
The “Ravell” Corporation
raises the issue of the importance of cultural awareness and our ability 
to measure individual and group performance. The history of the IT 
problems at Ravell made it easy for me to make management aware of 
what we were newly attempting to accomplish and of our reasons for 
creating dialogues about our successes and failures. Measurement and 
evaluation of IT performance are challenging because of the intrica-
cies involved in determining what represents success. I feel that one 
form of measurement can be found in the behavioral patterns of an 
organization. When it came time for employee evaluations, reviews 
were held with each IT staff member. Discussions at evaluation 
reviews focused on the individuals’ perceptions of their role, and how 
they felt about their job as a whole. The feedback from these review 
meetings suggested that the IT staff had become more devoted, and 
more willing to reflect on their role in the organization, and, gen-
erally, seemed happier at their jobs than ever before. Interestingly, 
and significantly, they also appeared to be having fun at their jobs. 
This happiness propagated into the community and influenced other 
supporting departments to create similar infrastructures that could 
reproduce our type of successes. This interest was made evident by 
frequent inquiries I received from other departments about how the 
transformation of IT was accomplished, and how it might be trans-
lated to create similar changes in staff behavior elsewhere in the com-
pany. I also noticed that there were fewer complaints and a renewed 
ability for the staff to work with our consultants.
Alignment with Administrative Departments
Ravell provided an excellent lesson about the penalties of not align-
ing properly with other strategic and operational partners in a firm. 
Sometimes, we become insistent on forcing change, especially when 
placed in positions that afford a manager power—the power to get 
results quickly and through force. The example of Ravell teaches us 
that an approach of power will not ultimately accomplish transforma-
tion of the organization. While senior management can authorize and 
mandate change, change usually occurs much more slowly than they 
wish, if it occurs at all. The management ranks can still push back 
and cause problems, if not sooner, then later. While I aligned with 
the line units, I failed to align with important operational partners, 

18
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
particularly human resources (HR). HR in my mind at that time 
was impeding my ability to accomplish change. I was frustrated and 
determined to get things done by pushing my agenda. This approach 
worked early on, but I later discovered that the HR management was 
bitter and devoted to stopping my efforts. The problems I encountered 
at Ravell are not unusual for IT organizations. The historical issues 
that affect the relationship between HR and IT are as follows:
•	 IT has unusual staff roles and job descriptions that can be 
inconsistent with the rest of the organization.
•	 IT tends to have complex working hours and needs.
•	 IT has unique career paths that do not “fit” with HR standards.
•	 IT salary structures shift more dynamically and are very sen-
sitive to market conditions.
•	 IT tends to operate in silos.
The challenge, then, to overcome these impediments requires IT to
•	 reduce silos and IT staff marginalization
•	 achieve better organization-wide alignment
•	 develop shared leadership
•	 define and create an HR/IT governance model
The success of IT/HR alignment should follow practices similar 
to those I instituted with the line managers at Ravell, specifically the 
following:
•	 Successful HR/IT integration requires organizational learn-
ing techniques.
•	 Alignment requires an understanding of the relationship 
between IT investments and business strategy.
•	 An integration of IT can create new organizational cultures 
and structures.
•	 HR/IT alignment will likely continue to be dynamic in 
nature, and evolve at an accelerated pace.
The oversight of not integrating better with HR cost IT dearly at 
Ravell. HR became an undisclosed enemy—that is, a negative force 
against the entire integration. I discovered this problem only later, and 
was never able to bring the HR department into the fold. Without 
HR being part of the learning organization, IT staff continued to 

19
The “Ravell” Corporation
struggle with aligning their professional positions with those of the 
other departments. Fortunately, within two  years the HR vice presi-
dent retired, which inevitably opened the doors for a new start.
In large IT organizations, it is not unusual to have an HR member 
assigned to focus specifically on IT needs. Typically, it is a joint position 
in which the HR individual in essence works for the IT executive. This 
is an effective alternative in that the HR person becomes versed in IT 
needs and can properly represent IT in the area of head count needs and 
specific titles. Furthermore, the unique aspect of IT organizations is in 
the hybrid nature of their staff. Typically, a number of IT staff members 
are consultants, a situation that presents problems similar to the one I 
encountered at Ravell—that is, the resentment of not really being part 
of the organization. Another issue is that many IT staff members are 
outsourced across the globe, a situation that brings its own set of chal-
lenges. In addition, the role of HR usually involves ensuring compliance 
with various regulations. For example, in many organizations, a con-
sultant is permitted to work on site for only one year before U.S. gov-
ernment regulations force the company to hire them as employees. The 
HR function must work closely with IT to enforce these regulations. 
Yet another important component of IT and HR collaboration is talent 
management. That is, HR must work closely with IT to understand new 
roles and responsibilities as they develop in the organization. Another 
challenge is the integration of technology into the day-to-day business 
of a company, and the question of where IT talent should be dispersed 
throughout the organization. Given this complex set of challenges, IT 
alone cannot facilitate or properly represent itself, unless it aligns with 
the HR departments. This becomes further complex with the prolifera-
tion of IT virtual teams across the globe that create complex structures 
that often have different HR ramifications, both legally and culturally. 
Virtual team management is discussed further in the book.
Conclusion
This case study shows that strategic integration of technical resources 
into core business units can be accomplished, by using those aspects of 
organizational learning that promote reflection in action. This kind of 
integration also requires something of a concomitant form of assimila-
tion, on the cultural level (see Chapter  3). Reflective thinking fosters the 

20
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
development of a learning organization, which in turn allows for the 
integration of the “other” in its various organizational manifestations. 
The experience of this case study also shows that the success of organi-
zational learning will depend on the degree of cross fertilization achiev-
able in terms of individual values and on the ability of the community 
to combine new concepts and beliefs, to form a hybrid culture. Such a 
new culture prospers with the use of organizational learning strategies 
to enable it to share ideas, accept mistakes, and learn to know less as a 
regular part their discourse and practice in their day-to-day operations.
Another important conclusion from the Ravell experience is that 
time is an important factor to the success of organizational learning 
approaches. One way of dealing with the problem of time is with 
patience—something that many organizations do not have. Another 
element of success came in the acceleration of events (such as the relo-
cation at Ravell), which can foster a quicker learning cycle and helps 
us see results faster. Unfortunately, impatience with using organiza-
tional learning methods is not an acceptable approach because it will 
not render results that change individual and organizational behavior. 
Indeed, I almost changed my approach when I did not get the results 
I had hoped for early in the Ravell engagement. Nevertheless, my per-
sistence paid off. Finally, the belief that replacing the staff, as opposed 
to investing in its knowledge, results from a faulty generalization. I 
found that most of the IT staff had much to contribute to the orga-
nization and, ultimately, to help transform the culture. Subsequent 
chapters of this book build on the Ravell experience and discuss spe-
cific methods for integrating organizational learning and IT in ways 
that can improve competitive advantage.
Another recent perception, which I discuss further in Chapter  4, 
is the commitment to “complete” integration. Simply put, IT cannot 
select which departments to work with, or choose to participate only 
with line managers; as they say, it is “all or nothing at all.” Furthermore, 
as Friedman (2007, p. 8) states “The world is flat.” Certainly, part of 
the “flattening” of the world has been initiated by technology, but it 
has also created overwhelming challenges for seamless integration of 
technology within all operations. The flattening of the world has cre-
ated yet another opportunity for IT to better integrate itself into what 
is now an everyday challenge for all organizations.

21
2
The IT Dilemma
Introduction
We have seen much discussion in recent writing about how informa-
tion technology has become an increasingly significant component of 
corporate business strategy and organizational structure (Bradley & 
Nolan, 1998; Levine et al., 2000; Siebel, 1999). But, do we know 
about the ways in which this significance takes shape? Specifically, 
what are the perceptions and realities regarding the importance of 
technology from organization leaders, business managers, and core 
operations personnel? Furthermore, what forms of participation 
should IT assume within the rest of the organization?
The isolation of IT professionals within their companies often pre-
vents them from becoming active participants in the organization. 
Technology personnel have long been criticized for their inability to 
function as part of the business and are often seen as a group falling 
outside business cultural norms (Schein, 1992). They are frequently 
stereotyped as “techies” and segregated into areas of the business 
where they become marginalized and isolated from the rest of the 
organization. It is my experience, based on case studies such as the 
one reviewed in Chapter  1 (the Ravell Corporation), that if an orga-
nization wishes to absorb its IT department into its core culture, and 
if it wishes to do so successfully, the company as a whole must be pre-
pared to consider structural changes and to seriously consider using 
organizational learning approaches.
The assimilation of technical people into an organization presents 
a special challenge in the development of true organizational learning 
practices (developed more fully in Chapter  3). This challenge stems 
from the historical separation of a special group that is seen as stand-
ing outside the everyday concerns of the business. IT is generally 
acknowledged as having a key support function in the organization as 
a whole. However, empirical studies have shown that it is a challenging 

22
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
endeavor to successfully integrate IT personnel into the learning fold 
and to do so in such a way that they not only are accepted, but also 
understood to be an important part of the social and cultural struc-
ture of the business (Allen & Morton, 1994; Cassidy, 1998; Langer, 
2007; Schein, 1992; Yourdon, 1998).
In his book In Over Our Heads,  Kegan (1994) discusses the chal-
lenges of dealing with individual difference. IT personnel have been 
consistently regarded as “different” fixtures; as outsiders who do not 
quite fit easily into the mainstream organization. Perhaps, because 
of their technical practices, which may at times seem “foreign,” or 
because of perceived differences in their values, IT personnel can 
become marginalized; imagined as outside the core social structures 
of business. As in any social structure, marginalization can result in 
the withdrawal of the individual from the community (Schlossberg, 
1989). As a result, many organizations are choosing to outsource their 
IT services rather than confront and address the issues of cultural 
absorption and organizational learning. The outsourcing alternative 
tends to further distance the IT function from the core organiza-
tion, thus increasing the effects of marginalization. Not only does the 
outsourcing of IT personnel separate them further from their peers, 
but it also invariably robs the organization of a potentially important 
contributor to the social growth and organizational learning of the 
business. For example, technology personnel should be able to offer 
insight into how technology can support further growth and learning 
within the organization. In addition, IT personnel are usually trained 
to take a logical approach to problem solving; as a result, they should 
be able to offer a complementary focus on learning. Hence, the inte-
gration of IT staff members into the larger business culture can offer 
significant benefits to an organization in terms of learning and orga-
nizational growth.
Some organizations have attempted to improve communications 
between IT and non-IT personnel through the use of an intermedi-
ary who can communicate easily with both groups. This intermediary 
is known in many organizations as the business analyst.  Typically, the 
business analyst will take responsibility for the interface between IT 
and the larger business community. Although a business analyst may 
help facilitate communication between IT and non-IT personnel, 
this arrangement cannot help but carry the implication that different 

23
The IT Dilemma
“languages” are spoken by these two groups and, by extension, that 
direct communication is not possible. Therefore, the use of such an 
intermediary suffers the danger of failing to promote integration 
between IT and the rest of the organization; in fact, it may serve to 
keep the two camps separate. True integration, in the form of direct 
contact between IT and non-IT personnel, represents a greater chal-
lenge for an organization than this remedy would suggest.
Recent Background
Since the 1990s, IT has been seen as a kind of variable that possesses 
the great potential to reinvent business. Aspects of this promise affected 
many of the core business rules used by successful chief executives and 
business managers. While organizations have used IT for the process-
ing of information, decision-support processing, and order ­processing, 
the impact of the Internet and e-commerce systems has initiated 
­revolutionary responses in every business sector. This economic phe-
nomenon became especially self-evident with the formation of dot-coms 
in the mid- and late 1990s. The advent of this phenomenon stressed 
the need to challenge fundamental business concepts. Many financial 
wizards surmised that new technologies were indeed changing the very 
infrastructure of business, affecting how businesses would operate and 
compete in the new millennium. Much of this hoopla seemed justified 
by the extraordinary potential that technology offered, particularly with 
respect to the revolutionizing of old-line marketing principles, for it 
was technology that came to violate what was previously thought to be 
protected market conditions and sectors. Technology came to reinvent 
these business markets and to allow new competitors to cross market in 
sectors they otherwise could not have entered.
With this new excitement also came fear— fear that fostered unnat-
ural and accelerated entry into technology because any delay might 
sacrifice important new market opportunities. Violating some of their 
traditional principles, many firms invested in creating new organi-
zations that would “incubate” and eventually, capture large market 
segments using the Internet as the delivery vehicle. By 2000, many of 
these dot-coms were in trouble, and it became clear that their notion 
of new business models based on the Internet contained significant 
flaws and shortfalls. As a result of this crisis, the role and valuation 

24
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
of IT is again going through a transformation and once more we are 
skeptical about the value IT can provide a business and about the way 
to measure the contributions of IT.
IT in the Organizational Context
Technology not only plays a significant role in workplace operations, 
but also continues to increase its relevance among other traditional 
components of any business, such as operations, accounting, and 
marketing (Earl, 1996b; Langer, 2001a; Schein, 1992). Given this 
increasing relevance, IT gains significance in relation to
	
1.	The impact it bears on organizational structure
	
2.	The role it can assume in business strategy
	
3.	The ways in which it can be evaluated
	
4.	The extent to which chief executives feel the need to manage 
operational knowledge and thus to manage IT effectively
IT and Organizational Structure
Sampler’s (1996) research explores the relationship between IT and 
organizational structure. His study indicated that there is no clear-cut 
relationship that has been established between the two. However, he 
concluded that there are five principal positions that IT can take in 
this relationship:
	
1.	IT can lead to centralization of organizational control.
	
2.	Conversely, IT can lead to decentralization of organizational 
control.
	
3.	IT can bear no impact on organizational control, its signifi-
cance being based on other factors.
	
4.	Organizations and IT can interact in an unpredictable 
manner.
	
5.	IT can enable new organizational arrangements, such as net-
worked or virtual organizations.
According to Sampler (1996), the pursuit of explanatory models for 
the relationship between IT and organizational structure continues 
to be a challenge, especially since IT plays dual roles. On the one 

25
The IT Dilemma
hand, it enhances and constrains the capabilities of workers within 
the organization, and because of this, it also possesses the ability 
to create a unique cultural component. While both roles are active, 
their impact on the organization cannot be predicted; instead, they 
evolve as unique social norms within the organization. Because IT 
has changed so dramatically over the past decades, it continues to be 
difficult to compare prior research on the relationship between IT and 
organizational structure.
Earl (1996a) studied the effects of applying business process reen-
gineering (BPR) to organizations. BPR is a process that organizations 
undertake to determine how best to use technology, to improve busi-
ness performance. Earl concludes that BPR is “an unfortunate title: it 
does not reflect the complex nature of either the distinctive underpin-
ning concept of BPR [i.e., to reevaluate methods and rules of business 
operations] or the essential practical challenges to make it happen 
[i.e., the reality of how one goes about doing that]” (p. 54).
In my 2001 study of the Ravell Corporation (“Fixing Bad Habits,” 
Langer, 2001b), I found that BPR efforts require buy-in from business 
line managers, and that such efforts inevitably require the adaptation 
by individuals of different cultural norms and practices.
Schein (1992) recognizes that IT culture represents a subculture in 
collision with many others within an organization. He concludes that if 
organizations are to be successful in using new technologies in a global 
context, they must cope with ceaseless flows of information to ensure 
organizational health and effectiveness. His research indicates that chief 
executive officers (CEOs) have been reluctant to implement a new sys-
tem of technology unless their organizations felt comfortable with it and 
were ready to use it. While many CEOs were aware of cost and effi-
ciency implications in using IT, few were aware of the potential impact 
on organizational structure that could result from “adopting an IT view 
of their organizations” (p. 293). Such results suggest that CEOs need 
to be more active and more cognizant than they have been of potential 
shifts in organizational structure when adopting IT opportunities.
The Role of IT in Business Strategy
While many chief executives recognize the importance of IT in 
the day-to-day operations of their business, their experience with 

26
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
attempting to utilize IT as a strategic business tool, has been frustrat-
ing. Typical executive complaints about IT, according to Bensaou and 
Earl (1998), fall into five problem areas:
	
1.	A lack of correspondence between IT investments and busi-
ness strategy
	
2.	Inadequate payoff from IT investments
	
3.	The perception of too much “technology for technology’s 
sake”
	
4.	Poor relations between IT specialists and users
	
5.	The creation of system designs that fail to incorporate users’ 
preferences and work habits
McFarlan created a strategic grid (as presented in Applegate et al., 
2003) designed to assess the impact of IT on operations and strategy. 
The grid shows that IT has maximum value when it affects both oper-
ations and core business objectives. Based on McFarlan’s hypothesis, 
Applegate et al. established five key questions about IT that may be 
used by executives to guide strategic decision making:
	
1.	Can IT be used to reengineer core value activities, and change 
the basis of competition?
	
2.	Can IT change the nature of the relationship, and the balance 
of power, between buyers and sellers?
	
3.	Can IT build or reduce barriers to entry?
	
4.	Can IT increase or decrease switching costs?
	
5.	Can IT add value to existing products and services, or create 
new ones?
The research and analysis conducted by McFarlan and Applegate, 
respectively, suggest that when operational strategy and its results 
are maximized, IT is given its highest valuation as a tool that can 
transform the organization. It then receives the maximum focus 
from senior management and board members. However, Applegate 
et al. (2003) also focus on the risks of using technology. These risks 
increase when executives have a poor understanding of competitive 
dynamics, when they fail to understand the long-term implications 
of a strategic system that they have launched, or when they fail to 
account for the time, effort, and cost required to ensure user adop-
tion, assimilation, and effective utilization. Applegate’s conclusion 

27
The IT Dilemma
underscores the need for IT management to educate senior man-
agement, so that the latter will understand the appropriate indi-
cators for what can maximize or minimize their investments in 
technology.
Szulanski and Amin (2000) claim that while emerging technologies 
shrink the window in which any given strategy can be implemented, 
if the strategy is well thought out, it can remain viable. Mintzberg’s 
(1987) research suggests that it would be useful to think of strategy as 
an art, not a science. This perspective is especially true in situations 
of uncertainty. The rapidly changing pace of emerging technologies, 
we know, puts a strain on established approaches to strategy— that is 
to say, it becomes increasingly difficult to find comfortable implemen-
tation of technological strategies in such times of fast-moving envi-
ronments, requiring sophisticated organizational infrastructure and 
capabilities.
Ways of Evaluating IT
Firms have been challenged to find a way to best evaluate IT, 
­particularly using traditional return on investment (ROI) approaches. 
Unfortunately, in this regard, many components of IT do not ­generate 
direct returns. Cost allocations based on overhead formulas (e.g., costs 
of IT as a percentage of revenues) are not applicable to most IT spend-
ing needs. Lucas (1999) established nonmonetary methods for evalu-
ating IT. His concept of conversion effectiveness  places value on the 
ability of IT to complete its projects on time and within its budgets. 
This alone is a sufficient factor for providing ROI, assuming that the 
project was approved for valid business reasons. He called this overall 
process for evaluation the “garbage can” model. It allows organizations 
to present IT needs through a funneling pipeline of conversion effec-
tiveness that filters out poor technology plans and that can determine 
which projects will render direct and indirect benefits to the organiza-
tion. Indirect returns, according to Lucas, are those that do not pro-
vide directly measurable monetary returns but do provide significant 
value that can be measured using his IT investment opportunities 
matrix. Utilizing statistical probabilities of returns, the opportunities 
matrix provides an effective tool for evaluating the impact of indirect 
returns.

28
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Executive Knowledge and Management of IT
While much literature and research have been produced on how IT 
needs to participate in and bring value to an organization, there has 
been relatively little analysis conducted on what non-IT chief execu-
tives need to know about technology. Applegate et al. (2003) suggest 
that non-IT executives need to understand how to differentiate new 
technologies from older ones, and how to gauge the expected impact 
of these technologies on the businesses, in which the firm competes 
for market share. This is to say that technology can change the rela-
tionship between customer and vendor, and thus, should be examined 
as a potential for providing competitive advantage. The authors state 
that non-IT business executives must become more comfortable with 
technology by actively participating in technology decisions rather than 
delegating them to others. They need to question experts as they would 
in the financial areas of their businesses. Lou Gerstner, former CEO 
of IBM ,  is a good example of a non-IT chief executive who acquired 
sufficient knowledge and understanding of a technology firm. He was 
then able to form a team of executives who better understood how to 
develop the products, services, and overall business strategy of the firm.
Allen and Percival (2000) also investigate the importance of non-
IT executive knowledge and participation with IT: “If the firm lacks 
the necessary vision, insights, skills, or core competencies, it may be 
unwise to invest in the hottest [IT] growth market” (p. 295). The 
authors point out that success in using emerging technologies is dif-
ferent from success in other traditional areas of business. They con-
cluded that non-IT managers need to carefully consider expected 
synergies to determine whether an IT investment can be realized and, 
especially, whether it is efficient to earn cost of capital.
Recent studies have focused on four important components in the 
linking of technology and business: its relationship to organizational 
structure, its role in business strategy, the means of its evaluation, and 
the extent of non-IT executive knowledge in technology. The chal-
lenge in determining the best organizational structure for IT is posed 
by the accelerating technological advances since the 1970s and by the 
difficulty in comparing organizational models to consistent business 
cases. Consequently, there is no single organizational structure that 
has been adopted by businesses.

29
The IT Dilemma
While most chief executives understand the importance of using 
technology as part of their business strategy, they express frustra-
tion in determining how to effectively implement a technology-based 
strategic approach. This frustration results from difficulties in under-
standing how IT investments relate to other strategic business issues, 
from difficulty in assessing payoff and performance of IT generally 
and from perceived poor relations between IT and other departments.
Because most IT projects do not render direct monetary returns, exec-
utives find themselves challenged to understand technology investments. 
They have difficulty measuring value since traditional ROI formulas are 
not applicable. Thus, executives would do better to focus on valuing tech-
nology investments by using methods that can determine payback based 
on a matrix of indirect returns, which do not always include monetary 
sources. There is a lack of research on the question of what general knowl-
edge non-IT executives need to have to effectively manage the strategic 
use of technology within their firms. Non-IT chief executives are often 
not engaged in day-to-day IT activities, and they often delegate dealing 
with strategic technology issues to other managers. The remainder of this 
chapter examines the issues raised by the IT dilemma in its various guises 
especially as they become relevant to, and are confronted from, the top 
management or chief executive point of view.
IT: A View from the Top
To investigate further the critical issues facing IT, I conducted a study 
in which I personally interviewed over 40 chief executives in vari-
ous industries, including finance/investment, publishing, insurance, 
wholesale/retail, and hotel management. Executives interviewed 
were either the CEO or president of their respective corporations. I 
canvassed a population of New York-based midsize corporations for 
this interview study. Midsize firms, in our case, comprise businesses 
of between 200 and 500 employees. Face-to-face interviews were 
conducted, to allow participants the opportunity to articulate their 
responses, in contrast to answering printed survey questions; execu-
tives were therefore allowed to expand, and clarify, their responses to 
questions. An interview guide (see questions in Tables  2.1 through 
2.3) was designed to raise issues relevant to the challenges of using 
technology, as reported in the recent research literature, and to 

30
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
consider significant phenomena, that could affect changes in the uses 
of technology, such as the Internet. The interview discussions focused 
on three sections: (1) chief executive perception of the role of IT, (2) 
management and strategic issues, and (3) measuring IT performance 
and activities. The results of the interviews are summarized next.
Table  2.1    Perception and Role of IT
QUESTION
ANALYSIS
	 1.	How do you define the role and the 
mission of IT in your firm?
Fifty-seven percent responded that their IT 
organizations were reactive and did not really have a 
mission. Twenty-eight percent had an IT mission that 
was market driven;  that is, their IT departments were 
responsible for actively participating in marketing 
and strategic processes.
	 2.	What impact has the Internet had 
on your business strategy?
Twenty-eight percent felt the impact was insignificant, 
while 24% felt it was critical. The remaining 48% felt 
that the impact of the Internet was significant to daily 
transactions.
	 3.	Does the firm have its own internal 
software development activity? Do 
you develop your own in-house 
software or use software 
packages?
Seventy-six percent had an internal development 
organization. Eighty-one percent had internally 
developed software.
	 4.	What is your opinion of 
outsourcing? Do you have the need 
to outsource technology? If so, how 
is this accomplished?
Sixty-two percent had outsourced certain aspects of 
their technology needs.
	 5.	Do you use consultants to help 
formulate the role of IT? If yes, 
what specific roles do they play? If 
not, why?
Sixty-two percent of the participants used consultants 
to assist them in formulating the role of IT.
	 6.	Do you feel that IT will become 
more important to the strategy of 
the business? If yes, why?
Eighty-five percent felt that IT had recently become 
more important to the strategic planning of the 
business.
	 7.	How is the IT department viewed 
by other departments? Is the IT 
department liked, or is it 
marginalized?
Twenty-nine percent felt that IT was still marginalized. 
Another 29% felt it was not very integrated. Thirty-eight 
percent felt IT was sufficiently integrated within the 
organization, but only one chief executive felt that IT 
was very integrated with the culture of his firm.
	 8.	Do you feel there is too much 
“ hype”  about the importance and 
role of technology?
Fifty-three percent felt that there was no hype. However, 
32% felt that there were levels of hype attributed to the 
role of technology;  10% felt it was “ all hype.” 
	 9.	Have the role and the uses of 
technology in the firm significantly 
changed over the last 5  years? If 
so, what are the salient changes?
Fourteen percent felt little had changed, whereas 43% 
stated that there were moderate changes. Thirty-eight 
percent stated there was significant change.

31
The IT Dilemma
Table  2.2    Management and Strategic Issues
QUESTION
ANALYSIS
	 1.	What is the most senior title held 
by someone in IT? Where does 
this person rank on the 
organization hierarchy?
Sixty-six percent called the highest position chief 
information officer (CIO). Ten percent used managing 
director, while 24% used director as the highest title.
	 2.	Does IT management ultimately 
report to you?
Fifty percent of IT leaders reported directly to the chief 
executive (CEO). The other half reported to either the 
chief financial officer (CFO) or the chief operating 
officer (COO).
	 3.	How active are you in working 
with IT issues?
Fifty-seven percent stated that they are very active— on 
a weekly basis. Thirty-eight percent were less active or 
inconsistently involved, usually stepping in when an 
issue becomes problematic.
	 4.	Do you discuss IT strategy with 
your peers from other firms?
Eighty-one percent did not communicate with peers at 
all. Only 10% actively engaged in peer-to-peer 
communication about IT strategy.
	 5.	Do IT issues get raised at board, 
marketing, and/or strategy 
meetings?
Eighty-six percent confirmed that IT issues were 
regularly discussed at board meetings. However, only 
57% acknowledged IT discussion during marketing 
meetings, and only 38% confirmed like discussions at 
strategic sessions.
	 6.	How critical is IT to the 
day-to-day business?
Eighty-two percent of the chief executives felt it was very 
significant or critical to the business.
Table  2.3    Measuring IT Performance and Activities
QUESTION
ANALYSIS
	 1.	Do you have any view of how IT 
should be measured and 
accounted for?
Sixty-two percent stated that they had a view on 
measurement;  however, there was significant 
variation in how executives defined measurement.
	 2.	Are you satisfied with IT 
performance in the firm?
There was significant variation in IT satisfaction. Only 
19% were very satisfied. Thirty-three percent were 
satisfied, another 33% were less satisfied, and 14% 
were dissatisfied.
	 3.	How do you budget IT costs? Is it 
based on a percentage of gross 
revenues?
Fifty-seven percent stated that they did not use gross 
revenues in their budgeting methodologies.
	 4.	To what extent do you perceive 
technology as a means of 
increasing marketing or 
productivity or both?
Seventy-one percent felt that technology was a 
significant means of increasing both marketing and 
productivity in their firms.
	 5.	Are Internet/Web marketing 
activities part of the IT function?
Only 24% stated that Internet/Web marketing efforts 
reported directly to the IT organization.

32
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Section  1: Chief Executive Perception of the Role of IT
This section of the interview focuses on chief executive perceptions of 
the role of IT within the firm. For the first question, about the role 
and mission of IT, over half of the interviewees responded in ways 
that suggested their IT organizations were reactive, without a strate-
gic mission. One executive admitted, “IT is not really defined. I guess 
its mission is to meet our strategic goals and increase profitability.” 
Another response betrays a narrowly construed understanding of its 
potential: “The mission is that things must work— zero tolerance for 
failure.” These two responses typify the vague and generalized percep-
tion that IT “has no explicit mission” except to advance the important 
overall mission of the business itself. Little over a quarter of respon-
dents could confirm a market-driven role for IT; that is, actively par-
ticipating in marketing and strategic processes. Question 2, regarding 
the impact of the Internet on business strategy, drew mixed responses. 
Some of these revealed the deeply reflective challenges posed by the 
Internet: “I feel the Internet forces us to take a longer-term view and a 
sharper focus to our business.” Others emphasized its transformative 
potential: “The Internet is key to decentralization of our offices and 
business strategy.”
Questions 3 and 4 focused on the extent to which firms have their own 
software development staffs, whether they use internally developed or 
packaged software, and whether they outsource IT services. Control over 
internal development of systems and applications remained important to 
the majority of chief executives: “I do not like ­outsourcing— surrender 
control, and it’s hard to bring back.” Almost two‑thirds of the partici-
pants employed consultants to assist them in formulating the role of IT 
within their firms but not always without reservation: “Whenever we 
have a significant design issue we bring in consultants to help us— but 
not to do actual development work.” Only a few were downright skepti-
cal: “I try to avoid consultants— what is their motivation?” The percep-
tion of outsourcing is still low in midsize firms, as compared to the recent 
increase in IT outsourcing abroad. The lower use could be related to the 
initial costs and management overheads that are required to properly 
implement outsource operations in foreign countries.
A great majority of chief executives recognized some form of the 
strategic importance of IT to business planning: “More of our business 

33
The IT Dilemma
is related to technology and therefore I believe IT is more important 
to strategic planning.” Still, this sense of importance remained some-
what intuitive: “I cannot quantify how IT will become more strategic 
to the business planning— but I sense that job functions will be dra-
matically altered.” In terms of how IT is viewed by other departments 
within the firm, responses were varied. A little over a third of respon-
dents felt IT was reasonably integrated within the organization: “The 
IT department is vitally important— but rarely noticed.” The major-
ity of respondents, however, recognized a need for greater integra-
tion: “IT was marginalized— but it is changing. While IT drives the 
­system— it needs to drive more of the business.” Some articulated 
clearly the perceived problems: “IT needs to be more proactive— they 
do not seem to have good interpersonal skills and do not understand 
corporate politics.” A few expressed a sense of misgiving (“IT people 
are strange— personality is an issue”) and even a sense of hopeless-
ness: “People hate IT— particularly over the sensitivity of the data. IT 
sometimes is viewed as misfits and incompetent.”
Question eight asked participants whether they felt there was too 
much “hype” attributed to the importance of technology in business. 
Over half responded in the negative, although not without reserva-
tion: “I do not think there is too much hype— but I am disappointed. 
I had hoped that technology at this point would have reduced paper, 
decreased cost— it just has not happened.” Others felt that there is 
indeed some degree of sensationalism: “I definitely think there is too 
much hype— everyone wants the latest and greatest.” Hype in many 
cases can be related to a function of evaluation, as in this exclama-
tion: “The hype with IT relates more to when will we actually see 
the value!” The last question in this section asks whether the uses of 
technology within the firm had significantly changed over the last 
five  years. A majority agreed that it had: “The role of IT has changed 
significantly in the last five  years—we need to stay up-to-date because 
we want to carry the image that we are ‘ on the ball’.” Many of these 
stressed the importance of informational flows: “I find the ‘ I’ [infor-
mation] part to be more and more important and the ‘ T’ [technol-
ogy] to be diminishing in importance.” Some actively downplayed the 
significance: “I believe in minimizing the amount of technology we 
use—people get carried away.”

34
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Section  2: Management and Strategic Issues
This section focuses on questions pertaining to executive and man-
agement organizational concerns. The first and second questions 
asked executives about the most senior title held by an IT officer 
and about the reporting structure for IT. Two-thirds of the par-
ticipants ranked their top IT officer as a chief information officer 
(CIO). In terms of organizational hierarchy, half of the IT leaders 
were at the second tier, reporting directly to the CEO or presi-
dent, while the other half were at the third tier, reporting either 
to the chief financial officer (CFO) or to the chief operating offi-
cer (COO). As one CEO stated, “Most of my activity with IT is 
through the COO. We have a monthly meeting, and IT is always 
on the agenda.”
The third question asked executives to consider their level of 
involvement with IT matters. Over half claimed a highly active rela-
tionship, engaging on a weekly basis: “I like to have IT people close 
and in one-on-one interactions. It is not good to have artificial barri-
ers.” For some, levels of involvement may be limited: “I am active with 
IT issues in the sense of setting goals.” A third of participants claimed 
less activity, usually becoming active when difficulties arose. Question 
four asked whether executives spoke to their peers at other firms about 
technology issues. A high majority managed to skip this potential for 
communication with their peers. Only one in 10 actively pursued this 
matter of engagement.
Question 5 asked about the extent to which IT issues were 
discussed at board meetings, marketing meetings, and business 
strategy sessions. Here, a great majority confirmed that there was 
regular discussion regarding IT concerns, especially at board meet-
ings. A smaller majority attested to IT discussions during market-
ing meetings. Over a third reported that IT issues maintained a 
presence at strategic sessions. The higher incidence at board meet-
ings may still be attributable to the effects of Year 2000 (Y2K) 
preparations. The final question in this section concerned the level 
of criticality for IT in the day-to-day operations of the business. A 
high majority of executives responded affirmatively in this regard: 
“IT is critical to our survival, and its impact on economies of scale 
is significant.”

35
The IT Dilemma
Section  3: Measuring IT Performance and Activities
This section is concerned with how chief executives measured IT per-
formance and activities within their firms. The first question of this 
section asked whether executives had a view about how IT performance 
should be measured. Almost two‑thirds affirmed having some formal 
or informal way of measuring performance: “We have no formal pro-
cess of measuring IT other than predefined goals, cost constraints, and 
deadlines.” Their responses demonstrated great variation, sometimes 
leaning on cynicism: “I measure IT by the number of complaints I 
get.” Many were still grappling with this challenge: “Measuring IT is 
unqualified at this time. I have learned that hours worked is not the way 
to measure IT— it needs to be more goal-­oriented.” Most chief execu-
tives expressed some degree of quandary: “We do not feel we know 
enough about how IT should be measured.” Question two asked execu-
tives to rate their satisfaction with IT performance. Here, also, there 
was significant variation. A little more than half expressed some degree 
of satisfaction: “Since 9/11 IT has gained a lot of credibility because of 
the support that was needed during a difficult time.” Slightly fewer than 
half revealed a degree of dissatisfaction: “We had to overhaul our IT 
department to make it more customer-service oriented.”
Question three concerned budgeting; that is, whether or not chief 
executives budgeted IT costs as a percentage of gross revenues. Over 
half denied using gross revenues in their budgeting method: “When 
handling IT projects we look at it on a request-by-request basis.”
The last two questions asked chief executives to assess the impact of 
technology on marketing and productivity. Almost three quarters of 
the participants felt that technology represented a significant means of 
enhancing both marketing and productivity. Some maintained a cer-
tainty of objective: “We try to get IT closer to the customer— having 
them understand the business better.” Still, many had a less-defined 
sense of direction: “I have a fear of being left behind, so I do think IT 
will become more important to the business.” And others remained 
caught in uncertainty: “I do not fully understand how to use technol-
ogy in marketing— but I believe it’s there.” Chief executive certainty, 
in this matter, also found expression in the opposite direction: “IT 
will become less important— it will be assumed as a capability and a 
service that companies provide to their customers.” Of the Internet/

36
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Web marketing initiatives, only one quarter of these reported directly 
to the IT organization: “IT does not drive the Web activities because 
they do not understand the business.” Often, these two were seen as 
separate or competing entities of technology: “Having Web develop-
ment report to IT would hinder the Internet business’s growth poten-
tial.” Yet, some might be willing to explore a synergistic potential: 
“We are still in the early stages of understanding how the Internet 
relates to our business strategy and how it will affect our product line.”
General Results
Section  1 revealed that the matter of defining a mission for the IT 
organization remains as unresolved as finding a way to reckon with the 
potential impact of IT on business strategy. Executives still seemed to 
be at a loss on the question of how to integrate IT into the workplace— a 
human resource as well as a strategic issue. There was uncertainty regard-
ing the dependability of the technology information received. Most 
agreed, however, in their need for software development departments to 
support their internally developed software, in their need to outsource 
certain parts of technology, and in their use of outside consultants to 
help them formulate the future activities of their IT departments.
Section  2 showed that while the amount of time that executives spent 
on IT issues varied, there was a positive correlation between a structure in 
which IT managers reported directly to the chief executive and the degree 
of activity that executives stated they had with IT matters. Section  3 
showed that chief executives understood the potential value that technol-
ogy can bring to the marketing and productivity of their firms. They did 
not believe, however, that technology can go unmeasured; there needs 
to be some rationale for allotting a spending figure in the budget. For 
most of the firms in this study, the use of the Internet as a technological 
vehicle for future business was not determined by IT. This suggests that 
IT does not manage the marketing aspects of technology, and that it has 
not achieved significant integration in strategic planning.
Defining the IT Dilemma
The variations found in this study in terms of where IT reports, how 
it is measured, and how its mission is defined were consistent with 

37
The IT Dilemma
existing research. But, the wide-ranging inconsistencies and uncer-
tainties among executives described here left many of them wonder-
ing whether they should be using IT as part of their business strategy 
and operations. While this quandary does not in itself suggest an 
inadequacy, it does point to an absence of a “best practices” guideline 
for using technology strategically. Hence, most businesses lacked a 
clear plan on how to evolve IT contributions toward business develop-
ment. Although a majority of respondents felt that IT was critical to 
the survival of their businesses, the degree of IT assimilation within 
the core culture of organizations still varied. This suggests that the 
effects of cultural assimilation lag behind the actual involvement of 
IT in the strategic direction of the company.
While Sampler (1996) attributes many operational inconsistencies to 
the changing landscape of technology, the findings of this study suggest 
that there is also a lack in professional procedures, rules, and established 
governance, that could support the creation of best practices for the 
profession. Bensaou and Earl (1998), on the one hand, have addressed 
this concern by taking a pro-Japanese perspective in extrapolating from 
five “Western” problems five “general” principles, presumably not cul-
ture bound, and thence a set of “best principles” for managing IT. But, 
Earl et al. (1995), on the other hand, have sidestepped any attempt to 
incorporate Earl’s own inductive approach discussed here; instead, they 
favor a market management approach, based on a supply-and-demand 
model to “balance” IT management. Of course, best practices already 
embody the implicit notion of best principles; however, the problems 
confronting executives— the need for practical guidelines— remain. For 
instance, this study shows that IT performance is measured in many 
different ways. It is this type of practical inconsistency that leaves chief 
executives with the difficult challenge of understanding how technol-
ogy decisions can be managed.
On a follow-up call related to this study, for example, a CEO 
informed me of a practical yet significant difference she had instituted 
since our interview. She stated:
The change in reporting has allowed IT to become part of the main-
stream vision of the business. It now is a fundamental component of all 
discussions with human resources, sales and marketing, and accounting. 
The change in reporting has allowed for the creation of a critical system, 

38
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
which has generated significant direct revenues for the business. I attri-
bute this to my decision to move the reporting of technology directly 
to me and to my active participation in the uses of technology in our 
business.
This is an example of an executive whom Schein (1994) would 
call a “change agent”— someone who employs “cognitive redefinition 
through scanning,” in this case to elicit the strategic potential of IT. 
We might also call this activity reflective thinking (Langer, 2001b). 
Schein’s change agents, however, go on to “acknowledge that future 
generations of CEOs will have been educated much more thoroughly 
in the possibilities of the computer and IT, thus enabling them to take 
a hands-on adopter stance” (p. 343). This insight implies a distanc-
ing (“future”) of present learning responsibilities among current chief 
executives. The nearer future of this insight may instead be seen in 
the development of organizational learning.* These are two areas of 
contemporary research that begin to offer useful models in the pursuit 
of a best practices approach to the understanding and managing of IT.
If the focus of this latter study was geared toward the evaluation of 
IT based on the view of the chief executive, it was, indeed, because 
their views necessarily shape the very direction for the organizations 
that they manage. Subsequent chapters of this book examine how 
the various dilemmas surrounding IT that I have discussed here are 
affecting organizations and how organizational learning practices can 
help answer many of the issues of today as raised by executives, man-
agers, and operations personnel.
Recent Developments in Operational Excellence
The decline in financial markets in 2009, and the continued increase 
in mergers and acquisitions due to global competition have created an 
interesting opportunity for IT that reinforces the need for integration 
via organizational learning. During difficult economic periods, IT 
has traditionally been viewed as a cost center and had its operations 
*	My case study “Fixing Bad Habits” (Langer, 2001b) has shown that integrating 
the practices of reflective thinking, to support the development of organizational 
learning, has greatly enhanced the adaptation of new technologies, their strategic 
valuation to the firm, and their assimilation into the social norms of the business.

39
The IT Dilemma
reduced (I discuss this further in Chapter  3, in which I introduce 
the concept of drivers and supporters). However, with the growth in 
the role of technology, IT management has now been asked to help 
improve efficiency through the use of technology across departments. 
That is, IT is emerging as an agent for business transformation in a 
much stronger capacity than ever before. This phenomenon has placed 
tremendous pressure on the technology executive to align with his or 
her fellow executives in other departments and to get them to partici-
pate in cost reductions by implementing more technology. Naturally, 
using technology to facilitate cuts to the workforce is often unpopular, 
and there has been much bitter fallout from such cross-department 
reductions. Technology executives thus face the challenge of position-
ing themselves as the agents of a necessary change. However, opera-
tional excellence is broader than just cutting costs and changing the 
way things operate; it is about doing things efficiently and with qual-
ity measures across corporate operations. Now that technology affects 
every aspect of operations, it makes sense to charge technology execu-
tives with a major responsibility to get it accomplished.
The assimilation of technology as a core part of the entire orga-
nization is now paramount  for survival, and the technology execu-
tive of today and certainly tomorrow will be one who understands 
that operational excellence through efficiency must be accomplished 
by educating business units in self-managing the process. The IT 
executive, then, supports the activity as a leader, not as a cost cut-
ter who invades the business. The two approaches are very different, 
and adopting the former can result in significant long-term results in 
strategic alignment.
My interviews with CEOs supported this notion: The CEO does 
not want to be the negotiator; change must be evolutionary within the 
business units themselves. While taking this kind of role in organiza-
tional change presents a new dilemma for IT, it can also be an oppor-
tunity for IT to position itself successfully within the organization.


41
3
Technology as a 
Variable and Responsive 
Organizational Dynamism
Introduction
This chapter focuses on defining the components of technology and 
how they affect corporate organizations. In other words, if we step 
back momentarily from the specific challenges that information tech-
nology (IT) poses, we might ask the following: What are the generic 
aspects of technology that have made it an integral part of strategic and 
competitive advantage for many organizations? How do organizations 
respond to these generic aspects as catalysts of change? Furthermore, 
how do we objectively view the role of technology in this context, and 
how should organizations adjust to its short- and long-term impacts?
Technological Dynamism
To begin, technology can be regarded as a variable, independent 
of others, that contributes to the life of a business operation. It is 
capable of producing an overall, totalizing, yet distinctive, effect on 
­organizations— it has the unique capacity to create accelerations of 
corporate events in an unpredictable way. Technology, in its aspect of 
unpredictability, is necessarily a variable, and in its capacity as accel-
erator— its tendency to produce change or advance— it is dynamic. 
My contention is that, as a dynamic kind of variable, technology, via 
responsive handling or management, can be tapped to play a special 
role in organizational development. It can be pressed into service as 
the dynamic catalyst that helps bring organizations to maturity in 
dealing not only with new technological quandaries, but also with 
other agents of change. Change generates new knowledge, which in 
turn requires a structure of learning that should, if managed properly, 

42
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
result in transformative behavior, supporting the continued evolution 
of organizational culture. Specifically, technology speeds up events, 
such as the expectation of getting a response to an e-mail, and requires 
organizations to respond to them in ever-quickening time frames. 
Such events are not as predictable as those experienced by individuals 
in organizations prior to the advent of new technologies— particu-
larly with the meteoric advance of the Internet. In viewing technology 
then as a dynamic variable, and one that requires systemic and cul-
tural organizational change, we may regard it as an inherent, internal 
driving force— a form of technological dynamism.
Dynamism  is defined as a process or mechanism responsible for the 
development or motion of a system. Technological dynamism  charac-
terizes the unpredictable and accelerated ways in which technology, 
specifically, can change strategic planning and organizational behav-
ior/culture. This change is based on the acceleration of events and 
interactions within organizations, which in turn create the need to 
better empower individuals and departments. Another way of under-
standing technological dynamism is to think of it as an internal drive 
recognized by the symptoms it produces. The new events and interac-
tions brought about by technology are symptoms of the dynamism 
that technology manifests. The next section discusses how organiza-
tions can begin to make this inherent dynamism work in their favor 
on different levels.
Responsive Organizational Dynamism
The technological dynamism at work in organizations has the power 
to disrupt any antecedent sense of comfortable equilibrium or an 
unwelcome sense of stasis. It also upsets the balance among the vari-
ous factors and relationships that pertain to the question of how we 
might integrate new technologies into the business— a question of 
what we will call strategic integration—  and how we assimilate the cul-
tural changes they bring about organizationally— a question of what 
we call cultural assimilation.  Managing the dynamism, therefore, is a 
way of managing the effects of technology. I propose that these orga-
nizational ripples, these precipitous events and interactions, can be 
addressed in specific ways at the organizational management level. 
The set of integrative responses to the challenges raised by technology 

43
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
is what I am calling responsive organizational dynamism,  which will 
also receive further explication in the next few chapters. For now, we 
need to elaborate the two distinct categories that present themselves 
in response to technological dynamism: strategic integration and cul-
tural assimilation. Figure 3.1 diagrams the relationships.
Strategic Integration
Strategic integration is a process that addresses the business-­strategic 
impact of technology on organizational processes. That is, the 
business-strategic impact of technology requires immediate orga-
nizational responses and in some instances zero latency. Strategic 
integration recognizes the need to scale resources across traditional 
business– geographic boundaries, to redefine the value chain in the 
life cycle of a product or service line, and generally to foster more 
agile business processes (Murphy, 2002). Strategic integration, then, 
Technology as an
independent
variable
Creates
Organizational
dynamism 
Acceleration of events that
require diﬀerent
infrastructures and
organizational processes 
Requires
Strategic
integration
Cultural
assimilation
Symptoms and
implications
Figure     3.1   Responsive organizational dynamism.

4 4
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
is a way to address the changing requirements of business processes 
caused by the sharp increases in uses of technology. Evolving tech-
nologies have become catalysts for competitive initiatives that create 
new and different ways to determine successful business investment. 
Thus, there is a dynamic business variable that drives the need for 
technology infrastructures capable of greater flexibility and of exhib-
iting greater integration with all business operations.
Historically, organizational experiences with IT investment have 
resulted in two phases of measured returns. The first phase often 
shows negative or declining productivity as a result of the investment; 
in the second phase, we often see a lagging of, although eventual 
return to, productivity. The lack of returns in the first phase has been 
attributed to the nature of the early stages of technology exploration 
and experimentation, which tend to slow the process of organizational 
adaptation to technology. The production phase then lags behind 
the ability of the organization to integrate new technologies with 
its existing processes. Another complication posed by technological 
dynamism via the process of strategic integration is a phenomenon we 
can call factors of multiplicity — essentially, what happens when several 
new technology opportunities overlap and create myriad projects that 
are in various phases of their developmental life cycle. Furthermore, 
the problem is compounded by lagging returns in productivity, which 
are complicated to track and to represent to management. Thus, it is 
important that organizations find ways to shorten the period between 
investment and technology’ s effective deployment. Murphy (2002) 
identifies several factors that are critical to bridging this delta:
	
1.	Identifying the processes that can provide acceptable business 
returns from new technological investments
	
2.	Establishing methodologies that can determine these processes
	
3.	Finding ways to actually perform and realize expected benefits
	
4.	Integrating IT projects with other projects
	
5.	Adjusting project objectives when changes in the business 
require them
Technology complicates these actions, making them more difficult 
to resolve; hence the need to manage the complications. To tackle 
these compounded concerns, strategic integration can shorten life 
cycle maturation by focusing on the following integrating factors:

45
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
•	 Addressing the weaknesses in management organizations in 
terms of how to deal with new technologies, and how to bet-
ter realize business benefits
•	 Providing a mechanism that both enables organizations to 
deal with accelerated change caused by technological innova-
tions and integrates them into a new cycle of processing and 
handling change
•	 Providing a strategic learning framework by which every new 
technology variable adds to organizational knowledge, par-
ticularly using reflective practices (see Chapter    4)
•	 Establishing an integrated approach that ties technology 
accountability to other measurable outcomes using organiza-
tional learning techniques and theories
To realize these objectives, organizations must be able to
•	 Create dynamic internal processes that can function on a 
daily basis to deal with understanding the potential fit of new 
technologies and their overall value to the business
•	 Provide the discourse to bridge the gaps between IT- and 
non-IT‑related investments and uses into an integrated system
•	 Monitor investments and determine modifications to the life 
cycle
•	 Implement various organizational learning practices, includ-
ing learning organization, knowledge management, change 
management, and communities of practice, all of which help 
foster strategic thinking and learning that can be linked to 
performance (Gephardt & Marsick, 2003)
Another important aspect of strategic integration is what Murphy 
(2002) calls “ consequential interoperability,”  in which “ the conse-
quences of a business process”  are understood to “ dynamically trigger 
integration”  (p. 31). This integration occurs in what he calls the five 
pillars of benefits realization:
	
1.	Strategic alignment: The alignment of IT strategically with 
business goals and objectives.
	
2.	Business process impact: The impact on the need for the organi-
zation to redesign business processes and integrate them with 
new technologies.

46
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
3.	Architecture: The actual technological integration of appli-
cations, databases, and networks to facilitate and support 
implementation.
	
4.	Payback: The basis for computing return on investment (ROI) 
from both direct and indirect perspectives.
	
5.	Risk: Identifying the exposure for underachievement or fail-
ure in the technology investment.
Murphy’ s (2002) pillars are useful in helping us understand how 
technology can engender the need for responsive organizational dyna-
mism (ROD), especially as it bears on issues of strategic integration. 
They also help us understand what becomes the strategic integration 
component of ROD. His theory on strategic alignment and business 
process impact supports the notion that IT will increasingly serve as an 
undergirding force, one that will drive enterprise growth by identify-
ing the initiators (such as e-business on the Internet) that best fit busi-
ness goals. Many of these initiators will be accelerated by the growing 
use of e-business, which becomes the very driver of many new market 
realignments. This e-business realignment will require the ongoing 
involvement of executives, business managers, and IT managers. In 
fact, the Gartner Group forecasted that 70% of new software applica-
tion investments and 5% of new infrastructure expenditures by 2005 
would be driven by e-business. Indeed, this has occurred and contin-
ues to expand.
The combination of evolving business drivers with accelerated and 
changing customer demands has created a business revolution that 
best defines the imperative of the strategic integration component of 
ROD. The changing and accelerated way businesses deal with their 
customers and vendors requires a new strategic integration to become 
a reality rather than remain a concept discussed but affecting little 
action. Without action directed toward new strategic integration, 
organizations would lose competitive advantage, which would affect 
profits. Most experts see e-business as the mechanism that will ulti-
mately require the integrated business processes to be realigned, thus 
providing value to customers and modifying the customer– vendor 
relationship. The driving force behind this realignment emanates from 
the Internet, which serves as the principle accelerator of the change 
in transactions across all businesses. The general need to optimize 

47
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
resources forces organizations to rethink and to realign business pro-
cesses to gain access to new business markets.
Murphy’ s (2002) pillar of architecture brings out yet another aspect 
of ROD. By architecture  we mean the focus on the effects that technol-
ogy has on existing computer applications or legacy systems (old exist-
ing systems). Technology requires existing IT systems to be modified 
or replacement systems to be created that will mirror the new busi-
ness realignments. These changes respond to the forces of strategic 
integration and require business process reengineering (BPR) activi-
ties, which represent the reevaluation of existing systems based on 
changing business requirements. It is important to keep in mind the 
acceleration factors of technology and to recognize the amount of 
organizational effort and time that such projects take to complete. We 
must ask the following question: How might organizations respond to 
these continual requirements to modify existing processes? I discuss 
in other chapters how ROD represents the answer to this question.
Murphy’ s (2002) pillar of direct return is somewhat limited and nar-
row because not all IT value can be associated with direct returns, but 
it is important to discuss. Technology acceleration is forcing organiza-
tions to deal with broader issues surrounding what represents a return 
from an investment. The value of strategic integration relies heavily on 
the ability of technology to encapsulate itself within other departments 
where it ultimately provides the value. We show in Chapter    4 that 
this issue also has significance in organizational formation. What this 
means is simply that value can be best determined within individual 
business units at the microlevel and that these appropriate-level busi-
ness units also need to make the case for why certain investments need 
to be pursued. There are also paybacks that are indirect; for example, 
Lucas (1999) demonstrates that many technology investments are non-
monetary. The IT department (among others) becomes susceptible to 
great scrutiny and subject to budgetary cutbacks during economically 
difficult times. This does not suggest that IT “ hide”  itself but rather 
that its investment be integrated within the unit where it provides the 
most benefit. Notwithstanding the challenge to map IT expenditures 
to their related unit, there are always expenses that are central to all 
departments, such as e-mail and network infrastructure. These types 
of expenses can rarely provide direct returns and are typically allocated 
across departments as a cost of doing business.

48
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Because of the increased number of technology opportuni-
ties, Murphy’ s (2002) risk pillar must be a key part of strategic 
­integration. The concept of risk assessment is not new to an organiza-
tion; ­however, it is somewhat misunderstood as it relates to technology 
assessment. Technology assessment, because of the acceleration factor, 
must be embedded within the strategic decision-making process. This 
can only be accomplished by having an understanding of how to align 
technology opportunities for business change and by understanding 
the cost of forgoing the opportunity as well as the cost of delays in 
delivery. Many organizations use risk assessment in an unstructured 
way, which does not provide a consistent framework to dynamically 
deal with emerging technologies. Furthermore, such assessment needs 
to be managed at all levels in the organization as opposed to being an 
event-driven activity controlled only by executives.
Summary
Strategic integration represents the objective of dealing with emerg-
ing technologies on a regular basis. It is an outcome of ROD, and it 
requires organizations to deal with a variable, that forces acceleration 
of decisions in an unpredictable fashion. Strategic integration would 
require businesses to realign the ways in which they include technol-
ogy in strategic decision making.
Cultural Assimilation
Cultural assimilation is a process that focuses on the organizational 
aspects of how technology is internally organized, including the role 
of the IT department, and how it is assimilated within the organiza-
tion as a whole. The inherent, contemporary reality of technologi-
cal dynamism requires not only strategic but also cultural change. 
This reality demands that IT organizations connect to all aspects of 
the business. Such affiliation would foster a more interactive culture 
rather than one that is regimented and linear, as is too often the case. 
An interactive culture is one that can respond to emerging technology 
decisions in an optimally informed way, and one that understands the 
impact on business performance.

49
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
The kind of cultural assimilation elicited by technological dyna-
mism and formalized in ROD is divided into two subcategories: the 
study of how the IT organization relates and communicates with 
“ others,”  and the actual displacement or movement of traditional 
IT staff from an isolated “ core”  structure to a firm-wide, integrated 
framework.
IT Organization Communications with “ Others” 
The Ravell case study shows us the limitations and consequences of 
an isolated IT department operating within an organization. The case 
study shows that the isolation of a group can lead to marginalization, 
which results in the kind of organization in which not all individuals 
can participate in decision making and implementation, even though 
such individuals have important knowledge and value. Technological 
dynamism is forcing IT departments to rethink their strategic posi-
tion within the organizational structure of their firm. No longer can 
IT be a stand-alone unit designed just to service outside departments 
while maintaining its separate identity. The acceleration factors of 
technology require more dynamic activity within and among depart-
ments, which cannot be accomplished through discrete communica-
tions between groups. Instead, the need for diverse groups to engage 
in more integrated discourse, and to share varying levels of techno-
logical knowledge, as well as business-end perspectives, requires new 
organizational structures that will of necessity give birth to a new 
and evolving business— social culture. Indeed, the need to assimilate 
technology creates a transformative effect on organizational cultures, 
the way they are formed and re-formed, and what they will need from 
IT personnel.
Movement of Traditional IT Staff
To facilitate cultural assimilation from an IT perspective, IT must 
become better integrated with non-IT personnel. This form of inte-
gration can require the actual movement of IT staff into other depart-
ments, which begins the process of a true assimilation of resources 
among business units. While this may seem like the elimination of 

50
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
the integrity or identity of IT, such a loss is far from the case. The 
elimination of the IT department is not at all what is called for here; 
on the contrary, the IT department is critical to the function of cul-
tural assimilation. However, the IT department may need to be struc-
tured differently from the way it has been so that it can deal primarily 
with generic infrastructure and support issues, such as e-mail, net-
work architecture, and security. IT personnel who focus on business-
specific issues need to become closely aligned with the appropriate 
units so that ROD  can be successfully implemented.
Furthermore, we must acknowledge that, given the wide range of 
available knowledge about technology, not all technological knowl-
edge emanates from the IT department. The question becomes 
one of finding the best structure to support a broad assimilation of 
knowledge about any given technology; then, we should ask how that 
knowledge can best be utilized by the organization. There is a pitfall 
in attempting to find a “ standard”  IT organizational structure that 
will address the cultural assimilation of technology. Sampler’ s (1996) 
research, and my recent research with chief executives, confirms that 
no such standard structure exists. It is my position that organizations 
must find their own unique blend, using organizational learning con-
structs. This simply means that the cultural assimilation of IT may 
be unique to the organization. What is then more important for the 
success of organizational development is the process of assimilation as 
opposed to the transplanting of the structure itself.
Today, many departments still operate within “ silos”  where they 
are unable to meet the requirements of the dynamic and unpredictable 
nature of technology in the business environment. Traditional orga-
nizations do not often support the necessary communications needed 
to implement cultural assimilation across business units. However, 
business managers can no longer make decisions without considering 
technology; they will find themselves needing to include IT staff in 
their decision-making processes. On the other hand, IT departments 
can no longer make technology-based decisions without concerted 
efforts toward assimilation (in contrast to occasional partnering or 
project-driven participation) with other business units. This assimi-
lation becomes mature when new cultures evolve synergistically as 
opposed to just having multiple cultures that attempt to work in con-
junction with each other. The important lesson from Ravell to keep 

51
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
in mind here is that the process of assimilating IT can create new 
cultures that in turn evolve to better support the requirements estab-
lished by the dynamism of technology.
Eventually, these new cultural formations will not perceive them-
selves as functioning within an IT or non-IT decision framework 
but rather as operating within a more central business operation that 
understands how to incorporate varying degrees of IT involvement 
as necessary. Thus, organizational cultures will need to fuse together 
to respond to new business opportunities and requirements brought 
about by the ongoing acceleration of technological innovation. This 
was also best evidenced by subsequent events at Ravell. Three years 
after the original case study, it became necessary at Ravell to inte-
grate one of its business operations with a particular group of IT staff 
members. The IT personnel actually transferred to the business unit 
to maximize the benefits of merging both business and technical cul-
tures. Interestingly, this business unit is currently undergoing cultural 
assimilation and is developing its own behavioral norms influenced by 
the new IT staff. However, technology decisions within such groups 
are not limited to the IT transferred personnel. IT and non-IT staff 
need to formulate decisions using various organizational learning 
techniques. These techniques are discussed in the next chapter.
Summary
Without appropriate cultural assimilation, organizations tend to have 
staff that “ take shortcuts, [then] the loudest voice will win the day, ad 
hoc decisions will be made, accountabilities lost, and lessons from suc-
cesses and failures will not become part of ... wisdom”  (Murphy, 2002, 
p. 152). As in the case of Ravell Corporation, it is essential, then, to 
provide for consistent governance that fits the profile of the existing cul-
ture or can establish the need for a new culture. While many scholars 
and managers suggest the need to have a specific entity responsible for 
IT governance, one that is to be placed within the operating structure 
of the organization, such an approach creates a fundamental problem. 
It does not allow staff and managers the opportunity to assimilate tech-
nologically driven change and understand how to design a culture that 
can operate under ROD. In other words, the issue of governance is 
misinterpreted as a problem of structural positioning or hierarchy when 

52
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
it is really one of cultural assimilation. As a result, many business solu-
tions to technology issues often lean toward the prescriptive, instead of 
the analytical, in addressing the real problem.
Murphy’ s (2002) risk pillar theory offers us another important 
component relevant to cultural assimilation. This approach addresses 
the concerns that relate to the creation of risk cultures formed to deal 
with the impact of new systems. New technologies can actually cause 
changes in cultural assimilation by establishing the need to make cer-
tain changes in job descriptions, power structures, career prospects, 
degree of job security, departmental influence, or ownership of data. 
Each of these potential risks needs to be factored in as an important 
part of considering how best to organize and assimilate technology 
through ROD.
Technology Business Cycle
To better understand technology dynamism, or how technology acts as 
a dynamic variable, it is necessary to define the specific steps that occur 
during its evolution in an organization. The evolution or business cycle 
depicts the sequential steps during the maturation of a new technology 
from feasibility to implementation and through subsequent evolution. 
Table    3.1 shows the five components that comprise the cycle: feasibil-
ity, measurement, planning, implementation, and evolution.
Table     3.1   Technology Business Cycle
CYCLE COMPONENT
COMPONENT DESCRIPTION
Feasibility
Understanding how to view and evaluate emerging technologies, from a 
technical and business perspective.
Measurement
Dealing with both the direct monetary returns and indirect nonmonetary 
returns;  establishing driver and support life cycles.
Planning
Understanding how to set up projects, establishing participation across 
multiple layers of management, including operations and departments.
Implementation
Working with the realities of project management;  operating with political 
factions, constraints;  meeting milestones;  dealing with setbacks;  having 
the ability to go live with new systems.
Evolution
Understanding how acceptance of new technologies affects cultural 
change, and how uses of technology will change as individuals and 
organizations become more knowledgeable about technology, and 
generate new ideas about how it can be used;  objective is established 
through organizational dynamism, creating new knowledge and an 
evolving organization.

53
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
Feasibility
The stage of feasibility focuses on a number of issues surrounding 
the practicality of implementing a specific technology. Feasibility 
addresses the ability to deliver a product when it is needed in com-
parison to the time it takes to develop it. Risk also plays a role in 
feasibility assessment; of specific concern is the question of whether 
it is possible or probable that the product will become obsolete before 
completion. Cost is certainly a huge factor, but viewed at a “ high 
level”  (i.e., at a general cost range), and it is usually geared toward 
meeting the expected ROI of a firm. The feasibility process must be 
one that incorporates individuals in a way that allows them to respond 
to the accelerated and dynamic process brought forth by technological 
innovations.
Measurement
Measurement is the process of understanding how an investment in 
technology is calculated, particularly in relation to the ROI of an 
organization. The complication with technology and measurement 
is that it is simply not that easy to determine how to calculate such 
a return. This problem comes up in many of the issues discussed by 
Lucas (1999) in his book Information Technology and the Productivity 
Paradox.  His work addresses many comprehensive issues, surround-
ing both monetary and nonmonetary ROI, as well as direct ver-
sus indirect allocation of IT costs. Aside from these issues, there 
is the fact that for many investments in technology the attempt to 
compute ROI may be an inappropriate approach. As stated, Lucas 
offered a “ garbage can”  model that advocates trust in the operational 
management of the business and the formation of IT representatives 
into productive teams that can assess new technologies as a regu-
lar part of business operations. The garbage can is an abstract con-
cept for allowing individuals a place to suggest innovations brought 
about by technology. The inventory of technology opportunities 
needs regular evaluation. Lucas does not really offer an explana-
tion of exactly how this process should work internally. ROD, how-
ever, provides the strategic processes and organizational– cultural 
needs that can provide the infrastructure to better understand and 

54
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
evaluate the potential benefits from technological innovations using 
the ­garbage can model. The graphic depiction of the model is shown 
in Figure 3.2.
Planning
Planning requires a defined team of user and IT representatives. This 
appears to be a simple task, but it is more challenging to understand 
how such teams should operate, from whom they need support, and 
what resources they require. Let me be specific. There are a number 
of varying types of “ users”  of technology. They typically exist in three 
tiers: executives, business line managers, and operations users. Each 
of these individuals offers valuable yet different views of the benefits 
of technology (Langer, 2002). I define these user tiers as follows:
	
1.	Executives: These individuals are often referred to as execu­
tive sponsors.  Their role is twofold. First, they provide input 
into the system, specifically from the perspective of pro-
ductivity, ROI, and competitive edge. Second, and per-
haps more important, their responsibility is to ensure that 
users are participating in the requisite manner (i.e., made 
Garbage can
model of IT value
Failed systems
Direct
beneﬁts
Indirect
beneﬁts
User
needs, etc.
Conversion
eﬀectiveness
Te IT value pipeline
Figure     3.2   Garbage can model of IT value. (From Lucas, H.C., Information Technology and the 
Productivity Paradox.  Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.)

55
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
to be available, in the right place, etc.). This area can be 
problematic because internal users are typically busy doing 
their jobs and sometimes neglect to provide input or to 
attend project meetings. Furthermore, executive sponsors 
can help control political agendas that can hurt the success 
of the project.
	
2.	Business line managers: This interface provides the most 
information from a business unit perspective. These indi-
viduals are responsible for two aspects of management. 
First, they are responsible for the day-to-day productivity 
of their unit; therefore, they understand the importance 
of productive teams, and how software can assist in this 
endeavor. Second, they are responsible for their staff. Thus, 
line managers need to know how software will affect their 
operational staff.
	
3.	Functional users: These are the individuals in the trenches who 
understand exactly how processing needs to get done. While 
their purview of the benefits of the system is relatively nar-
rower than that of the executives and managers, they provide 
the concrete information that is required to create the feature/
functions that make the system usable.
The planning process becomes challenging when attempting to 
get the three user communities to integrate their needs and “ agree to 
agree”  on how a technology project needs to be designed and managed.
Implementation
Implementation is the process of actually using a technology. 
Implementation of technology systems requires wider integration 
within the various departments than other systems in an organization 
because usually multiple business units are affected. Implementation 
must combine traditional methods of IT processes of development 
yet integrate them within the constraints, assumptions, and cultural 
(perhaps political) environments of different departments. Cultural 
assimilation is therefore required at this stage because it delves into 
the structure of the internal organization and requires individual 
participation in every phase of the development and implementation 

56
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
cycle. The following are some of the unique challenges facing the 
implementation of technological projects:
	
1.	Project managers as complex managers: Technology projects 
require multiple interfaces that often lie outside the traditional 
user community. They can include interfacing with writers, 
editors, marketing personnel, customers, and consumers, all 
of whom are stakeholders in the success of the system.
	
2.	Shorter and dynamic development schedules: Due to the dynamic 
nature of technology, its process of development is less lin-
ear than that of others. Because there is less experience in 
the general user community, and there are more stakeholders, 
there is a tendency by those in IT, and executives, to underes-
timate the time and cost to complete the project.
	
3.	New untested technologies: There is so much new technol-
ogy offered to organizations that there is a tendency by IT 
organizations to implement technologies that have not yet 
matured— that are not yet the best products they will eventu-
ally be.
	
4.	Degree of scope changes: Technology, because of its dynamic 
nature, tends to be prone to scope creed — the scope of the orig-
inal project expanding during development.
	
5.	Project management: Project managers need to work closely 
with internal users, customers, and consumers to advise 
them on the impact of changes to the project schedule. 
Unfortunately, scope changes that are influenced by changes 
in market trends may not be avoidable. Thus, part of a good 
strategy is to manage scope changes rather than attempt to 
stop them, which might not be realistic.
	
6.	Estimating completion time: IT has always had difficulties in 
knowing how long it will take to implement a technology. 
Application systems are even more difficult because of the 
number of variables and unknowns.
	
7.	Lack of standards: The technology industry continues to be a 
profession that does not have a governing body. Thus, it is 
impossible to have real enforced standards that other pro-
fessions enjoy. While there are suggestions for best prac-
tices, many of them are unproven and not kept current with 

57
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
changing developments. Because of the lack of successful 
application projects, there are few success stories to create new 
and better sets of best practices.
	
8.	Less-specialized roles and responsibilities: The IT team tends to 
have staff members who have varying responsibilities. Unlike 
traditional new technology-driven projects, separation of roles 
and responsibilities is more difficult when operating in more 
dynamic environments. The reality is that many roles have not 
been formalized and integrated using something like ROD.
	
9.	Broad project management responsibilities: Project management 
responsibilities need to go beyond those of the traditional IT 
manager. Project managers are required to provide manage-
ment services outside the traditional software staff. They need 
to interact more with internal and external individuals, as well 
as with non‑traditional members of the development team, 
such as Web text and content staff. Therefore, there are many 
more obstacles that can cause implementation problems.
Evolution
The many ways to form a technological organization with a natural 
capacity to evolve have been discussed from an IT perspective in this 
chapter. However, another important factor is the changing nature 
of application systems, particularly those that involve e-businesses. 
E-business systems are those that utilize the Internet and engage 
in e-commerce activities among vendors, clients, and internal users 
in the organization. The ways in which e-business systems are built 
and deployed suggest that they are evolving systems. This means 
that they have a long life cycle involving ongoing maintenance and 
enhancement. They are, if you will, “ living systems”  that evolve 
in a manner similar to organizational cultures. So, the traditional 
beginning-to-end life cycle does not apply to an e-business proj-
ect that must be implemented in inherently ongoing and evolving 
phases. The important focus is that technology and organizational 
development have parallel evolutionary processes that need to be in 
balance with each other. This philosophy is developed further in the 
next chapter.

58
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Drivers and Supporters
There are essentially two types of generic functions performed by 
departments in organizations: driver functions and supporter func-
tions. These functions relate to the essential behavior and nature of 
what a department contributes to the goals of the organization. I 
first encountered the concept of drivers and supporters at Coopers 
& Lybrand, which was at that time a Big 8* accounting firm. I stud-
ied the formulation of driver versus supporter as it related to the role 
of our electronic data processing (EDP) department. The firm was 
attempting to categorize the EDP department as either a driver or a 
supporter.
Drivers  were defined in this instance as those units that engaged 
in frontline or direct revenue-generating activities. Supporters  were 
units that did not generate obvious direct revenues but rather were 
designed to support frontline activities. For example, operations such 
as internal accounting, purchasing, or office management were all 
classified as supporter departments. Supporter departments, due to 
their nature, were evaluated on their effectiveness and efficiency or 
economies of scale. In contrast, driver organizations were expected to 
generate direct revenues and other ROI value for the firm. What was 
also interesting to me at the time was that drivers were expected to 
be more daring— since they must inevitably generate returns for the 
business. As such, drivers engaged in what Bradley and Nolan (1998) 
coined “ sense and respond”  behaviors and activities. Let me explain.
Marketing departments often generate new business by investing 
or “ sensing”  an opportunity quickly because of competitive forces 
in the marketplace. Thus, they must sense an opportunity and be 
allowed to respond to it in a timely fashion. The process of sensing 
opportunity, and responding with competitive products or services, 
is a stage in the cycle that organizations need to support. Failures in 
the cycles of sense and respond are expected. Take, for example, the 
*	The original “ Big 8”  consisted of the eight large accounting and management con-
sulting firms— Coopers &  Lybrand, Arthur Anderson, Touche Ross, Deloitte 
Haskins &  Sells, Arthur Young, Price Waterhouse, Pete Marwick Mitchell, and 
Ernst and Whinney— until the late 1980s, when these firms began to merge. Today, 
there are four: Price Waterhouse Coopers, Deloitte &  Touche, Ernst &  Young, and 
KPMG (Pete Marwick and others).

59
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
launching of new fall television shows. Each of the major stations 
goes through a process of sensing which shows might be interesting to 
the viewing audience. They respond, after research and review, with a 
number of new shows. Inevitably, only a few of these selected shows 
are actually successful; some fail almost immediately. While relatively 
few shows succeed, the process is acceptable and is seen by manage-
ment as the consequence of an appropriate set of steps for competing 
effectively— even though the percentage of successful new shows is 
low. Therefore, it is safe to say that driver organizations are expected 
to engage in high-risk operations, of which many will fail, for the sake 
of creating ultimately successful products or services.
The preceding example raises two questions: (1) How does sense 
and respond relate to the world of IT? and (2) Why is it important? 
IT is unique in that it is both a driver and a supporter. The latter is the 
generally accepted norm in most firms. Indeed, most IT functions are 
established to support myriad internal functions, such as
•	 Accounting and finance
•	 Data center infrastructure (e-mail, desktop, etc.)
•	 Enterprise-level application (enterprise resource planning, ERP)
•	 Customer support (customer relationship management, CRM)
•	 Web and e-commerce activities
As one would expect, these IT functions are viewed as overhead 
related, as somewhat of a commodity, and thus are constantly man-
aged on an economy-of-scale basis— that is, how can we make this 
operation more efficient, with a particular focus on cost containment?
So, what then are IT driver functions? By definition, they are those 
that engage in direct revenues and identifiable ROI. How do we define 
such functions in IT because most activities are sheltered under the 
umbrella of marketing organization domains? (Excluding, of course, 
software application development firms that engage in marketing for 
their actual application products.) I define IT driver functions as those 
projects that, if delivered, would change the relationship between the 
organization and its customers; that is, those activities that directly 
affect the classic definition of a market: forces of supply and demand, 
which are governed by the customer (demand) and the vendor (sup-
plier) relationship. This concept can be shown in the case example that 
follows.

60
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Santander versus  Citibank 
Santander Bank, the major bank of Spain, had enjoyed a dominant 
market share in its home country. Citibank had attempted for years to 
penetrate Santander’ s dominance using traditional approaches (open-
ing more branch offices, marketing, etc.) without success, until, that 
is, they tried online banking. Using technology as a driver, Citibank 
made significant penetration into the market share of Santander 
because it changed the customer– vendor relationship. Online bank-
ing, in general, has had a significant impact on how the banking 
industry has established new markets, by changing this relationship. 
What is also interesting about this case is the way in which Citibank 
accounted for its investment in online banking; it knows little about 
its total investment and essentially does not care about its direct pay-
back. Rather, Citibank sees its ROI in a similar way that depicts 
driver/marketing behavior; the payback is seen in broader terms to 
affect not only revenue generation, but also customer support and 
quality recognition.
Information Technology Roles and Responsibilities
The preceding section focuses on how IT can be divided into two dis-
tinct kinds of business operations. As such, the roles and responsibili-
ties within IT need to change accordingly and be designed under the 
auspices of driver and supporter theory. Most traditional IT depart-
ments are designed to be supporters, so that they have a close-knit 
organization that is secure from outside intervention and geared to 
respond to user needs based on requests. While in many instances 
this type of formation is acceptable, it is limited in providing the IT 
department with the proper understanding of the kind of business 
objectives that require driver-type activities. This was certainly the 
experience in the Ravell case study. In that instance, I found that 
making the effort to get IT support personnel “ out from their com-
fortable shells”  made a huge difference in providing better service 
to the organization at large. Because more and more technology is 
becoming driver essential, this development will require of IT per-
sonnel an increasing ability to communicate to managers and execu-
tives and to assimilate within other departments.

61
Technology as a Variable and Responsive
The Ravell case, however, also brought to light the huge vacuum of 
IT presence in driver activities. The subsequent chief executive inter-
view study also confirmed that most marketing IT-oriented activities, 
such as e-business, do not fall under the purview of IT in most orga-
nizations. The reasons for this separation are correlated with the lack 
of IT executive presence within the management team.
Another aspect of driver and supporter functions is the concept of 
a life cycle. A life cycle, in this respect, refers to the stages that occur 
before a product or service becomes obsolete. Technology products 
have a life cycle of value just as any other product or service. It is 
important not to confuse this life cycle with processes during devel-
opment as discussed elsewhere in this chapter.
Many technical products are adopted because they are able to deliver 
value that is typically determined based on ROI calculations. However, 
as products mature within an organization, they tend to become more of 
a commodity, and as they are normalized, they tend to become support-
oriented. Once they reach the stage of support, the rules of economies 
of scale become more important and relevant to evaluation. As a prod-
uct enters the support stage, replacement based on economies of scale 
can be maximized by outsourcing to an outside vendor who can provide 
the service cheaper. New technologies then can be expected to follow 
this kind of life cycle, by which their initial investment requires some 
level of risk to provide returns to the business. This initial investment 
is accomplished in ROD using strategic integration. Once the evalua-
tions are completed, driver activities will prevail during the maturation 
process of the technology, which will also require cultural assimilation. 
Inevitably, technology will change organizational behavior and struc-
ture. However, once the technology is assimilated and organizational 
behavior and structures are normalized, individuals will use it as a per-
manent part of their day-to-day operations. Thus, driver activities give 
way to those of supporters. Senior managers become less involved, and 
line managers then become the more important group that completes 
the transition from driver to supporter.
Replacement or Outsource
After the technology is absorbed into operations, executives will seek 
to maximize the benefit by increased efficiency and effectiveness. 

62
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Certain product enhancements may be pursued during this phase; they 
can create “ mini-loops”  of driver-to-supporter activities. Ultimately, a 
technology, viewed in terms of its economies of scale and longevity, 
is considered for replacement or outsourcing. Figure 3.3 graphically 
shows the cycle.
The final stage of maturity of an evolving driver therefore includes 
becoming a supporter, at which time it becomes a commodity and, 
finally, an entity with potential for replacement or outsourcing. The 
next chapter explores how organizational learning theories can be 
used to address many of the issues and challenges brought forth in 
this chapter.
Mini loop technology enhancements
Technology
driver
Evaluation
cycle
Driver
maturation
Support
status
Replacement or
outsource
Economies
of scale
Figure     3.3   Driver-to-supporter life cycle.

63
4
Organizational Learning 
Theories and Technology
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to provide readers with an under-
standing of organizational theory. The chapter covers some aspects 
of the history and context of organizational learning. It also defines 
and explains various learning protocols, and how they can be used to 
promote organizational learning. The overall objective of organiza-
tional learning is to support a process that guides individuals, groups, 
and entire communities through transformation. Indeed, evidence of 
organizational transformation provides the very proof that learning 
has occurred, and that changes in behavior are occurring. What is 
important in this regard is that transformation remains internal to 
the organization so that it can evolve in a progressive manner while 
maintaining the valuable knowledge base that is contained within 
the personnel of an organization. Thus, the purpose of organiza-
tional learning is to foster evolutionary transformation that will lead 
to change in behaviors and that is geared toward improving strategic 
performance.
Approaches to organizational learning typically address how indi-
viduals, groups, and organizations “notice and interpret information 
and use it to alter their fit with their environments” (Aldrich, 2001, 
p. 57). As such, however, organizational learning does not direct itself 
toward, and therefore has not been able to show, an inherent link to 
success—which is a critical concern for executive management. There 
are two perspectives on organizational learning theory. On the one 
hand, the adoptive approach, pioneered by Cyert and March (1963), 
treats organizations as goal-oriented activity systems. These systems 
generate learning when repeating experiences that have either suc-
ceeded or failed, discarding, of course, processes that have failed. 

64
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Knowledge development, on the other hand, treats organizations as 
sets of interdependent members with shared patterns of cognition and 
belief (Argyris & Schö n, 1996). Knowledge development empha-
sizes that learning is not limited to simple trial and error, or direct 
experience. Instead, learning is understood also to be inferential and 
vicarious; organizations can generate new knowledge through experi-
mentation and creativity. It is the knowledge development perspec-
tive that fits conceptually and empirically with work on technological 
evolution and organizational knowledge creation and deployment 
(Tushman & Anderson, 1986).
There is a complication in the field of organizational learning over 
whether it is a technical or social process. Scholars disagree on this 
point. From the technical perspective, organizational learning is 
about the effective processing of, interpretation of, and response to 
information both inside and outside the organization. “An organiza-
tion is assumed to learn if any of its units acquires knowledge that it 
recognizes as potentially useful to the organization” (Huber, 1991, 
p. 89). From the social perspective, on the other hand, comes the con-
cept that learning is “something that takes place not with the heads of 
individuals, but in the interaction between people” (Easterby-Smith 
et al., 1999, p. 6). The social approach draws from the notion that 
patterns of behavior are developed, via patterns of socialization, by 
evolving tacit knowledge and skills. There is, regrettably, a lack of 
ongoing empirical investigation in the area of organizational learning 
pertaining, for example, to in-depth case studies, to micropractices 
within organizational settings, and to processes that lead to outcomes. 
Indeed, measuring learning is a difficult process, which is why there 
is a lack of research that focuses on outputs. As Prange (1999, p. 24) 
notes: “The multitude of ways in which organizational learning has 
been classified and used purports an ‘organizational learning jungle,’ 
which is becoming progressively dense and impenetrable.” Mackenzie 
(1994, p. 251) laments that what the “scientific community devoted 
to organizational learning has not produced discernable intellectual 
progress.”
Ultimately, organizational learning must provide transformation 
that links to performance. Most organizations seeking improved per-
formance expect changes that will support new outcomes. The study of 
organizational learning needs an overarching framework under which 

65
Organizational Learning Theories
an inquiry into the pivotal issues surrounding organizational change 
can be organized. Frameworks that support organizational learning, 
whether their orientation is on individuals, groups, or infrastructure, 
need to allow for natural evolution within acceptable time frames for 
the organization. This is the problem of organizational learning the-
ory. It lacks a method of producing measurable results that executives 
can link to performance. While scholars seek outcomes through stra-
tegic learning, there must be tangible evidence of individual and orga-
nizational performance to ensure future investments in the concepts 
of learning. Technology, we should remember, represents the oppor-
tunity to provide outcomes through strategic learning that addresses 
transitions and transformations over a specific life cycle.
We saw this opportunity occur in the Ravell case study; the 
information technology (IT) department used organizational learn-
ing. Specifically, individual reflective practices were used to provide 
measurable outcomes for the organization. In this case, the out-
comes related to a specific event, the physical move of the business 
to a different location. Another lesson we can derive (with hindsight) 
from the Ravell experience is that learning was converted to strategic 
benefit for the organization. The concept of converting learning to 
strategic benefit was pioneered by Pietersen (2002). He established a 
strategic learning cycle composed of four component processes that he 
identified with the action verbs learn, focus, align,  and execute.  These 
are stages in the learning cycle, as follows:
	
1.	Learn: Conduct a situation analysis to generate insights into 
the competitive environment and into the realities of the 
company.
	
2.	Focus: Translate insights into a winning proposition that out-
lines key priorities for success.
	
3.	Align: Align the organization and energize the people behind 
the new strategic focus.
	
4.	Execute: Implement strategy and experiment with new con-
cepts. Interpret results and continue the cycle.
At Ravell, technology assisted in driving the learning cycle because, 
by its dynamic nature, it mandated the acceleration of the cycle that 
Pietersen (2002) describes in his stage strategy of implementation. 
Thus, Ravell required the process Pietersen outlined to occur within 

66
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
6 months, and therein established the opportunity to provide ­outcomes. 
It also altered the culture of the organization (i.e., the evolution in cul-
ture was tangible because the transformation was concrete).
We see from the Ravell case that technology represents the best 
opportunity to apply organizational learning techniques because the 
use of it requires forms of evolutionary-related change. Organizations 
are continually seeking to improve their operations and competi-
tive advantage through efficiency and effective processes. As I have 
discussed in previous chapters, today’s businesses are experiencing 
technological dynamism (defined as causing accelerated and dynamic 
transformations), and this is due to the advent of technologically driven 
processes. That is, organizations are experiencing more pressure to 
change and compete as a result of the accelerations that technology 
has brought about. Things happen quicker, and more unpredictably, 
than before. This situation requires organizations to sense the need for 
change and execute that change. The solution I propose is to tie orga-
nizational theory to technological implementation. Another way of 
defining this issue is to provide an overarching framework that orga-
nizes an inquiry into the issues surrounding organizational change.
Another dimension of organizational learning is political. Argyris 
(1993) and Senge (1990) argue that politics gets “in the way of good 
learning.” In my view, however, the political dimension is very much 
part of learning. It seems naï ve to assume that politics can be elimi-
nated from the daily commerce of organizational communication. 
Instead, it needs to be incorporated as a factor in organizational learn-
ing theory rather than attempting to disavow or eliminate it, which is 
not realistic. Ravell also revealed that political factors are simply part 
of the learning process. Recall that during my initial efforts to create 
a learning organization there were IT staff members who deliberately 
refused to cooperate, assuming that they could “outlast” me in my 
interim tenure as IT director. But politics, of course, is not limited to 
internal department negotiations; it was also a factor at Ravell with, 
and among, departments outside IT. These interdepartmental rela-
tionships applied especially to line managers, who became essential 
advocates for establishing and sustaining necessary forms of learning 
at the organizational level. But, not all line managers responded with 
the same enthusiasm, and a number of them did not display a sense of 
authentically caring about facilitating synergies across departments. 

67
Organizational Learning Theories
The irrepressible existence of politics in social organizations, however, 
must not in itself deter us from implementing organizational learn-
ing practices; it simply means that that we must factor it in as part 
of the equation. At Ravell, I had to work within the constraints of 
both internal and external politics. Nevertheless, in the end I was able 
to accomplish the creation of a learning organization. Another way 
one might look at the road bumps of politics is to assume that they 
will temporarily delay or slow the implementation of organizational 
learning initiatives. But, let us make no mistake about the potentially 
disruptive nature of politics because, as we know, in its extreme cases 
of inflexibility, it can be damaging.
I have always equated politics with the dilemma of blood cholesterol. 
We know that there are two types of cholesterol: “good” ­cholesterol 
and “bad” cholesterol. We all know that bad cholesterol in your blood 
can cause heart disease, among other life-threatening conditions. 
However, good cholesterol is essential to the body. My point is simple; 
the general word politics  can have damaging perceptions. When most 
people discuss the topic of cholesterol, they focus on the bad type, not 
the good. Such is the same with politics—that is, most individuals dis-
cuss the bad type, which often corresponds with their personal expe-
riences. My colleague Professor Lyle Yorks, at Columbia University, 
often lectures on the importance of politics and its positive aspects for 
establishing strategic advocacy,  defined as the ability to establish per-
sonal and functional influence through cultivating alliances through 
defining opportunities for the adding value to either the top or bottom 
line (Langer & Yorks, 2013). Thus, politics can add value for indi-
viduals by allowing them to initiate and influence relationships and 
­conversations with other leaders. This, then, is “good” politics!
North American cultural norms account for much of what goes 
into organizational learning theory, such as individualism, an empha-
sis on rationality, and the importance of explicit, empirical informa-
tion. IT, on the other hand, has a broadening, globalizing effect on 
organizational learning because of the sheer increase in the number of 
multicultural organizations created through the expansion of global 
firms. Thus, technology also affects the social aspects of organizational 
learning, particularly as it relates to the cultural evolution of commu-
nities. Furthermore, technology has shown us that what works in one 
culture may not work in another. Dana Deasy, the former CIO of the 

68
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Americas region/sector for Siemens AG, experienced the ­difficulties 
and challenges of introducing technology standards on a global scale. 
He quickly learned that what worked in North America did not oper-
ate with the same expectations in Asia or South America. I discuss 
Siemens AG as a case study in Chapter  8.
It is my contention, however, that technology can be used as an 
intervention that can actually increase organizational learning. In 
effect, the implementation of organizational learning has lacked and 
has needed concrete systemic processes that show results. A solution 
to this need can be found, as I have found it, in the incorporation of 
IT itself into the process of true organizational learning. The prob-
lem with IT is that we keep trying to simplify it—trying to reduce 
its complexity. However, dealing with the what, when, and how of 
working with technology is complex. Organizations need a kind of 
mechanism that can provide a way to absorb and learn all of the com-
plex pieces of technology.
It is my position that organizational change often follows learn-
ing, which to some extent should be expected. What controls whether 
change is radical or evolutionary depends on the basis on which 
new processes are created (Argyris & Schö n, 1996; Senge, 1990; 
Swieringa & Wierdsma, 1992). Indeed, at Ravell the learning fol-
lowed the Argyris and Schö n approach: that radical change occurs 
when there are major events that support the need for accelerated 
change. In other words, critical events become catalysts that promote 
change, through reflection. On the other hand, there can be non-
event-related learning, that is not so much radical in nature, as it is 
evolutionary. Thus, evolutionary learning is characterized as an ongo-
ing process that slowly establishes the need for change over time. This 
evolutionary learning process compares to what Senge (1990, p. 15) 
describes as “learning in wholes as opposed to pieces.” 
This concept of learning is different from an event-driven perspec-
tive, and it supports the natural tendency that groups and organiza-
tions have to protect themselves from open confrontation and critique. 
However, technology provides an interesting variable in this regard. 
It is generally accepted as an agent of change that must be addressed 
by the organization. I believe that this agency can be seized as an 
opportunity to promote such change because it establishes a reason 
why organizations need to deal with the inevitable transitions brought 

69
Organizational Learning Theories
about by technology. Furthermore, as Huysman (1999) points out, the 
history of organizational learning has not often created measurable 
improvement, particularly because implementing the theories has not 
always been efficient or effective. Much of the impetus for implement-
ing a new technology, however, is based on the premise that its use 
will result in such benefits. Therefore, technology provides compelling 
reasons for why organizational learning is important: to understand 
how to deal with agents of change, and to provide ongoing changes in 
the processes that improve competitive advantage.
There is another intrinsic issue here. Uses of technology have not 
always resulted in efficient and effective outcomes, particularly as 
they relate to a firm’s expected ROI. In fact, IT projects often cost 
more than expected and tend to be delivered late. Indeed, research 
performed by the Gartner Group and CIO Magazine  (Koch, 1999) 
reports that 54% of IT projects are late and that 22% are never com-
pleted. In May 2009, McGraw reported similar trends, so industry 
performance has not materially improved. This is certainly a disturb-
ing statistic for a dynamic variable of change that promises outcomes 
of improved efficiency and effectiveness. The question then is why is 
this occurring? Many scholars might consider the answer to this ques-
tion as complex. It is my claim, however, based on my own research, 
that the lack of organizational learning, both within IT and within 
other departments, poses, perhaps, the most significant barrier to the 
success of these projects in terms of timeliness and completion. Langer 
(2001b) suggests that the inability of IT organizations to understand 
how to deal with larger communities within the organization and to 
establish realistic and measurable outcomes are relevant both to many 
of the core values of organizational learning and to its importance in 
attaining results. What better opportunity is there to combine the 
strengths and weaknesses of each of IT and organizational learning?
Perhaps what is most interesting—and, in many ways, lacking 
within the literature on organizational learning—is the actual way 
individuals learn. To address organizational learning, I believe it is 
imperative to address the learning styles of individuals within the 
organization. One fundamental consideration to take into account 
is that of individual turnover within departments. Thus, methods 
to measure or understand organizational learning must incorporate 
the individual; how the individual learns, and what occurs when 

70
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
individuals change positions or leave, as opposed to solely focusing 
on the event-driven aspect of evolutionary learning. There are two 
sociological positions about how individual learning occurs. The first 
suggests that individual action derives from determining influences 
in the social system, and the other suggests that it emanates from 
individual action. The former proposition supports the concept that 
learning occurs at the organizational, or group level, and the lat-
ter supports it at the individual level of action and experience. The 
“system” argument focuses on learning within the organization as a 
whole and claims that individual action functions within its boundar-
ies. The “individual” argument claims that learning emanates from 
the individual first and affects the system as a result of outcomes from 
individual actions. Determining a balance between individual and 
organizational learning is an issue debated by scholars and an impor-
tant one that this book must address.
Why is this issue relevant to the topic of IT and organizational 
learning? Simply put, understanding the nature of evolving technolo-
gies requires that learning—and subsequent learning outcomes—will 
be heavily affected by the processes in which it is delivered. Therefore, 
without understanding the dynamics of how individuals and organi-
zations learn, new technologies may be difficult to assimilate because 
of a lack of process that can determine how they can be best used in 
the business. What is most important to recognize is the way in which 
responsive organizational dynamism (ROD) needs both the system 
and individual approaches. Huysman (1999) suggests (and I agree) 
that organizational versus individual belief systems are not mutually 
exclusive pairs but dualities. In this way, organizational processes are 
not seen as just top-down or bottom-up affairs, but as accumulations 
of history, assimilated in organizational memory, which structures 
and positions the agency or capacity for learning. In a similar way, 
organizational learning can be seen as occurring through the actions 
of individuals, even when they are constrained by institutional forces. 
The strategic integration component of ROD lends itself to the system 
model of learning to the extent that it almost mandates change—
change that, if not addressed, will inevitably affect the competitive 
advantage of the organization. On the other hand, the cultural assim-
ilation component of ROD is also involved because of its effect on 
individual behavior. Thus, the ROD model needs to be expanded to 

71
Organizational Learning Theories
show the relationship between individual and organizational learning 
as shown in Figure  4.1.
An essential challenge to technology comes from the fact that 
organizations are not sure about how to handle its overall potential. 
Thus, in a paradoxical way, this quandary provides a springboard to 
learning by utilizing organizational learning theories and concepts to 
create new knowledge, by learning from experience, and ultimately by 
linking technology to learning and performance. This perspective can 
be promoted from within the organization because chief executives 
are generally open to investing in learning as long as core business 
principles are not violated. This position is supported by my research 
with chief executives that I discussed in Chapter  2.
Organizational
dynamism
Acceleration of events that
require diﬀerent
infrastructures and
organizational processes
Requires
Strategic
integration
Cultural
assimilation
Organization
structures
(system)
Individual
actions
Renegotiation of
relationship
Organizational learning techniques
Symptoms and
implications
Technology
Figure  4.1   ROD and organizational learning.

72
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Organizational learning can also assist in the adoption of 
­technologies by providing a mechanism to help individuals manage 
change. This notion is consistent with Aldrich (2001), who observes 
that many organizations reject technology-driven changes or “pio-
neering ventures,” which he called competence-destroying ventures 
because they threaten existing norms and processes. Organizations 
would do well to understand the value of technology, particularly for 
those who adopt it early (early adopters), and how it can lead to com-
petitive advantages. Thus, organizations that position themselves to 
evolve, to learn, and to create new knowledge are better prepared to 
foster the handling, absorption, and acceptance of technology-driven 
change than those that are not. Another way to view this ethic is to 
recognize that organizations need to be “ready” to deal with change—
change that is accelerated by technology innovations. Although 
Aldrich (2001) notes that organizational learning has not been tied 
to performance and success, I believe it will be the technology revolu-
tion that establishes the catalyst that can tie organizational learning 
to performance.
The following sections of this chapter expand on the core concept 
that the success of ROD is dependent on the uses of organizational 
learning techniques. In each section, I correlate this concept to many 
of the organizational learning theories and show how they can be 
tailored and used to provide important outcomes that assist the pro-
motion of both technological innovation and organizational learning.
Learning Organizations
Business strategists have realized that the ability of an organization 
to learn faster, or “better,” than its competitors may indeed be the key 
to long-term business success (Collis, 1994; Dodgson, 1993; Grant, 
1996; Jones, 1975). A learning organization  is defined as a form of 
organization that enables, in an active sense, the learning of its mem-
bers in such a way that it creates positive outcomes, such as innovation, 
efficiency, improved alignment with the environment, and competi-
tive advantage. As such, a learning organization is one that acquires 
knowledge from within. Its evolution, then, is primarily driven by 
itself without the need for interference from outside forces. In this 
sense, it is a self-perpetuating and self-evolving system of individual 

73
Organizational Learning Theories
and organizational transformations integrated into the daily processes 
of the organization. It should be, in effect, a part of normal organiza-
tional behavior. The focus of organizational learning is not so much 
on the process of learning but more on the conditions that allow suc-
cessful outcomes to flourish. Learning organization literature draws 
from organizational learning theory, particularly as it relates to inter-
ventions based on outcomes. This provides an alternative to social 
approaches.
In reviewing these descriptions of what a learning organization 
does, and why it is important, we can begin to see that technology may 
be one of the few agents that can actually show what learning organi-
zations purport to do. Indeed, Ravell created an evolving population 
that became capable of dealing with environmental changes brought 
on by technological innovation. The adaptation of these changes 
created those positive outcomes and improved efficiencies. Without 
organizational learning, specifically the creation of a learning organi-
zation, many innovations brought about by technology could produce 
chaos and instability. Organizations generally tend to suffer from, and 
spend too much time reflecting on, their past dilemmas. However, 
given the recent phenomenon of rapid changes in technology, orga-
nizations can no longer afford the luxury of claiming that there is 
simply too much else to do to be constantly worrying about technol-
ogy. Indeed, Lounamaa and March (1987) state that organizations 
can no longer support the claim that too-frequent changes will inhibit 
learning. The fact is that such changes must be taken as evolutionary, 
and as a part of the daily challenges facing any organization. Because 
a learning organization is one that creates structure and strategies, it 
is positioned to facilitate the learning of all its members, during the 
ongoing infiltration of technology-driven agents of change. Boland 
et al. (1994) show that information systems based on multimedia 
technologies may enhance the appreciation of diverse interpretations 
within organizations and, as such, support learning organizations. 
Since learning organizations are deliberately created to facilitate the 
learning of their members, understanding the urgency of technologi-
cal changes can provide the stimulus to support planned learning.
Many of the techniques used in the Ravell case study were based 
on the use of learning organizational techniques, many of which were 
pioneered by Argyris and Schö n (1996). Their work focuses on using 

74
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
“action science” methods to create and maintain learning organiza-
tions. A key component of action science is the use of reflective prac-
tices—including what is commonly known among researchers and 
practitioners as reflection in action and reflection on action. Reflection 
with action  is the term I use as a rubric for these various methods, 
involving reflection in relation to activity. Reflection has received 
a number of definitions, from different sources in the literature. 
Depending on the emphasis, whether on theory or practice, defini-
tions vary from philosophical articulation (Dewey, 1933; Habermas, 
1998), to practice-based formulations, such as Kolb’s (1984b) use of 
reflection in the experiential learning cycle. Specifically, reflection 
with action carries the resonance of Schö n’s (1983) twin constructs: 
reflection on action and reflection in action, which emphasize reflec-
tion in retrospect, and reflection to determine which actions to take 
in the present or immediate future, respectively. Dewey (1933) and 
Hullfish and Smith (1978) also suggest that the use of reflection sup-
ports an implied purpose: individuals reflect for a purpose that leads 
to the processing of a useful outcome. This formulation suggests the 
possibility of reflection that is future oriented—what we might call 
“reflection to action.” These are methodological orientations covered 
by the rubric.
Reflective practices are integral to ROD because so many 
­technology-based projects are event driven and require individu-
als to reflect before, during, and after actions. Most important to 
this process is that these reflections are individually driven and that 
technology projects tend to accelerate the need for rapid decisions. 
In other words, there are more dynamic decisions to be made in less 
time. Without operating in the kind of formation that is a learning 
organization, IT departments cannot maintain the requisite infra-
structure to develop products timely on time and support business 
units—something that clearly is not happening if we look at the 
existing lateness of IT projects. With respect to the role of reflec-
tion in general, the process can be individual or organizational. 
While groups can reflect, it is in being reflective that individuals 
bring about “an orientation to their everyday lives,” according to 
Moon (1999). “For others reflection comes about when conditions 
in the learning environment are appropriate” (p. 186). However, 
IT departments have long suffered from not having the conditions 

75
Organizational Learning Theories
to support such an individual learning environment. This is why 
implementing a learning organization is so appealing as a remedy 
for a chronic problem.
Communities of Practice
Communities of practice are based on the assumption that learning 
starts with engagement in social practice and that this practice is the 
fundamental construct by which individuals learn (Wenger, 1998). 
Thus, communities of practice are formed to get things done by using 
a shared way of pursuing interest. For individuals, this means that 
learning is a way of engaging in, and contributing to, the practices 
of their communities. For specific communities, on the other hand, 
it means that learning is a way of refining their distinctive practices 
and ensuring new generations of members. For entire organizations, 
it means that learning is an issue of sustaining interconnected com-
munities of practice, which define what an organization knows and 
contributes to the business. The notion of communities of practice 
supports the idea that learning is an “inevitable part of participat-
ing in social life and practice” (Elkjaer, 1999, p. 75). Communities of 
practice also include assisting members of the community, with the 
particular focus on improving their skills. This is also known as situ­
ated learning.  Thus, communities of practice are very much a social 
learning theory, as opposed to one that is based solely on the indi-
vidual. Communities of practice have been called learning in working,  
in which learning is an inevitable part of working together in a social 
setting. Much of this concept implies that learning, in some form or 
other will occur, and that it is accomplished within a framework of 
social participation, not solely or simply in the individual mind. In a 
world that is changing significantly due to technological innovations, 
we should recognize the need for organizations, communities, and 
individuals to embrace the complexities of being interconnected at an 
accelerated pace.
There is much that is useful in the theory of communities of practice 
and that justifies its use in ROD. While so much of learning technol-
ogy is event driven and individually learned, it would be shortsighted 
to believe that it is the only way learning can occur in an organization. 
Furthermore, the enormity and complexity of technology requires a 

76
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
community focus. This would be especially useful within the confines of 
specific departments that are in need of understanding how to deal with 
technological dynamism. That is, preparation for using new technolo-
gies cannot be accomplished by waiting for an event to occur. Instead, 
preparation can be accomplished by creating a community that can 
assess technologies as a part of the normal activities of an organization. 
Specifically, this means that, through the infrastructure of a commu-
nity, individuals can determine how they will organize themselves to 
operate with emerging technologies, what education they will need, and 
what potential strategic integration they will need to prepare for changes 
brought on by technology. Action in this context can be viewed as a 
continuous process, much in the same way that I have presented technol-
ogy as an ongoing accelerating variable. However, Elkjaer (1999) argues 
that the continuous process cannot exist without individual interaction. 
As he states: “Both individual and collective activities are grounded in 
the past, the present, and the future. Actions and interactions take place 
between and among group members and should not be viewed merely as 
the actions and interactions of individuals” (p. 82).
Based on this perspective, technology can be handled by the 
actions (community) and interactions (individuals) of the organiza-
tion as shown in Figure  4.2.
Communities of practice:
Social actions of how to
deal with technology
Allows groups to engage in
discourse and examine the
ongoing eﬀects on the
department/unit, including
short/long-term education
requirements, skills transfer
and development,
organizational issues,
relationships with other
departments and customers
Te individual interacts with
others and determines new
methods of utilizing
technology within his/her
speciﬁc business objectives.
Individuals use reﬂection as
the basis of transformative
learning.
Event-driven individual-
based learning
Figure  4.2   Technology relationship between communities and individuals.

77
Organizational Learning Theories
It seems logical that communities of practice provide the mecha-
nism to assist, particularly, with the cultural assimilation component 
of ROD. Indeed, cultural assimilation targets the behavior of the 
community, and its need to consider what new organizational struc-
tures can better support emerging technologies. I have, in many ways, 
already established and presented the challenge of what should be 
called the “community of IT practice” and its need to understand how 
to restructure to meet the needs of the organization. This is the kind 
of issue that does not lend itself to event-driven, individual learning, 
but rather to a more community-based process that can deal with the 
realignment of departmental relationships.
Essentially, communities of IT practice must allow for the con-
tinuous evolution of learning based on emergent strategies. Emergent 
strategies acknowledge unplanned action. Such strategies are defined 
as patterns that develop in the absence of intentions (Mintzberg & 
Waters, 1985). Emergent strategies can be used to gather groups that 
can focus on issues not based on previous plans. These strategies can 
be thought of as creative approaches to proactive actions. Indeed, a 
frustrating aspect of technology is its uncertainty. Ideas and concepts 
borrowed from communities of practice can help departments deal 
with the evolutionary aspects of technological dynamism.
The relationship, then, between communities of practice and tech-
nology is significant. Many of the projects involving IT have been tra-
ditionally based on informal processes of learning. While there have 
been a number of attempts to computerize knowledge using various 
information databases, they have had mixed results. A “structured” 
approach to creating knowledge reporting is typically difficult to estab-
lish and maintain. Many IT departments have utilized International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9000 concepts. The ISO is 
a worldwide organization that defines quality processes through for-
mal structures. It attempts to take knowledge-based information and 
transfer it into specific and documented steps that can be evaluated as 
they occur. Unfortunately, the ISO 9000 approach, even if realized, 
is challenging when such knowledge and procedures are undergoing 
constant and unpredictable change. Technological dynamism cre-
ates too many uncertainties to be handled by the extant discourses on 
how organizations have dealt with change variables. Communities of 
practice provide an umbrella of discourses that are necessary to deal 

78
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
with ongoing and unpredictable interactions established by emerging 
technologies.
Support for this position is found in the fact that technology requires 
accumulative collective learning that needs to be tied to social prac-
tices; this way, project plans can be based on learning as a participatory 
act. One of the major advantages of communities of practice is that 
they can integrate key competencies into the very fabric of the organi-
zation (Lesser et al., 2000). The typical disadvantage of IT is that its 
staff needs to serve multiple organizational structures simultaneously. 
This requires that priorities be set by the organization. Unfortunately, 
it is difficult, if not impossible, for IT departments to establish such 
priorities without engaging in concepts of communities of practice that 
allow for a more integrated process of negotiation and determination. 
Much of the process of communities of practice would be initiated by 
strategic integration and result in many cultural assimilation changes; 
that is, the process of implementing communities of practice will 
necessitate changes in cultural behavior and organization processes.
As stated, communities-of-practice activities can be initiated via 
the strategic integration component of ROD. According to Lesser et 
al. (2000), a knowledge strategy based on communities of practice 
consists of seven basic steps (Table  4.1).
Lesser and Wenger (2000) suggest that communities of practice 
are heavily reliant on innovation: “Some strategies rely more on inno-
vation than others for their success. … Once dependence on innova-
tion needs have been clarified, you can work to create new knowledge 
where innovation matters” (p. 8). Indeed, electronic communities of 
practice are different from physical communities. IT provides another 
dimension to how technology affects organizational learning. It does 
so by creating new ways in which communities of practice operate. In 
the complexity of ways that it affects us, technology has a dichoto-
mous relationship with communities of practice. That is, there is a 
two-sided issue: (1) the need for communities of practice to imple-
ment IT projects and integrate them better into learning organiza-
tions, and (2) the expansion of electronic communities of practice 
invoked by technology, which can, in turn, assist in organizational 
learning, globally and culturally.
The latter issue establishes the fact that a person can now readily 
be a member of many electronic communities, and in many different 

79
Organizational Learning Theories
capacities. Electronic communities are different, in that they can 
have memberships that are short-lived and transient, forming and 
re-forming according to interest, particular tasks, or commonality of 
issue. Communities of practice themselves are utilizing technologies 
to form multiple and simultaneous relationships. Furthermore, the 
growth of international communities resulting from ever-expanding 
global economies has created further complexities and dilemmas.
Thus far, I have presented communities of practice as an infra-
structure that can foster the development of organizational learn-
ing to support the existence of technological dynamism. Most of 
what I presented has an impact on the cultural assimilation com-
ponent of ROD—that is, affecting organizational structure and the 
Table  4.1   Extended Seven Steps of Community of Practice Strategy
STEP
COMMUNITIES-OF-PRACTICE STEP
TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION
1
Understanding strategic knowledge 
needs: What knowledge is critical 
to success.
Understanding how technology affects strategic 
knowledge, and what specific technological 
knowledge is critical to success.
2
Engaging practice domains: People 
form communities of practice to 
engage in and identify with.
Technology identifies groups, based on 
business-related benefits;  requires domains to 
work together toward measurable results.
3
Developing communities: How to 
help key communities reach their 
full potential.
Technologies have life cycles that require 
communities to continue;  treats the life cycle 
as a supporter for attaining maturation and 
full potential.
4
Working the boundaries: How to link 
communities to form broader 
learning systems.
Technology life cycles require new boundaries to 
be formed. This will link other communities 
that were previously outside discussions and 
thus, expand input into technology 
innovations.
5
Fostering a sense of belonging: How 
to engage people’s identities and 
sense of belonging.
The process of integrating communities: IT and 
other organizational units will create new 
evolving cultures that foster belonging as well 
as new social identities.
6
Running the business: How to 
integrate communities of practice 
into running the business of the 
organization.
Cultural assimilation provides new 
organizational structures that are necessary to 
operate communities of practice and to 
support new technological innovations.
7
Applying, assessing, reflecting, 
renewing: How to deploy knowledge 
strategy through waves of 
organizational transformation.
The active process of dealing with multiple new 
technologies that accelerates the deployment 
of knowledge strategy. Emerging technologies 
increase the need for organizational 
transformation.

80
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
way things need to be done. However, technology, particularly the 
strategic integration component of ROD, fosters a more expanded 
vision of what can represent a community of practice. What does 
this mean? Communities of practice, through the advent of strate-
gic integration, have expanded to include electronic communities. 
While technology can provide organizations with vast electronic 
libraries that end up as storehouses of information, they are only 
valuable if they are allowed to be shared within the community. 
Although IT has led many companies to imagine a new world of 
leveraged knowledge, communities have discovered that just storing 
information does not provide for effective and efficient use of knowl-
edge. As a result, many companies have created these “electronic” 
communities so that knowledge can be leveraged, especially across 
cultures and geographic boundaries. These electronic communities 
are predictably more dynamic as a result of what technology pro-
vides to them. The following are examples of what these communi-
ties provide to organizations:
•	 Transcending boundaries and exchanging knowledge with 
internal and external communities. In this circumstance, 
communities are extending not only across business units, 
but also into communities among various clients—as we 
see developing in advanced e-business strategies. Using the 
Internet and intranets, communities can foster dynamic inte-
gration of the client, an important participant in competitive 
advantage. However, the expansion of an external commu-
nity, due to emergent electronics, creates yet another need for 
the implementation of ROD.
•	 Creating “Internet” or electronic communities as sources 
of knowledge (Teigland, 2000), particularly for technical-­
oriented employees. These employees are said to form “com-
munities of techies”: technical participants, composed largely 
of the IT staff, who have accelerated means to come into con-
tact with business-related issues. In the case of Ravell, I cre-
ated small communities by moving IT staff to allow them to 
experience the user’s need; this move is directly related to the 
larger, and expanded, ability of using electronic communities 
of practice.

81
Organizational Learning Theories
•	 Connecting social and workplace communities through 
sophisticated networks. This issue links well to the entire 
expansion of issues surrounding organizational learning, in 
particular, learning organization formation. It enfolds both 
the process and the social dialectic issues so important to cre-
ating well-balanced communities of practice that deal with 
organizational-level and individual development.
•	 Integrating teleworkers and non-teleworkers, including the 
study of gender and cultural differences. The growth of dis-
tance workers will most likely increase with the maturation of 
technological connectivity. Videoconferencing and improved 
media interaction through expanded broadband will support 
further developments in virtual workplaces. Gender and cul-
ture will continue to become important issues in the expan-
sion of existing models that are currently limited to specific 
types of workplace issues. Thus, technology allows for the 
“globalization” of organizational learning needs, especially 
due to the effects of technological dynamism.
•	 Assisting in computer-mediated communities. Such media-
tion allows for the management of interaction among com-
munities, of who mediates their communications criteria, and 
of who is ultimately responsible for the mediation of issues. 
Mature communities of practice will pursue self-mediation.
•	 Creating “flame” communities. A flame  is defined as a lengthy, 
often personally insulting, debate in an electronic commu-
nity that provides both positive and negative consequences. 
Difference can be linked to strengthening the identification 
of common values within a community but requires organiza-
tional maturation that relies more on computerized commu-
nication to improve interpersonal and social factors to avoid 
miscommunications (Franco et al., 2000).
•	 Storing collective knowledge in large-scale libraries and 
databases. As Einstein stated: “Knowledge is experience. 
Everything else is just information.” Repositories of informa-
tion are not knowledge, and they often inhibit organizations 
from sharing important knowledge building blocks that affect 
technical, social, managerial, and personal developments that 
are critical for learning organizations (McDermott, 2000).

82
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Ultimately, these communities of practice are forming new social 
networks, which have established the cornerstone of “global connectiv-
ity, virtual communities, and computer-supported cooperative work” 
(Wellman et al., 2000, p. 179). These social networks are creating 
new cultural assimilation issues, changing the very nature of the way 
organizations deal with and use technology to change how knowledge 
develops and is used via communities of practice. It is not, therefore, 
that communities of practice are new infrastructure or social forces; 
rather, the difference is in the way they communicate. Strategic inte-
gration forces new networks of communication to occur (the IT effect 
on communities of practice), and the cultural assimilation component 
requires communities of practice to focus on how emerging technolo-
gies are to be adopted and used within the organization.
In sum, what we are finding is that technology creates the need 
for new organizations that establish communities of practice. New 
members enter the community and help shape its cognitive schemata. 
Aldrich (2001) defines cognitive schemata  as the “structure that repre-
sents organized knowledge about persons, roles, and events” (p. 148). 
This is a significant construct in that it promotes the importance of a 
balanced evolutionary behavior among these three areas. Rapid learn-
ing, or organizational knowledge, brought on by technological inno-
vations can actually lessen progress because it can produce premature 
closure (March, 1991). Thus, members emerge out of communities of 
practice that develop around organizational tasks. They are driven by 
technological innovation and need constructs to avoid premature clo-
sure, as well as ongoing evaluation of perceived versus actual realities. 
As Brown and Duguid (1991, p. 40) state:
The complex of contradictory forces that put an organization’s assump-
tions and core beliefs in direct conflict with members’ working, learn-
ing, and innovating arises from a thorough misunderstanding of what 
working, learning, and innovating are. As a result of such misunder-
standings, many modern processes and technologies, particularly those 
designed to downskill, threaten the robust working, learning, and inno-
vating communities and practice of the workplace.
This perspective can be historically justified. We have seen time 
and time again how a technology’s original intention is not realized 

83
Organizational Learning Theories
yet still productive. For instance, many uses of e-mail by individuals 
were hard to predict. It may be indeed difficult, if not impossible, 
to predict the eventual impact of a technology on an organization 
and provide competitive advantages. However, based on evolutionary 
theories, it may be beneficial to allow technologies to progress from 
driver‑to‑supporter activity. Specifically, this means that communi-
ties of practice can provide the infrastructure to support growth from 
individual-centered learning; that is, to a less event-driven process 
that can foster systems thinking, especially at the management levels 
of the organization. As organizations evolve into what Aldrich (2001) 
call “bounded entities,” interaction behind boundaries heightens the 
salience of cultural difference. Aldrich’s analysis of knowledge cre-
ation is consistent with what he called an “adaptive organization”—one 
that is goal oriented and learns from trial and error (individual-based 
learning)—and a “knowledge development” organization (system-
level learning). The latter consists of a set of interdependent members 
who share patterns of belief. Such an organization uses inferential and 
vicarious learning and generates new knowledge from both experi-
mentation and creativity. Specifically, learning involves sense mak-
ing and builds on the knowledge development of its members. This 
becomes critical to ROD, especially in dealing with change driven 
by technological innovations. The advantages and challenges of vir-
tual teams and communities of practice are expanded in Chapter  7, in 
which I integrate the discussion with the complexities of outsourcing 
teams.
Learning Preferences and Experiential Learning
The previous sections of this chapter focused on organizational learn-
ing, particularly two component theories and methods: learning 
organizations and communities of practice. Within these two meth-
ods, I also addressed the approaches to learning; that is, learning that 
occurs on the individual and the organizational levels. I advocated 
the position that both system and individual learning need to be part 
of the equation that allows a firm to attain ROD. Notwithstanding 
how and when system and individual learning occurs, the investi-
gation of how individuals learn must be a fundamental part of any 
theory-to-practice effort, such as the present one. Indeed, whether 

84
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
one favors a view of learning as occurring on the organizational or 
on the individual level (and it occurs on both), we have to recog-
nize that individuals are, ultimately, those who must continue to 
learn. Dewey (1933) first explored the concepts and values of what 
he called “experiential learning.” This type of learning comes from 
the experiences that adults have accrued over the course of their 
individual lives. These experiences provide rich and valuable forms 
of “literacy,” which must be recognized as important components 
to overall learning development. Kolb (1984a) furthered Dewey’s 
research and developed an instrument that measures individual 
preferences or styles in which adults learn, and how they respond 
to day-to-day scenarios and concepts. Kolb’s (1999) Learning Style 
Inventory (LSI) instrument allows adults to better understand how 
they learn. It helps them understand how to solve problems, work in 
teams, manage conflicts, make better career choices, and negotiate 
personal and professional relationships. Kolb’s research provided a 
basis for comprehending the different ways in which adults prefer to 
learn, and it elaborated the distinct advantages of becoming a bal-
anced learner.
The instrument schematizes learning preferences and styles into 
four quadrants: concrete experience , reflective observation , abstract con­
ceptualization , and active experimentation . Adults who prefer to learn 
through concrete experience are those who need to learn through 
actual experience, or compare a situation with reality. In reflective 
observation,  adults prefer to learn by observing others, the world 
around them, and what they read. These individuals excel in group 
discussions and can effectively reflect on what they see and read. 
Abstract conceptualization refers to learning, based on the assimila-
tion of facts and information presented, and read. Those who prefer 
to learn by active experimentation do so through a process of evaluat-
ing consequences; they learn by examining the impact of experimen-
tal situations. For any individual, these learning styles often work in 
combinations. After classifying an individual’s responses to questions, 
Kolb’s instrument determines the nature of these combinations. For 
example, an individual can have a learning style in which he or she 
prefers to learn from concrete experiences using reflective observation 
as opposed to actually “doing” the activity. Figure  4.3 shows Kolb’s 
model in the form of a “learning wheel.” The wheel graphically shows 

85
Organizational Learning Theories
an individual’s learning style inventory, reflecting a person’s strengths 
and weaknesses with respect to each learning style.
Kolb’s research suggests that learners who are less constrained by 
learning preferences within a distinct style are more balanced and are 
better learners because they have available to them more dimensions 
in which to learn. This is a significant concept; it suggests that adults 
who have strong preferences may not be able to learn when faced with 
learning environments that do not fit their specific preference. For 
example, an adult who prefers group discussion and enjoys reflective 
conversation with others may feel uncomfortable in a less interper-
sonal, traditional teaching environment. The importance of Kolb’s 
LSI is that it helps adults become aware that such preferences exist.
McCarthy’s (1999) research furthers Kolb’s work by investigating 
the relationship between learning preferences and curriculum devel-
opment. Her Learning Type Measure (4Mat) instrument mirrors 
and extends the Kolb style quadrants by expressing preferences from 
an individual’s perspective on how to best achieve learning. Another 
important contribution in McCarthy’s extension of Kolb’s work is the 
inclusion of brain function considerations, particularly in terms of 
hemisphericity. McCarthy focuses on the cognitive functions asso-
ciated with the right hemisphere (perception) and left hemisphere 
(process) of the brain. Her 4Mat system shows how adults, in each 
Concrete experience
Abstract
conceptualization
Learns from
hands-on
experience
Observes
concrete
situation and
reﬂects on its
meaning
Seeks to ﬁnd
practical uses
for ideas and
theories
Interested in
abstract ideas
and concepts
Active
experimentation
Reﬂective
observation
Figure  4.3   Kolb’s Learning Style Inventory.

86
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
style quadrant, perceive learning with the left hemisphere of the 
brain and how it is related to processing in the right hemisphere. 
For example, for Type 1 learners (concrete experience and reflective 
observation), adults perceive in a concrete way and process in a reflec-
tive way. In other words, these adults prefer to learn by actually doing 
a task and then processing the experience by reflecting on what they 
experienced during the task. Type 2 learners (reflective observation 
and abstract conceptualization), however, perceive a task by abstract 
thinking and process it by developing concepts and theories from 
their initial ideas. Figure  4.4 shows McCarthy’s rendition of the 
Kolb learning wheel.
The practical claim to make here is that practitioners who acquire 
an understanding of the concepts of the experiential learning mod-
els will be better able to assist individuals in understanding how 
they learn, how to use their learning preferences during times of 
Meaning
Concepts
What?
Skills
How?
Why?
Adaptations
If?
Integrate
QIV
QIII
QI
QII
Try Deﬁne
Reﬁne
Examine
Image
Extend
Counsel
Figure  4.4   McCarthy rendition of the Kolb Learning Wheel.

87
Organizational Learning Theories
transition, and the importance of developing other dimensions of 
learning. The last is particularly useful in developing expertise in 
learning from individual reflective practices, learning as a group 
in communities of practice, and participating in both individual 
transformative learning, and organizational transformations. How, 
then, does experiential learning operate within the framework of 
organizational learning and technology? This is shown Figure  4.5 
in a combined wheel, called the applied individual learning for tech­
nology model,  which creates a conceptual framework for linking the 
technology life cycle with organizational learning and experiential 
learning constructs.
Figure  4.5 expands the wheel into two other dimensions. The 
first quadrant (QI) represents the feasibility stage of technology. It 
requires communities to work together, to ascertain why a particular 
technology might be attractive to the organization. This quadrant is 
Engaging in the
technology process
Conceptualize driver and supporter
life cycles
Measurement and
analysis–What?
Exploring technology opportunities
Planning and
design–How?
Feasibility–Why?
Implementing technology
Creation–What If?
Action
learning
QIV
QIII
QI
QII
Knowledge
management
Transformative
learning
Communities
of practice
Figure  4.5   Combined applied learning wheel.

88
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
best represented by individuals who engage in group discussions to 
make better connections from their own experiences. The process 
of determining whether a technology is feasible requires integrated 
discourse among affected communities, who then can make better 
decisions, as opposed to centralized or individual and predetermined 
decisions on whether to use a specific technology. During this phase, 
individuals need to operate in communities of practice, as the infra-
structure with which to support a democratic process of consensus 
building.
The second quadrant (QII) corresponds to measurement and analy-
sis. This operation requires individuals to engage in specific details 
to determine and conceptualize driver and supporter life cycles ana-
lytically. Individuals need to examine the specific details to under-
stand “ what” the technology can do, and to reflect on what it means to 
them, and their business unit. This analysis is measured with respect 
to what the ROI will be, and which driver and supporter functions 
will be used. This process requires transformation theory that allows 
individuals to perceive and conceptualize which components of the 
technology can transform the organization.
Quadrant 3 (QIII), design and planning, defines the “how” 
­component of the technology life cycle. This process involves explor-
ing technology opportunities after measurement and analysis have 
been completed. The process of determining potential uses for 
­technology requires knowledge of the organization. Specifically, it 
needs the abstract concepts developed in QII to be integrated with 
tacit knowledge, to then determine possible applications where the 
technology can succeed. Thus, knowledge management becomes the 
predominant mechanism for translating what has been conceptual-
ized into something explicit (discussed further in Chapter  5).
Quadrant 4 (QIV) represents the implementation-and-creation 
step in the technology life cycle. It addresses the hypothetical ques-
tion of “What if?” This process represents the actual implementation 
of the technology. Individuals need to engage in action learning tech-
niques, particularly those of reflective practices. The implementation 
step in the technology life cycle is heavily dependent on the indi-
vidual. Although there are levels of project management, the essential 
aspects of what goes on inside the project very much relies on the 
individual performances of the workers.

89
Organizational Learning Theories
Social Discourse and the Use of Language
The successful implementation of communities of practice fosters 
heavy dependence on social structures. Indeed, without understand-
ing how social discourse and language behave, creating and sustaining 
the internal interactions within and among communities of practice 
are not possible. In taking individuals as the central component for 
continued learning and change in organizations, it becomes impor-
tant to work with development theories that can measure and support 
individual growth and can promote maturation with the promotion 
of organizational/system thinking (Watkins & Marsick, 1993). Thus, 
the basis for establishing a technology-driven world requires the inclu-
sion of linear and circular ways of promoting learning. While there 
is much that we will use from reflective action concepts designed by 
Argyris and Schö n (1996), it is also crucial to incorporate other theo-
ries, such as marginality, transitions, and individual development.
Senge (1990) also compares learning organizations with engineer-
ing innovation; he calls these engineering innovations “technologies.” 
However, he also relates innovation to human behavior and distin-
guishes it as a “discipline.” He defines discipline  as “a body of theory 
and technique that must be studied and mastered to be put into prac-
tice, as opposed to an enforced order or means of punishment” (p. 10). 
A discipline, according to Senge, is a developmental path for acquir-
ing certain skills or competencies. He maintains the concept that cer-
tain individuals have an innate “gift”; however, anyone can develop 
proficiency through practice. To practice a discipline is a lifelong 
learning process—in contrast to the work of a learning organization. 
Practicing a discipline is different from emulating a model. This book 
attempts to bring the arenas of discipline and technology into some 
form of harmony. What technology offers is a way of addressing the 
differences that Senge proclaims in his work. Perhaps this is what is 
so interesting and challenging about attempting to apply and under-
stand the complexities of how technology, as an engineering innova-
tion, affects the learning organization discipline—and thereby creates 
a new genre of practices. After all, I am not sure that one can master 
technology as either an engineering component, or a discipline.
Technology dynamism and ROD expand the context of the glo-
balizing forces that have added to the complexity of analyzing “the 

90
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
language and symbolic media we employ to describe, represent, 
interpret, and theorize what we take to be the facticity of organi-
zational life” (Grant et al., 1998, p. 1). ROD needs to create what 
I call the “language of technology.” How do we then incorporate 
technology in the process of organizing discourse, or how has tech-
nology affected that process? We know that the concept of dis-
course includes language, talk, stories, and conversations, as well 
as the very heart of social life, in general. Organizational discourse 
goes beyond what is just spoken; it includes written text and other 
informal ways of communication. Unfortunately, the study of dis-
course is seen as being less valuable than action. Indeed, discourse 
is seen as a passive activity, while “doing” is seen as supporting 
more tangible outcomes. However, technology has increased the 
importance of sensemaking media as a means of constructing and 
understanding organizational identities. In particular, technology, 
specifically the use of e-mail, has added to the instability of lan-
guage, and the ambiguities associated with metaphorical analysis—
that is, meaning making from language as it affects organizational 
behavior. Another way of looking at this issue is to study the meta-
phor, as well as the discourse, of technology. Technology is actually 
less understood today, a situation that creates even greater reason 
than before for understanding its metaphorical status in organiza-
tional discourse—particularly with respect to how technology uses 
are interpreted by communities of practice. This is best shown using 
the schema of Grant et al. of the relationship between content and 
activity and how, through identity, skills, and emotion, it leads to 
action (Figure  4.6).
To best understand Figure  4.4 and its application to technology, 
it is necessary to understand the links between talk and action. It 
is the activity and content of conversations that discursively produce 
identities, skills, and emotions, which in turn lead to action. Talk, 
in respect to conversation and content, implies both oral and writ-
ten forms of communications, discourse, and language. The written 
aspect can obviously include technologically fostered communications 
over the Internet. It is then important to examine the unique condi-
tions that technology brings to talk and its corresponding actions.

91
Organizational Learning Theories
Identity
Individual identities are established in collaborations on a team, or 
in being a member of some business committee. Much of the theory 
of identity development is related to how individuals see themselves, 
particularly within the community in which they operate. Thus, how 
active or inactive we are within our communities, shapes how we see 
ourselves and how we deal with conversational activity and content. 
Empowerment is also an important part of identity. Indeed, being 
excluded or unsupported within a community establishes a different 
identity from other members of the group and often leads to margin-
ality (Schlossberg, 1989).
Identities are not only individual but also collective, which to 
a large extent contributes to cultures of practice within organiza-
tional factions. It is through common membership that a collec-
tive identity can emerge. Identity with the group is critical during 
discussions regarding emerging technologies and determining how 
they affect the organization. The empowerment of individuals, and 
the creation of a collective identity, are therefore important in fos-
tering timely actions that have a consensus among the involved 
community.
Skills
Identity
Emotions
Action
Conversational
activity
Conversational
content
Figure  4.6   Grant’s schema— relationship between content and activity.

92
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Skills
According to Hardy et al. (1998, p. 71), conversations are “arenas in 
which particular skills are invested with meaning.” Watson (1995) 
suggests that conversations not only help individuals acquire “techni-
cal skills” but also help develop other skills, such as being persuasive. 
Conversations that are about technology can often be skewed toward 
the recognition of those individuals who are most “technologically 
talented.” This can be a problem when discourse is limited to who 
has the best “credentials” and can often lead to the undervaluing of 
social production of valued skills, which can affect decisions that lead 
to actions.
Emotion
Given that technology is viewed as a logical and rational field, the 
application of emotion is not often considered a factor of action. 
Fineman (1996) defines emotion  as “personal displays of affected, or 
‘moved’ and ‘agitated’ states—such as joy, love, fear, anger, sadness, 
shame, embarrassment,”—and points out that these states are socially 
constructed phenomena. There is a positive contribution from emo-
tional energy as well as a negative one. The consideration of positive 
emotion in the organizational context is important because it drives 
action (Hardy et al., 1998). Indeed, action is more emotion than ratio-
nal calculation. Unfortunately, the study of emotions often focuses on 
its negative aspects. Emotion, however, is an important part of how 
action is established and carried out, and therefore warrants attention 
in ROD.
Identity, skills, and emotion are important factors in how talk actu-
ally leads to action. Theories that foster discourse, and its use in orga-
nizations, on the other hand, are built on linear paths of talk and 
action. That is, talk can lead to action in a number of predefined paths. 
Indeed, talk is typically viewed as “cheap” without action or, as is often 
said, “action is valued,” or “action speaks louder than words.” Talk, 
from this perspective, constitutes the dynamism of what must occur 
with action science, communities of practice, transformative learn-
ing, and, eventually, knowledge creation and management. Action, 
by contrast, can be viewed as the measurable outcomes that have been 

93
Organizational Learning Theories
eluding organizational learning scholars. However, not all actions 
lead to measurable outcomes. Marshak (1998) established three types 
of talk that lead to action: tool-talk , frame-talk , and mythopoetic-talk :
	
1.	Tool-talk  includes “instrumental communities required to: 
discuss, conclude, act, and evaluate outcomes” (p. 82). What 
is most important in its application is that tool-talk be used to 
deal with specific issues for an identified purpose.
	
2.	Frame-talk  focuses on interpretation to evaluate the mean-
ings of talk. Using frame-talk results in enabling implicit and 
explicit assessments, which include symbolic, conscious, pre-
conscious, and contextually subjective dimensions.
	
3.	Mythopoetic-talk  communicates ideogenic ideas and images 
(i.e., myths and cosmologies) that can be used to communicate 
the nature of how to apply tool-talk and frame-talk within the 
particular culture or society. This type of talk allows for con-
cepts of intuition and ideas for concrete application.
Furthermore, it has been shown that organizational members 
experience a difficult and ambiguous relationship, between discourse 
that makes sense, and non-sense—what is also known as “the struggle 
with sense” (Grant et al., 1998). There are two parts that comprise 
non-sense: The first is in the difficulties that individuals experience in 
understanding why things occur in organizations, particularly when 
their actions “make no sense.” Much of this difficulty can be cor-
related with political issues that create “nonlearning” organizations. 
However, the second condition of non-sense is more applicable, and 
more important, to the study of ROD than the first—that is, non-
sense associated with acceleration in the organizational change pro-
cess. This area comes from the taken-for-granted assumptions about 
the realities of how the organization operates, as opposed to how it can 
operate. Studies performed by Wallemacq and Sims (1998) provide 
examples of how organizational interventions can decompose stories 
about non-sense and replace them with new stories that better address 
a new situation and can make sense of why change is needed. This 
phenomenon is critical to changes established, or responded to, by the 
advent of new technologies. Indeed, technology has many nonsensi-
cal or false generalizations regarding how long it takes to ­implement 
a product, what might be the expected outcomes, and so on. Given 

94
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
the need for ROD—due to the advent of technology—there is a con-
comitant need to reexamine “old stories” so that the necessary change 
agents can be assessed and put into practice. Ultimately, the challenge 
set forth by Wallemacq and Sims is especially relevant, and critical, 
since the very definition of ROD suggests that communities need 
to accelerate the creation of new stories—stories that will occur at 
unpredictable intervals. Thus, the link between discourse, organiza-
tional learning, and technology is critical to providing ways in which 
to deal with individuals and organizations facing the challenge of 
changing and evolving.
Grant’s (1996) research shows that sense making using media and 
stories provided effective ways of constructing and understanding 
organizational identities. Technology affects discourse in a similar 
way that it affects communities of practice; that is, it is a variable that 
affects the way discourse is used for organizational evolution. It also 
provides new vehicles on how such discourse can occur. However, it is 
important not to limit discourse analysis to merely being about “texts,” 
emotion, stories, or conversations in organizations. Discourse analysis 
examines “the constructing, situating, facilitating, and communicat-
ing of diverse cultural, instrumental, political, and socio-economic 
parameters of ‘organizational being’” (Grant, 1996, p. 12). Hence, 
discourse is the essential component of every organizational learn-
ing effort. Technology accelerates the need for such discourse, and 
language, in becoming a more important part of the learning matura-
tion process, especially in relation to “system” thinking and learning. 
I propose then, as part of a move toward ROD, that discourse theories 
must be integrated with technological innovation and be part of the 
maturation in technology and in organizational learning.
The overarching question is how to apply these theories of dis-
course and language to learning within the ROD framework and par-
adigm. First, let us consider the containers of types of talk discussed 
by Marshak (1998) as shown in Figure  4.7.
These types of talk can be mapped onto the technology wheel, so that 
the most appropriate oral and written behaviors can be set forth within 
each quadrant, and development life cycle, as shown in Figure  4.8.
Mythopoetic-talk is most appropriate in Quadrant 1 (QI), where 
the fundamental ideas and issues can be discussed in communities of 
practice. These technological ideas and concepts, deemed feasible, are 

95
Organizational Learning Theories
then analyzed through frame-talk, by which the technology can be 
evaluated in terms of how it meets the fundamental premises estab-
lished in QI. Frame-talk also reinforces the conceptual legitimacy 
of how technology will transform the organization while provid-
ing appropriate ROI. Tool-talk represents the process of identifying 
applications and actually implementing them. For this reason, tool-
talk exists in both QIII and QIV. The former quadrant represents 
Mythopoetic-talk: Ideogenic
Frame-talk: Interpretive
Tool-talk: Instrumental
Figure  4.7   Marshak’s type of talk containers.
Planning and design–How?
Implementation–What If?
Tool-talk: Doing
using reﬂective
practices
QIV
QIII
QI
QII
Tool-talk:
Discuss-decide:
Knowledge
management
Frame-talk:
Transformative
Mythopoetic-
talk: Ground
ideas using
communities of
practice
Feasibility–Why?
Measurement and analysis–What?
Figure  4.8   Marshak’s model mapped to the technology learning wheel.

96
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
the discussion-to-decision portion, and the latter represents the actual 
doing and completion of the project itself. In QIII, table-talk requires 
knowledge management to transition technology concepts into real 
options. QIV transforms these real options into actual projects, in 
which, reflecting on actual practices during implementation, provides 
an opportunity for individual- and organizational-level learning.
Marshak’s (1998) concept of containers and cycles of talk and 
action are adapted and integrated with cyclical and linear matu-
rity models of learning. However, discourse and language must 
be linked to performance, which is why it needs to be part of the 
discourse and language-learning wheel. By integrating discourse 
and language into the wheel, individual and group activities can 
use discourse and language as part of reflective practices to create 
an environment that can foster action that leads to measurable 
outcomes. This process, as explained throughout this book, is of 
paramount importance in understanding how discourse operates 
with ROD in the information age.
Linear Development in Learning Approaches
Focusing only on the role of the individual in the company is an incom-
plete approach to formulating an effective learning program. There is 
another dimension to consider that is based on learning maturation. 
That is, where in the life cycle of learning are the individuals and the 
organization? The best explanation of this concept is the learning mat-
uration experience at Ravell. During my initial consultation at Ravell, 
the organization was at a very early stage of organizational learning. 
This was evidenced by the dependence of the organization on event-
driven and individual reflective practice learning. Technology acted 
as an accelerator of learning—it required IT to design a new network 
during the relocation of the company. Specifically, the acceleration, 
operationalized by a physical move, required IT to establish new rela-
tionships with line management. The initial case study concluded that 
there was a cultural change as a result of these new relationships—
cultural assimilation started to occur using organizational learning 
techniques, specifically reflective practices.
After I left Ravell, another phase in the evolution of the company 
took place. A new IT director was hired in my stead, who attempted 

97
Organizational Learning Theories
to reinstate the old culture: centralized infrastructure, stated opera-
tional boundaries, and separations that mandated anti-learning orga-
nizational behaviors. After six  months, the line managers, faced with 
having to revert back to a former operating culture, revolted and 
demanded the removal of the IT director. This outcome, regrettable 
as it may be, is critical in proving the conclusion of the original study 
that the culture at Ravell had indeed evolved from its state, at the time 
of my arrival. The following are two concrete examples that support 
this notion:
	
1.	The attempt of the new IT director to “roll back” the process 
to a former cultural state was unsuccessful, showing that a 
new evolving culture had indeed occurred.
	
2.	Line managers came together from the established learning 
organization to deliver a concerted message to the execu-
tive team. Much of their learning had now shifted to a social 
organization level that was based less on events and was 
more holistic with respect to the goals and objectives of the 
organization.
Thus, we see a shift from an individual-based learning process 
to one that is based more on the social and organizational issues to 
stimulate transformation. This transformation in learning method 
occurred within the same management team, suggesting that changes 
in learning do occur over time and from experience. Another way of 
viewing the phenomenon is to see Ravell as reaching the next level of 
organizational learning or maturation with learning. Consistent with 
the conclusion of the original study, technology served to accelerate 
the process of change or accelerate the maturation process of organi-
zational learning.
Another phase (Phase II) of Ravell transpired after I returned 
to the company. I determined at that time that the IT department 
needed to be integrated with another technology-based part of the 
business—the unit responsible for media and engineering services 
(as opposed to IT). While I had suggested this combination eight 
months earlier, the organization had not reached the learning matu-
ration to understand why such a combination was beneficial. Much 
of the reason it did not occur earlier, can also be attributed to the 
organization’s inability to manage ROD, which, if implemented, 

98
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
would have made the integration more obvious. The initial Ravell 
study served to bring forth the challenges of cultural assimilation, 
to the extent that the organization needed to reorganize itself and 
change its behavior. In phase II, the learning process matured by 
accelerating the need for structural change in the actual reporting 
processes of IT.
A year later, yet another learning maturation phase (phase III) 
occurred. In Ravell, Phase III, the next stage of learning matura-
tion, allowed the firm to better manage ROD. After completing 
the merger of the two technically related business units discussed 
(phase II), it became necessary to move a core database depart-
ment completely out of the combined technology department, and 
to integrate it with a business unit. The reason for this change was 
compelling and brought to light a shortfall in my conclusions from 
the initial study. It appears that as organizational learning matures 
within ROD, there is an increasing need to educate the executive 
management team of the organization. This was not the case during 
the early stages of the case study. The limitation of my work, then, 
was that I predominantly interfaced with line management and 
neglected to include executives in the learning. During that time, 
results were encouraging, so there was little reason for me to include 
executives in event-driven issues, as discussed. Unfortunately, lack-
ing their participation fostered a disconnection with the strategic 
integration component of ROD. Not participating in ROD created 
executive ignorance of the importance that IT had on the strategy of 
the business. Their lack of knowledge resulted in chronic problems 
with understanding the relationship and value of IT on the business 
units of the organization. This shortcoming resulted in continued 
conflicts over investments in the IT organization. It ultimately left 
IT with the inability to defend many of its cost requirements. As 
stated, during times of economic downturns, firms tend to reduce 
support organizations. In other words, executive management did 
not understand the driver component of IT.
After the move of the cohort of database developers to a formal 
business line unit, the driver components of the group provided 
the dialogue and support necessary to educate executives. However, 
this education did not occur based on events, but rather, on using 
the social and group dynamics of organizational learning. We see 

99
Organizational Learning Theories
here another aspect of how organizational and individual learning 
methods work together, but evolve in a specific way, as summarized 
in Table  4.2.
Another way of representing the relationship between individual 
and organizational learning over time is to chart a “maturity” arc 
to illustrate the evolutionary life cycle of technology and organiza-
tional learning. I call this arc the ROD arc. The arc is designed to 
assess individual development in four distinct sectors of ROD, each 
in relation to five developmental stages of organizational learning. 
Thus, each sector of ROD can be measured in a linear and inte-
grated way. Each stage in the course of the learning development 
Table  4.2   Analysis of Ravell’s Maturation with Technology
LEARNING
PHASE I
PHASE II
PHASE III
Type of learning
Individual reflective 
practices used to 
establish 
operations and 
line management.
Line managers 
defend new culture 
and participate in 
less event-driven 
learning.
Movement away from holistic 
formation of IT, into 
separate driver and 
supporter attributes. 
Learning approaches are 
integrated using both 
individual and 
organizational methods, and 
are based on functionality 
as opposed to being 
organizationally specific.
Learning 
outcomes
Early stage of 
learning 
organization 
development.
Combination of 
event-driven and 
early-stage social 
organizational 
learning 
formation.
Movement toward social-
based organizational 
decision making, relative to 
the different uses of 
technology.
Responsive 
organizational 
dynamism: 
cultural 
assimilation.
Established new 
culture;  no change 
in organizational 
structure.
Cultural 
assimilation 
stability with 
existing structures;  
early phase of IT 
organizational 
integration with 
similar groups.
Mature use of cultural 
assimilation, based on IT 
behaviors (drivers and 
supporters).
Responsive 
organizational 
dynamism: 
Strategic 
integration.
Limited integration 
due to lack of 
executive 
involvement.
Early stages of 
value/needs based 
on similar 
strategic 
alignment.
Social structures emphasize 
strategic integration based 
on business needs.

100
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
of an organization reflects an underlying principle that guides the 
process of ROD norms and behaviors; specifically, it guides orga-
nizations in how they view and use the ROD components available 
to them.
The arc is a classificatory scheme that identifies progressive 
stages in the assimilated uses of ROD. It reflects the perspective—­
paralleling Knefelkamp’s (1999) research—that individuals in an 
organization are able to move through complex levels of thinking, 
and to develop independence of thought and judgment, as their 
careers progress within the management structures available to 
them. Indeed, assimilation to learning at specific levels of opera-
tions and management are not necessarily an achievable end but 
one that fits into the psychological perspective of what productive 
employees can be taught about ROD adaptability. Figure  4.9 illus-
trates the two axes of the arc.
The profile of an individual who assimilates the norms of ROD 
can be characterized in five developmental stages (vertical axis) 
along four sectors of literacy (horizontal axis). The arc character-
izes an individual at a specific level in the organization. At each 
level, the arc identifies individual maturity with ROD, specifically 
strategic integration, cultural assimilation, and the type of learning 
process (i.e., individual vs. organizational). The arc shows how each 
tier integrates with another, what types of organizational learning 
theory best apply, and who needs to be the primary driver within 
the organization. Thus, the arc provides an organizational schema 
for how each conceptual component of organizational learning 
applies to each sector of ROD. It also identifies and constructs a 
path for those individuals who want to advance in organizational 
rank; that is, it can be used to ascertain an individual’s ability to 
cope with ROD requirements as a precursor for advancement in 
management. Each position within a sector, or cell, represents a 
specific stage of development within ROD. Each cell contains spe-
cific definitions that can be used to identify developmental stages 
of ROD and organizational learning maturation. Figure  4.10 rep-
resents the ROD arc with its cell definitions. The five stages of the 
arc are outlined as follows:

101
Organizational Learning Theories
Strategic integration
Sectors of responsive
organizational dynamism
Operational
knowledge
Department/unit
view as other
Integrated
disposition
Stable operations
Organizational
leadership
Organizational learning constructs
Management level
Cultural assimilation
Figure  4.9   Reflective organizational dynamism arc model.

102
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Sector variable
Operational
knowledge
Department/unit view
as other
Integrated disposition
Stable operations
Organizational
leadership
Strategic integration
Operations personnel
 understand that
 technology has an
 impact on strategic
 development,
 particularly on existing
 processes
View that technology
 can and will aﬀect the
 way the organization
 operates and that it
 can aﬀect roles and
 responsibilities
Changes brought forth by
 technology need to be
 assimilated into
 departments and are
 dependent on how others
 participate
Understands need for
 organizational changes;
 diﬀerent cultural
 behavior new structures
 are seen as viable
 solutions
Organizational changes
 are completed and in
 operation; existence of
 new or modiﬁed
 employee positions
Department-level
 organizational changes
 and cultural evolution
 are integrated with
 organization-wide
 functions and cultures
Individual beliefs of
 strategic impact are
 incomplete; individual
 needs to incorporate
 other views within the
 department or business
 unit
Recognition that individual
 and department views
 must be integrated to be
 complete and
 strategically productive
 for the department/unit
Changes made to
 processes at the
 department/unit level
 formally incorporate
 emerging technologies
Departmental strategies
 are propagated and
 integrated at
 organization level
Cultural
 assimilation
Organizational
 learning constructs
Individual-based
 reﬂective practice
Small group-based
 reﬂective practices
Interactive with both
 individual and middle
 management using
 communities of practice
Interactive between
 middle management and
 executives using social
 discourse methods to
 promote transformation
Organizational learning at
 executive level using
 knowledge management
Management level
Operations
Operation and middle
 management
Middle management
Middle management and
 executive
Executive
Figure  4.10   Responsive organizational dynamism arc.

103
Organizational Learning Theories
	
1.	Operational knowledge: Represents the capacity to learn, con-
ceptualize, and articulate key issues relating to how technology 
can have an impact on existing processes and organizational 
structure. Organizational learning is accomplished through 
individual learning actions, particularly reflective practices. 
This stage typically is the focus for operations personnel, who 
are usually focused on their personal perspectives of how 
technology affects their daily activities.
	
2.	Department/unit view as other : Indicates the ability to inte-
grate points of view about using technology from diverse indi-
viduals within the department or business unit. Using these 
new perspectives, the individual is in position to augment 
his or her understanding of technology and relate it to others 
within the unit. Operations personnel participate in small-
group learning activities, using reflective practices. Lower 
levels of middle managers participate in organizational learn-
ing that is in transition, from purely individual to group-level 
thinking.
	
3.	Integrated disposition : Recognizes that individual and depart-
mental views on using technology need to be integrated to 
form effective business unit objectives. Understanding that 
organizational and cultural shifts need to include all mem-
ber perspectives, before formulating departmental decisions, 
organizational learning is integrated with middle managers, 
using communities of practice at the department level.
	
4.	Stable operations : Develops in relation to competence in sec-
tors of ROD appropriate for performing job duties for emerg-
ing technologies, not merely adequately, but competitively, 
with peers and higher-ranking employees in the organization. 
Organizational learning occurs at the organizational level 
and uses forms of social discourse to support organizational 
transformation.
 5. Organizational leadership : Ability to apply sectors of ROD to 
multiple aspects of the organization. Department concepts 
can be propagated to organizational levels, including strate-
gic and cultural shifts, relating to technology opportunities. 
Organizational learning occurs using methods of knowledge 
management with executive support. Individuals use their 

104
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
technology knowledge for creative purposes. They are will-
ing to take risks using critical discernment and what Heath 
(1968) calls “freed” decision making.
The ROD arc addresses both individual and organizational 
learning. There are aspects of Senge’s (1990) “organizational” 
approach that are important and applicable to this model. I 
have mentioned its appropriateness in regard to the level of the 
manager—­suggesting that the more senior manager is better posi-
tioned to deal with nonevent learning practices. However, there is 
yet another dimension within each stage of matured learning. This 
dimension pertains to timing. The timing dimension focuses on 
a multiple-phase approach to maturing individual and organiza-
tional learning approaches. The multiple phasing of this approach 
suggests a maturing or evolutionary learning cycle that occurs 
over time, in which individual learning fosters the need and the 
acceptance of organizational learning methods. This process can 
be applied within multiple tiers of management and across differ-
ent business units.
The ROD arc can also be integrated with the applied individual 
learning wheel. The combined models show the individual’s cycle of 
learning along a path of maturation. This can be graphically shown 
to reflect how the wheel turns and moves along the continuum of the 
arc (Figure  4.11).
Figure  4.11 shows that an experienced technology learner can 
maximize learning by utilizing all four quadrants in each of the 
maturity stages. It should be clear that certain quadrants of indi-
vidual learning are more important to specific stages on the arc. 
However, movement through the arc is usually not symmetrical; 
that is, individuals do not move equally from stage to stage, within 
the dimensions of learning (Langer, 2003). This integrated and 
multiphase method uses the applied individual learning wheel 
with the arc. At each stage of the arc, an individual will need 
to draw on the different types of learning that are available in 
the learning wheel. Figure  4.12 provides an example of this con-
cept, which Knefelkamp calls “multiple and simultaneous” (1999), 
meaning that learning can take on multiple meanings across dif-
ferent sectors simultaneously.

105
Organizational Learning Theories
Figure  4.12 shows that the dimension variables are not necessarily 
parallel in their linear maturation. This phenomenon is not unusual 
with linear models, and in fact, is quite normal. However, it also reflects 
the complexity of how variables mature, and the importance of having 
the capability and infrastructure to determine how to measure such 
levels of maturation within dimensions. There are both qualitative 
and quantitative approaches to this analysis. Qualitative approaches 
typically include interviewing, ethnographic-type experiences over 
Engaging in the
technology process
Conceptualize driver and supporter
life cycles
Measurement and
analysis–What?
Exploring technology opportunities
Planning and
design–How?
Feasibility–Why?
Implementing technology
Creation–What If?
Action
learning
QIV
QIII
QI
QII
Operational
knowledge
Department/unit
view as other
Integrated
disposition
Increased levels of maturity with
organizational dynamism
Stable
operations
Organizational
leadership
Knowledge
management
Transformative
learning
Communities
of practice
Figure  4.11   ROD arc with applied individual learning wheel.

106
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Dimension variable
Operational
knowledge
Department/unit
view as other
Integrated
disposition
Stable operations
Organizational
leadership
Strategic integration
Cultural assimilation
Organizational learning constructs
Management level
Figure  4.12   Sample ROD arc.

107
Organizational Learning Theories
some predetermined time period, individual journals or diaries, group 
meetings, and focus groups. Quantitative measures involve the cre-
ation of survey-type measures; they are based on statistical results 
from answering questions that identify the level of maturation of the 
individual.
The learning models that I elaborate in this chapter are suggestive 
of the rich complexities surrounding the learning process for indi-
viduals, groups, and entire organizations. This chapter establishes a 
procedure for applying these learning models to technology-specific 
situations. It demonstrates how to use different phases of the learning 
process to further mature the ability of an organization to integrate 
technology strategically and culturally.


109
5
Managing Organizational 
Learning and Technology
The Role of Line Management
In Chapter  1, the results of the Ravell case study demonstrated the 
importance of the role that line managers have, for the success of imple-
menting organizational learning, particularly in the objective of inte-
grating the information technology (IT) department. There has been 
much debate related to the use of event-driven learning. In particular, 
there is Senge’s (1990) work from his book, The Fifth Discipline.  While 
overall, I agree with his theories, I believe that there is a need to critique 
some of his core concepts and beliefs. That is, Senge tends to make 
broad generalizations about the limits of event-driven education and 
learning in organizations. He believes that there is a limitation of learn-
ing from experience because it can create limitations to learning based 
on actions—as he asks: “What happens when we can no longer observe 
the consequences of our actions?” (Senge, 1990, p. 23). 
My research has found that event-driven learning is essential to 
most workers who have yet to learn through other means. I agree with 
Senge that not all learning can be obtained through event-oriented 
thinking, but I feel that much of what occurs at this horizon pertains 
more to the senior levels than to what many line managers have to deal 
with as part of their functions in business. Senge’s concern with learn-
ing methods that focus too much on the individual, perhaps, is more 
powerful, if we see the learning organization as starting at the top and 
then working its way down. The position, however, particularly with 
respect to the integration of technology, is that too much dependence 
on executive-driven programs to establish and sustain organizational 
learning, is dangerous. Rather, the line management—or middle 
managers who fundamentally run the business—is best positioned 
to make the difference. My hypothesis here is that both top-down 
and bottom-up approaches to organizational learning are riddled with 

110
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
problems, especially in their ability to sustain outcomes. We cannot 
be naï ve—even our senior executives must drive results to maintain 
their positions. As such, middle managers, as the key business drivers, 
must operate in an event- and results-driven world—let us not under-
estimate the value of producing measurable outcomes, as part of the 
ongoing growth of the organizational learning practicum.
To explore the role of middle managers further, I draw on the inter-
esting research done by Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995). These research-
ers examined how Japanese companies manage knowledge creation, 
by using an approach that they call “middle-up-down.” Nonaka and 
Takeuchi found that middle managers “best communicate the contin-
uous iterative process by which knowledge is created” (p. 127). These 
middle managers are often seen as leaders of a team, or task, in which 
a “spiral conversion process” operates and that requires both executive 
and operations management personnel. Peters and Waterman (1982), 
among others, often have attacked middle managers as representing a 
layer of management that creates communication problems and inef-
ficiencies in business processes that resulted in leaving U.S. workers 
trailing behind their international competitors during the automobile 
crisis in the 1970s. They advocate a “flattening” of the never-ending 
levels of bureaucracy responsible for inefficient operations. However, 
executives often are not aware of details within their operating depart-
ments and may not have the ability or time to acquire those details. 
Operating personnel, on the other hand, do not possess the vision 
and business aptitudes necessary to establish the kind of knowledge 
creation that fosters strategic learning.
Middle managers, or what I prefer to identify as line managers 
(Langer, 2001b), possess an effective combination of skills that can pro-
vide positive strategic learning infrastructures. Line managers under-
stand the core issues of productivity in relation to competitive operations 
and return on investment, and they are much closer to the day-to-day 
activities that bring forth the realities of how, and when, new strategic 
processes can be effectively implemented. While many researchers, such 
as Peters and Waterman, find them to be synonymous with backward-
ness, stagnation, and resistance to change, middle managers are the 
core group that can provide the basis for continuous innovation through 
strategic learning. It is my perspective that the difference of opinion 
regarding the positive or negative significance middle managers have 

111
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
in relation to organizational learning has to do with the wide-ranging 
variety of employees who fall into the category of “middle.” It strikes 
me that Peters and Waterman were somewhat on target with respect to 
a certain population of middle managers, although I would not char-
acterize them as line managers. To justify this position, it is important 
to clearly establish the differences. Line managers should be defined as 
pre-executive employees who have reached a position of managing a 
business unit that contains some degree of return on investment for the 
business. In effect, I am suggesting that focusing on “middle” manag-
ers, as an identifiable group, is too broad. Thus, there is a need to further 
delineate the different levels of what comprises middle managers, and 
their roles in the organization.
Line Managers
These individuals usually manage an entire business unit and have 
“return-on-investment” responsibilities. Line managers should be 
categorized as those who have middle managers reporting to them; 
they are, in effect, managers of managers, or, as in some organiza-
tions, they serve a “directorial” function. Such individuals are, in 
many ways, considered future executives and perform many low-end 
executive tasks. They are, if you will, executives in training. What 
is significant about this managerial level is the knowledge it carries 
about operations. However, line managers are still involved in daily 
operations and maintain their own technical capabilities.
First-Line Managers
First-line individuals manage nonmanagers but can have supervisory 
employees who report to them. They do not carry the responsibility 
for a budget line unit but for a department within the unit. These 
managers have specific goals that can be tied to their performance and 
to the department’s productivity.
Supervisor
A supervisor is the lowest-level middle manager. These individu-
als manage operational personnel within the department. Their 

112
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
management activities are typically seen as “functions,” as opposed 
to managing an entire operation. These middle managers do not have 
other supervisors or management-level personnel reporting to them.
We should remember that definitions typically used to character-
ize the middle sectors of management, as described by researchers 
like Peters, Nonaka, and others, do not come from exact science. The 
point must be made that middle managers cannot be categorized by a 
single definition. The category requires distinctive definitions within 
each level of stratification presented. Therefore, being more specific 
about the level of the middle manager can help us determine the man-
ager’s role in the strategic learning process. Given that Nonaka and 
Takeuchi (1995) provide the concept of middle-up-down as it related 
to knowledge management, I wish to broaden it into a larger sub-
ject of strategic learning, as a method of evolving changes in culture 
and organizational thinking. Furthermore, responsive organizational 
dynamism (ROD), unlike other organizational studies, represents 
both situational learning and ongoing evolutionary learning require-
ments. Evolutionary learning provides a difficult challenge to organi-
zational learning concepts. Evolutionary learning requires significant 
contribution from middle managers. To understand the complexity of 
the middle manager, all levels of the organization must be taken into 
consideration. I call this process management vectors. 
Management Vectors
Senge’s (1990) work addresses some aspects of how technology might 
affect organizational behavior: “The central message of the Fifth 
Discipline is more radical than ‘ radical organization redesign’—
namely that our organizations work the way they work, ultimately 
because of how we think and how we interact” (p. xiv). Technology 
aspires to be a new variable or catalyst that can change everyday 
approaches to things—to be the radical change element that forces 
us to reexamine norms no longer applicable to business operations. 
On the other hand, technology can be dangerous if perceived unre-
alistically as a power that possesses new answers to organizational 
performance and efficiency. In the late 1990s, we experienced the 
“bust” of the dot-com explosion, an explosion that challenged conven-
tional norms of how businesses operate. Dot-coms sold the concepts 

113
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
that brick-and-mortar operations could no longer compete with new 
technology-driven businesses and that “older” workers could not be 
transformed in time to make dot-com organizations competitive. 
Dot-coms allowed us to depart from our commitment to knowledge 
workers and learning organizations, which is still true today. 
For example, in 2003, IBM at its corporate office in Armonk, New 
York, laid off 1,000 workers who possessed skills that were no lon-
ger perceived as needed or competitive. Rather than retrain work-
ers, IBM determined that hiring new employees to replace them 
was simply more economically feasible and easier in terms of trans-
forming their organization behaviors. However, in my interview 
with Stephen McDermott, chief executive officer (CEO) of ICAP 
Electronic Trading Community (ETC), it became apparent that 
many of the mystiques of managing technology were incorrect. As he 
stated, “Managing a technology company is no different from manag-
ing other types of businesses.” While the technical skills of the IBM 
workers may no longer be necessary, why did the organization not 
provide enough opportunities to migrate important knowledge work-
ers to another paradigm of technical and business needs? Widespread 
worker replacements tell us that few organizational learning infra-
structures actually exist. The question is whether technology can pro-
vide the stimulus to prompt more organizations to commit to creating 
infrastructures that support growth and sustained operation. Most 
important is the question of how we establish infrastructures that can 
provide the impetus for initial and ongoing learning organizations. 
This question suggests that the road to working successfully with tech-
nology will require the kind of organizational learning that is driven 
by both individual and organization-wide initiatives. This approach 
can be best explained by referring to the concept of driver and sup-
porter functions and life cycles of technology presented in Chapter  3. 
Figure  5.1 graphically shows the relationship between organizational 
structure and organizational learning needs. We also see that this 
relationship maps onto driver and supporter functionality.
Figure  5.1 provides an operational overview of the relations between 
the three general tiers of management in most organizations. These 
levels or tiers are mapped onto organizational learning approaches; 
that is, organizational/system or individual. This mapping follows a 
general view based on what individuals at each of these tiers view or 

114
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
seek as their job responsibilities and what learning method best sup-
ports their activities within their environment. For example, execu-
tive learning focuses on system-level thinking and learning because 
executives need to view their organizations in a longer-term way (e.g., 
return on investment), as opposed to viewing learning on an indi-
vidual, transactional event way. Yet, executives play an integral part in 
long-term support for technology, as an accelerator. Their role within 
ROD is to provide the stimulus to support the process of cultural 
assimilation, and they are also very much a component of strategic 
integration. Executives do not require as much event-driven reflective 
change, but they need to be part of the overall “social” structure that 
paves the way for marrying the benefits of technology with organi-
zational learning. What executives do need to see, are the planned 
measurable outcomes linked to performance from the investment of 
coupling organizational learning with technology. The lack of execu-
tive involvement and knowledge will be detrimental to the likelihood 
of making this relationship successful.
Operations, on the other hand, are based more on individual prac-
tices of learning. Attempting to incorporate organizational vision 
and social discourse at this level is problematic until event-driven 
learning is experienced individually to prove the benefits that can be 
derived from reflective practices. In addition, there is the problem of 
the credibility of a learning program. Workers are often wary of new 
Management/
operational
layers
Executive tier
Middle
management
tiers
Operations tier
Support
Event-driven
individual
Reﬂective practices
Organization/
system on
driver individual
on support
Communities of
practice (driver)
reﬂective practices
(supporter)
Driver/support
life cycle
Organizational
learning
method
Knowledge
management
Learning
approach
Organization
system
Driver/support
life cycle
involvement
Driver
Figure  5.1  Three-tier organizational structure.

115
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
programs designed to enhance their development and productivity. 
Many question the intentions of the organization and why it is mak-
ing the investment, especially given what has occurred in corporations 
over the last 20  years: Layoffs and scandals have riddled organizations 
and hurt employee confidence in the credibility of employer programs.
Ravell showed us that using reflective practices during events pro-
duces accelerated change, driven by technological innovation, which 
in turn, supports the development of the learning organization. It is 
important at this level of operations to understand the narrow and 
pragmatic nature of the way workers think and learn. The way opera-
tions personnel are evaluated is also a factor. Indeed, operations per-
sonnel are evaluated based on specific performance criteria.
The most complex, yet combined, learning methods relate to the 
middle management layers. Line managers, within these layers, are 
engrossed in a double-sided learning infrastructure. On one side, they 
need to communicate and share with executives what they perceive to 
be the “overall” issues of the organization. Thus, they need to learn 
using an organizational learning approach, which is less dependent 
on event-driven learning and uses reflective practice. Line managers 
must, along with their senior colleagues, be able to see the business 
from a more proactive perspective and use social-oriented methods 
if they hope to influence executives. Details of events are more of an 
assumed responsibility to them than a preferred way of interacting. In 
other words, most executives would rather interface with line manag-
ers on how they can improve overall operations efficiently and effec-
tively, as opposed to dealing with them on a micro, event-by-event 
basis. The assumption, then, is that line managers are expected to deal 
with the details of their operations, unless there are serious problems 
that require the attention of executives; such problems are usually cor-
related to failures in the line manager’s operations.
On the other side are the daily relationships and responsibilities 
managers face for their business units. They need to incorporate more 
individual-based learning techniques that support reflective practices 
within their operations to assist in the personal development of their 
staff. The middle management tier described in Figure  5.1 is shown 
at a summary level and needs to be further described. Figure  5.2 pro-
vides a more detailed analysis based on the three types of middle man-
agers described. The figure shows the ratio of organizational learning 

116
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
to individual learning based on manager type. The more senior the 
manager, the more learning is based on systems and social processes. 
Knowledge Management
There is an increasing recognition that the competitive advantage of 
organizations depends on their “ability to create, transfer, utilize, and 
protect difficult-to-intimate knowledge assets” (Teece, 2001, p. 125). 
Indeed, according to Bertels and Savage (1998), the dominant logic 
of the industrial era requires an understanding of how to break the 
learning barrier to comprehending the information era. While we 
have developed powerful solutions to change internal processes and 
organizational structures, most organizations have failed to address 
the cultural dimensions of the information era. Organizational 
knowledge creation is a result of organizational learning through stra-
tegic processes. Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) define organizational 
knowledge as “the capability of a company as a whole to create new 
knowledge, disseminate it throughout the organization, and embody 
it in products, services, and systems” (p. 3). Nonaka and Takeuchi use 
the steps shown in Figure  5.3 to assess the value and chain of events 
surrounding the valuation of organization knowledge.
Supervisor
High individual-
based learning
High org/system-
based learning
Individual
System
Manager
Director
Figure  5.2  Organizational/system versus individual learning by middle manager level.
Knowledge creation
Continuous innovation
Competitive advantage
Figure  5.3  Nonaka and Takeuchi steps to organizational knowledge.

117
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
If we view the Figure  5.3 processes as leading to competitive advan-
tage, we may ask how technology affects the chain of actions that 
Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) identify. Without violating the model, 
we may insert technology and observe the effects it has on each step, 
as shown in Figure  5.4.
According to Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995), to create new knowl-
edge means to re-create the company, and everyone in it, in an ongo-
ing process that requires personal and organizational self-renewal. 
That is, knowledge creation is the responsibility of everyone in the 
organization. The viability of this definition, however, must be ques-
tioned. Can organizations create personnel that will adhere to such 
parameters, and under what conditions will senior management sup-
port such an endeavor?
Again, technology has a remarkable role to play in substantiat-
ing the need for knowledge management. First, executives are still 
challenged to understand how they need to deal with emerging tech-
nologies as this relates to whether their organizations are capable 
of using them effectively and efficiently. Knowledge management 
provides a way for the organization to learn how technology will be 
used to support innovation and competitive advantage. Second, IT 
departments need to understand how they can best operate within 
the larger scope of the organization—they are often searching for a 
true mission that contains measurable outcomes, as defined by the 
entire organization, including senior management. Third, both execu-
tives and IT staff agree that understanding the uses of technology is a 
continuous process that should not be utilized solely in a reactionary 
Knowledge creation: Technology provides more dynamic shifts in knowledge,
thus accelerating the number of knowledge-creation events that can occur.
Continuous innovation: Innovations are accelerated because of the dynamic
nature of events and the time required to respond—therefore, continuous
innovation procedures are more signiﬁcant to have in each department in order
to respond to technological opportunities on an ongoing basis.
Competitive advantage: Technology has generated more global competition.
Competitive advantages that depend on technological innovation
are more common.
Figure  5.4  Nonaka and Takeuchi organizational knowledge with technology extension.

118
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and event-driven way. Finally, most employees accept the fact that 
technology is a major component of their lives at work and at home, 
that technology signifies change, and that participating in knowledge 
creation is an important role for them.
Again, we can see that technology provides the initiator for 
understanding how organizational learning is important for com-
petitive advantage. The combination of IT and other organizational 
departments, when operating within the processes outlined in ROD, 
can significantly enhance learning and competitive advantage. To 
expand on this point, I now focus on the literature specifically relat-
ing to tacit knowledge and its important role in knowledge man-
agement. Scholars theorize knowledge management is an ability to 
transfer individual tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge. Kulkki 
and Kosonen (2001) define tacit knowledge as an experience-based 
type of knowledge and skill and as the individual capacity to give 
intuitive forms to new things; that is, to anticipate and preconcep-
tualize the future. Technology, by its very definition and form of 
being, requires this anticipation and preconceptualization. Indeed, 
it provides the perfect educational opportunity in which to practice 
the transformation of tacit into explicit knowledge. Tacit knowledge 
is an asset, and having individual dynamic abilities to work with 
such knowledge commands a “higher premium when rapid organic 
growth is enabled by technology” (Teece, 2001, p.  140). Thus, 
knowledge management is likely to be greater when technological 
opportunity is richer.
Because evaluating emerging technologies requires the ability to 
look into the future, it also requires that individuals translate valu-
able tacit knowledge, and creatively see how these opportunities are 
to be judged if implemented. Examples of applicable tacit knowledge 
in this process are here extracted from Kulkki and Kosonen (2001):
•	 Cultural and social history
•	 Problem-solving modes
•	 Orientation to risks and uncertainties
•	 Worldview organizing principles
•	 Horizons of expectations
 I approach each of these forms of tacit knowledge from the per-
spective of the components of ROD as shown in Table  5.1.

119
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
It is not my intention to suggest that all technologies should be, or 
can be, used to generate competitive advantage. To this extent, some 
technologies may indeed get rejected because they cannot assist the 
organization in terms of strategic value and competitive advantage. As 
Teece (2001) states, “Information transfer is not knowledge transfer and 
information management is not knowledge management, although the 
former can assist the latter. Individuals and organizations can suffer 
from information overload” (p. 129). While this is a significant issue for 
many firms, the ability to have an organization that can select, interpret, 
Table  5.1  Mapping Tacit Knowledge to Responsive Organizational Dynamism
TACIT KNOWLEDGE
STRATEGIC INTEGRATION
CULTURAL ASSIMILATION
Cultural and social 
history
How the IT department and other 
departments translate emerging 
technologies into their existing processes 
and organization.
Problem-solving 
modes
Individual reflective practices that assist 
in determining how specific technologies 
can be useful and how they can be 
applied.
Technology opportunities 
may require organizational 
and structural changes to 
transfer tacit knowledge to 
explicit knowledge.
Utilization of tacit knowledge 
to evaluate probabilities for 
success.
Orientation to risks 
and uncertainties
Technology offers many risks and 
uncertainties. All new technologies may 
not be valid for the organization.
Tacit knowledge is a 
valuable component to fully 
understand realities, risks, 
and uncertainties.
Worldviews
Technology has global effects and changes 
market boundaries that cross business 
cultures. It requires tacit knowledge to 
understand existing dispositions on how 
others work together.
Review how technology 
affects the dynamics of 
operations.
Organizing 
principles
How will new technologies actually be 
integrated? What are the organizational 
challenges to “rolling out” products and 
to implementation timelines? What 
positions are needed, and who in the 
organization might be best qualified to 
fill new responsibilities?
Identify limitations of the 
organization; that is, tacit 
knowledge versus explicit 
knowledge realities.
Horizons of 
expectations
Individual limitations in the tacit domain 
that may hinder or support whether a 
technology can be strategically 
integrated into the organization.

120
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and integrate information is a valuable part of knowledge management. 
Furthermore, advances in IT have propelled much of the excitement 
surrounding knowledge management. It is important to recognize that 
learning organizations, reflective practices, and communities of prac-
tice all participate in creating new organizational knowledge. This is 
why knowledge management is so important. Knowledge must be built 
on its own terms, which requires intensive and laborious interactions 
among members of the organization.
Change Management 
Because technology requires that organizations accelerate their 
actions, it is necessary to examine how ROD corresponds to theories 
in organizational change. Burke (2002) states that most organiza-
tional change is evolutionary; however, he defines two distinct types 
of change: planned versus unplanned and revolutionary versus evolu-
tionary. Burke also suggests that the external environmental changes 
are more rapid today and that most organizations “are playing catch 
up.” Many rapid changes to the external environment can be attrib-
uted to emerging technologies, which have accelerated the divide 
between what an organization does and what it needs to do to remain 
competitive. This is the situation that creates the need for ROD.
The catching-up process becomes more difficult because the amount 
of change required is only increasing given ever-newer technologies. 
Burke (2002) suggests that this catching up will likely require planned 
and revolutionary change. Such change can be mapped onto much of 
my work at Ravell. Certainly, change was required; I planned it, and 
change had to occur. However, the creation of a learning organiza-
tion, using many of the organizational learning theories addressed 
in Chapter  4, supports the eventual establishment of an operating 
organization that can deal with unplanned and evolutionary change. 
When using technology as the reason for change, it is then important 
that the components of ROD be integrated with theories of organi-
zational change.
History has shown that most organizational change is not success-
ful in providing its intended outcomes, because of cultural lock-in. 
Cultural lock-in  is defined by Foster and Kaplan (2001) as the inability 
of an organization to change its corporate culture even when there 

121
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
are clear market threats. Based on their definition, then, technology 
may not be able to change the way an organization behaves, even 
when there are obvious competitive advantages to doing so. My con-
cern with Foster and Kaplan’s conclusion is whether individuals truly 
understand exactly how their organizations are being affected—or are 
we to assume that they do understand? In other words, is there a pro-
cess to ensure that employees understand the impact of not changing? 
I believe that ROD provides the infrastructure required to resolve 
this dilemma by establishing the processes that can support ongoing 
unplanned and evolutionary change.
To best show the relationship of ROD to organizational change 
theory, I use Burke’s (2002) six major points in assisting change in 
organizations:
	
1.	Understanding the external environment: What are competitors 
and customers’ expectations? This is certainly an issue, specif-
ically when tracking whether expected technologies are made 
available in the client– vendor relationship. But, more critical 
is the process of how emerging technologies, brought about 
through external channels, are evaluated and put into produc-
tion; that is, having a process in place. Strategic integration of 
ROD is the infrastructure that needs to facilitate the moni-
toring and management of the external environment.
	
2.	Evaluation of the inside of the organization: This directly relates 
to technology and how it can be best utilized to improve 
internal operations. While evaluation may also relate to a 
restructuring of an organization’s mission, technology is often 
an important driver for why a mission needs to be changed 
(e.g., expanding a market due to e-commerce capabilities).
	
3.	Readiness of the organization: The question here is not whether 
to change but how fast the organization can change to address 
technological innovations. The ROD arc provides the steps 
necessary to create organizations that can sustain change as a 
way of operation, blending strategic integration with cultural 
assimilation. The maturation of learning: moving toward sys-
tem-based learning also supports the creation of infrastruc-
tures that are vitally prepared for changes from emerging 
technologies.

122
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
4.	Cultural change as inevitable: Cultural assimilation essentially 
demands that organizations must dynamically assimilate new 
technologies and be prepared to evolve their cultures. Such 
evolution must be accelerated and be systemic within business 
units, to be able to respond effectively to the rate of change 
created by technological innovations.
	
5.	Making the case for change: It is often difficult to explain why 
change is inevitable. Much of the need for change can be sup-
ported using the reflective practices implemented at Ravell. 
However, such acceptance is directly related to the process of 
time. Major events can assist in establishing the many needs 
for change, as discussed by Burke (2002).
	
6.	Sustaining change: Perhaps the strongest part of ROD is its 
ability to create a process that is evolutionary and systemic. It 
focuses on driving change to every aspect of the organization 
and provides organizational learning constructs to address 
each level of operation. It addresses what Burke (2002) calls 
the “prelaunch, launch, postlaunch, and sustaining,” in the 
important sequences of organizational change (p. 286).
Another important aspect of change management is leadership. 
Leadership takes many forms and has multiple definitions. Technology 
plays an interesting role in how leadership can be presented to orga-
nizations, especially in terms of the management style of leadership, 
or what Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) have coined as “power cen-
tralization.” Their study examines high-velocity environments in the 
microcomputer industry during the late 1980s. By high velocity,  they 
refer to “those environments in which there is a rapid and discon-
tinuous change in demand, competitors, technology, or regulation, so 
that information is often inaccurate, unavailable, or obsolete” (p. 738). 
During the period of their study, the microcomputer industry was 
undergoing substantial technological change, including the introduc-
tion of many new competitors. As it turns out, the concept of high 
velocity is becoming more the norm today given the way organizations 
find themselves needing to operate in constant fluxes of velocity. The 
term power centralization  is defined as the amount of decision-making 
control wielded by the CEO. Eisenhardt and Bourgeois’s study finds 
that the more the CEO engages in power-centralized leadership, 

123
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
the greater the degree of politics, which has a negative impact on the 
strategic performance of the firms examined. This finding suggests 
that the less democratic the leadership is in high-velocity environ-
ments, the less productive the organization will be. Indeed, the study 
found that when individuals engaged in team learning, political ten-
sion was reduced, and the performance of the firms improved.
The structure of ROD provides the means of avoiding the high-
velocity problems discovered by the Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) 
study. This is because ROD allows for the development of more indi-
vidual learning, as well as system thinking, across the executive ranks 
of the business. If technology is to continue to establish such high 
velocities, firms need to examine the Eisenhardt and Bourgeois study 
for its relevance to everyday operations. They also need to use orga-
nizational learning theories as a basis for establishing leadership that 
can empower employees to operate in an accelerated and unpredict-
able environment.
Change Management for IT Organizations
While change management theories address a broad population in 
organizations, there is a need to create a more IT-specific approach to 
address the unique needs of this group. Lientz and Rea (2004) estab-
lish five specific goals for IT change managers:
	
1.	Gain support for change from employees and non-IT 
managers.
	
2.	Implement change along measurements for the work so that 
the results of the change are clearly determined.
	
3.	Implement a new culture of collaboration in which employees 
share more information and work more in teams.
	
4.	Raise the level of awareness of the technology process and 
work so that there is less of a tendency for reversion.
	
5.	Implement an ongoing measurement process for the work to 
detect any problems.
Lientz and Rea’s (2004) position is that when a new culture is 
instilled in IT departments, it is particularly important that it should 
not require massive management intervention. IT people need to be 
self-motivated to keep up with the myriad accelerated changes in the 

124
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
world of technology. These changes occur inside IT in two critical 
areas. The first relates to the technology itself. For example, how do 
IT personnel keep up with new versions of hardware and software? 
Many times, these changes come in the form of hardware (often 
called system) and software upgrades from vendors who require 
them to maintain support contracts. The ongoing self-management 
of how such upgrades and changes will ultimately affect the rest 
of the organization is a major challenge and one that is difficult to 
manage top-down. The second area is the impact of new or emerg-
ing technologies on business strategy. The challenge is to develop IT 
personnel who can transform their technical knowledge into busi-
ness knowledge and, as discussed, take their tacit knowledge and 
convert it into explicit, strategic knowledge. Further understanding 
of the key risks to the components of these accelerated changes is 
provided as follows:
System and software version control: IT personnel must continue 
to track and upgrade new releases and understand the impact 
of product enhancements. Some product-related enhance-
ments have no bearing on strategic use; they essentially fix 
problems in the system or software. On the other hand, some 
new releases offer new features and functions that need to be 
communicated to both IT and business managers.
Existing legacy systems: Many of these systems cannot support 
the current needs of the business. This often forces IT staff to 
figure out how to create what is called “workarounds” (quick 
fixes) to these systems. This can be problematic given that 
workarounds might require system changes or modifications 
to existing software. The risk of these changes, both short and 
long term, needs to be discussed between user and IT staff 
communities of practice.
Software packages (off-the-shelf software): Since the 1990s, the use 
of preprogrammed third-party software packages has become 
a preferred mode of software use among users. However, 
many of these packages can be inflexible and do not support 
the exact processes required by business users. IT personnel 
need to address users’ false expectations about what software 
packages can and cannot do.

125
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
System or software changes: Replacement of systems or software 
applications is rarely 100% complete. Most often, remnants of 
old systems will remain. IT personnel can at times be insensi-
tive to the lack of a complete replacement.
Project completion: IT personnel often misevaluate when their 
involvement is finished. Projects are rarely finished when the 
software is installed and training completed. IT staff tend to 
move on to other projects and tasks and lose focus on the like-
lihood that there will be problems discovered or last-minute 
requests made by business users.
Technical knowledge: IT staff members need to keep their techni-
cal skills up to date. If this is not done, emerging technolo-
gies may not be evaluated properly as there may be a lack of 
technical ability inside the organization to map new technical 
developments onto strategic advantage.
Pleasing users : While pleasing business users appears to be a 
good thing, it can also present serious problems with respect 
to IT projects. What users want, and what they need, may 
not be the same. IT staff members need to judge when they 
might need assistance from business and IT management 
because users may be unfairly requesting things that are not 
feasible within the constraints of a project. Thus, IT staff must 
have the ability to articulate what the system can do and what 
might be advisable. These issues tend to occur when certain 
business users want new systems to behave like old ones.
Documentation: This, traditionally, is prepared by IT staff and 
contains jargon that can confuse business users. Furthermore, 
written procedures prepared by IT staff members do not con-
sider the entire user experience and process.
Training: This is often carried out by IT staff and is restricted 
to covering system issues, as opposed to the business realities 
surrounding when, how, and why things are done.
These issues essentially define key risks to the success of imple-
menting technology projects. Much of this book, thus far, has focused 
on the process of organizational learning from an infrastructure per-
spective. However, the implementation component of technology 
possesses new risks to successfully creating an organization that can 

126
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
learn within the needs of ROD. These risks, from the issues enumer-
ated, along with those discussed by Lientz and Rea (2004) are sum-
marized as follows:
Business user involvement: Continuous involvement from busi-
ness users is necessary. Unfortunately, during the life of a proj-
ect there are so many human interfaces between IT staff and 
business users that it is unrealistic to attempt to control these 
communications through tight management procedures.
Requirements, definition, and scope: These relate to the process 
by which IT personnel work with business users to deter-
mine exactly what software and systems need to accomplish. 
Determining requirements is a process, not a predetermined 
list that business users will necessarily have available to 
them. The discourse that occurs in conversations is critical to 
whether such communities are capable of developing require-
ments that are unambiguous in terms of expected outcomes.
Business rules: These rules have a great effect on how the organi-
zation handles data and transactions. The difference between 
requirements and business rules is subtle. Specifically, busi-
ness rules, unlike requirements, are not necessarily related to 
processes or events of the business. As such, the determina-
tion of business rules cannot be made by reviewing proce-
dures; for example, all account numbers must be numeric.
Documentation and training materials: IT staff members need to 
interact with business users and establish joint processes that 
foster the development of documentation and training that 
best fit user needs and business processes.
Data conversion: New systems and applications require that data 
from legacy systems be converted into the new formats. This 
process is called data mapping;  IT staff and key business users 
review each data field to ensure that the proper data are rep-
resented correctly in the new system. IT staff members should 
not be doing this process without user involvement.
Process measurement: Organizations typically perform a post-
completion review after the system or software application 
is installed. Unfortunately, this process measurement should 
occur during and after project completion.

127
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
IT change management poses some unique challenges to imple-
menting organizational learning, mostly because managers cannot 
conceivably be available for all of the risks identified. Furthermore, 
the very nature of new technologies requires that IT staff mem-
bers develop the ability to self-manage more of their daily functions 
and interactions, particularly with other staff members outside the 
IT department. The need for self-development is even more critical 
because of the existence of technological dynamism, which focuses 
on dynamic and unpredictable transactions that often must be han-
dled directly by IT staff members and not their managers. Finally, 
because so many risks during technology projects require business 
user interfaces, non-IT staff members also need to develop better and 
more efficient self-management than they are accustomed to doing. 
Technological dynamism, then, has established another need for 
change management theory. This need relates to the implementation 
of self-development methods. Indeed, part of the reason for the lack 
of success of IT projects can be attributed to the inability of the core 
IT and business staff to perform in a more dynamic way. Historically, 
more management cannot provide the necessary learning and reduc-
tion of risk.
The idea of self-development became popular in the early 1980s as 
an approach to the training and education of managers, and managers 
to be. Thus, the focus of management self-development is to increase 
the ability and willingness of managers to take responsibility for 
themselves, particularly for their own learning (Pedler et al., 1988). 
I believe that management self-development theory can be applied to 
nonmanagers, or to staff members, who need to practice self-manage-
ment skills that can assist them in transitioning to operating under 
the conditions of technological dynamism.
Management self-development draws on the idea that many peo-
ple emphasize the need for learner centeredness. This is an impor-
tant concept in that it ties self-development theory to organizational 
learning, particularly to the work of Chris Argyris and Malcolm 
Knowles. The concept of learner centeredness holds that individuals 
must take prime responsibility for their own learning: when and how 
to learn. The teacher (or manager) is assigned the task of facilitator—a 
role that fosters guidance as opposed to direct initiation of learning. 
In many ways, a facilitator can be seen as a mentor whose role it is to 

128
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
guide an individual through various levels of learning and individual 
development.
What makes self-development techniques so attractive is that 
learners work on actual tasks and then reflect on their own efforts. 
The methods of reflective practice theory, therefore, are applicable 
and can be integrated with self-development practices. Although self-
development places the focus on the individual’s own efforts, manag-
ers still have responsibilities to mentor, coach, and counsel their staff. 
This support network allows staff to receive appropriate feedback and 
guidance. In many ways, self-development relates to the professional 
process of apprenticeship but differs from it in that the worker may not 
aspire to become the manager but may wish simply to develop better 
management skills. Workers are expected to make mistakes and to be 
guided through a process that helps them reflect and improve. This is 
why self-development can be seen as a management issue as opposed 
to just a learning theory.
A mentor or coach can be a supervisor, line manager, director, or 
an outside consultant. The bottom line is that technological dyna-
mism requires staff members who can provide self-­management 
to cope with constant project changes and risks. These individu-
als must be able to learn, be self-aware of what they do not know, 
and possess enough confidence to initiate the required learning 
and assistance that they need to be successful (Pedler et al., 1988). 
Self-development methods, like other techniques, have risks. 
Most notable, is the initial decrement in performance followed by 
a slow increment as workers become more comfortable with the 
process and learn from their mistakes. However, staff members 
must be given support and time to allow this process to occur; 
self-development is a trial-and-error method founded on the basis 
of mastery learning (i.e., learning from one’s mistakes). Thus, the 
notion of self-development is both continuous and discontinuous 
and must be implemented in a series of phases, each having unique 
outcomes and maturity. The concept of self-development is also 
consistent with the ROD arc, in which early phases of maturation 
require more individual learning, particularly reflective practices. 
Self-development, in effect, becomes a method of indirect man-
agement to assist in personal transformation. This personal trans-
formation will inevitably better prepare individuals to participate 

129
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
in group- and organizational-level learning at later stages of 
maturation.
The first phase of establishing a self-development program is to 
create a “learning-to-learn” process. Teaching individuals to learn is a 
fundamental need before implementing self-development techniques. 
Mumford (1988) defines learning to learn as
	
1.	Helping staff to understand the stages of the learning process 
and the pitfalls to not learning
	
2.	Helping staff to find their own preferences to learning
	
3.	Assisting staff in understanding their present learning prefer-
ences and how to deal with, and overcome, learning weaknesses
	
4.	Helping staff to build on their learning experience and apply 
it to their current challenges in their job
The first phase of self-development clearly embraces the Kolb 
(1999) Learning Style Inventory and the applied individual learn-
ing wheel that were introduced in Chapter  4. Thus, all staff members 
should be provided with both of these learning wheels, made aware 
of their natural learning strengths and weaknesses, and provided with 
exercises to help them overcome their limitations. Most important is 
that the Kolb system will make staff aware of their shortfalls with 
learning. The applied individual learning wheel will provide a per-
spective on how individuals can link generic learning preferences into 
organizational learning needs to support ROD.
The second phase of self-development is to establish a formal learn-
ing program in which staff members
	
1.	Are responsible for their own learning, coordinated with a 
mentor or coach
	
2.	Have the right to determine how they will meet their own 
learning needs, within available resources, time frames, and 
set outcomes
	
3.	Are responsible for evaluating and assessing their progress 
with their learning
In parallel, staff coaches or mentors
	
1.	Have the responsibility to frame the learning objectives so 
that they are consistent with agreed-on individual weaknesses

130
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
2.	Are responsible for providing access and support for staff
	
3.	Must determine the extent of their involvement with mentor-
ing and their commitment to assisting staff members achieve 
stated outcomes
	
4.	Are ultimately responsible for the evaluation of individual’s 
progress and success
 This program must also have a formal process and structure. 
According to Mossman and Stewart (1988), formal programs, called 
self-managed learning (SML), need the following organization and 
materials:
	
1.	Staff members should work in groups as opposed to on their 
own. This is a good opportunity to intermix IT and non-
IT staff with similar issues and objectives. The size of these 
groups is (typically) from four to six members. Groups should 
meet every two– three  weeks, and should develop what are 
known as learning contracts . Learning contracts specifically 
state what the individual and management have agreed on. 
Essentially, the structure of self-development allows staff 
members to experience communities of practice, which by 
their very nature, will also introduce them to group learning 
and system-level thinking.
	
2.	Mentors or coaches should preside over a group as opposed to 
presiding over just one individual. There are two benefits to 
doing this: (1) There are simply economies of scale for which 
managers cannot cover staff on an individual basis, and (2) 
facilitating a group with similar objectives benefits interac-
tion among the members. Coaches obviously need to play an 
important role in defining the structure of the sessions, in 
offering ideas about how to begin the self-development pro-
cess, and in providing general support.
	
3.	Staff members need to have workbooks, films, courses, 
study guides, books, and specialists in the organization, 
all of which learners can use to help them accomplish their 
goals.
	
4.	Typically, learning contracts will state the assessment meth-
ods. However, assessment should not be limited only to indi-
viduals but also should include group accomplishments.

131
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
An SML should be designed to ensure that the learning program 
for staff members represents a commitment by management to a for-
mal process, that can assist in the improvement of the project teams.
The third phase of self-development is evaluation. This process is a 
mixture of individual and group assessments from phase II, coupled 
with assessments from actual practice results. These are results from 
proven outcomes during normal workday operations. To garner the 
appropriate practice evaluation, mentors and coaches must be involved 
in monitoring results and noting the progress on specific events that 
occur. For example, if a new version of software is implemented, we 
will want to know if IT staff and business users worked together to 
determine how and when it should be implemented. These results 
need to be formally communicated back to the learning groups. This 
process needs to be continued on an ongoing basis to sustain the 
effects of change management. Figure  5.5 represents the flow of the 
three phases of the process.
The process for self-development provides an important approach 
in assisting staff to perform better under the conditions of technologi-
cal dynamism. It is one thing to teach reflective practice; it is another 
Individual learning contracts
Learning styles inventory
Self-managed learning program
communities of
practice IT and non-IT staﬀ
Phase 1:
Establish
learning to
learn
objectives
Phase 2:
Create formal
learning
program
Make necessary
changes to self-
development
learning
Individual and group assessment
monitor operations for
measurable outcomes
Phase 3:
Implement
evaluation
Figure  5.5  Phases of self-development.

132
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
to get staff members to learn how to think in a manner that takes into 
consideration the many risks that have plagued systems and software 
projects for decades. While the role of management continues to play 
a major part in getting things done within strategic objectives, self-
development can provide a strong learning method, that can foster 
sustained bottom-up management, which is missing in most learning 
organizations.
The Ravell case study provides some concrete evidence on how 
self-development techniques can indeed get results. Because of the 
time pressures at Ravell, I was not able to invest in the learning-to-
learn component at the start of the process. However, I used informal 
methods to determine the learning preferences of the staff. This can 
be accomplished through interviews in which staff responses can pro-
vide a qualitative basis for evaluating how specific personnel prefer to 
learn. This helped me to formulate a specific training program that 
involved group meetings with IT and non-IT-oriented groups.
In effect, phase II at Ravell had two communities. The first com-
munity was the IT staff. We met each week to review progress and 
to set short-term objectives of what the community of IT wanted to 
accomplish. I acted as a facilitator, and although I was in a power 
position as their manager, I did not use my position unless there were 
clear signs of resistance in the team (which there were in specific situ-
ations). The second community was formed with various line manager 
departments. This is where I formed “dotted-line” reporting struc-
tures, which required IT staff members also to join other commu-
nities of practice. This proved to be an invaluable strategy because 
it brought IT and business users together and formed the links that 
eventually allowed IT staff members to begin to learn and to form 
relationships with the user community, which fostered reflective 
thinking and transformation.
As stated, there are setbacks at the start of any self-development 
program, and the experience at Ravell was no exception. Initially, 
IT staff members had difficulty understanding what was expected 
of them; they did not immediately perceive the learning program as 
an opportunity for their professional growth. It was through ongo-
ing, motivated discourse in and outside of the IT community that 
helped achieve measurable increments of self-developmental growth. 
Furthermore, I found it necessary to integrate individual coaching 

133
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
sessions with IT staff. While group sessions were useful, they were 
not a substitute for individual discussions, which at times allowed 
IT staff members to personally discuss their concerns and learning 
requirements. I found the process to be ultimately valuable, and I 
maintained the role of coach, as opposed to that of a manager who 
tells IT staff members what to do in every instance. I knew that direct 
management only would never allow for the development of learning.
Eventually, self-development through discourse will foster identity 
development. Such was the case at Ravell, where both user and IT 
groups eventually came together to form specific and interactive com-
munities of practice. This helped form a clearer identity for IT staff 
members, and they began to develop the ability to address the many 
project risk issues that I defined in this chapter. Most important for 
the organization was that Ravell phase I built the foundation for later 
phases that required more group and system thinking among the IT 
ranks.
Evaluation of the performance at Ravell (phase III of the self-
development process) was actually easier than expected, which means 
that if the first two phases are successful, evaluation will naturally be 
easy to determine. As reflective thinking became more evident in the 
group, it was easier to see the growth in transformative behavior; the 
IT groups became more proactive and critical by themselves, without 
necessarily needing my input. In fact, my participation fell into more 
of a supporter role; I was asked to participate more when I felt needed 
to provide a specific task for the group. Evaluation based on perfor-
mance was also easier to determine, mainly because we had formed 
interdepartmental communities and because of the relationships I 
established with line managers.
Another important decision we made and one that nurtured our 
evaluation capabilities was the fact that line managers often joined 
our IT staff meetings. So, getting feedback on actual results was 
always open for discussion.
Viewing self-development in the scope of organizational learning 
and management techniques provides an important support method 
for later development in system thinking. The Ravel experience did 
just that, as the self-development process inevitably laid the foun-
dation for more sophisticated organizational learning, required as a 
business matures under ROD.

134
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Social Networks and Information Technology
The expansion of social networks, through the use of technological 
innovations, has substantially changed the way information flows in 
and out of a business community. Some companies, particularly in the 
financial services communities, have attempted to “lock out” social 
network capabilities. These attempts are ways for organizations to 
control, as opposed to change, behavior. Historically, such controls 
to enforce compliance have not worked. This is particularly relevant 
because of the emergence of a younger generation of workers who use 
social networking tools as a regular way to communicate and carry out 
discourse. Indeed, social networking has become the main vehicle for 
social discourse both inside and outside organizations. There are those 
who feel that the end of confidentiality may be on the horizon. This 
is not to suggest that technology executives give up on security—we 
all know this would be ludicrous. On the other hand, the increasing 
pressure to “open” the Web will inevitably become too significant to 
ignore. Thus, the technology executive of the future must be prepared 
to provide desired social and professional networks to their employees 
while figuring out how to minimize risk—certainly not an easy objec-
tive. Organizations will need to provide the necessary learning tech-
niques to help employees understand the limits of what can be done.
We must remember that organizations, governments, and busi-
nesses have never been successful at controlling the flow of information 
to any population to or from any specific interest group—inevitably, 
information flows through. As stated by Cross and Thomas (2009), 
“The network perspective could trigger new approaches to organiza-
tion design at a time when environmental and competitive conditions 
seem to be exhausting conventional wisdom” (p. 186). Most important 
is the understanding that multinational organizations need to think 
globally and nationally at the same time. To do this, employees must 
transform their behavior and how they interact. Controlling access 
does not address this concern; it only makes communication more 
difficult and therefore does not provide a solution. Controls typically 
manifest themselves in the form of new processes and procedures. I 
often see technology executives proclaiming the need to change pro-
cesses in the name of security without really understanding that they 
are not providing a solution, but rather, fostering new procedures that 

135
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
will allow individuals to evade the new security measures. As Cross and 
Thomas (2009) point out, “Formal structures often overlook the fact 
that every formal organization has in its shadow an informal or ‘ invis-
ible’ organization” (p.  1). Instead, technology executives concerned 
with security, need to focus on new organizational design to assist 
businesses to be “social network ready.” ROD must then be extended 
to allow for the expansion of social network integration, including, 
but not limited to, such products as Linkedln, Facebook, and Twitter. 
It may also be necessary to create new internal network infrastruc-
tures that specifically cater to social network communication.
Many software application companies have learned that compat-
ibility in an open systems environment is a key factor for success-
ful deployment of an enterprise-wide application solution. Thus, all 
applications developed within or for an organization need to have 
compatibility with the common and popular social network products. 
This popularity is not static, but rather, a constant process of deter-
mining which products will become important social networks that 
the company may want to leverage. We see social networks having 
such an impact within the consumer environment—or what we can 
consider to be the “market.” I explained in my definition of ROD that 
it is the acceleration of market changes—or the changing relationship 
between a buyer and seller—that dictates the successes and failures of 
businesses. That said, technology executives must focus their attention 
on how such networks will require their organizations to embrace 
them. Obviously, this change carries risks. Adapting too early could 
be overreacting to market hype, while lagging could mean late entry.
The challenge, then, for today’s technology leaders is to create 
dynamic, yet functional, social networks that allow businesses to 
compete while maintaining the controls they must have to protect 
themselves. The IT organization must concentrate on how to provide 
the infrastructure that allows these dynamic connections to be made 
without overcontrol. The first mission for the technology executive is 
to negotiate this challenge by working with the senior management 
of the organization to reach consensus on the risk factors. The issues 
typically involve the processes, behavior patterns, and risks shown in 
Figure  5.6.
Ultimately, the technology executive must provide a new road map 
that promotes interagency and cross-customer collaboration in a way 

136
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
that will assist the organization to attain a ROD culture. Social net-
works are here to stay and will continue to necessitate 24/7 access for 
everyone. This inevitably raises salient issues relating to the manage-
ment structure within businesses and how best to manage them.
In Chapter  2, I defined the IT dilemma in a number of contexts. 
During an interview, a chief executive raised an interesting issue that 
relates to the subject: “My direct reports have been complaining that 
because of all this technology that they cannot get away from—that 
their days never seem to end.” I responded to this CEO by asking, 
Business process
Design a social network
that allows
participants to
respond dynamically
to customer and
business needs
Aspired behavior patterns
Risks
Users understand the inherent limits
to what can be communicated
outside the organization, limit
personal transactions, and use
judgment when foreign e-mails are
forwarded.
Users cannot properly
determine the ethics of
behavior and will not take
the necessary precautions
to avoid exposing the
organization to outside
security breaches.
Discern which critical
functions are required
for the social network
to work eﬀectively and
maintain the ﬁrm's
competitive
positioning
Users are active and form strategic
groups (communities of practice)
that deﬁne needs on a regular basis
and work closely with IT and senior
management.
Users cannot keep up with
changes in social 
networks, and it is 
impossible to track
individual needs and
behaviors.
Provide a network
design that can be
scaled as needs
change within the
budget limitations of
the organization
Te organization must understand
that hard budgets for social
networking may not be feasible.
Rather, the network needs are
dynamic, and costs must be
assessed dynamically within the
appropriate operating teams in the
organizations.
Reality tells us that all
organizations operate
within budget limitations.
Large organizations ﬁnd
it diﬃcult to govern
dynamically, and smaller
organizations cannot 
aﬀord the personnel 
necessary to manage 
dynamically.
Create a social network
that “ﬂattens” the
organization so that
all levels are
accessible
Particularly large organizations need
to have a network that allows its
people better access to its
departments, talent, and
management. In the 1980s, the
book In Search of Excellence (Peters
& Waterman, 1982) was the ﬁrst
eﬀort to present the value of a
“ﬂatter” organizational structure.
Social networks provide the
infrastructure to make this a reality.
With access come the
challenges of responding
to all that connect to the
system. Te organization
needs to provide the
correct etiquette of how
individuals respond
dynamically without
creating anarchy.
Figure  5.6  Social network management issues.

137
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
“Why are they e-mailing and calling you? Is it possible that tech-
nology has exposed a problem that has always existed?” The CEO 
seemed surprised at my response and said, “What do you mean?” 
Again, I responded by suggesting that technology allowed access, 
but perhaps, that was not really the problem. In my opinion, the real 
problem was a weakness in management or organizational structure. 
I argued that good managers build organizations that should handle 
the questions that were the subject of these executives’ complaints. 
Perhaps the real problem was that the organization or management 
was not handling day-to-day issues. This case supports my thesis that 
technology dynamism requires reevaluation of how the organization 
operates and stresses the need to understand the cultural assimilation 
abilities of dealing with change.
Another interesting aspect of social networks is the emergence of 
otherwise invisible participants. Technology-driven networks have 
allowed individuals to emerge not only because of the access determi-
nant but also because of statistics. Let me be specific. Network traffic 
can easily be tracked, as can individual access. Even with limited his-
tory, organizations are discovering the valued members of their com-
panies simply by seeing who is active and why. This should not suggest 
that social networks are spy networks. Indeed, organizations need to 
provide learning techniques to guide how access is tracked and to 
highlight the value that it brings to a business. As with other issues, 
the technology executive must align with other units and individuals; 
the following are some examples:
•	 Human resources (HR): This department has specific needs 
that can align effectively with the entire social network. 
Obviously, there are compliance issues that limit what can 
be done over a network. Unfortunately, this is an area that 
requires reassessment: In general, governance and controls do 
not drive an organization to adopt ROD. There are other fac-
tors related to the HR function. First, is the assimilation of 
new employees and the new talents that they might bring to 
the network. Second, is the challenge of adapting to ongoing 
change within the network. Third, is the knowledge lost of 
those who leave the organization yet may still want to partici-
pate socially within the organization (friends of the company).

138
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
•	 Gender: Face-to-face meetings have always shown differences 
in participation by gender. Men tend to dominate meetings 
and the positions they hold in an organization. However, the 
advent of social virtual networks has begun to show a shift 
in the ways women participate and hold leadership positions 
among their peers. In an article in Business Week  (May 19, 
2008), Auren Hoffman reports that women dominate social 
network traffic. This may result in seeing more women-centric 
communication. The question, then, is whether the expan-
sion of social networks will give rise to more women in senior 
management positions.
•	 Marketing: The phenomenon of social networking has allowed 
for the creation of more targeted connectivity; that is, the abil-
ity to connect with specific clients in special ways. Marketing 
departments are undergoing an extraordinary transformation 
in the way they target and connect with prospective custom-
ers. The technology executive is essentially at the center of 
designing networks that provide customizable responses and 
facilitate complex matrix structures. Having such abilities 
could be the differentiator between success and failure for 
many organizations.
One can see that the expansion of social networks is likely to have 
both good and bad effects. Thus far, in this section I have discussed the 
good. The bad relates to the expansion of what seems to be an unlim-
ited network. How does one manage such expansion? The answer lies 
within the concept of alignment. Alignment has always been critical 
to attain organizational effectiveness. The heart of alignment is deal-
ing with cultural values, goals, and processes that are key to meet 
strategic objectives (Cross & Thomas, 2009). While the social net-
work acts to expose these issues, it does not necessarily offer solutions 
to these differences. Thus, the challenge for the technology executive 
of today is to balance the power of social networks while providing 
direction on how to deal with alignment and control—not an easy 
task but clearly an opportunity for leadership. The following chapters 
offer some methods to address the challenges discussed in this chap-
ter, and the opportunities they provide for technology executives.

139
6
Organizational 
Transformation and the 
Balanced Scorecard
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to examine the nature of organiza-
tional transformation, how it occurs, and how it can be measured. 
Aldrich (2001) defines organizational transformation along three 
possible dimensions: changes in goals, boundaries, and activities. 
According to Aldrich, transformations “must involve a qualita-
tive break with routines and a shift to new kinds of competencies 
that challenge existing organizational knowledge” (p. 163). He 
warns us that many changes in organizations disguise themselves 
as transformative but are not. Thus, focusing on the qualifications 
of authentic or substantial transformation is key to understanding 
whether it has truly occurred in an organization. Technology, as 
with any independent variable, may or may not have the capacity to 
instigate organizational transformation. Therefore, it is important 
to integrate transformation theory with responsive organizational 
dynamism (ROD). In this way, the measurable outcomes of orga-
nizational learning and technology can be assessed in organizations 
that implement ROD. Most important in this regard, is that organi-
zational transformation, along with knowledge creation, be directly 
correlated to the results of implementing organizational learning. 
That is, the results of using organizational learning techniques must 
result in organizational transformation.
Organizational transformation is significant for three key reasons:
	
1.	Organizations that cannot change will fundamentally be at 
risk against competitors, especially in a quickly changing 
market.

140
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
2.	If the organization cannot evolve, it will persist in its norms 
and be unwilling to change unless forced to do so.
	
3.	If the community population is forced to change and is con-
strained in its evolutionary path, it is likely that it will not be 
able to transform and thus, will need to be replaced.
Aldrich (2001) establishes three dimensions of organizational 
transformation. By examining them, we can apply technology-­
specific changes and determine within each dimension what consti-
tutes authentic organizational transformation.
	
1.	Goals: There are two types of goal-related transformations: (a) 
change in the market or target population of the organiza-
tion; (b) the overall goal of the organization itself changes. I 
have already observed that technology can affect the mission 
of an organization, often because it establishes new market 
niches (or changes them). Changed mission statements also 
inevitably modify goals and objectives.
	
2.	Boundaries: Organizational boundaries transform when there 
is expansion or contraction. Technology has historically 
expanded domains by opening up new markets that could 
not otherwise be reached without technological innovation. 
E-business is an example of a transformation brought about 
by an emerging technology. Of course, business can contract 
as a result of not assimilating a technology; technology also 
can create organizational transformation.
	
3.	Activity systems: Activity systems define the way things are 
done. They include the processing culture, such as behav-
ioral roles. Changes in roles and responsibilities alone do 
not necessarily represent organizational transformation 
unless it is accompanied by cultural shifts in behavior. The 
cultural assimilation component of ROD provides a method 
with which to facilitate transformations that are unpredict-
able yet evolutionary. Sometimes, transformations in activ-
ity systems deriving from technological innovations can 
be categorized by the depth and breadth of its impact on 
other units. For example, a decision could be made to use 
technology as part of a total quality management (TQM) 

141
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
effort. Thus, activity transformations can be indirect and  
need to be evaluated based on multiple and simultaneous 
events.
Aldrich’ s (2001) concept of organizational transformation bears 
on the issue of frequency of change. In general, he concludes that 
the changes that follow a regular cycle are part of normal evolution 
and “flow of organizational life” (p. 169) and should not be treated as 
transformations. Technology, on the other hand, presents an inter-
esting case in that it can be perceived as normal in its persistence 
and regularity of change while being unpredictable in its dynamism. 
However, Aldrich’ s definition of transformation poses an interesting 
issue for determining transformations resulting from technological 
innovations. Specifically, under what conditions is a technological 
innovation considered to have a transformative effect on the organi-
zation? And, when is it to be considered as part of regular change? I 
refer to Figure  6.1, first presented in Chapter  3 on driver and sup-
porter life cycles to respond to this question.
The flows in this cycle can be used as the method to determine 
technological events that are normal change agents versus transforma-
tive ones. To understand this point, one should view all driver-related 
technologies as transformational agents because they, by definition, 
affect strategic innovation and are approved based on return on 
investment (ROI). Aldrich’ s (2001) “normal ebb and flows” repre-
sent the “mini-loops” that are new enhancements or subtechnologies, 
which are part of normal everyday changes necessary to mature a 
Mini loop technology enhancements
Technology
driver
Evaluation
cycle
Driver
maturation
Support
status
Replacement or
outsource
Economies
of scale
Figure  6.1   Driver-to-supporter life cycle.

142
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
technological innovation. Thus, driver variables that result from mini-
loops, would not be considered transformational agents of change.
It is important to recognize that Aldrich’ s (2001) definition of 
organizational transformation should not be confused with theories 
of transformative learning. As West (1996) proclaims, “The goal of 
organizational learning is to transform the organization” (p. 54). The 
study of transformative learning has been relevant to adult education, 
and has focused on individual, as opposed to organizational, devel-
opment and learning. Thus, transformative learning has been better 
integrated in individual learning and reflective practice theories than 
in organizational ones. While these modes of learning are related to 
the overall learning in organizations, they should not be confused 
with organizations that are attempting to realize their performance 
objectives.
Yorks and Marsick (2000) offer two strategies that can produce 
transformative learning for individuals, groups, or organizations: 
action learning and collaborative inquiry. I covered action science in 
Chapter  4, particularly reflective practices, as key interventions to fos-
ter both individual and group evolution of learning, specifically in 
reference to how to manage ROD. Aspects of collaborative inquiry 
are applied to later stages of maturation and to more senior levels of 
management based on systems-level learning. As Yorks and Marsick 
(2000) state, “For the most part the political dimensions of how the 
organization functions is off limits, as are discussions of larger social 
consequences” (p. 274).
Technological innovations provide acceleration factors and foster 
the need for ROD. Technology also furnishes the potential tangible 
and measurable outcomes necessary to normalize York and Marsick’ s 
(2000) framework for transformative learning theory into organiza-
tional contexts as follows:
	
1.	Technology, specifically e-business, has created a critical need 
for organizations to engage with clients and individuals in a 
new interactive context. This kind of discourse has established 
accelerated needs, such as understanding the magnitude of 
alternative courses of action between customer and vendor. 
The building of sophisticated intranets (internal Internets) and 
their evolution to assimilate with other Internet operations 

143
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
has also fueled the need for learning to occur more often than 
before and at organizational level.
	
	
Because technology can produce measurable outcomes, 
individuals are faced with accelerated reflections about the 
cultural impact of their own behaviors. This is directly related 
to the implementation of the cultural assimilation component 
of ROD, by which individuals determine how their behaviors 
are affected by emerging technologies.
	
2.	Early in the process of implementing strategic integration, 
reflective practices are critical for event-driven technology 
projects. These practices force individuals to continually reex-
amine their existing meaning perspectives (specifically, their 
views and habits of mind). Individual reflection in, on, and to 
practice will evolve to system-level group and organizational 
learning contexts, as shown in the ROD arc.
	
3.	The process of moving from individual to system-level learn-
ing during technology maturation is strengthened by the 
learners’  abilities to comprehend why historical events have 
influenced their existing habits of mind.
	
4.	The combination of strategic integration and cultural assimi-
lation lays the foundation for organizational transformation 
to occur. Technology provides an appropriate blend of being 
both strategic and organizational in nature, thus allow-
ing learners to confront their prior actions and develop new 
practices.
Aldrich (2001) also provides an interesting set of explanations for 
why it is necessary to recognize the evolutionary aspect of organiza-
tional transformations. I have extended them to operate within the 
context of ROD, as follows:
Variation : Defined as “change from current routines and compe-
tencies and change in organizational forms” (Aldrich, 2001, 
p. 22). Technology provides perhaps the greatest amount of 
variation in routines and thereby establishes the need for 
something to manage it: ROD. The higher the frequency of 
variation, the greater the chance that organizational transfor-
mation can occur. Variation is directly correlated to cultural 
assimilation.

14 4
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Selection : This is the process of determining whether to use a 
technology variation. Selections can be affected by external 
(outside the organization) and internal (inside the organi-
zation) factors, such as changes in market segments or new 
business missions, respectively. The process of selection can be 
related to the strategic integration component of ROD.
Retention : Selected variations are retained or preserved by the 
organization. Retention is a key way of validating whether 
organizational transformation has occurred. As Aldrich 
states: “Transformations are completed when knowledge 
required for reproducing the new form is embodied in a com-
munity of practice” (p. 171).
Because of the importance of knowledge creation as the basis of 
transformation, communities of practice are the fundamental struc-
tures of organizational learning to support organizational transforma-
tion. Aldrich (2001) also goes beyond learning; he includes policies, 
programs, and networks as parts of the organizational transformative 
process. Figure  6.2 shows Aldrich’ s evolutionary process and its rela-
tionship to ROD components.
Thus, we see from Figure  6.2 the relationships between the pro-
cesses of creating organizational transformation, the stages required 
to reach it, the ROD components in each stage, and the correspond-
ing organizational learning method that is needed. Notice that the 
mapping of organizational learning methods onto Aldrich’ s (2001) 
scheme for organizational transformation can be related to the ROD 
arc. It shows us that as we get closer to retention, organizational learn-
ing evolves from an individual technique to a system/organizational 
learning perspective. Aldrich’ s model is consistent with my driver-
versus-supporter concept. He notes, “When the new form becomes 
a taken-for-granted aspect of every day life in the organization, its 
legitimacy is assumed” (p. 175).
Hence, the assimilation of new technologies cannot be consid-
ered transformative until it behaves as a supporter. Only then can we 
determine that the technology has changed organizational biases and 
norms. Representing the driver and supporter life cycle to include this 
important relationship is shown in Figure  6.3.

145
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
Technology
Variation
Strategic integration–
assess value of
technology
Cultural assimilation–
assess extent of what
to implement and
determine eﬀects on
structure
Strategic integration–
determine which
technologies best ﬁt
corporate needs and
provide highest ROI
Corresponding organizational learning methods
Individual
reﬂective
practices
Group-based
reﬂective
practices
Social discourse
using
communities
of practice
Communities of
practice and
knowledge
management
Validation of
organizational
transformation–
technology has provided
strategic outcomes and
modiﬁed structures
and processes
Selection
Retention
Figure  6.2   Stages of organizational transformation and ROD.
Individual
reﬂective practice
Group-based
reﬂective
practice
Communities
of practice
Knowledge
management
Organizational
transformation
Mini loop technology enhancements
Technology
driver
Evaluation
cycle
Driver
maturation
Support
status
Replacement or
outsource
Economies
of scale
Figure  6.3   Organizational transformation in the driver-to-supporter life cycle.

146
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Methods of Ongoing Evaluation
If we define organizational transformation as the retention of knowl-
edge within the body of communities of practice, the question to be 
answered is how this retention actually is determined in practice. 
The possibility often occurs that transformations are partial or in 
some phase of completion. This would mean that the transformation 
is incomplete or needs to continue along some phase of approach. 
Indeed, cultural assimilation does not occur immediately, but rather, 
over periods of transition. Much of the literature on organizational 
transformation does not address the practical aspects of evaluation 
from this perspective. This lack of information is particularly prob-
lematic with respect to technology, since so much of how technology 
is implemented relates to phased steps that rarely happen in one major 
event. Thus, it is important to have some method of ongoing evalua-
tion to determine the extent of transformation that has occurred and 
which organizational learning methods need to be applied to help 
continue the process toward complete transformation.
Aldrich’ s (2001) retention can also be misleading. We know that 
organizational transformation is an ongoing process, especially as 
advocated in ROD. It is probable that transformations continue and 
move from one aspect of importance to another, so a completed trans-
formation may never exist. Another way of viewing this concept is to 
treat transformations as event milestones. Individuals and communi-
ties of practice are able to track where they are in the learning process. 
It also fits into the phased approach of technology implementation. 
Furthermore, the notion of phases allows for integration of organiza-
tional transformation concepts with stage and development theories. 
With the acceptance of this concept, there needs to be a method or 
model that can help organizations define and track such phases of 
transformation. Such a model would also allow for mapping outcomes 
onto targeted business strategies. Another way of understanding the 
importance of validating organizational transformation is to recognize 
its uniqueness, since most companies fail to execute their strategies.
The method that can be applied to the validation of organizational 
transformation is a management tool called the balanced scorecard. 
The balanced scorecard was introduced by Kaplan and Norton (2001) 
in the early 1990s as a tool to solve measurement problems. The ability 

147
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
of an organization to develop and operationalize its intangible assets 
has become more and more a critical component for success. As I 
have already expressed regarding the work of Lucas (1999), financial 
measurement may not be capable of capturing all IT value. This is 
particularly true in knowledge-based theories. The balanced score-
card can be used as a solution for measuring outcomes that are not 
always financial and tangible. Furthermore, the balanced scorecard 
is a “living” document that can be modified as certain objectives or 
measurements require change. This is a critical advantage because, as 
I have demonstrated, technology projects often change in scope and in 
objectives as a result of internal and external factions.
The ultimate value, then, of the balanced scorecard, in this con-
text, is to provide a means for evaluating transformation not only for 
measuring completion against set targets but also for defining how 
expected transformations map onto the strategic objectives of the 
organization. In effect, it is the ability of the organization to execute 
its strategy. Before explaining the details of how a balanced scorecard 
can be applied specifically to ROD, I offer Figure  6.4, which shows 
Mobilize change
through executive
leadership
Balanced
Translate the
strategy to
operational terms
Scorecard
Make strategy a
continual process
Strategy
Align
organizational to
the strategy
Make strategy
everyone’s job
Figure  6.4   Balanced scorecard. (From Kaplan, R.S., & Norton, D.P., The Strategy-Focused 
Organization , Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001.)

148
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
exactly where the scorecard fits into the overall picture of transition-
ing emerging technologies into concrete strategic benefit.
The generic objectives of a balanced scorecard are designed to cre-
ate a strategy-focused organization. Thus, all of the objectives and 
measurements should be derived from the vision and strategy of the 
organization (Kaplan & Norton, 2001). These measurements are 
based on the fundamental principles of any strategically focused orga-
nization and on alignment and focus. Kaplan and Norton define these 
principles as the core of the balanced scorecard:
	
1.	Translate the strategy to operational terms : This principle 
includes two major components that allow an organization to 
define its strategy from a cause-and-effect perspective using 
a strategy map and scorecard. Thus, the strategy map and its 
corresponding balanced scorecard provide the basic measure-
ment system.
	
2.	Align the organization to the strategy: Kaplan and Norton 
define this principle as favoring synergies among organiza-
tional departments that allow communities of practice to have 
a shared view, and common understanding of their roles.
	
3.	Make strategy everyone’ s everyday job: This principle supports 
the notion of a learning organization that requires everyone’ s 
participation, from the chief executive officer (CEO) to cleri-
cal levels. To accomplish this mission, the members of the 
organization must be aware of business strategy; individuals 
may need “personal” scorecards and a matching reward sys-
tem for accomplishing the strategy.
	
4.	Make strategy a continual process: This process requires the 
linking of important, yet fundamental, components, includ-
ing organizational learning, budgeting, management reviews, 
and a process of adaptation. Much of this principle falls into 
the areas of learning organization theories that link learning 
and strategy in ongoing perpetual cycles.
	
5.	Mobilize change through executive leadership: This principle 
stresses the need for a strategy-focused organization that 
incorporates the involvement of senior management and can 
mobilize the organization and provide sponsorship to the 
overall process.

149
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
Using the core balanced scorecard schematic, I have modified it to 
operate with technology and ROD, as shown in Figure  6.5.
	
1.	Evaluation of technology: The first step is to have an infrastruc-
ture that can determine how technology fits into a specific 
strategy. Once this is targeted, the evaluation team needs to 
define it in operational terms. This principle requires the stra-
tegic integration component of ROD.
	
2.	Align technology with business strategy : Once technology is 
evaluated, it must be integrated into the business strategy. 
This involves ascertaining whether the addition of technology 
will change the current business strategy. This principle is also 
connected to the strategic integration component of ROD.
	
3.	Make technology projects part of communities of practice : Affected 
communities need to be strategically aware of the project. 
Organizational structures must determine how they distrib-
ute rewards and objectives across departments. This principle 
requires the cultural assimilation component of ROD.
	
4.	Phased-in technology implementation : Short- and long-term 
project objectives are based on driver and supporter life cycles. 
Executive
interfaces
Balanced
Evaluation of
technology
Scorecard
Phase technology
implementation
Responsive
org
dynamism
strategy
Align
technology
with business
strategy
Make technology
project part of
communities of
practice
Figure  6.5   Balanced scorecard ROD.

150
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
This will allow organizational transformation phases to be 
linked to implementation milestones. This principle maps 
onto the cultural assimilation component of ROD.
	
5.	Executive interface : CEO and senior managers act as executive 
sponsors and project champions. Communities of practice 
and their common “threads” need to be defined, including 
middle management and operations personnel, so that top-
down, middle-up-down, and bottom-up information flows 
can occur.
The balanced scorecard ultimately provides a framework to view 
strategy from four different measures:
	
1.	Financial : ROI and risk continue to be important components 
of strategic evaluation.
	
2.	Customer : This involves the strategic part of how to create 
value for the customers of the organization.
	
3.	Internal business processes : This relates to the business pro-
cesses that provide both customer satisfaction and operational 
efficiency.
	
4.	Learning and growth : This encompasses the priorities and 
infrastructure to support organizational transformation 
through ROD.
The generic balanced scorecard framework needs to be extended to 
address technology and ROD. I propose the following adjustments:
	
1.	Financial : Requires the inclusion of indirect benefits from 
technology, particularly as Lucas (1999) specifies, in nonmon-
etary methods of evaluating ROI. Risk must also be factored 
in, based on specific issues for each technology project.
	
2.	Customer : Technology-based products are integrated with 
customer needs and provide direct customer package inter-
faces. Further, web systems that use the Internet are depen-
dent on consumer use. As such, technology can modify 
organizational strategy because of its direct effect on the cus-
tomer interface.
	
3.	Internal business processes : Technology requires business pro-
cess reengineering (BPR), which is the process of reevaluat-
ing existing internal norms and behaviors before designing a 

151
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
new system. This new evaluation process addresses customers, 
operational efficiencies, and cost.
	
4.	Learning and growth : Organizational learning techniques, 
under the umbrella of ROD, need to be applied on an ongo-
ing and evolutionary basis. Progress needs to be linked to the 
ROD arc.
The major portion of the balanced scorecard strategy is in its initial 
design; that is, in translating the strategy or, as in the ROD scorecard, 
the evaluation of technology. During this phase, a strategy map and 
actual balanced scorecards are created. This process should begin by 
designing a balanced scorecard that articulates the business strategy. 
Remember, every organization needs to build a strategy that is unique 
and based on its evaluation of the external and internal situation (Olve 
et al., 2003). To clarify the definition of this strategy, it is easier to 
consider drawing the scorecard initially in the form of a strategy map. 
A generic strategy map essentially defines the components of each 
perspective, showing specific strategies within each one, as shown in 
Figure  6.6.
Perspective:
Financial
Customer
Process
Learning and
growth
Improve
technology
Improve staﬀ
skills
Establish new
markets
Increase
customer
service
Increase
eﬃciency
More satisﬁed
customers
Improve
proﬁtability
Stronger
ﬁnances
Increase
customer
base
Figure  6.6   Strategy map. (From Olve, N., et al., Making Scorecards Actionable: Balancing 
Strategy and Control , Wiley, New York, 2003.)

152
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
We can apply the generic strategy map to an actual case study, 
Ravell phase I, as shown in Figure  6.7.
Recall that Ravell phase I created a learning organization using 
reflective practices and action science. Much of the organization 
transformation at Ravell was accelerated by a major event— the relo-
cation of the company. The move was part of a strategic decision for 
the organization, specifically the economies of scale for rental expense 
and an opportunity to retire old computers and replace them with 
a much needed state-of-the-art network. Furthermore, there was a 
grave need to replace old legacy applications that were incapable of 
operating on the new equipment and were also not providing the 
competitive advantage that the company sought. In using the strategy 
map, a balanced scorecard can be developed containing the specific 
outcomes to achieve the overall mission. The balanced scorecard is 
shown in Figure  6.8.
The Ravell balanced scorecard has an additional column that defines 
the expected organizational transformation from ROD. This model 
addresses the issue of whether a change is truly a transformation. This 
method also provides a systematic process to forecast, understand, and 
Perspective:
Financial
Users
Process
Learning
and growth
New technology
products
New ways of
staﬀ interaction
Establish
new organization
structure
Improved
systems
Provide accurate
and timely
information
More satisﬁed
users
Improve return
on project
investments
Reduce
technology
overhead
Increase user
IT support
Figure  6.7   Technology strategy map.

153
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
present what technology initiatives will ultimately change in the stra-
tegic integration and cultural assimilation components of ROD.
There are two other important factors embedded in this modified 
balanced scorecard technique. First, scorecards can be designed at 
varying levels of detail. Thus, two more balanced scorecards could 
Strategy map
perspective
Financial
Measureable
outcomes
Strategic objectives
Organizational
transformation
Combine IT expenses with 
relocation and capitalize
entire expense
Combination of expenses 
 requires formation of new
 communities of practice, 
 which includes ﬁnance,
 engineering, and IT
Improve
returns on
project
investments
Reduce
technology
overhead
costs
More
satisﬁed
users
Increase
user IT
support
Users
Process
Learning and
growth
Provide
accurate
and timely
information
Improved
systems
New
technology
products
New ways
of staﬀ
interaction
structure
Establish
new
organization
Integrate new telephone
system with computer
network expenses
Leverage engineering
and communications
expenses with technology
Retire old equipment
from ﬁnancial statements
Increase access to
central applications
Integrate IT within other
departments to improve
dynamic customer
support requirements
Provide new products to
replace old e-mail
system and make
standard applications
available to all users
Establish help desk
personnel
Process of supporting users
 requires IT staﬀ to embrace
 reﬂective practices. User
 relationship formed through
 new communities of practice
 and cultural assimilation
 with user community
New culture at Ravell
 established
Startegic integration occurs
 through increased discourse
 and language among
 communities of practice
 engaged in making
 relocation successful. New
 knowledge created and
 needs knowledge
 management
Improve decision support
for improved reporting
and strategic marketing
Upgrade new internal
systems, including
customer relationship
management (CRM),
general ledger, and
rights and royalties
Investigate new
voice-messaging
technology to improve
integration of e-mail and
telephone systems
Physically relocate IT
staﬀ across departments
Modify IT reporting
structure with “dotted
line” to business units
IT becomes more critically
 reﬂective, understands value
 of their participation with
 learning organization. IT
 staﬀ seeks to know less and
 understands view of the
 “other”
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
Figure  6.8   Ravell phase I balanced scorecard.

154
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
be developed that reflect the organizational transformations that 
occurred in Ravell phases II and III, or the three phases could 
be summarized as one large balanced scorecard or some combina-
tion of summary and detail together. Second, the scorecard can 
be modified to reflect unexpected changes during implementa-
tion of a technology. These changes could be related to a shift-
ing mission statement or to external changes in the market that 
require a change in business strategy. Most important, though, 
are the expected outcomes and transformations that occur during 
the course of a project. Essentially, it is difficult to predict how 
organizations will actually react to changes during an IT project 
and transform.
The balanced scorecard provides a checklist and tracking system 
that is structured and sustainable— but not perfect. Indeed, many 
of the outcomes from the three phases of Ravell were unexpected or 
certainly not exactly what I expected. The salient issue here is that it 
allows an organization to understand when such unexpected changes 
have occurred. When this does happen, organizations need to have 
an infrastructure and a structured system to examine what a change 
in their mission, strategy, or expectations means to all of the com-
ponents of the project. This can be described as a “rippling effect,” in 
which one change can instigate others, affecting many other parts of 
the whole. Thus, the balanced scorecard, particularly using a strat-
egy map, allows practitioners to reconcile how changes will affect the 
entire plan.
Another important component of the balanced scorecard, and the 
reason why I use it as the measurement model for outcomes, is its 
applicability to organizational learning. In particular, the learning 
and growth perspective shows how the balanced scorecard ensures 
that learning and strategy are linked in organizational development 
efforts.
Implementing balanced scorecards is another critical part of the 
project— who does the work, what the roles are, and who has the 
responsibility for operating the scorecards? While many companies 
use consultants to guide them, it is important to recognize that bal-
anced scorecards reflect the unique features and functions of the com-
pany. As such, the rank and file need to be involved with the design 
and support of balanced scorecards.

155
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
Every business unit that has a scorecard needs to have someone 
assigned to it, someone accountable for it. A special task force may 
often be required to launch the training for staff and to agree on how 
the scorecard should be designed and supported. It is advisable that the 
scorecard be implemented using some application software and made 
available on an Internet network. This provides a number of benefits:
It reduces paper or local files that might get lost or not be secured, allows 
for easy “roll-up” of multiple scorecards, to a summary level, and access 
via the Internet (using an external secured hookup) allows the scorecard 
to be maintained from multiple locations. This is particularly attractive 
for staff members and management individuals who travel.
According to Olve et al. (2003), there are four primary responsi-
bilities that can support balanced scorecards:
	
1.	Business stakeholders : These are typically senior managers 
who are responsible for the group that is using the score-
card. These individuals are advocates of using scorecards and 
require compliance if deemed necessary. Stakeholders use 
scorecards to help them manage the life cycle of a technology 
implementation.
	
2.	Scorecard designers : These individuals are responsible for the 
“look and feel” of the scorecard as well as its content. To some 
extent, the designers set standards for appearance, text, and 
terminology. In certain situations, the scorecard designers 
have dual roles as project managers. Their use of scorecards 
helps them understand how the technology will operate.
	
3.	Information providers : These people collect, measure, and 
report on the data in the balanced scorecard. This function 
can be implemented with personnel on the business unit level 
or from a central services department. Reporting informa-
tion often requires support from IT staff, so it makes sense to 
have someone from IT handle this responsibility. Information 
providers use the scorecard to perform the measurement of 
project performance and the handling of data.
	
4.	Learning pilots : These individuals link the scorecard to organi-
zational learning. This is particularly important when measur-
ing organizational transformation and individual development.

156
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The size and complexity of an organization will ultimately deter-
mine the exact configuration of roles and responsibilities that are 
needed to implement balanced scorecards. Perhaps the most appli-
cable variables are:
Competence : Having individuals who are knowledgeable about 
the business and its processes, as well as knowledgeable 
about IT.
Availability : Individuals must be made available and appropri-
ately accommodated in the budget. Balanced scorecards that 
do not have sufficient staffing will fail.
Executive management support:  As with most technology proj-
ects, there needs to be a project advocate at the executive level.
Enthusiasm : Implementation of balanced scorecards requires a 
certain energy and excitement level from the staff and their 
management. This is one of those intangible, yet invaluable, 
variables.
Balanced Scorecards and Discourse
In Chapter  4, I discussed the importance of language and discourse 
in organizational learning. Balanced scorecards require ongoing dia-
logues that need to occur at various levels and between different com-
munities of practice. Therefore, it is important to integrate language 
and discourse and communities of practice theory with balanced 
scorecard strategy. The target areas are as follows:
•	 Developing of strategy maps
•	 Validating links across balanced scorecard perspectives
•	 Setting milestones
•	 Analyzing results
•	 Evaluating organizational transformation
Figure  6.9 indicates a community of practice relationship that 
exists at a company. Each of these three levels was connected by a 
concept I called “common threads of communication.” This model can 
be extended to include the balanced scorecard.
The first level of discourse occurs at the executive community 
of practice. The executive management team needs to agree on the 

157
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
specific business strategy that will be used as the basis of the mis-
sion statement for the balanced scorecard. This requires conversations 
and meetings that engage the CEO, executive board members (when 
deemed applicable), and executive managers, like the chief operat-
ing officer (COO), chief financial officer (CFO), chief information 
officer (CIO), and so on. Each of these individuals needs to represent 
his or her specific area of responsibility and influence from an execu-
tive perspective. The important concept is that the balanced scorecard 
mission and strategy should be a shared vision and responsibility for 
the executive management team as a whole. To accomplish this task, 
the executive team needs to be instructed on how the balanced score-
card operates and on its potential for accomplishing organizational 
transformation that leads to strategic performance. Ultimately, the 
discourse must lead to a discussion of the four balanced scorecard 
perspectives: financial, customer, process, and learning and growth.
From a middle management level, the balanced scorecard allows 
for a measurable model to be used as the basis of discourse with 
Executive community of practice
CEO
Americas
Executive
board
Consultants
CEO
Americas
New ideas
and
adjustments
Senior
management
Operations
Middle
management
Middle
management
Adjustments as a
result of discourse
with operations
community
Operations management community of practice
Implementation community of practice
Figure  6.9   Community of practice “threads.”

158
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
executives. For example, the strategy map can be the vehicle for 
conducting meaningful conversations on how to transform execu-
tive-level thinking and meaning into a more operationally focused 
strategy. Furthermore, the scorecard outlines the intended outcomes 
for strategy and organizational learning and transformation.
The concept of using the balanced scorecard as a method with 
which to balance thinking and meaning across communities of prac-
tice extends to the operational level as well. Indeed, the challenge of 
making the transition from thinking and meaning at the executive 
level of operations is complicated, especially since these communi-
ties rarely speak the same language. The measurable outcomes section 
of the scorecard provides the concrete layer of outcomes that opera-
tions staff tend to embrace. At the same time, this section provides 
corresponding strategic impact and organizational changes needed to 
satisfy business strategies set by management.
An alternative method of fostering the need forms of discourse is to 
create multiple-tiered balanced scorecards designed to fit the language 
of each community of practice, as shown in Figure  6.10. The diagram 
in Figure  6.10 shows that each community can maintain its own lan-
guage and methods while establishing “common threads” to foster a 
transition of thinking and meaning between it and other communi-
ties. The common threads from this perspective look at communica-
tion at the organizational/group level, as opposed to the individual 
level. This relates to my discussion in Chapter  4, which identified 
individual methods of improving personal learning, and development 
within the organization. This suggests that each balanced scorecard 
must embrace language that is common to any two communities to 
establish a working and learning relationship— in fact, this common 
language is the relationship.
Knowledge Creation, Culture, and Strategy
Balanced scorecards have been used as a measurement of knowledge 
creation. Knowledge creation, especially in technology, has signifi-
cant meaning, specifically in the relationship between data and infor-
mation. Understanding the sequence between these two is interesting. 
We know that organizations, through their utilization of software 
applications, inevitably store data in file systems called databases. 

159
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
The information stored in these databases can be accessed by many 
different software applications across the organization. Accessing 
multiple databases and integrating them across business units creates 
further valuable information. Indeed, the definition of information 
is “organized data.” These organized data are usually stored in data 
infrastructures called data warehouses or data marts, where the infor-
mation can be queried and reported on to assist managers in their 
decision-making processes. We see, in the Ravell balanced scorecard, 
that decision-support systems were actually one of the strategic objec-
tives for the process perspective.
Organization-level balanced scorecard
Common
discourse threads
Executive-level
balanced scorecard
Management-level
balanced scorecard
Operational-level
balanced scorecard
Common
discourse threads
Common
discourse threads
Figure  6.10   Community of practice “common threads.”

160
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Unfortunately, information does not ensure new knowledge cre-
ation. New knowledge can only be created by individuals who evolve 
in their roles and responsibilities. Individuals, by participating in 
groups and communities of practice, can foster the creation of new 
organizational knowledge. However, to change or evolve one’ s behav-
ior, there must be individual or organizational transformation. This 
means that knowledge is linked to organizational transformation. The 
process to institutionalize organizational transformation is dependent 
on management interventions at various levels. Management needs to 
concentrate on knowledge management and change management and 
to act as a catalyst and advocate for the successful implementation of 
organizational learning techniques. These techniques are necessary to 
address the unique needs of ROD.
Ultimately, the process must be linked to business strategy. ROD 
changes the culture of an organization, through the process of cul-
tural assimilation. Thus, there is an ongoing need to reestablish align-
ment between culture and strategy, with culture altered to fit new 
strategy, or strategy first, then culture (Pietersen, 2002). We see this 
as a recurring theme, particularly from the case studies, that busi-
ness strategy must drive organizational behavior, even when technol-
ogy acts as a dynamic variable. Pietersen identifies what he called six 
myths of corporate culture:
	
1.	Corporate culture is vague and mysterious.
	
2.	Corporate culture and strategy are separate and distinct 
things.
	
3.	The first step in reducing our company should be defining our 
values.
	
4.	Culture cannot be measured or rewarded.
	
5.	Our leaders must communicate what our culture is.
	
6.	Our culture is the one constant that never changes.
Resulting from these myths, Pietersen (2002) establishes four basic 
rules of success for creating a starting point for the balance between 
culture and strategy:
	
1.	Company values should directly support strategic priorities.
	
2.	They should be described as behaviors.
	
3.	They should be simple and specific.

161
ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION
	
4.	They should be arrived at through a process of enrollment 
(motivation).
Once business synergy is created, sustaining the relationship 
becomes an ongoing challenge. According to Pietersen (2002), this 
must be accomplished by continual alignment, measurement, set-
ting examples, and a reward system for desired behaviors. To lead 
change, organizations must create compelling statements of the case 
for change, communicate constantly and honestly with their employ-
ees, maximize participation, remove ongoing resistance in the ranks, 
and generate some wins. The balanced scorecard system provides the 
mechanism to address the culture– strategy relationship while main-
taining an important link to organizational learning and ROD. These 
linkages are critical because of the behavior of technology. Sustaining 
the relationship between culture and strategy is simply more critical 
with technology as the variable of change.
Ultimately, the importance of the balanced scorecard is that it 
forces an understanding that everything in an organization is con-
nected to some form of business strategy. Strategy calls for change, 
which requires organizational transformation.
Mission : To accelerate investment in technology during the reloca-
tion of the company for reasons of economies of scale and competitive 
advantage.


163
7
Virtual Teams and 
Outsourcing
Introduction
Much has been written and published about virtual teams. Most 
define virtual teams as those that are geographically dispersed, 
although others state that virtual teams are those that primarily inter-
act electronically. Technology has been the main driver of the growth 
of virtual teams. In fact, technology organizations, due mostly to the 
advent of competitive outsourcing abroad, have pushed information 
technology (IT) teams to learn how to manage across geographical 
locations, in such countries as India, China, Brazil, Ireland, and many 
others. These countries are not only physically remote but also present 
barriers of culture and language. These barriers often impede commu-
nications about project status, and affect the likelihood of delivering a 
project on time, and within forecasted budgets.
Despite these major challenges, outsourcing remains attractive due 
to the associated cost savings and talent supply. These two advantages 
are closely associated. Consider the migration of IT talent that began 
with the growth of India in providing cheap and educated talent. The 
promise of cost savings caused many IT development departments to 
begin using more India-based firms. The ensuing decline in IT jobs 
in the United States resulted in fewer students entering IT curricu-
lums at U.S. universities for fear that they would not be able to find 
work. Thus, began a cycle of lost jobs in the United States and further 
demand for talent abroad. Now, technology organizations are faced 
with the fact that they must  learn to manage virtually because the tal-
ent they need is far away.
From an IT perspective, successful outsourcing depends on effec-
tive use of virtual teams. However, the converse is not true; that is, 
virtual teams do not necessarily imply outsourcing. Virtual teams can 

164
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
be made up of workers anywhere, even those in the United States 
who are working from a distance rather than reporting to an office 
for work. A growing number of employees in the United States want 
more personal flexibility; in response, many companies are allow-
ing employees to work from home more often— and have found the 
experience most productive. This type of virtual team management 
generally follows a hybrid model, with employees working at home 
most of the time but reporting to the office for critical meetings; an 
arrangement that dramatically helps with communication and allows 
management to have quality checkpoints.
This chapter addresses virtual teams working both within the 
United States and on an outsource basis and provides readers with 
an understanding of when and how to consider outsource partners. 
Chapter topics include management considerations, dealing with 
multiple locations, contract administration, and in-house alternatives. 
Most important, this chapter examines organizational learning as a 
critical component of success in using virtual teams. Although the 
advent of virtual teams creates another level of complexity for design-
ing and maintaining learning organizations, organizational learning 
approaches represent a formidable solution to the growing dilemma of 
how teams work, especially those that are 100% virtual.
Most failures in virtual management are caused by poor communi-
cation. From an organizational learning perspective, we would define 
this as differences in meaning making— stemming mostly from cul-
tural differences in the meaning of words and differing behavioral 
norms. There is also no question that time zone differences play a role 
in certain malfunctions of teams, but the core issues remain commu-
nication related.
As stated, concerning the Ravell case study, cultural transformation 
is slow to occur and often happens in small intervals. In many virtual 
team settings, team members may never do more than communicate 
via e-mail. As an example, I had a client who was outsourcing produc-
tion in China. One day, they received an e-mail stating, “ We cannot 
do business with you.”  Of course, the management team was confused 
and worried, seeking to understand why the business arrangement 
was ending without any formal discussions of the problem. A trans-
lator in China was hired to help clarify the dilemma. As it turned 
out, the statement was meant to suggest that the company needed 

165
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
to provide more business— more work, that is. The way the Chinese 
communicated that need was different from the Western interpre-
tation. This is just a small example of what can happen without a 
well-thought-out organizational learning scheme. That is, individuals 
need to develop more reflective abilities to comprehend the meaning 
of words before they take action, especially in virtual environments 
across multiple cultures. The development of such abilities— the 
continual need for organizations to respond effectively to dynamic 
changes, brought about by technology, in this case, e-mail— is consis-
tent with my theory of responsive organizational dynamism (ROD). 
The e-mail established a new dynamic of communication. Think how 
often specifications and product requirements are changing and need 
virtual teams to somehow come together and agree on how to get the 
work done— or think they agree.
Prior research and case studies provide tools and procedures as ways 
to improve productivity and quality of virtual team operations. While 
such processes and methodologies are helpful, they will not necessar-
ily ensure the successful outcomes that IT operations seek unless they 
also change. Specifically, new processes alone are not sufficient or a 
substitute for learning how to better communicate and make mean-
ing in a virtual context. Individuals must learn how to develop new 
behaviors when working virtually. We must also remember that vir-
tual team operations are not limited to IT staffs. Business users often 
need to be involved as they would in any project, particularly when 
users are needed to validate requirements and test the product.
Status of Virtual Teams
The consensus tells us that virtual teams render results. According to 
Bazarova and Walther (2009), “ Virtual groups whose members com-
municate primarily or entirely via email, computer conferencing, chat, 
or voice— have become a common feature of twenty-first century 
organizations”  (p. 252). Lipnack and Stamps (2000) state that virtual 
teams will become the accepted way to work and will likely reshape 
the work world. While this prediction seems accurate, there has also 
been evidence of negative attribution or judgment about problems that 
arise in virtual team performance. Thus, it is important to understand 
how virtual teams need to be managed and how realistic expectations 

166
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
of such teams might be formed. So, while organizations understand 
the need for virtual teams, they are not necessarily happy with proj-
ect results. Most of the disappointment relates to a lack of individual 
development that helps change the mindset of how people need to 
communicate, coupled with updated processes.
Management Considerations
Attribution theory “ describes how people typically generate explana-
tions for outcomes and actions— their own and others”  (Bazarova & 
Walther, 2009, p. 153). This theory explains certain behavior patterns 
that have manifested during dysfunctional problems occurring in man-
aging virtual teams. Virtual teams are especially vulnerable to such 
problems because their limited interactions can lead to members not 
having accurate information about one another. Members of virtual 
teams can easily develop perceptions of each other’ s motives that are 
inaccurate or distorted by differing cultural norms. Research also shows 
us that virtual team members typically attribute failure to the external 
factors and successes to internal factors. Problems are blamed on the 
virtual or outside members for not being available or accountable to the 
physical community. The successes then tend to reinforce that virtual 
teams are problematic because of their very nature. This then estab-
lishes the dilemma of the use of virtual teams and ­organizations— its 
use will continue to increase and dominate workplace structures and 
yet will present challenges to organizations that do not want to change. 
The lack of support to change will be substantiated during failures in 
expected outcomes. Some of the failures, however, can and should be 
attributable to distance. As Olson and Olson (2000) state: “ Distance 
will persist as an important element of human experience”  (p. 172). So, 
despite the advent of technology, it is important not to ignore the social 
needs that teams need to have to be effective.
Dealing with Multiple Locations
Perhaps the greatest difficulty in implementing virtual teams is the 
reality that they span multiple locations. More often, these locations 
can be in different time zones and within multiple cultures. To prop-
erly understand the complexity of interactions, it makes sense to revisit 

167
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
the organizational learning tools discussed in prior chapters. Perhaps 
another way of viewing virtual teams and their effects on organiza-
tion learning is to perceive it as another dimension— a dimension that 
is similar to multiple layers in a spreadsheet. This notion means that 
virtual teams do not upset the prior relations between technology as 
a variable from a two-dimensional perspective, rather in the depth 
of how it affects this relationship in a third dimension. Figure  7.1 
reflects how this dimension should be perceived.
In other words, the study of virtual teams should be viewed as 
a subset of the study of organizations. When we talk about work-
place activities, we need to address issues at the component level. In 
this example, the components are the physical organization and the 
Technology as an
independent
variable
Creates
Virtual organizational
dynamism dimension
Physical organizational
dynamism dimension
Virtual acceleration
dimension
Strategic
integration
Cultural
assimilation
Total
organizational
dynamism
Acceleration of events that
require diﬀerent
infrastructures and
organizational processes
Virtual cultural
assimilation dimension
Virtual strategic
integration dimension
Figure  7.1    The three-dimensional ROD.

168
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
virtual organization. The two together make up the superset or the 
entire organization. To be fruitful, any discussion of virtual organiza-
tions must be grounded in the context of the entire organization and 
address the complete topic of workplace learning and transformation. 
In Chapter  4, I discussed organizational learning in communities of 
practice (COP). In this section, I expand that discussion to include 
virtual organizational structures.
The growing use of virtual teams may facilitate the complete inte-
gration of IT and non-IT workers. The ability to connect from various 
locations using technology itself has the potential to expand COP. 
But, as discussed in Chapter  4, it also presents new challenges, most 
of which relate to the transient nature of members, who tend to par-
ticipate on more of a subject or transactional basis, rather than being 
permanent members of a group. Table  7.1 reflects some of the key 
differences between physical and virtual teams.
There has been much discussion about whether every employee is 
suited to perform effectively in a virtual community. The consensus is 
that effective virtual team members need to be self-motivated, able to 
work independently, and able to communicate clearly and in a posi-
tive way. However, given that many workers lack some or all of these 
skills, it seems impractical to declare that workers who do not meet 
these criteria should be denied the opportunity to work in virtual 
Table  7.1    Operating Differences between Traditional and Virtual Teams
TRADITIONAL OR PHYSICAL TEAMS
VIRTUAL TEAMS
Teams tend to have fixed participation and 
members.
Membership shifts based on topics and needs.
Members tend to be from the same 
organization.
Team members can include people from outside 
the organization (clients and collaborators).
Team members are 100% dedicated.
Members are assigned to multiple teams.
Team members are collocated geographically 
and by organization.
Team members are distributed geographically and 
by organization.
Teams tend to have a fixed term of 
membership;  that is, start and stop dates.
Teams are reconfigured dynamically and may 
never terminate.
Teams tend to have one overall manager.
Teams have multiple reporting relationships with 
different parts of the organization at different 
times.
Teamwork is physical and practiced in 
face-to-face interactions.
Teamwork is basically social.
Engagement is often during group events 
and can often be hierarchical in nature.
Individual engagement is inseparable from 
empowerment.

169
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
teams. A more productive approach might be to encourage workers to 
recognize that they must adapt to changing work environments at the 
risk of becoming marginal in their organizations.
To better understand this issue, I extended the COP matrix, 
presented in Chapter 4, to include virtual team considerations in 
Table  7.2.
Item 7 in Table  7.2 links the study of knowledge management with 
COP. Managing knowledge in virtual communities within an orga-
nization has become associated directly with the ability of a firm to 
sustain competitive advantage. Indeed, Peddibhotla and Subramani 
(2008) state that “ virtual communities are not only recognized as 
important contributors to both the development of social networks 
among individuals but also towards individual performance and firm 
performance”  (p. 229). However, technology-enabled facilities and 
support, while providing a repository for better documentation, also 
create challenges in maintaining such knowledge. The process of how 
information might become explicit has also dramatically changed 
with the advent of virtual team communications. For example, much 
technology-related documentation evolves from bottom-up sources, 
rather than the traditional top-down process. In effect, virtual com-
munities share knowledge more on a peer-to-peer basis or through 
mutual consensus of the members. As a result, virtual communities 
have historically failed to meet expectations, particularly those of 
management, because managers tend to be uninvolved in communi-
cation. While physical teams can meet with management more often 
before making decisions, virtual teams have no such contact available. 
To better understand the complexities of knowledge management and 
virtual teams, Sabherwal and Becerra-Fernandez (2005) expand on 
Nonaka’ s (1994) work on knowledge management, which outlined 
four modes of knowledge creation: externalization, internalization, 
combination, and socialization. Each of these modes is defined and 
discussed next.
Externalization
Externalization  is the process of converting or translating tacit knowl-
edge (undocumented knowledge) into explicit forms. The problem with 
this concept is whether individuals really understand what they know 

170
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  7.2    Communities of Practice: Virtual Team Extensions
STEP
COMMUNITIES-OF-
PRACTICE STEP
TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION
VIRTUAL EXTENSION
1
Understanding strategic 
knowledge needs: What 
knowledge is critical to 
success.
Understanding how 
technology affects 
strategic knowledge and 
what specific 
technological knowledge 
is critical to success.
Understanding how to 
integrate multiple visions 
of strategic knowledge and 
where it can be found 
across the organization.
2
Engaging practice 
domains: Where people 
form communities of 
practice to engage in 
and identify with.
Technology identifies 
groups based on 
business-related 
benefits, requiring 
domains to work together 
toward measurable 
results.
Virtual domains are more 
dynamic and can be 
formed for specific 
purposes and then 
reconfigured based on 
practice needs of subjects 
discussed.
3
Developing communities: 
How to help key 
communities reach their 
full potential.
Technologies have life 
cycles that require 
communities to continue;  
treats the life cycle as a 
supporter for attaining 
maturation and full 
potential.
Communities can be 
reallocated to participate 
in multiple objectives. 
Domains of discussion 
have no limits to reach 
organizational needs.
4
Working the boundaries: 
How to link communities 
to form broader learning 
systems
Technology life cycles 
require new boundaries 
to be formed. This will 
link other communities 
that were previously 
outside of discussions 
and thus expand input 
into technology 
innovations.
Virtual abilities allow for 
customer interfaces, 
vendors, and other 
interested parties to join 
the community.
5
Fostering a sense of 
belonging: How to 
engage people’ s 
identities and sense of 
belonging.
The process of integrating 
communities: IT and 
other organizational 
units will create new 
evolving cultures that 
foster belonging as well 
as new social identities.
Communities establish 
belonging in a virtual way. 
Identities are established 
more on content of 
discussion than on 
physical attributes of 
members.
6
Running the business: 
How to integrate 
communities of practice 
into running the 
business of the 
organization.
Cultural assimilation 
provides new 
organizational structures 
that are necessary to 
operate communities of 
practice and to support 
new technological 
innovations.
The organization functions 
more as a virtual 
community or team, being 
more agile to demands of 
the business, and 
interactions may not 
always include all 
members.
(Continued)

171
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
and how it might affect organizational knowledge. Virtual communi-
ties have further challenges in that the repository of tacit information 
can be found in myriad storage facilities, namely, audit trails of e-mail 
communications. While Sabherwal and Becerra-Fernandez (2005) 
suggest that technology may indeed assist in providing the infrastruc-
ture to access such information, the reality is that the challenge is not 
one of process but rather of thinking and doing. That is, it is more a 
process of unlearning existing processes of thinking and doing, into 
new modes of using knowledge that is abundantly available.
Internalization
Internalization  is a reversal of externalization: It is the process of 
transferring explicit knowledge into tacit knowledge— or individual-
ized learning. The individual thus makes the explicit process into his 
or her own stabilized thinking system so that it becomes intuitive 
in operation. The value of virtual team interactions is that they can 
provide more authentic evidence of why explicit knowledge is valu-
able to the individual. Virtual systems simply can provide more people 
who find such knowledge useful, and such individuals, coming from 
a more peer relationship, can understand why their procedures can be 
internalized and become part of the self.
Combination
Combination  allows individuals to integrate their physical processes 
with virtual requirements. The association, particularly in a global 
Table  7.2 (Continued)   Communities of Practice: Virtual Team Extensions
STEP
COMMUNITIES-OF-
PRACTICE STEP
TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION
VIRTUAL EXTENSION
7
Applying, assessing, 
reflecting, renewing: How 
to deploy knowledge 
strategy through waves 
of organizational 
transformation.
The active process of 
dealing with multiple 
new technologies that 
accelerates the 
deployment of knowledge 
strategy. Emerging 
technologies increase 
the need for 
organizational 
transformation.
Virtual systems allow for 
more knowledge strategy 
because of the ability to 
deploy information and 
procedures. Tacit 
knowledge is easier to 
transform to explicit forms.

172
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
environment, allows virtual team members to integrate new explicit 
forms into their own, not by replacing their beliefs, but rather, by 
establishing new hybrid knowledge systems. This is particularly 
advantageous across multiple cultures and business systems in coun-
tries that hold different and, possibly complementary, knowledge 
about how things can get done. Nonaka’ s (1994) concept of combina-
tion requires participants in the community to be at later stages of 
multiplicity— suggesting that this form can only be successful among 
certain levels or positions of learners.
Socialization
As Nonaka (1994) notes, individuals learn by observation, imitation, 
and practice. The very expansion of conversations via technology 
can provide a social network in which individuals can learn simply 
through discourse. Discourse, as I discussed in Chapter  4, is the basis 
of successful implementations of COP. The challenge in virtual social 
networks is the difficulty participants have in assessing the authentic-
ity of the information provided by those in the community.
The four modes of knowledge management formulated by Nonaka 
(1994) need to be expanded to embrace the complexities of virtual 
team COPs. Most of the adjustments are predicated on the team’ s 
ability to deal with the three fundamental factors of ROD that I 
introduced in this book; that is, acceleration, dynamic, and unpre-
dictability. The application of these three factors of ROD to Nonaka’ s 
four modes is discussed next.
Externalization Dynamism
The externalization mode must be dynamic and ongoing with little 
ability to forecast the longevity of any tacit-to-explicit formulation. 
In other words, tacit-to-explicit change may occur daily but may 
only operate effectively for a shorter period due to additional changes 
brought on by technology dynamism. This means that members in 
a community must continually challenge themselves to revisit pre-
vious tacit processes and acknowledge the need to reformulate their 
tacit systems. Thus, transformation from tacit knowledge to explicit 
knowledge can be a daily challenge for COP virtual organizations.

173
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
Internalization Dynamism
Careful reflection on this process of internalizing explicit forms must 
be done. Given the differences in cultures and acceleration of busi-
ness change, individualized learning creating new tacit abilities may 
not operate the same in different firm settings. It may be necessary 
to adopt multiple processes depending on the environment in which 
tacit operations are being performed. As stated, what might work in 
China may not work in Brazil, for example. Tacit behavior is culture 
oriented, so multiple and simultaneous versions must be respected 
and practiced. Further expansion of internalization is a virtual team’ s 
understanding of how such tacit behaviors change over time due to 
the acceleration of new business challenges.
Combination Dynamism
I believe the combination dynamism mode is the most important com-
ponent of virtual team formation. Any combination or hybrid model 
requires a mature self— as specified in my maturity arcs discussed in 
Chapter  4. This means that individuals in virtual teams may need to 
be operating at a later stage of maturity to deal with the complexities 
of changing dispositions. Members of COPs must be observed, and a 
determination of readiness must be made for such new structures to 
develop in a virtual world. Thus, COP members need training; the lack 
of such training might explain why so many virtual teams have had 
disappointing results. Readiness for virtual team participation depends 
on a certain level of relativistic thinking. To be successful, virtual team 
members must be able to see themselves outside their own world and 
have the ability to understand the importance of what “ others”  need. 
This position suggests that individuals need to be tested to the extent 
that they are ready for such challenges. Organizational learning tech-
niques remain a valid method for developing workers who can cope 
with the dynamic changes that occur in virtual team organizations.
Socialization Dynamism
Socialization challenges the virtual team members’  abilities to 
understand the meaning of words and requires critical reflection 

174
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
of its constituents. ROD requires that virtual teams be agile and, 
especially, that they be responsive to the emotions of others in the 
community. This may require individuals to understand another 
member’ s maturity. Thus, virtual team members need to be able 
to understand why another member is behaving as he or she is or 
reacting in a dualistic manner. Assessment in a virtual collabora-
tion becomes a necessity, especially given the unpredictability of 
technology-based projects.
In Table  5.1, I showed how tacit knowledge is mapped to ROD. 
Table  7.3 further extends this mapping to include virtual teams.
The requirements support research findings that knowledge man-
agement in a virtual context has significant factors that must be 
addressed to improve its success. These factors include management 
commitment, resource availability, modification of work practices, 
marketing of the initiative, training, and facilitation of cultural dif-
ferences (Peddibhotla & Subramani, 2008).
The following are some action steps that organizations need to take 
to address these factors:
	
1.	The executive team needs to advocate the commitment and 
support for virtual teams. The chief information officer (CIO) 
and his or her counterparts need to provide teams with the 
“ sponsorship”  that the organization will need to endure set-
backs until the virtual organization becomes fully integrated 
into the learning organization. This commitment can be 
accomplished via multiple actions, including, but not limited 
to, a kickoff meeting with staff, status reports to virtual teams 
on successes and setbacks, e-mails and memos on new vir-
tual formations, and a general update on the effort, perhaps 
on a quarterly basis. This approach allows the organization to 
understand the evolution of the effort and know that virtual 
teams are an important direction for the firm.
	
2.	There should be training and practice sessions with collocated 
groups that allow teams to voice their concerns and receive 
direction on how best to proceed. Practice sessions should 
focus on team member responsibilities and advocating their 
ownership of responsibility. These sessions should cover les-
sons learned from actual experiences, so that groups can learn 

175
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
Table  7.3    Tacit Knowledge and Virtual Teams
TACIT KNOWLEDGE
STRATEGIC INTEGRATION
STRATEGIC INTEGRATION 
VIRTUAL
CULTURAL ASSIMILATION
CULTURAL ASSIMILATION 
VIRTUAL
Cultural and social 
history
How the IT department and other 
departments translate 
emerging technologies into 
their existing processes and 
organization.
How can virtual and nonvirtual 
departments translate emerging 
technologies into their projects 
across multiple locations and 
cultures?
Problem-solving modes
Individual reflective practices 
that assist in determining how 
specific technologies can be 
useful and how they can be 
applied;  utilization of tacit 
knowledge to evaluate 
probabilities for success.
Individual reflective practices 
and intercultural 
communications needed to 
determine how tacit knowledge 
should be applied to specific 
group and project needs.
Technology opportunities may 
require organizational and 
structural changes to transfer 
tacit knowledge to explicit 
knowledge.
Technological opportunities may 
require configuration of virtual 
communities of practice and 
explicit knowledge.
Orientation to risks and 
uncertainties
Technology offers many risks and 
uncertainties. All new 
technologies may not be valid 
for the organization. Tacit 
knowledge is a valuable 
component to fully understand 
realities, risks, and 
uncertainties.
Technology risks and 
uncertainties need to be 
assessed by multiple virtual 
and physical teams to 
determine how technologies 
will operate across multiple 
locations and cultures.
(Continued)

176
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  7.3 (Continued)    Tacit Knowledge and Virtual Teams
TACIT KNOWLEDGE
STRATEGIC INTEGRATION
STRATEGIC INTEGRATION 
VIRTUAL
CULTURAL ASSIMILATION
CULTURAL ASSIMILATION 
VIRTUAL
Worldviews
Technology has global effects 
and changes market 
boundaries, that cross 
business cultures; it requires 
tacit knowledge to understand 
existing dispositions on how 
others work together. Reviews 
how technology affects the 
dynamics of operations.
Market boundaries are more 
dynamic across virtual teams 
that operate to solve cross-
cultural and business problems. 
Worldviews are more the norm 
than the exception.
Organizing principles
How will new technologies 
actually be integrated? What 
are the organizational 
challenges to “ rolling out”  
products, and to 
implementation timelines? 
What positions are needed, and 
who in the organization might 
be best qualified to fill new 
responsibilities? Identify 
limitations of the organization;  
that is, tacit knowledge versus 
explicit knowledge realities.
What are the dynamic needs of the 
virtual team, to handle new 
technologies on projects? What 
are the new roles and 
responsibilities of virtual team 
members? Determine what tacit 
and explicit knowledge will be 
used to make decisions.
Horizons of expectation
Individual limitations in the tacit 
domain that may hinder or 
support whether a technology 
can be strategically integrated 
into the organization.
Individuals within the virtual 
community need to understand 
the limitations on strategic 
uses of technology. This may 
vary across cultures.

177
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
from others. Training should set the goals and establish the 
criteria for how virtual teams interact in the firm. This should 
include the application software and repositories that are in 
place and the procedures for keeping information and knowl-
edge current.
	
3.	External reminders should be practiced so that virtual teams 
do not become lax and develop bad habits since no one is 
monitoring or measuring success. Providing documented 
processes, perhaps a balanced scorecard or International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9000-type proce-
dures and measurements, is a good practice for monitoring 
compliance.
Dealing with Multiple Locations and Outsourcing
Virtual organizations are often a given in outsourcing environments, 
especially those that are offshore. Offshore outsourcing also means 
that communications originate in multiple locations. The first step in 
dealing with multiple locations is finding ways to deal with different 
time zones. Project management can become more complicated when 
team meetings occur at obscure times for certain members of the 
community. Dealing with unanticipated problems can be more chal-
lenging when assembling the entire team may not be feasible because 
of time differences. The second challenge in running organizations 
in multiple locations is culture. Differing cultural norms can espe-
cially cause problems during off-hour virtual sessions. For example, 
European work culture does not often support having meetings out-
side work hours. In some countries, work hours may be regulated by 
the government or powerful unions.
A further complication in outsourcing is that the virtual team 
members may be employed by different companies. For instance, 
part of the community may include a vendor who has assigned staff 
resources to the effort. Thus, these outsourced team members belong 
to the community of the project yet also work for another organiza-
tion. The relationship between an outside consultant and the internal 
team is not straightforward and varies among projects. For example, 
some outsourced technical resources may be permanently assigned to 
the project, so while they actually work for another firm, they behave 

178
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and take daily direction as if they were an employee of the focal busi-
ness. Yet, in other relationships, outsourced resources work closely 
under the auspices of the outsourced “ project manager,”  who acts 
as a buffer between the firm and the vendor. Such COP formations 
vary. Still other outsourcing arrangements involve team members the 
firm does not actually know unless outsourced staff is called in to 
solve a problem. This situation exists when organizations outsource 
complete systems, so that the expectation is based more on the results 
than on the interaction. Notwithstanding the arrangement or level 
of integration, a COP must exist, and its behavior in all three of 
these examples varies in participation, but all are driven in a virtual 
relationship more by dynamic business events than by preplanned 
activities.
If we look closely at COP approaches to operations, it is neces-
sary to create an extension of dynamism in a virtual team commu-
nity. The extension reflects the reliance on dynamic transactions, 
which creates temporary team formations based on demographic 
similarity needs. This means that virtual teams will often be formed 
based on specific interests of people within the same departments. 
Table  7.4 shows the expansion of dynamism in a virtual setting 
of COPs.
Thus, the advent of modern-day IT outsourcing has complicated 
the way COPs function. IT outsourcing has simultaneously brought 
attention to the importance of COP and knowledge management 
in general. It also further supports the reality of technology dyna-
mism as more of a norm in human communication in the twenty-
first century.
Revisiting Social Discourse
In Chapter  4, I covered the importance of social discourse and the use 
of language as a distinct component of how technology changes COP. 
That section introduced three components that linked talk and action, 
according to the schema of Grant et al. (1998): Identity, skills and 
emotion. Figure  7.2 shows this relationship again. The expansion of 
virtual team communications further emphasizes the importance of 
discourse and the need to rethink how these three components relate 
to each other in a virtual context.

179
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
Identity
I spoke about the “ cultures of practice”  due to expansion of contacts 
from technology capacities. This certainly holds true with virtual 
teams. However, identities can be transactional— in ways such that 
an individual may be a member of multiple COP environments and 
have different identities in each. This fact emphasizes the multitask-
ing aspect of the linear development modules discussed throughout 
this book. Ultimately, social discourse will dynamically change based 
on the COP to which an individual belongs, and that individual needs 
to be able to “ inventory”  these multiple roles and responsibilities. 
Such roles and responsibilities themselves will transform, due to the 
dynamic nature of technology-driven projects. Individuals will thus 
have multiple identities and must be able to manage those identities 
across different COPs and in different contexts within those COPs. 
Table  7.4    COP Virtual Dynamism
COP PHYSICAL SOCIAL SETTINGS
COP VIRTUAL DYNAMISMS
There is shared pursuit of interest 
accomplished through group meetings.
Interest in discussion is based more on dynamic 
transactions and remote needs to satisfy specific 
personal needs.
Creation of the “ community”  is typically 
established within the same, or similar, 
departments.
The notion of permanency is deemphasized. 
Specific objectives based on the needs of the 
group will establish the community.
Demographic similarity is a strong 
contributor to selection of community 
members.
Demographic similarity has little to do with 
community selection. Selection is based more on 
subject-matter expertise.
Situated learning is often accomplished by 
assisting members to help develop others. 
Learning occurs within a framework of 
social participation.
Situated learning to help others has less focus. It 
may not be seen as the purpose or responsibility 
of virtual team members. Social participation has 
more concrete perspective.
Community needs to assess technology 
dynamism using ROD in more physical 
environments requiring a formal 
infrastructure.
Community is less identifiable from a physical 
perspective. ROD must be accomplished by 
members who have special interests at the 
subject level as opposed to the group level.
COP works well with cultural assimilation 
of formal work groups where participants 
are clearly identified.
Cultural assimilation in virtual settings is more 
transaction-based. Assimilation can be a limited 
reality during the time of the transaction to 
ensure success of outcomes.
COP can be used for realignment of work 
departments based on similar needs.
COP in a virtual environment creates temporary 
realignments, based on similar needs during the 
process.
COP supports continual learning and 
dealing with unplanned action.
COPs are continually reconfigured, and do not have 
permanency of group size or interest.

180
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
This requires individual maturities that must be able to cope with the 
“ other”  and understand the relativistic nature of multiple cultures and 
the way discourse transforms into action.
Skills
I mentioned the importance of persuasion as a skill to transform talk 
into action. Having the ability to persuade others across virtual teams 
is critical. Often, skills are misrepresented as technical abilities that 
give people a right of passage. Across multiple cultures, individuals 
in teams must be able to recognize norms and understand how to 
communicate with others to get tangible results on their projects. It is 
difficult to make such determinations about individuals that one has 
never met face to face. Furthermore, virtual meetings may not pro-
vide the necessary background required to properly understand a per-
son’ s skill sets, both “ hard”  and “ soft.”  The soft skills analysis is more 
important as the individual’ s technical credentials become assumed. 
We see such assumptions when individuals transition into manage-
ment positions. Ascertaining technical knowledge at the staff level is 
easier— almost like an inventory analysis of technical requirements. 
Conversational
activity
Skills
Identity
Emotions
Action
Conversational
content
Figure  7.2    Grant’ s schema of the relationship between talk and action.

181
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
However, assessing an individual’ s soft skills is much more challeng-
ing. Virtual teams will need to create more complex and broadened 
inventories of their team’ s skill sets, as well as establish better criteria 
on how to measure soft skills. Soft skills will require individuals to 
have better “ multicultural”  abilities, so that team members can be 
better equipped to deal with multinational and cross-cultural issues.
Emotion
Like persuasion, emotion involves an individual’ s ability to motivate 
others and to create positive energy. Many of those who successfully 
use emotion are more likely to have done so in a physical context than 
a virtual one. Transferring positive emotion in a virtual world can 
be analogous to what organizations experienced in the e-commerce 
world, in which organizations needed to rebrand themselves across 
the Web in such a way that their image was reflected virtually to 
their customers. Marketing had to be accomplished without exposure 
to the buyer during purchase decisions. Virtual COPs are similar: 
Representation must be what the individual takes away, without see-
ing the results physically. This certainly offers a new dimension for 
managing teams. This means that the development requirements for 
virtual members must include advanced abstract thinking so that the 
individual can better forecast virtual team reactions to what will  be 
said, as opposed to reacting while the conversation is being conducted 
or thinking about what to do after virtual meetings.
In Chapter  4, I presented Marshak’ s (1998) work on types of 
talk that lead to action: tool-talk, frame-talk, and mythopoetic-talk. 
Virtual teams require modification to the sequence of talk; that is, 
the use of talk is altered. Let us first look at Figure  7.3, represent-
ing Marshak’ s model. To be effective, virtual teams must follow this 
sequence from the outside inward. That is, the virtual team must focus 
on mythopoetic-talk in the center as opposed to an outer ring. This 
means that ideogenic issues must precede interpretation in a virtual 
world. Thus, tool-talk, which in the physical world lies at the center of 
types of tools, is now moved to the outside rectangle. In other words, 
instrumental actions lag those of ideology and interpretation. This is 
restructured in Figure  7.4.

182
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Mythopoetic-talk is at the foundation of grounding ideas in a vir-
tual COP. It would only make sense that a COP-driven talk requires 
ideogenic behavior before migrating to instrumental outcomes. 
Remember that ideogenic talk allows for concepts of intuition and 
ideas for concrete application especially relevant among multiple cul-
tures and societies. So, we again see that virtual teams require changes 
in the sequence of how learning occurs. This change in sequence 
places more emphasis on the need for an individual to be more devel-
opmentally mature— with respect to thinking, handling differences, 
and thinking abstractly. This new “ abstract individual”  must be able 
to reflect before action and reflect in action to be functionally compe-
tent in virtual team participation.
Because ROD is relevant, it is important to determine how virtual 
teams affect the ROD maturity arc first presented in Figure  4.10 and 
redisplayed in Figure  7.5.
Mythopoetic-talk: Ideogenic
Frame-talk: Interpretive
Tool-talk: Instrumental
Figure  7.3    Marshak’ s types of talk.
Mythopoetic-talk: Ideogenic
Frame-talk: Interpretive
Tool-talk: Instrumental
Figure  7.4    Virtual team depiction of Marshak’ s types of talk.

183
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
Stages of individual and organizational learning
Sector variable
Operational
knowledge
Department/unit view
as other
Integrated disposition
Stable operations
Organizational
leadership
Operations personnel
understand that
technology has an
impact on strategic
development,
particularly on existing
processes
Individual beliefs of
strategic impact are
incomplete; individual
needs to incorporate
other views within the
department or business
unit
Changes brought forth
by technology need to
be assimilated into
departments and are
dependent on how
others participate
Small-group based
reﬂective practices
Operation and middle
management
Middle management
Interactive with both
individual and middle
management using
communities of practice
Understands need for
organizational changes;
diﬀerent cultural
behavior new structures
are seen as viable
solutions
Recognition that
individual and
department views must
be integrated to be
complete and
strategically productive
for the department/unit
Changes made to processes
at the department/unit
level formally incorporate
emerging technologies
Organizational changes
are completed and in
operation; existence of
new or modiﬁed employee
positions
Interactive between
middle management and
executives using social
discourse methods to
promote transformation
Middle management and
executive
Executive
Organizational learning
at executive level using
knowledge
management
Department-level
organizational changes
and cultural evolution
are integrated with
organization-wide
functions and cultures
Department strategies
are propagated and
integrated at
organization level
Strategic integration
Cultural assimilation
Organizational
learning constructs
Management level
Operations
Individual-based
reﬂective practice
View that technology
can and will aﬀect the
way the organization
operates and that it
can aﬀect roles and
responsibilities
Figure  7.5    Responsive organizational dynamism arc model.

184
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Cultural
assimilation
Organizational
learning
constructs
Management
level
Operations, middle management,
and executive
Middle management and
executive
Interactive with individual,
middle management, and
executive using virtual
communities of practice
Understands need for
organizational changes
across multiple organizations.
Diﬀerent cultural behaviors
and new structures are seen
as viable solutions that can
be permanent or temporary
because of the dynamic
memberships in COP
Organizational changes are
never completed and may
be in temporary operation.
Existence of new or
modiﬁed COP member
positions could be
permanent or transitional
based on project needs
Department-level
organizational changes
and cultural evolution
may remain separate
and case driven. Some
assimilation may be
integrated with
organizaion-wide
functions and cultures
Interactive between middle
management and
executives using social
discourse methods to
promote more transactional
behavioral transitions.
Some transitions may lead
to transformation
Organizational learning
at executive level
incorporates virtual
team needs using more
dynamic COP structures
and broadened
knowledge managment
that is more situational
Middle management and
executive
Executive
Virtual group-based reﬂective
practices are necessary to
understand how to operate in a
COP environment with individuals
who have diﬀerent perspectives
Changes brought forth by technology
need to be assimilated into
departments and are dependent on
how others participate.
Assimilation of cultural norm may
have very diﬀerent roles and
responsibilities in other cultures.
Shifting assimilation needs may
diﬀer as diﬀerent members join or
leave the COP
Individual-based
reﬂective practice
Operations
View that technology
can and will aﬀect
the way the
organization
operates, and that it
can aﬀect roles and
responsibilities
Figure  7.6    Virtual team extension to the ROD arc. Changes are shown in italics.

185
Virtual Teams and Outsourcing
Figure  7.6 represents the virtual team extension to the ROD arc. 
The changes to the cells are shown in italics. Note that there are no 
changes to operational knowledge because this stage focuses solely 
on self-knowledge learned from authoritative sources. However, as 
the individual matures, there is greater need to deal with uncer-
tainty. This includes the uncertainty that conditions in a COP may 
be temporary, and thus knowledge may need to vary from meeting to 
meeting. Furthermore, while operational realities may be more trans-
actional, it does not necessarily mean that adopted changes are not 
permanent. Most important is the reality that permanence in general 
may no longer be a characteristic of how the organization operates; 
this further emphasizes ROD as a way of life. As a result of this 
extreme complexity in operations, there is an accelerated requirement 
for executives to become involved earlier in the development process. 
Specifically, by stage two (department/unit view of the other), execu-
tives must be engaged in virtual team management considerations.
Ultimately, the virtual team ROD arc demonstrates that vir-
tual teams are more complex and therefore need members who are 
more mature to ensure the success of outsourcing and other virtual 
constructs. It also explains why virtual teams have struggled, likely 
because their members are not ready for the complex participation 
necessary for adequate outcomes.
We must also remember that maturity growth is likely not parallel 
in its linear progression. This was previously shown in Figure  4.12.
This arc demonstrates the challenge managers face in gauging 
the readiness of their staff to cope with virtual team engagement. 
On the other hand, the model also provides an effective measure-
ment schema that can be used to determine where members should 
be deployed and their required roles and responsibilities. Finally, the 
model allows management to prepare staff for the training and devel-
opment they need as part of the organizational learning approach to 
dealing with ROD.


187
8
Synergistic Union of 
IT and Organizational 
Learning
Introduction
This chapter presents case studies that demonstrate how information 
technology (IT) and organizational learning occur in the real corpo-
rate world. It examines the actual processes of how technological and 
organizational learning can be implemented in an organization and 
what management perspectives can support its growth so that forms 
of responsive organizational dynamism can be formed and developed. 
I will demonstrate these important synergies through three case stud-
ies that will show how the components of responsive organizational 
dynamism, strategic integration and cultural assimilation, actually 
operate in practice.
Siemens AG
The first case study offers a perspective from the chief informa-
tion officer (CIO). The CIO of Siemens of the Americas at the 
time of this study was Dana Deasy, and his role was to introduce 
and expand the use of e-business across 20 discrete businesses. The 
Siemens Corporation worldwide network was composed of over 150 
diverse sets of businesses, including transportation, healthcare, and 
telecommunications. Deasy’ s mission was to create a common road 
map across different businesses and cultures. What makes this case 
so distinct from others is that each business is highly decentralized 
under the umbrella of the Siemens Corporation. Furthermore, each 
company has its own mission; the companies have never been asked 
to come together and discuss common issues with regard to technol-
ogy. That is, each business focused on itself as opposed to the entire 

188
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
organization. Deasy had to deal with two sectors of scope and hence, 
two levels of learning: the Americas as a region and the global firm 
internationally.
The challenge was to introduce a new e-business strategy from the 
top‑down in each business in the Americas and then to integrate it 
with the global firm. Ultimately, the mission was to review what each 
business was doing in e-business and to determine whether there was 
an opportunity to consolidate efforts into a common direction.
IT was, for the most part, viewed as a back-office operation—­
handling services of the company as a support function as opposed to 
thinking about ways to drive business strategy. In terms of IT report-
ing, most CIOs reported directly to the chief financial officer (CFO). 
While some IT executives view this as a disadvantage because CFOs 
are typically too focused on financial issues, Deasy felt that a focus on 
cost containment was fine as long as the CIO had access to the chief 
executive officer (CEO) and others who ultimately drove business 
strategy. So, the real challenge was to ensure that CIOs had access to 
the various strategic boards that existed at Siemens.
What are the challenges in transforming an organization the size 
of Siemens? The most important issue was the need to educate CIOs 
on the importance of their role with respect to the business as opposed 
to the technology. As Deasy stated in an interview, “ Business must 
come first and we need to remind our CIOs that all technology issues 
must refer back to the benefits it brings to the business.”  The question 
then is how to implement this kind of learning.
Perhaps the best way to understand how Siemens approached this 
dilemma is to understand Deasy’ s role as a corporate CIO. The reality 
is that there was no alternative but to create his position. What drove 
Siemens to this realization was fear that they needed someone to drive 
e-business, according to Deasy—fear of losing competitive edge in 
this area, fear that they were behind the competition and that smaller 
firms would begin to obtain more market share. Indeed, the growth 
of e-business occurred during the dot-com era, and there were huge 
pressures to respond to new business opportunities brought about by 
emerging technologies, specifically the Internet. It was, therefore, a 
lack of an internal capacity, such as responsive organizational dyna-
mism, that stimulated the need for senior management to get involved 
and provide a catalyst for change.

189
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
The first aspect of Siemens’ s approach can be correlated to the 
strategic integration component of responsive organizational dyna-
mism. We see that Siemens was concerned about whether technology 
was properly being integrated in strategic discussions. It established 
the Deasy role as a catalyst to begin determining the way technol-
ogy needed to be incorporated within the strategic dimension of the 
business. This process cannot occur without executive assistance, so 
evolutionary learning must first be initiated by senior management. 
Unfortunately, Deasy realized early on that he needed a central pro-
cess to allow over 25 CIOs in the Americas to interact regularly. This 
was important to understand the collective needs of the community 
and to pave the way for the joining of technology and strategic inte-
gration from a more global perspective. Deasy established an infra-
structure to support open discourse by forming CIO forums, similar 
to communities of practice, in which CIOs came together to discuss 
common challenges, share strategies, and have workshops on the 
ways technology could help the business. Most important at these 
forums was the goal of consolidating their ideas and their common 
challenges.
There are numerous discussions regarding the common problems 
that organizations face regarding IT expenditures, specifically the 
approach to its valuation and return on investment (ROI). While 
there are a number of paper-related formulas that financial executives 
use (e.g., percentage of gross revenues within an industry), Deasy uti-
lized learning theories, specifically, communities of practice, to ­foster 
more thinking and learning about what was valuable to Siemens, as 
opposed to using formulas that might not address important indi-
rect benefits from technology. In effect, Deasy promoted learning 
among a relatively small but important group of CIOs who needed 
to better understand the importance of strategic innovation and the 
value it could bring to the overall business mission. Furthermore, 
these forums provided a place where CIOs could develop their own 
community—a community that allowed its members to openly par-
ticipate in strategic discourse that could help transform the organiza-
tion. It was also a place to understand the tacit knowledge of the CIO 
organization and to use the knowledge of the CIOs to summarize 
common practices and share them among the other members of the 
community.

190
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Most of the CIOs at Siemens found it challenging to understand 
how their jobs were to be integrated into business strategy. Indeed, 
this is not a surprise. In Chapter  1, I discuss the feedback from my 
research on CEO evaluation of technology; I found that there were few 
IT executives who were actually involved in business strategy. Thus, 
the organization sought to create an advocate in terms of a central-
ized corporate headquarter that could provide assistance as opposed 
to forcing compliance. That is, it sought a structure with which to 
foster organizational learning concepts and develop an approach to 
create a more collective effort that would result in global direction for 
IT strategic integration.
To establish credibility among the CIO community, Deasy needed 
to ensure that the CIOs of each individual company were able to inter-
act with board-level executives. In the case of Siemens, this board is 
called the president’ s council. The president’ s council has regularly held 
meetings in which each president attends and receives presentations on 
ideas about the regional businesses. Furthermore, there are quarterly 
CFO meetings as well, where CIOs can participate in understand-
ing the financial implications of their IT investments. At the same 
time, these meetings provided the very exposure to the executive team 
that CIOs needed. Finally, Deasy established a CIO advisory board ­	
comprised of CIOs who actually vote on the common strategic issues 
and thus manage the overall direction of technology at Siemens. Each 
of these groups established different types of communities of practice 
that focused on a specific aspect of technology. The groups were geared 
to create better discourse and working relationships among these com-
munities to, ultimately, improve Siemens’ s competitive advantage. 
The three communities of practice at work in the Siemens model—­
executive, finance, and technology—suggest that having only one gen-
eral community of practice to address technology issues may be too 
limiting. Thus, theories related to communities of practice may need 
to be expanded to create discourse among multiple communities. This 
might be somewhat unique for IT, not in that there is a need for mul-
tiple communities, but that the same individuals must have an identity 
in each community. This shows the complexity of the CIO role today 
in the ability to articulate technology to different types and tiers of 
management. Figure  8.1 shows the interrelationships among the CIO 
communities of practice at Siemens.

191
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
Another way to represent these communities of practice is to view 
them as part of a process composed of three operating levels. Each level 
represents a different strategic role of management that is responsible 
for a unique component of discourse and on the authorization for uses 
of technology. Therefore, if the three different communities of prac-
tice are viewed strategically, each component could be constructed as 
a process leading to overall organizational cooperation, learning, and 
strategic integration as follows:
Tier 1: CIO Advisory Board : This community discusses issues of 
technology standards, operations, communications, and ini-
tiatives that reflect technology-specific areas. Such issues are 
seen as CIO specific and only need this community’ s agree-
ment and justification. However, issues or initiatives that 
require financial approval, such as those that may not yet be 
budgeted or approved, need to be discussed with group CFOs. 
Proposals to executive management—that is, the President’ s 
Council—also need prior approval from the CFOs.
Communities of practice consist of
presidents from each company.
Regular meetings are designed for
discussion over common issues on
business strategy. Corporate CIOs
can use this forum to present new
proposals on emerging technologies
and seek approval for their plans
and vision.
President’s council
Corporate
CIO of the
Americas
CFO quarterly
meetings
CIO advisory
board
Communities of practice consist of CIOs
from each company. Forum is designed to
openly discuss common challenges, agree
on technology initiatives, foster a more
united community and build on shared
knowledge across businesses.
Communities of practice consist of CFOs
from each company. Discussions
relate to how strategies can be
implemented with respect to ROI.
CIOs need to understand IT costs, both
direct and indirect.
Figure  8.1   Inter-relationships among CIO communities of practice at Siemens.

192
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Tier 2: CFO Quarterly : CFOs discuss new emerging technolo-
gies and ascertain their related costs and benefits (ROI). 
Those technologies that are already budgeted can be approved 
based on agreed ROI scenarios. Proposals for new technology 
projects are approved in terms of their financial viability and 
are prepared for further discussion at the President’ s Council.
Tier 3: President’ s Council : Proposals for new technology projects 
and initiatives are discussed with a focus on their strategic 
implications on the business and their expected outcome.
Deasy realized that he needed to create a common connection 
among these three communities. While he depended on the initia-
tives of others, he coordinated where these CIO initiatives needed to 
be presented, based on their area of responsibility.
Graphically, this can be shown as a linear progression of commu-
nity-based discussions and approvals, as in Figure  8.2.
The common thread to all three tiers is the corporate CIO. Deasy 
was active in each community; however, his specific activities within 
each community of practice were different. CIOs needed to estab-
lish peer relationships with other CIOs share their tacit knowledge 
and contribute ideas that could be useful to other Siemens companies. 
Thus, CIOs needed to transform their personal views of technology 
and expand them to a group-level perspective. Their challenge was 
to learn how to share concepts and how to understand new ones that 
emanated at the CIO advisory board level. From this perspective, 
they could create the link between the local strategic issues and those 
discussed at the regional and global levels, as shown in Figure  8.3.
Using this infrastructure, Siemens’ s organizational learning in 
technology, occurred at two levels of knowledge management. The 
first is represented by Deasy’ s position, which effectively represents a 
top-down structure to initiate the learning process. Second, are the 
tiers of communities of practice when viewed hierarchically. This view 
reflects a more bottom-up learning strategy, with technological oppor-
tunities initiated by a community of regional, company CIOs, each 
representing the specific interests of their companies or specific lines 
of business. This view can also be structured as an evolutionary cycle 
in which top-down management is used to initiate organizational 
learning from the bottom‑up, the bottom, in this case, represented by 

193
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
local operating company CIOs. This means that the CIO is seen rela-
tively, in this case, as the lower of the senior management population. 
Figure  8.4 depicts the CIO as this “ senior lower level.” 
From this frame of reference, the CIO represents the bottom-up 
approach to the support of organizational learning by addressing the 
technology dilemma created by technological dynamism—­specifically, 
in this case, e-business strategy.
The role of IT in marketing and e-business was another important 
factor in Siemens’ s model of organizational learning. The technology 
strategy at Siemens was consistent with the overall objectives of the 
organization: to create a shared environment that complements each 
Tier 3
Tier 2
Corporate CIO oversight and management
Tier 1
CFO
quarterly
CIO advisory
board
President’s
council
Outcomes
Budgeted but not approved
implementations. Projects are
approved within budget
constraints
Proposals reviewed based on
strategy and corporate
direction, and approved for
implementation, including
ﬁnancial commitment
Outcomes
Outcomes
Local or pre-budgeted
technology speciﬁc
implementation issues
Requires ﬁnancial
approval
Requires strategic
approval
Figure  8.2   Siemens’ community-based links.

194
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Dana Deasy
Strategic senior
Management level
President and
executive
management
Chief ﬁnancial
oﬃcer
Local CIO
Financial senior
Management level
Senior lower level
Figure  8.4   CIO as the “ senior lower level.” 
Company president
CIO advisory board
Company CFO
Technology issues related to
sharing across businesses or
issues for discussion that
require consesus among CIO
population
Company-speciﬁc strategic
issues regarding how
technology aﬀects speciﬁc
corporate goals and
objectives
Financial implications and
direct reporting at the
company level
Figure  8.3   Siemens’  local to global links.

195
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
business by creating the opportunity to utilize resources. This shared 
environment became an opportunity for IT to lead the process and 
become the main catalyst for change. I discuss this kind of support in 
Chapter  5, in which I note that workers see technology as an accept-
able agent of change. Essentially, the CIOs were challenged with the 
responsibility of rebranding their assets into clusters based on their 
generic business areas, such as hospitals, medical interests, and com-
munications. The essence of this strategic driver was to use e-business 
strategy to provide multiple offerings to the same customer base.
As with the Ravell case discussed in Chapter  1, the Siemens case 
represents an organization that was attempting to identify the driver 
component of IT. To create the driver component, it became necessary 
for executive management to establish a corporate position (embodied 
by Deasy) to lay out a plan for transformation, through learning and 
through the use of many of the organizational learning theories pre-
sented in Chapter  4.
The Siemens challenge, then, was to transform its CIOs from being 
back‑office professionals to proactive technologists focused primarily 
on learning to drive business strategy. That is not to say that back‑office 
issues became less important; they became, instead, responsibilities left 
to the internal organizations of the local CIOs. However, back‑office 
issues can often become strategic problems, such as with the use of 
e-mail. This is an example of a driver situation even though it still per-
tains to a support concern. That is, back‑office technologies can indeed 
be drivers, especially when new or emerging technologies are available. 
As with any transition, the transformation of the CIO role was not 
accomplished without difficulty. The ultimate message from executive 
management to the CIO community was that it should fuse the vital 
goals of the business with its technology initiatives. Siemens asked its 
CIOs to think of new ways that technology could be used to drive 
strategic innovations. It also required CIOs to change their behavior 
by asking them to think more about business strategy.
The first decision that Deasy confronted was whether to change 
the reporting structure of the CIO. Most CIOs at Siemens reported 
directly to the CFO as opposed to the CEO. After careful thought, 
Deasy felt that to whom the CIO reported was less important than 
giving access and exposure to the President’ s Council meetings. It was 
Deasy’ s perspective that only through exposure and experience could 

196
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
CIOs be able to transform from back‑office managers to ­strategic 
planners. As such, CIO training was necessary to prepare them for 
participation in communities of practice. Eventually, Siemens recog-
nized this need and, as a result, sponsored programs, usually lasting 
one  week, in which CIOs would be introduced to new thinking and 
learning by using individual-based reflective practices. Thus, we see 
an evolutionary approach, similar to that of the responsive organiza-
tional dynamism arc, presented in Chapter  4; that is, one that uses 
both individual and organizational learning techniques.
Deasy also understood the importance of his relationship and role 
with each of the three communities of practice. With respect to the 
CEOs of each company, Deasy certainly had the freedom to pick up 
the phone and speak with them directly. However, this was rarely a 
realistic option as Deasy knew early on that he needed the trust and 
cooperation of the local CIO to be successful. The community with 
CEOs was then broadened to include CIOs and other senior manag-
ers. This was another way in which Deasy facilitated the interaction 
and exposure of his CIOs to the executives at Siemens.
Disagreement among the communities can and does occur. Deasy 
believed in the “ pushing-back”  approach. This means that, inevitably, 
not everyone will agree to agree, and, at times, senior executives may 
need to press on important strategic issues even though they are not 
mutually in agreement with the community. However, while this type 
of decision appears to be contrary to the process of learning embed-
ded in communities of practice learning, it can be a productive and 
acceptable part of the process. Therefore, while a democratic process 
of learning is supported and preferred, someone in the CIO posi-
tion ultimately may need to make a decision when a community is 
deadlocked.
The most important component of executive decision making is 
that trust exists within the community. In an organizational learning 
infrastructure, it is vital that senior management share in the value 
proposition of learning with members of the community. In this way, 
members feel that they are involved, and are a part of decision mak-
ing as opposed to feeling that they are a part of a token effort that 
allows some level of participation. As Deasy stated, “ I was not try-
ing to create a corporate bureaucracy, but rather always representing 
myself as an ambassador for their interest, however, this does not 

197
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
guarantee that I will always agree with them.”  Disagreements, when 
managed properly, require patience, which can result in iterative dis-
cussions with members of the community before a consensus posi-
tion may be reached, if it is at all. Only after this iterative process is 
exhausted does a senior overarching decision need to be made. Deasy 
attributed his success to his experience in field operations, similar to 
those of his constituents. As a prior business-line CIO, he understood 
the dilemma that many members of the community were facing. 
Interestingly, because of his background, Deasy was able to “ qual-
ify”  as a true member of the CIO community of practice. This truth 
establishes an important part of knowledge management and change 
management—senior managers who attempt to create communities 
of practice will be more effective when they share a similar back-
ground and history with the community that they hope to manage. 
Furthermore, leaders of such communities must allow members to 
act independently and not confuse that independence with autonomy. 
Finally, managers of communities of practice are really champions 
of their group and as such must ensure that the trust among mem-
bers remains strong. This suggests that CIO communities must first 
undergo their own cultural assimilation to be prepared to integrate 
with larger communities within the organization.
Another important part of Deasy’ s role was managing the technol-
ogy itself. This part of his job required strategic integration in that 
his focus was more about uses of technology, as opposed to commu-
nity behavior or cultural assimilation. Another way of looking at this 
issue is to consider the ways in which communities of practice actually 
transform tacit knowledge and present it to senior management as 
explicit knowledge. This explicit knowledge about uses of technology 
must be presented in a strategic way and show the benefits for the 
organization. The ways that technology can benefit a business often 
reside within IT as tacit knowledge. Indeed, many senior manag-
ers often criticize IT managers for their inability to articulate what 
they know and to describe it so that managers can understand what it 
means to the business. Thus, IT managers need to practice transform-
ing their tacit knowledge about technology and presenting it effec-
tively, as it relates to business strategy.
Attempting to keep up with technology can be a daunting, if not 
impossible, task. In some cases, Siemens allows outside consultants 

198
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
to provide help on specific applications if there is not enough 
­expertise within the organization. The biggest challenge, however, 
is not ­necessarily in keeping up with new technologies but rather, in 
testing technologies to determine exactly the benefit they have on 
the business. To address this dilemma, Deasy established the con-
cept of “ revalidation.”  Specifically, approved technology projects 
are reviewed every 90 days to determine whether they are indeed 
providing the planned outcomes, whether new outcomes need 
to be established, or whether the technology is no longer useful. 
The concept of revalidation can be associated with my discussion 
in Chapter  3, which introduced the concept of “ driver”  aspects of 
technology. This required that IT be given the ability to invest and 
experiment with technology to fully maximize the evaluation of 
IT in strategic integration. This was particularly useful to Deasy, 
who needed to transform the culture at Siemens to one that rec-
ognized that not all approved technologies succeed. In addition, 
he needed to dramatically alter the application development life 
cycle and reengineer the process of how technology was evaluated 
by IT and senior management. This challenge was significant in 
that it had to be accepted by over 25 autonomous presidents, who 
were more focused on short and precise outcomes from technology 
investments.
Deasy was able to address the challenges that many presidents 
had in understanding IT jargon, specifically as it related to ben-
efits of using technology. He engaged in an initiative to communi-
cate with non-IT executives by using a process called storyboarding.  
Storyboarding is the process of creating prototypes that allow users to 
actually see examples of technology and how it will look and operate. 
Storyboarding tells a story and can quickly educate executives without 
being intimidating. Deasy’ s process of revaluation had its own unique 
life cycle at Siemens:
	
1.	Create excitement through animation. What would Siemens 
be like if ... ?
	
2.	Evaluate the way the technology would be supported.
	
3.	Recognize implementation considerations about how the 
technology as a business driver is consistent with what the 
organization is doing and experiencing.

199
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
	
4.	Technology is reviewed every 90 days by the CIO advisory 
board after experimental use with customers and presented to 
the president’ s council on an as-needed basis.
	
5.	Establish responsive organizational dynamism with cultural 
assimilation; that is, recognize the instability of technol-
ogy and that there are no guarantees to planned outcomes. 
Instead, promote business units to understand the concept of 
“ forever prototyping.” 
Thus, Siemens was faced with the challenge of cultural assimi-
lation, which required dramatic changes in thinking and business 
life cycles. This process resembles Bradley and Nolan’ s (1998) Sense 
and Respond —the ongoing sensing of technology opportunities and 
responding to them dynamically. This process disturbs traditional and 
existing organizational value chains and therefore represents the need 
for a cultural shift in thinking and doing. Deasy, using technology as 
the change variable, began the process of reinventing the operation of 
many traditional value chains.
Siemens provides us with an interesting case study for responsive 
organizational dynamism because it had so many diverse companies 
(in over 190 countries) and over 425,000 employees. As such, Siemens 
represents an excellent structure to examine the importance of cul-
tural assimilation. Deasy, as a corporate CIO, had a counterpart in 
Asia/Australia. Both corporate CIOs reported to a global CIO in 
Germany, the home office of Siemens. There was also a topic-centered 
CIO responsible for global security and application-specific planning 
software. This position also reported directly to the global CIO. There 
were regional and local CIOs who focused on specific geographical 
areas and vertical lines of business and operating company CIOs. This 
organization is shown in Figure  8.5.
Deasy’ s operation represents one portion (although the most 
quickly changing and growing) of Siemens worldwide. Thus, the issue 
of globalization is critical for technologies that are scalable beyond 
regional operating domains. Standardization and evaluations of tech-
nology often need to be ascertained at the global level and as a result 
introduce new complexities relating to cultural differences in business 
methods and general thinking processes. Specifically, what works in 
one country may not work the same way in another. Some of these 

200
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
matters can be legally based (e.g., licensing of software or assumptions 
about whether a technology is legally justified). To a large extent, solv-
ing legal matters relating to technology is easier than cultural ones.
Cultural assimilation matters about technology typically occur 
in global organizations with respect to acceptability of operational 
norms from one country to another. This becomes a particularly dif-
ficult situation when international firms attempt to justify standards. 
At Siemens, Deasy introduced three “ standards”  of technology that 
defined how it could be used across cultures, and communities of 
practice:
	
1.	Corporate services : These are technologies that are required to 
be used by the business units. There are central service charges 
for their use as well.
	
2.	Mandatory services : Everyone must comply with using a par-
ticular type of application; that is, mandatory software based 
on a specific type of application. For example, if you use a 
Web browser, it must be Internet Explorer.
	
3.	Optional : These are technologies related to a specific business 
and used only within a local domain. There may be a preferred 
solution, but IT is not required to use it.
This matrix of standards allows for a culture to utilize technologies 
that are specific to its business needs, when justified. Standards at 
Siemens are determined by a series of steering committees, starting 
Siemens global CIO
(Germany)
Topic centered CIO
Regional CIOs
Operating
company CIO
Operating
company CIO
Regional CIOs
Corporate CIO
Asia/Australia
Corporate CIO
Americas
(deasy)
Figure  8.5   Siemens’  CIO organization.

201
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
at the regional level, that meet two to three times annually. Without 
question, implementing standards across cultures is, as Deasy phrased 
it, “ a constant wrestling match which might need to change by the 
time a standard is actually reached.”  This is why strategic integra-
tion is so important, given the reality that technology cannot always 
be controlled or determined at senior levels. Organizations must be 
able to dynamically integrate technology changes parallel to business 
changes.
Deasy’ s longer-term mission was to provide a community of CIOs 
who could combine the business and technology challenges. It was 
his initial vision that the CIO of the future would be more involved 
than before with marketing and value chain creation. He felt that 
“ the CIO community needed to be detached from its technology-
specific issues or they would never be a credible business partner.”  
It was his intent to establish organizational learning initiatives that 
helped CIOs “ seize and succeed,”  to essentially help senior manage-
ment by creating vision and excitement, by establishing best practices, 
and by learning better ways to communicate through open discourse 
in communities of practice.
Three years after his initial work, I reviewed the progress that 
Deasy had made at Siemens. Interestingly, most of his initiatives 
had been implemented and were maturing—except for the role of 
e-business strategy. I discovered, after this period, that the orga-
nization thought that e-business was an IT responsibility. As such, 
they expected that the CIOs had not been able to determine the 
best business strategy. This was a mistake; the CIO could not estab-
lish strategy but rather needed to react to the strategies set forth 
by senior management. This means that the CIO was not able to 
really establish stand-alone strategies as drivers based on technology 
alone. CIOs needed, as Deasy stated, “ to be a participant with the 
business strategist and to replace this was inappropriate.”  This raises 
a number of questions:
	
1.	Did this occur because CIOs at Siemens do not have the edu-
cation and skills to drive aspects of business strategy?
	
2.	Did the change in economy and the downfall of the dot-coms 
create a negative feeling toward technology as a business 
driver?

202
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
3.	Are CEOs not cognizant enough about uses of technology, 
and do they need better education and skills to better under-
stand the role of technology?
	
4.	Is the number of communities of practice across the organi-
zation integrated enough so that IT can effectively commu-
nicate and form new cultures that can adapt to the changes 
brought about by emerging technologies?
	
5.	Is there too much impatience with the evolution of tech-
nology? Does its assimilation in an organization the size of 
Siemens simply take too long to appreciate and realize the 
returns from investments in technology?
I believe that all of these questions apply, to some extent, and are 
part of the challenges that lie ahead at Siemens. The company has now 
initiated a series of educational seminars designed to provide more 
business training for CIOs, which further emphasizes the importance 
of focusing on business strategy as opposed to just technology. It could 
also mean the eventual establishment of a new “ breed”  of CIOs who 
are better educated in business strategy. However, it is inappropriate 
for non-IT managers to expect that the CIOs will be able to handle 
strategy by themselves; they must disconnect e-business as solely being 
about technology. The results at Siemens only serve to strengthen the 
concept that responsive organizational dynamism requires that cul-
tural assimilation occur within all the entities of a company.
Aftermath
Dana Deasy left Siemens a few years after this case study was com-
pleted. During that time, the executive team at Siemens realized that 
the CIO alone could not provide business strategy or react quickly 
enough to market needs. Rather, such strategy required the integra-
tion of all aspects of the organization, with the CIO only one part of 
the team to determine strategic shifts that lead or use components of 
technology. Thus, the executives realized that they needed to become 
much better versed in technology so that they also could engage in 
strategic conversations. This does not suggest that executives needed 
technology training per se, but that they do need training that allows 
them to comment intelligently on technology issues. What is the best 

203
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
way to accomplish this goal? The answer is through short seminars 
that can provide executives with terminology and familiarize them 
with the processes their decisions will affect. The case also raised the 
question of whether a new wave of executives would inevitably be 
required to move the organization forward to compete more effec-
tively. While these initiatives appear to make sense, they still need to 
address the fundamental challenges posed by technology dynamism 
and the need to develop an organization that is positioned to respond 
(i.e., responsive organizational dynamism). We know from the results 
of the Ravell case that executives cannot be excluded. However, the 
case also showed that all levels of the organization need to be involved. 
Therefore, the move to responsive organizational dynamism requires 
a reinvention of the way individuals work, think, and operate across 
multiple tiers of management and organizational business units. This 
challenge will continue to be a difficult but achievable objective of 
large multinational companies.
ICAP
This second case study focuses on a financial organization called ICAP, 
a leading money and securities broker. When software development 
exceeded 40% of IT activities, ICAP knew it was time to recognize 
IT as more than just technical support. Stephen McDermott provided 
the leadership, leaving his role as CEO of the Americas at ICAP to 
become CEO of the Electronic Trading Community (ETC), a new 
entity focused solely on software development. This IT community 
needed to be integrated with a traditional business model that was 
undergoing significant change due to emerging technologies, in this 
specific case, the movement from voice to electronic trading systems.
This case study reflects many aspects of the operation of responsive 
organizational dynamism. From the strategic integration perspec-
tive, ICAP needed to understand the ways electronic trading could 
ultimately affect business strategy. For example, would it replace all 
voice-related business interactions, specifically voice trading? Second, 
what would be the effect on its culture, particularly with respect to the 
way the business needed to be organizationally structured? This study 
focuses on the role of the CEO as a pioneer in reexamining his own 
biases, which favored an old-line business process, and for developing 

204
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
a realization to manage a major change in business strategy and 
­organizational philosophy. Indeed, as McDermott stated, “ It was the 
challenge of operating at the top, yet learning from the bottom.”  This 
sentiment essentially reflects the reality of a management dilemma. 
Could a CEO who, without question, had substantial knowledge of 
securities trading, learn to lead a technology-driven operation, for 
which he had little knowledge and experience?
To better understand the impact of technology on the business of 
ICAP, it is important to have some background information. Since 
1975, the use of technology at ICAP was limited to operations of 
the back-office type. Brokers (the front-end or sales force of a trad-
ing business), communicated with customers via telephone. As such, 
processing transactions was always limited to the time necessary 
to manually disseminate prices and trading activity over the phone 
to a securities trader. However, by 1997 a number of technological 
advancements, particularly with the proliferation of Internet-based 
communication and the increased bandwidth available, enabled bro-
kers and dealers to communicate bidirectionally. The result was that 
every aspect of the trade process could now be streamlined, includ-
ing the ability for the trader to enter orders directly into the brokers’  
trading systems. The technological advancements and the availability 
of capital in the mid-1990s made it difficult to invest in computer 
operations. Specifically, the barriers to investing in technology had 
been high as developing proprietary trading systems and deploying a 
private network were all costly. The market of available products was 
scarce, filled with relatively tiny competitors with little more than a 
concept, rather than an integrated product that could do what a com-
pany like ICAP needed, in order to maintain its competitive position. 
The existing system, called the ICAP Trading Network application 
was far from a trading system that would compete against the newer 
emerging technologies. The goal was to develop a new trading sys-
tem that would establish an electronic link between the back-office 
systems of ICAP and its clients. The system would need to be simple 
to use as the traders were not necessarily technology literate. It would 
need to be robust, include features that were specific to the markets, 
and easily installed and distributed. In addition, as ICAP decided 
to fund the entire project, it would have to be cost‑effective and not 
burden the other areas of the business. As competitive systems were 

205
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
already being introduced, the new system needed to be operational 
within three to six  months for ICAP to remain competitive.
McDermott recognized that designing a new product would require 
that IT developers and business matter experts learn to work together. 
As a result of this realization, a representative from the operation was 
selected to see if a third-party developer could modify an existing 
product. After exploring and evaluating responses, the search team 
concluded that off-the-shelf solutions, prohibitive in cost, were not 
available that would meet the critical timing needs of the business. 
However, during the period when IT and the business users worked 
together, these groups came to realize that the core components of 
its own trading system could be modified and used to build the new 
system. This realization resulted from discussions between IT and the 
business users that promoted organizational learning. This process 
resembles the situation in the Ravell study, in which I concluded that 
specific events could accelerate organizational learning and actually 
provide an opportunity to embed the process in the normal discourse 
of an organization. I also concluded that such learning starts with 
individual reflective practices, and understanding how both factions, 
in this case, IT and the business community, can help each other in a 
common cause. In the case of Ravell, it was an important relocation 
of the business that promoted integration between IT and the busi-
ness community. At ICAP, the common cause was about maintaining 
competitive advantage.
The project to develop the new electronic trading application was 
approved in August 1999, and the ETC was formed. The new entity 
included an IT staff and selected members from the business commu-
nity, who moved over to the new group. Thus, because of technologi-
cal dynamism, it was determined that the creation of a new product 
established the need for a new business entity that would form its 
own strategic integration and cultural assimilation. An initial test of 
the new product took place in November, and it successfully executed 
the first electronic trade via the Internet. In addition to their design 
responsibility, ETC was responsible for marketing, installing, and 
training clients on the use of the product. The product went live in 
February 2000. Since its introduction, the ETC product has been 
modified to accommodate 59 different fixed-income products, serving 
more than 1,000 users worldwide in multiple languages.

206
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
While the software launch was successful, McDermott’ s role was 
a challenge, from coordinating the short- and long-term goals of 
ETC with the traditional business models of ICAP to shifting from 
management of a global financial enterprise to management of an IT 
community. The ICAP case study examines the experiences and per-
ceptions one  year after the launch of the new entity.
The first most daunting result, after a year of operations, was 
the significant growth of technology uses in the business. Initially, 
McDermott noted that electronic trading was about 40% of opera-
tions and that it had grown over 60%. He stated that ETC had 
become, without question, the single most important component of 
the ICAP international business focus. The growth of electronic trad-
ing created an accelerated need for transformation within ICAP and 
its related businesses. This transformation essentially changed the 
balance between voice or traditional trading and electronic trading. 
McDermott found himself responsible for much of this transforma-
tion and was initially concerned whether he had the technical exper-
tise to manage it.
McDermott admitted that as a chief executive of the traditional 
ICAP business, he was conservative and questioned the practicality 
and value of many IT investments. He often turned down requests 
for more funding and looked at technology as more of a supporter of 
the business. As I explain in Chapter  3, IT as a supporter will always 
be managed, based on efficiencies and cost controls. McDermott’ s 
view was consistent with this position. In many ways, it was ironic 
that he became the CEO of the electronic component of the business. 
Like many CEOs, McDermott initially had the wrong impression of 
the Internet. Originally looking at it as a “ big threat,”  he eventually 
realized from the experience that the Internet was just another way 
of communicating with his clients and that its largest contribution 
was that it could be done more cost-effectively, thus leading to higher 
profits.
One of the more difficult challenges for McDermott was develop-
ing the mission for ETC. At the time of the launch of the new product, 
this mission was unclear. With the assistance of IT and the business 
community, the mission of ETC has been developing dynamically; 
the business is first trying to protect itself from outside competi-
tion. Companies like IBM, Microsoft, and others, might attempt to 

207
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
invade the business market of ICAP. Thus, it is important that ETC 
­continues to produce a quality product and keep its competitive edge 
over more limited competitors that are software-based organizations 
only. The concept of a dynamic mission can be correlated to the fun-
damental principles of responsive organizational dynamism. In fact, it 
seems rather obvious that organizations dealing with emerging tech-
nologies might need to modify their missions to parallel the acceler-
ated changes brought about by technological innovation. We certainly 
see this case with ICAP, for which the market conditions became 
volatile because of emerging electronic trading capacities. Why, then, 
is it so difficult for organizations to realize that changing or modify-
ing their missions should not be considered that unusual? Perhaps the 
approach of ICAP in starting a completely separate entity was correct. 
However, it is interesting that this new organization was operating 
without a consistent and concrete mission.
Another important concept that developed at ETC was that 
technology was more of a commodity and that content (i.e., the dif-
ferent services offered to clientele) was more important. Indeed, as 
McDermott often stated, “ I assume that the technology works, the 
real issue is the way you intend to implement it; I want to see a com-
pany’ s business plan first.”  Furthermore, ETC began to understand 
that technology could be used to leverage ICAP businesses in areas 
that they had never been able to consider before the advent of the 
technology and the new product. McDermott knew that this was 
a time, as Deasy often stated, to “ seize and succeed”  the moment. 
McDermott also realized that organizational learning practices were 
critical for ideas to come from within the staff. He was careful not 
to require staff to immediately present a formal new initiative, but 
he allowed them to naturally develop a plan as the process became 
mature. That is one of the reasons that ETC uses the word community  
in its name. As he expressed it to me during a conversation:
Now that is not my mandate to grow into other areas of opportunity, my 
initial responsibility is always to protect our businesses. However, I will 
not let opportunities go by which can help the business grow, especially 
things that we could never do as a voice broker. It has been very exciting 
and I can see ICAP becoming a considerably larger company than we 
have been historically because of our investment in technology.

208
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
McDermott also was challenged to learn what his role would be as 
a chief executive of a software technology organization. In the early 
stages, he was insecure about his job because for the first time he 
knew less than his workers about the business. Perhaps this provides 
organizational learning practitioners with guidance on the best way 
of getting the CEO engaged in the transformative process; that is, 
getting the CEO to understand his or her role in an area in which, 
typically, he or she does not have expertise. McDermott represented 
an executive who reached that position coming up through the ranks. 
Therefore, much of his day-to-day management was based on his 
knowledge of the business—a business that he felt he knew as well as 
anyone. With technology, and its effect as technological dynamism, 
CEOs face more challenges, not only because they need to manage 
an area they may know little about but also because of the dynamic 
aspects of technology and the way it causes unpredictable and acceler-
ated change. McDermott realized this and focused his attention on 
discovering what his role needed to be in this new business. There 
was no question in McDermott’ s mind that he needed to know more 
about technology, although he also recognized that management was 
the fundamental responsibility he would have with this new entity:
[Although] I was insecure at the beginning I started to realize that it does 
not take a genius to do my job. Management is management, and whether 
you manage a securities brokering firm or you manage a deli or manage 
a group of supermarkets or an IT or an electronic company, it is really 
about management, and that is what I am finding out now. So, whether 
I am the right person to bring ETC to the next level is irrelevant at this 
time. What is more important is that I have the skills that are necessary to 
manage the business issues as opposed to the technological ones.
However, McDermott did have to make some significant changes 
to operate in a technology-based environment. ETC was now des-
tined to become a global organization. As a result, McDermott had 
to create three senior executive positions to manage each of the three 
major geographic areas of operation: North America, Europe, and 
Asia. He went from having many indirect reports to having just a 
few. He needed four or five key managers. He needed to learn to trust 
that they were the right people, people who had the ability to nurture 

209
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
the parts of each of their respective divisions. “ What it leaves now is 
being a true CEO,”  he stated, “ and that means picking your people, 
delegating the responsibility and accepting that they know the busi-
ness.”  Thus, we see technological dynamism actually realigning the 
reporting structure, and social discourse of the company.
My presentation in previous chapters focused on helping orga-
nizations transform and change. Most important in organizational 
learning theories is the resistance to change that most workers have, 
particularly when existing cultural norms are threatened. ICAP was 
no exception to the challenges of change management. The most sig-
nificant threat at ICAP was the fear that the traditional voice bro-
ker was endangered. McDermott understood this fear factor and 
presented electronic trading not as a replacement but rather, a sup-
plement to the voice broker. There was no question that there were 
certain areas of the business that lent themselves more to electronic 
trading; however, there are others that will never go electronic or at 
least predominantly electronic. Principles of responsive organizational 
dynamism suggest that accelerated change becomes part of the stra-
tegic and cultural structure of an organization. We see both of these 
components at work in this case.
Strategically, ICAP was faced with a surge in business opportuni-
ties that were happening at an accelerated pace and were, for the most 
part, unplanned, so there was little planned activity. The business was 
feeling its way through its own development, and its CEO was pro-
viding management guidance, as opposed to specific solutions. ICAP 
represents a high-velocity organization similar to those researched by 
Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988), and supports their findings that a 
democratic, less power-centralized management structure enhances 
the performance of such a firm. From a cultural assimilation perspec-
tive, the strategic decisions are changing the culture and requiring new 
structures and alignments. Such changes are bound to cause fears.
As a result of recognizing the inevitable changes that were becom-
ing realities, McDermott reviewed the roles and responsibilities of 
his employees on the brokering side of the business. After careful 
analysis, he realized that he could divide the brokers into three dif-
ferent divisions, which he branded as A, B, and C brokers. The A 
brokers were those who were fixed on the relational aspect of their 
jobs, so voice interaction was the only part of their work world. Such 

210
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
individuals could do things in the voice world that electronic means 
could not reach. They were personal experts, if you will, who could 
deal with clients requiring a human voice. Thus, the A broker would 
exist as long as the broker wanted to work—and would always be 
needed because a population of clients wants personal support over 
the phone. This is similar to the opposition to the Internet in which 
we find that some portion of the population will never use e-com-
merce because they prefer a live person. The B broker was called the 
hybrid broker—an individual who could use both voice and electronic 
means. Most important, these brokers were used to “ convert”  voice-
based clients into electronic ones. As McDermott explained:
Every day I see a different electronic system that someone is trying to 
sell in the marketplace. Some of these new technologies are attempting 
to solve problems that do not exist. I have found that successful systems 
address the content more than the technology. Having a relationship for 
many of our customers is more important. And we can migrate those 
relationships from voice to electronic or some sort of a hybrid combi-
nation. The B brokers will end up with servicing some combination of 
these relationships or migrate themselves to the electronic system. So, I 
believe they have nothing to fear.
The C brokers, on the other hand, represented the more average 
voice brokers who would probably not have a future within the busi-
ness. They would be replaced by electronic trading because they did 
not bring the personal specialization of the A broker. The plight of 
the C broker did raise an important issue about change management 
and technological dynamism: Change will cause disruption, which 
can lead to the elimination of jobs. This only further supported the 
fears that workers had when faced with dynamic environments. For 
McDermott, this change would need to be openly discussed with the 
community, especially for the A and B brokers, who in essence would 
continue to play an important role in the future of the business. C 
brokers needed to be counseled so that they could appropriately seek 
alternate career plans. Thus, honesty brings forth trust, which inevi-
tably fosters the growth of organizational learning. Another perspec-
tive was that the A and B brokers understood the need for change 
and recognized that not everyone could adapt to new cultures driven 

211
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
by strategic integration, so they understood why the C broker was 
eliminated.
In Chapter  2, I discussed the dilemma of IT as a “ marginalized”  
component of an organization. This case study provides an opportunity 
to understand how the traditional IT staff at ICAP made the transi-
tion into the new company—a company in which they represented a 
direct part of its success. As noted, ICAP considered the IT depart-
ment as a back-office support function. In the new organization, it 
represented the nucleus or the base of all products and careers. Hence, 
McDermott expected ETC employees to be technology proficient. No 
longer were IT people just coders or hardware specialists—he saw tech-
nology people as lawyers, traders, and other businesspeople. He related 
technology proficiency in a similar way to how his business used to 
view a master’ s degree in business (MBA) in the late 1980s. This issue 
provides further support for the cultural assimilation component of 
responsive organizational dynamism. We see a situation in which the 
discrepancy between who is and is not a technology person beginning 
to dwindle in importance. While there is still clear need for expertise 
and specialization, the organization as a whole has started the process 
of educating itself on the ways in which technology affects every aspect 
of its corporate mission, operations, and career development.
ICAP has not been immune to the challenges that have faced most 
technology-driven organizations. As discussed in Chapter  2, IT proj-
ects typically face many problems in terms of their ability to complete 
projects on time and within budget. ICAP was also challenged with 
this dilemma. Indeed, ICAP had no formal process but focused on 
the criterion of meeting the delivery date as the single most important 
issue. As a result, McDermott was attempting to instill a new culture 
committed to the importance of what he called the “ real date of deliv-
ery.”  It was a challenge to change an existing culture that had difficulty 
with providing accurate dates for delivery. As McDermott suggested:
I am learning that technology people know that there is no way that they 
can deliver an order in the time requested, but they do not want to disap-
point us. I find that technology people are a different breed from the peo-
ple that I normally work with. Brokers are people looking for immediate 
gratification and satisfaction. Technology people, on the other hand, are 
always dedicated to the project regardless of its time commitment.

212
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
McDermott was striving to attain a mix or blend of the traditional 
culture with the technology culture and create a new hybrid organiza-
tion capable of developing realistic goals and target dates. This process 
of attainment mirrors the results from the Ravell case, which resulted 
in the formation of a new hybrid culture after IT and business staff 
members were able to assimilate one another and find common needs 
and uses for technology and the business.
McDermott also understood his role as a leader in the new orga-
nization. He realized early on that technology people are what he 
called more “ individualistic” ; that is, they seemingly were reluctant to 
take on responsibility of other people. They seemed, as McDermott 
observed, “ to have greater pleasure in designing and creating some-
thing and they love solving problems.”  This was different from what 
CEOs experienced with MBAs, who were taught more to lead a group 
as opposed to being taught to solve specific problems. Yet, the integra-
tion of both approaches can lead to important accomplishments that 
may not be reachable while IT and non-IT are separated by depart-
mental barriers.
Ultimately, the cultural differences and the way they are managed 
lead to issues surrounding the basis of judging new technologies for 
future marketing consideration. McDermott understood that this was 
a work in progress. He felt strongly that the issue was not technology, 
but that it was the plan for using technology competitively. In other 
words, McDermott was interested in the business model for the tech-
nology that defined its benefits to the business strategically. As he put 
it, “ Tell me how you are going to make money, tell me what you can 
do for me to make my life easier. That is what I am looking at!”  While 
McDermott felt that many people were surprised by his response, he 
believed its reality was taken too much for granted. During the dot-
com era, too many investors and businesses assumed that technologi-
cal innovation would somehow lead to multiples of earnings—that 
simply did not happen. Essentially, McDermott realized that good 
technology was available in many places and that the best technology 
is not necessarily the one that will provide businesses with the highest 
levels of success.
Judging new technologies based on the quality of the business plan 
is an effective method of emphasizing the importance of why the 
entire organization needs to participate and understand technology. 

213
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
This inevitably leads to questions about the method in which ROI is, 
or should be, measured. The actual measurement of ROI for ICAP 
was remarkably simple yet effective. There were four methods of 
­determining ROI. The first and most significant was whether the 
technology would increase volume of trades along the different prod-
uct lines. The second was the amount in dollars of the securities being 
traded. That is, did technology provide a means for clients to do larger 
dollar trades? The third factor could be an increase in the actual num-
ber of clients using the electronic system. The fourth might be allevi-
ating existing bottlenecks in the voice trading process, whether it was 
a legal issue or the advantage provided by having electronic means. 
We see here that some of the ROI factors are direct and monetary. As 
expected methods, the first and second were very much direct mone-
tary ways to see the return for investing in electronic trading systems. 
However, as Lucas (1999) reminds us, many benefits derived from IT 
investments are indirect, and some are impossible to measure. We see 
this with the third and fourth methods. Increasing the number of cli-
ents indirectly suggested more revenue, but did not guarantee it. An 
even more abstract benefit was the improvement of throughput, what 
is typically known as improved efficiency in operations.
While all of the accomplishments of ICAP and McDermott seem 
straightforward, they were not accomplished without challenges; 
perhaps the most significant was the approach, determination, and 
commitment that were needed by the executive team. This chal-
lenge is often neglected in the literature on organizational learning. 
Specifically, the executive board of ETC needed to understand what 
was necessary in terms of funding to appropriately invest in the future 
of technology. To do that, they needed to comprehend what e-­business 
was about and why it was important for a global business to make seri-
ous investments in it to survive. In this context, then, the executive 
board needed to learn about technology as well and found themselves 
in a rather difficult position. During this period, McDermott called 
in an outside consultant who could provide a neutral and objective 
opinion. Most important was to define the issue in lay terms so that 
board members could correlate it with their traditional business mod-
els. Ultimately, the learning consisted of understanding that technol-
ogy and e-commerce were about expanding into more markets, ones 
that ICAP could not reach using traditional approaches. There was a 

214
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
realization that ICAP was too focused on its existing client base, as 
opposed to reaching out for new ones—and there was also the reverse 
reality that a competitor would figure out a strategy to reach out to the 
client base of ICAP. What is also implied in expanding one’ s client 
base is that it means going outside one’ s existing product offerings. 
This had to be carefully planned as ICAP did not want to venture 
outside what it was—an intermediary brokering service. So, expan-
sion needed to be carefully planned and discussed first among the 
executive members, then presented as a challenge to the senior man-
agement, and so on.
This process required some modifications to the organizational 
learning process proposed by such scholars as Nonaka and Takeuchi 
(1995). Specifically, their models of knowledge management do not 
typically include the executive boards; thus, they are not considered a 
part of the learning organization. The ICAP case study exposes the fact 
that their exclusion can be a serious limitation, especially with respect 
to the creation of responsive organizational dynamism. In previous 
chapters, I presented a number of management models that could be 
used to assist in developing and sustaining organizational learning. 
They focused fundamentally on the concept of whether such manage-
ment should be top-down, bottom-up, or, as Nonaka and Takeuchi 
suggest, “ middle-up-down.”  I laid out my case for a combination of 
all of them in a specific order and process that could maximize each 
approach. However, none of these models really incorporates the out-
side executive boards that have been challenged to truly understand 
what technology is about, their approach to management, and what 
their overall participation should be in organizational learning.
Perhaps the most significant historical involvement of executive 
boards was with the Year 2000 (Y2K) event. With this event, executive 
boards mandated that their organizations address the potential tech-
nology crisis at the turn of the century. My CEO interviews verified 
that, if anything, the Y2K crisis served to educate executive boards by 
forcing them to focus on the issue. Boards became unusually involved 
with the rest of the organization because independent accounting firms, 
as outside objective consultants, were able to expose the risks for not 
addressing the problem. The handling of e-commerce by ICAP was 
in many ways similar but also suggests that executive boards should 
not always wait for a crisis to occur before they get involved. They also 

215
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
must be an important component of organizational learning, particu-
larly in responsive organizational dynamism. While organizational 
learning fosters the involvement of the entire community or workers, 
it also needs advocates and supporters who control funding. In the case 
of ICAP, organizational learning processes without the participation 
of the executive board, ultimately would not have been successful. The 
experience of ICAP also suggests that this educational and learning 
process may need to come from independent and objective sources, 
which integrates another component of organizational learning that 
has not been effectively addressed: the role of outside consultants as a 
part of a community of practice. Figure  8.6 depicts the addition of the 
ICAP ETC executive board and outside consultants in the organiza-
tional learning management process.
The sequential activities that occurred among the different communi-
ties are shown in Table  8.1. While Table  8.1 shows the sequential steps 
necessary to complete a transformation toward strategic integration and 
cultural assimilation, the process is also very iterative. Specifically, this 
means that organizations do not seamlessly move from one stage to 
another without setbacks. Thus, transformation depends heavily on dis-
course as the main driver for ultimate organizational evolution.
Figure  8.7 shows a somewhat messier depiction of organizational 
learning under the auspices of ROD. The changes brought on by 
dynamic interactions foster top-down, middle-up-down, and bottom-
up knowledge management techniques—all occurring simultane-
ously. This level of complex discourse creates a number of overlapping 
communities of practice that have similar, yet unique, objectives in 
learning. These communities of practice overlap at certain levels as 
shown in Figure  8.8.
As stated, organizational learning at the executive levels tends to 
be ignored in the literature. At ICAP, an important community of 
practice emerged that created a language discourse essential to its 
overall success in dealing with technological dynamism, brought on 
by technological innovation in electronic communications. Language 
was critical at this level; ICAP is a U.K.-based organization and as 
such has an international board. As McDermott explained:
As you know, from travelling anywhere around the world, cultures are 
different. And even the main office for our company, ICAP in England, 

216
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and even with the English, we are separated by a common language, as 
we often say. There is a very, very different culture everywhere in the 
world. I will tell you that information technology in our company is 
separated from electronic trading—there is a difference.
Thus, McDermott’ s challenge was to establish a community 
that could reach consensus not only on strategic issues but also 
Advisement on e-commerce
business opportunities
Overall changes to
corporate mission
ﬁnancial
commitments
approve major
organizational
changes—form ETC
Discourse and
learning at the
organizational
level, non-event
speciﬁc. ICAP
board focused on
impact of
technology on
trading operations.
Senior
management
team meets and
determines
strategy and
organization for
creating new
corporate entity.
Middle managers
determine how and
when operations
will be changed.
Tis includes
personnel
changes and
development of
speciﬁc
implementation
schedules through
group discourse.
Operations
personnel work
with middle
management to
determine change
in organization
structure and duties
and responsibilies of
new and old positions.
Individual reﬂective
practice, tacit knowledge
of how to actually
implement changes at
the individual and
group levels
Buy in
modify
implementation plans
based on discourse and
knowledge of how the
business operates
Buy in
modify strategic plans
based on discourse and
knowledge of speciﬁc
areas of the business
Speciﬁc skills in
technology strategy
objective analysis
of business
realignment
education of
executive board
Initiator of change
knowledge and
strategic management
organizational change
agent
ICAP ETC
executive board
Independent
consultants
CEO
Senior
management
Middle
management
Operations
Figure  8.6   ICAP ETC management tiers.

217
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
Table  8.1   ICAP—Steps to Transformation
STEP
LEARNING ENTITY(S)
LEARNING ACTIVITY
1
CEO Americas
Initiates discourse at board level on 
approaches to expanding electronic trading 
business
2
Executive board
Decides to create separate corporate entity 
ETC to allow for the establishment of a new 
culture
3
Outside consultant
E-commerce discourse, ways in which to 
expand the domain of the business
4
Executive board
Discussion of corporate realignment of 
mission, goals, and objectives
5
CEO/senior management
Establishes strategic direction with senior 
management
6
Senior management/middle 
management
Meet to discuss and negotiate details of the 
procedures to implement
7
Middle management/operations 
communities
Meet with operations communities to discuss 
impact on day-to-day processes and 
procedures
Discourse initiated
Discourse on
“how” to
implement
Rollout of new
organization and
strategies
Interactive discussions
Questions and responses
Executive
board
CEO
Americas
Senior
management
Middle
management
Operations
Operations adjustments
based on reﬂective practices
Adjustments as a result of
discourse with operations
community
New ideas and
adjustments
Objective advice
and education
Objective advice
and education
Meetings and
discussions on
day-to-day
operations
Consultants
Figure  8.7   ICAP—responsive organizational dynamism.

218
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
on the very nomenclature applied to how technology was defined 
and procedures adopted among the international organizations 
within ICAP. That is why outside consultation could be effective 
as it provided independent and objective input that could foster 
the integration of culture-based concepts of technology, strategy, 
and ROI. Key to understanding the role of executive communi-
ties of practice is their overall importance to organizational learn-
ing growth. Very often we have heard, “ Can we create productive 
discourse if the executive team cannot discuss and agree on issues 
themselves?”  Effectively, ICAP created this community to ensure 
consistency among all the levels within the business. Consistent 
with the responsive organizational dynamism arc, learning in this 
community was at the “ system”  or organizational level, as opposed 
to being based on specific events like Y2K. These concerns had 
a broader context, and they affected both short- and long-term 
issues of business strategy and culture.
Another community of practice was the operations manage-
ment team, which was the community responsible for transform-
ing strategy into a realistic plan of strategic implementation. This 
team consisted of three levels (Figure  8.9). We see in this commu-
nity of practice that the CEO was common to both this commu-
nity and the executive community of practice. His participation in 
both provided the consistency and discourse that pointed to three 
valuable components:
	
1.	The CEO could accurately communicate decisions reached at 
the board level to the operations management team.
CEO
Americas
Executive
board
Consultants
Questions and responses
Objective advice
and education
Objective advice
and education
Interactive discussions
Discourse initiated
Figure  8.8   ICAP—community of practice.

219
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
	
2.	The operations team could provide important input and sug-
gestions to the CEO, who could then provide this informa-
tion to the executive community.
	
3.	The CEO interacted in different ways between the two com-
munities of practice. This was critical because the way things 
were discussed, the language used, and the processes of con-
sensus were different in each community.
The operations management community was not at the detailed 
level of implementation; rather, it was at the conceptual one. It needed 
to embrace the strategic and cultural outcomes discussed at the execu-
tive community, suggest modifications if applicable, and eventually 
reach consensus within the community and with the executive team. 
The operations management community, because of its conceptual 
perspectives, used more organizational learning methods as opposed 
to individual techniques. However, because of their relationship 
with operations personnel, they did participate in individual reflec-
tive practices. Notwithstanding their conceptual nature, event-driven 
issues were important for discussion. That is why middle management 
needed to be part of this community, for without their input, concep-
tual foundations for implementing change may very well have flaws. 
CEO
Americas
Senior
management
New ideas and
adjustments
Middle
management
Rollout of new
organization and
strategies
Discourse on
“how” to
implement
Adjustments as a result of
discourse with operations
community
Figure  8.9   ICAP—community of practice interfaces.

220
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Middle management participated to represent the concrete pieces 
and the realities for modifications to conceptual arguments. As such, 
middle managers could indirectly affect the executive board commu-
nity since their input could require change in the operations man-
agement community, which in turn could foster the need for change 
requests back to the board. This process provides the very essence of 
why communities of practice need to work together, especially with 
the dynamic changes that can occur from technological innovations.
The third community of practice at ICAP was at the operations 
or implementation tier. It consisted of the community of staff that 
needed to transition conceptual plans into concrete realities. To ensure 
that conceptual ideas of implementation balanced with the concrete 
events that needed to occur operationally, middle managers needed 
to be part of both the operations management, and implementation 
communities, as shown in Figure  8.10.
Because of the transitory nature of this community, it was important 
that both organizational learning and individual learning occurred 
simultaneously. Thus, it was the responsibility of middle managers 
to provide the transition of organizational-based ideas to the event 
and concrete level so that individuals understood what it ultimately 
meant to the operations team. As one would expect, this level oper-
ated on individual attainment, yet through the creation of a commu-
nity of practice, ICAP could get its operations members to begin to 
think more at the conceptual level. This provided management with 
the opportunity to discuss conceptual and system-level ideas with 
Middle
management
Operations
Meetings and
discussions on
day-to-day
operations
Operations adjustments
based on reﬂective practices
Figure  8.10   Middle-management community of practice at ICAP.

221
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
operations personnel. Operations personnel could review them and, 
under a managed and controlled process, could reach consensus. That 
is, changes required by the implementation community could be rep-
resented to the operations management community through middle 
management. If middle management could, through discourse and 
language, reach consensus with the operations management commu-
nity, then the CEO could bring them forth to the executive commu-
nity for further discussion. We can see this common thread concept 
among communities of practice as a logical process among tiers of 
operations and management and one that can foster learning matura-
tion, as identified in the responsive organizational dynamism arc. This 
is graphically shown in Figure  8.11.
Figure  8.11 shows the relationships among the three communi-
ties of practice at ICAP and how they interacted, especially through 
upward feedback using common threads of communication. Thus, 
multiple communities needed to be linked via common individu-
als to maintain threads of communication necessary to support 
Executive community of practice
Operations management community of practice
CEO
Americas
CEO
Americas
New ideas
and
adjustments
Implementation community of practice
Senior
management
Operations
Adjustments as
a result of
discourse
with operations
community
Middle
management
Middle
management
Executive
board
Consultants
Figure  8.11   ICAP—COP common threads.

222
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
responsive organizational dynamism and learning across organiza-
tional boundaries.
Another important observation is the absence of independent con-
sultants from the operations management and implementation com-
munities of practice. This does not suggest that consultants were not 
needed or used by these communities. The independent consultant 
in the executive community provides organizational-level learning, as 
opposed to the consultant who is, for example, a specialist in database 
design or training.
This case study provides an example of how an international firm 
dealt with the effects of technology on its business. The CEO, Stephen 
McDermott in this case, played an important role, using many forms 
of responsive organizational dynamism, in managing the organiza-
tion through a transformation. His experience fostered the realiza-
tion that CEOs and their boards need to reinvent themselves on an 
ongoing basis. Most important, this case study identified the number 
of communities of practice that needed to participate in organiza-
tional transformation. The CEO continued to have an important role; 
in many ways, McDermott offered some interesting advice for other 
chief executives to consider:
	
1.	The perfect time may or may not exist to deal with changes 
brought on by technology. The CEO may need to just “ dive 
in”  and serve as a catalyst for change.
	
2.	Stay on course with the fundamentals of business and do not 
believe everything everyone tells you; make sure your busi-
ness model is solid.
	
3.	Trust that your abilities to deal with technology issues are no 
different from managing any other business issue.
As a result of the commitment and the process for adapting tech-
nology at ICAP, it has realized many benefits, such as the following:
•	 Protection of tacit knowledge : By incorporating the existing 
trading system, ICAP was able to retain the years of expe-
rience and expertise of its people. As a result, ICAP devel-
oped an electronic system that better served the needs of 
broker users; this ability gave it an advantage over competitor 
systems.

223
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
•	 Integrated use : The combination of the new system and its 
compatibility with other ICAP legacy systems enabled the 
organization to continue to service the core business while 
increasing access for new clients. This resulted in a reduction 
of costs and an increase in its user base.
•	 Transformation of tacit knowledge to explicit product knowledge : 
By providing an infrastructure of learning and strategic inte-
gration, ICAP was able to bridge a wide range of its employ-
ees’  product knowledge, particularly of those outside IT with 
a specific understanding of trading system design, and to 
transform their tacit knowledge into explicit value that was 
used to build on to the existing trading systems.
•	 Flexibility : Because multiple communities of practice were 
formed, IT and non-IT cultures were able to assimilate. As a 
result, ICAP was able to reduce its overall development time 
and retain the functionality necessary for a hybrid voice and 
electronic trading system.
•	 Expansion : Because of the assimilation of cultures, ICAP 
was able to leverage its expertise so that the design of the 
electronic system allowed it to be used with other third-party 
trading systems. For example, it brought together another 
trading system from ICAP in Europe and enabled concurrent 
development in the United States and the United Kingdom.
•	 Evolution : By incorporating existing technology, ICAP con-
tinued to support the core business and gradually introduced 
new enhancements and features to serve all of its entities.
•	 Knowledge creation : By developing the system internally, 
ICAP was able to increase its tacit knowledge base and stay 
current with new trends in the industry.
ICAP went on to evolve its organization as a result of its adop-
tion of technology and its implementation of responsive organiza-
tional dynamism. The company reinvented itself again. McDermott 
became the chief operating officer (COO) for three business units 
in the Americas; all specific business lines, yet linked by their inte-
grated technologies and assimilated cultures. In addition, ICAP 
purchased a competitor electronic trading product and assimilated 
these combined technologies into a new organization. Business 

224
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
revenues rose at that time from $350 million to over $1 billion four 
years later. The company also had more than 2,800 staff members 
and operated from 21 offices worldwide. Much has been attrib-
uted to ICAP’ s investment in electronic trading systems and other 
emerging technologies.
Five Years Later
I returned to meet with Stephen McDermott almost five  years after 
our original case study. Many of the predictions about how technol-
ogy would affect the business had indeed become reality. In 2010, 
technology at ICAP had become the dominant component of the 
business. The C brokers had all but disappeared, with the organiza-
tion now consisting of two distinct divisions: voice brokers and elec-
tronic brokers. The company continued to expand by acquiring other 
smaller competitors in the technology space. The electronic division 
now consisted of three distinct divisions from these acquisitions, with 
ETC just one of those divisions. In effect, the expansion led to more 
specialization and leveraging of technology to capture larger parts of 
various markets.
Perhaps the unseen reality was how quickly technology became a 
commodity. As McDermott said to me, “ Everybody (our competi-
tors) can do it; it’ s now all about your business strategy.”  While the 
importance of strategy was always part of McDermott’ s position, 
the transition from product value to market strategy was much more 
transformative on the organization’ s design and how it approached 
the market. For example, the additional regulatory controls on voice 
brokering actually forced many brokers to move to an electronic 
interface, which reduced liability between the buyer and the broker. 
McDermott also emphasized how “ technology has created overnight 
businesses,”  forcing the organization to understand how technology 
could provide new competitive advantages that otherwise did not 
exist. Today, 50% of the trading dollars, some $2 trillion, occurs over 
electronic technology-driven platforms. Undoubtedly, these dynamic 
changes, brought on by technological dynamism, continue to chal-
lenge ICAP on how they strategically integrate new opportunities 
and how the organization must adapt culturally with changes in indi-
vidual roles and responsibilities.

225
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
HTC
HTC (a pseudoacronym) is a company that provides creative business 
services and solutions. The case study involving HTC demonstrates 
that changes can occur when technology reports to the appropriate 
level in an organization. This case study offers the example of a com-
pany with a CEO who became an important catalyst in the successful 
vitalization of IT. HTC is a company of approximately 700 employees 
across 16 offices. The case involves studying the use of a new applica-
tion that directly affected some 200 staff people.
The company was faced with the challenge of providing accurate 
billable time records to its clients. Initial client billings were based on 
project estimates, which then needed to be reconciled with actual work 
performed. This case turned out to be more complex than expected. 
Estimates typically represented the amount of work to which a client 
agreed. Underspending the budget agreed to by the client, however, 
could lead to lost revenue opportunities for the firm. For example, if 
a project was estimated at 20   hours, but the actual work took only 
15, then most clients would seek an additional five hours of service 
because they had already budgeted the total 20 hours. If the recon-
ciliation between hours budgeted and hours worked was significantly 
delayed, clients might lose their window of opportunity to spend the 
remaining five hours (in the example situation). Thus, the incapacity 
to provide timely reporting of this information resulted in the actual 
loss of revenue, as well as upset clients. If clients did not spend their 
allocated budget, they stood to lose the amount of the unused portion 
in their future budget allocations. Furthermore, clients had expecta-
tions that vendors were capable of providing accurate reporting, espe-
cially given that present-day technology could automate the recording 
and reporting of this information. Finally, in times of a tight econ-
omy, businesses tend to manage expenditures more closely and insist 
on more accurate record keeping than at other times.
The objective at HTC was to transform its services to better meet 
the evolving changes of its clients’  business requirements. While the 
requirement for a more timely and accurate billing system seems 
straightforward, it became a greater challenge to actually implement 
than it otherwise seemed.
The first obstacle for HTC to overcome was the clash between this 
new requirement and the existing ethos, or culture of the business. 

226
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
HTC provided creative services; 200 of its staff members were artisti-
cally oriented and were uncomfortable with focusing on time-based 
service tracking; they were typically engrossed in the creative per-
formance required by their clients. Although it would seem a simple 
request to track time and enter it each day, this projected change in 
business norms became a significant barrier to its actual implemen-
tation. Project managers became concerned that reporting require-
ments would adversely affect performance, and thus, inevitably hurt 
the business. Efforts to use blunt force—do it or find another job —
were not considered a good long-term solution. Instead, the company 
needed to seek a way to require the change while demonstrating the 
value of focusing on time management.
Many senior managers had thought of meeting with key users to 
help determine a workable solution, but they were cognizant of the 
fact that such interactive processes with the staff do not always lead to 
agreement on a dependable method of handling the problem. This is a 
common concern among managers and researchers working in orga-
nizational behavior. While organizational learning theorists advocate 
this mediating, interactive approach, it may not render the desired 
results in time and can even backfire if staff members are not genu-
inely willing to solve the problem or if they attempt to make it seem 
too difficult or a bad idea. The intervention of the CEO of HTC, 
together with the change in time reporting methods, directly involv-
ing IT, made a significant difference in overcoming the obstacle.
IT History at HTC
When I first interviewed the CEO, I found that she had little direct 
interaction with the activities of the IT department. IT reported to 
the CFO, as in many companies, because it was seen as an opera-
tional support department. However, the CEO subsequently became 
aware of certain shortfalls associated with IT and with its report-
ing structure. First, the IT department was not particularly liked 
by other departments. Second, the department seemed incapable of 
implementing software solutions that could directly help the busi-
ness. Third, the CFO did not possess the creativity beyond account-
ing functions to provide the necessary leadership needed to steer the 
activities of IT in a more fruitful direction. As a result, the CEO 

227
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
decided that the IT department should report directly to her. She was 
also concerned that IT needed a more senior manager and hired a new 
chief technology officer (CTO). 
Interactions of the CEO
My research involving 40 chief executives showed that many execu-
tives are unsure about what role they need to take with their chief IT 
managers. However, the CEO of HTC took on the responsibility to 
provide the financial support to get the project under way. First, the 
CEO made it clear that a solution was necessary and that appropri-
ate funds would be furnished to get the project done. Second, the 
new CTO was empowered to assess the needs of the business and the 
staff, and to present a feasible solution for both business and cultural 
adaptation needs.
The CEO was determined to help transform the creative-artistic 
service business into one that would embrace the kinds of controls that 
were becoming increasingly necessary to support clients. Addressing 
the existing lag in collecting time records from employees, which 
directly affected billing revenue, seemed like the logical first step for 
engaging the IT department in the design and implementation of new 
operating procedures and cultural behavior.
Because middle managers were focused on providing services to 
their clients, they were less concerned with the collection of time 
sheets. This need was a low priority of the creative workers of the firm. 
Human resources (HR) had been involved in attempting to address 
the problem, but their efforts had failed. Much of this difficulty was 
attributed to an avoidance by middle managers of giving ultimatums 
as a solution; that is, simply demanding that workers comply. Instead, 
management subsequently became interested in a middle-ground 
approach that could possibly help departments realize the need to 
change and to help determine what the solution might be. The ini-
tial thinking of the CEO was to see if specialized technology could 
be built that would (1) provide efficiency to the process of recording 
time, and (2) create a form of controls that would require some level 
of compliance.
With the involvement of the CEO, the embattled IT depart-
ment was given the authority to determine what technology could 

228
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
be employed to help the situation. The existing application that had 
been developed by the IT department did not provide the kind of ease 
of use and access that was needed by operations. Previous attempts 
to develop a new system, without the intervention of the CEO, had 
failed for a number of reasons. Management did not envision the 
potential solution that software was capable of delivering. It was not 
motivated in getting the requisite budget support; no one was in a 
position to champion it, to allocate the needed budget. Ultimately, 
management individuals were not convinced of the importance of 
providing a better solution.
The Process
The new CTO determined that there was a technological solution 
that could provide greater application flexibility, while maintaining its 
necessary integrity, through the use of the existing e-mail system. The 
application would require staff to enter their project time spent before 
signing on to the e-mail system. While this procedure might be seen 
as a punishment, it became the middle-ground solution for securing 
compliance without dramatically dictating policy. There was initial 
rejection of the procedure by some of the line managers, but it was 
with the assistance of the CEO, who provided the necessary support 
and enforcement, that the new procedure took hold. This enforcement 
became crucial when certain groups asked to be excluded from the 
process. The CEO made it clear that all departments were expected 
to comply.
The application was developed in three  months and went into pilot 
implementation. The timely delivery of the application by the IT 
department gave IT its first successful program implementation and 
helped change the general view of IT among its company colleagues. 
It was the first occasion in which IT had a leadership role in guiding 
the company to a major behavioral transformation. Another positive 
outcome that resulted from the transition occurred in the way that 
resistance to change was managed by the CTO. Simply put, the cre-
ative staff was not open to a structured solution. The CTO’ s response 
was to implement a warning system instead of immediately disallow-
ing e-mail access. This procedure was an important concession as it 

229
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
allowed staff and management to deal with the transition, to meet 
them halfway.
Transformation from the Transition
After the pilot period, the application was implemented firm-wide. 
The results of this new practice have created an interesting internal 
transformation: IT is now intimately engaged in working on new 
enhancements to the time-recording system. For instance, a “ digital 
dashboard”  is now used to measure performance against estimates. 
More important, however, are the results of the new application. The 
firm has shown substantial increases in revenue because its new time-
recording system enabled it to discover numerous areas in which it 
was underbilling its clients. Its clients, on the other hand, are happier 
to receive billing statements that can demonstrate more accurately 
than before just how time was spent on their projects. Hence, the 
IT-implemented solution proved beneficial not only to the client but 
also to the firm.
Notwithstanding the ultimate value of utilizing appropriate tech-
nology and producing measurable outcomes, IT has also been able 
to assist in developing and establishing a new culture in the firm. 
Staff members are now more mindful and have a greater sense of cor-
porate-norm responsibility than they did before. They have a clearer 
understanding of the impact that recording their time will have and of 
how this step ultimately contributes to the well-being of the business. 
Furthermore, the positive results of the new system have increased 
attention on IT spending. The CEO and other managers seek new 
ways in which technology can be made to help them; this mindset has 
been stressed further down to operating departments. The methods 
of IT evaluation have also evolved. There is now a greater clarification 
of technology benefits, a better articulation of technology problems, 
less trial and error, and more time spent on understanding how to use 
the technology better.
Another important result from this project has been the cascad-
ing effect of the financial impact. The increased profits have required 
greater infrastructure capacity. A new department was created with 
five new business managers whose responsibility it is to analyze and 
interpret the time reports so that line managers, in turn, can think of 

230
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
ways to generate greater profit through increased services. The project, 
in essence, has merged the creative performance of the firm with new 
business initiatives, resulting in a higher ROI.
In analyzing the HTC case study, we see many organizational 
learning techniques that were required to form a new community 
that could assimilate multiple cultures. However, while the organiza-
tion saw the need, it could not create a process without an advocate. 
This champion was the CEO, who had the ability to make the salient 
organizational changes and act as a catalyst for the natural processes 
that HTC hoped to achieve. This case also provides direction on the 
importance of having the right resource to lead IT. At HTC, this 
person was the CTO; in actuality, this has little bearing on the over-
all role and responsibilities that were needed at HTC. At HTC, it 
became more apparent to the CEO that she had the wrong individual 
running the technology management of her firm. Only the CEO in 
this situation was able to foster the initial steps necessary to start what 
turned out to be a more democratic evolution of using technology in 
the business.
Companies that adapt to technological dynamism find that the 
existing leadership and infrastructure may need to be enhanced or 
replaced as well as reorganized, particularly in terms of reporting 
structure. This case supports the notion that strategic integration may 
indeed create the need for more cultural assimilation. One question 
to ask, is why the CEO waited so long to make the changes. This was 
not a situation of a new CTO who inherited resources. Indeed, the 
former CTO was part of her regime. We must remember that CEOs 
typically concentrate on driving revenue. They hope that what are 
considered “ back-end”  support issues will be handled by other senior 
managers. Furthermore, support structures are measured differently 
and from a specific frame of reference. I have found that CEOs inter-
vene in supporter departments only when there are major complaints 
that threaten productivity, customer support, sales, and so on. The 
other threat is cost, so CEOs will seek to make supporter departments 
more efficient. These activities are consistent with my earlier findings 
regarding the measurement and role of supporter departments.
In the case of HTC, the CEO became more involved because of 
the customer service problems, which inevitably threatened revenues. 

231
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
On her review of the situation, she recognized three major flaws in 
the operation:
•	 The CFO was not in a position to lead the organizational 
changes necessary to assimilate a creative-based department.
•	 Technology established a new strategy (strategic integration), 
which necessitated certain behavioral changes within the 
organization (cultural assimilation). The creative department 
was also key to make the organizational transition possible.
•	 The current CTO did not have the management and business 
skills that were necessary to facilitate the integration of IT 
with the rest of the organization.
HTC provides us with an interesting case of what we have defined 
as responsive organizational dynamism, and it bears some parallels to 
the Ravell study. First, like Ravell, the learning process was triggered 
by a major event. Second, the CTO did not dictate assimilation but 
rather provided facilitation and support. Unlike Ravell, the CEO of 
the organization was the critical driver to initiate the project. Because 
of the CEO’ s particular involvement, organizational learning started 
at the top and was thus system oriented. At the same time, the CTO 
understood that individual event-driven learning using reflective 
practices was critical to accomplish organizational transformation. In 
essence, the CTO was the intermediary between organizational-level 
and individual-level learning. Figure  8.12 depicts this relationship.
Five Years Later
HTC has been challenged because of the massive changes that adver-
tising companies have faced over this timeframe, particularly with 
the difficulty of finding new advertising revenue sources for their 
clients. The CEO has remained active in technology matters, and 
there has also been turnover in the CTO role at the company. The 
CEO has been challenged to find the right fit—a person who can 
understand not only the technology but also the advertising business. 
With media companies taking over much of the advertising space, the 
CEO clearly recognizes the need to have a technology-driven market 
strategy. Most important is the dilemma of how to transform what 

232
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
was once a “ paper”  advertising business to what has become a lower-
cost media market. “ Advertising companies need to do more business 
just to keep the same revenue stream and that is a big challenge in 
today’ s volatile market,”  the CEO stated. The time-recording system 
has gone through other changes to provide what are known as value-
added services , not necessarily tied to time effort, but rather, the value 
of the output itself.
The experience at HTC shows the importance of executive partici-
pation, not just sponsorship. Many technology projects have assumed 
the need for executive sponsorship. It is clear to me that this position 
is obsolete. If the CEO at HTC had not become involved in the prob-
lem five  years ago, then the organization would not be in the position 
to embrace the newest technology dynamism affecting the industry. 
So, the lessons learned from this case, as well as from the Ravell case, 
are that all levels of the organization must be involved, and that exec-
utives must not be sacred. Responsive organizational dynamism, and 
the use of organizational learning methods to develop staff, remains 
key concepts for adapting to market changes and ensuring economic 
survival.
Organizational and system
level learning
Organizational and
individual-level learning
Individual learning
Learning
facilitator
CTO
CEO
Middle
management
Creative
operations
Figure  8.12   HTC—Role of the CTO as an intermediary.

233
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
Summary
This chapter has provided three case studies that show the ways 
­technology and organizational learning operate and lead to results 
through performance. The Siemens example provided us with an 
opportunity to see a technology executive formulate relationships, 
form multiple communities of practice, and create an infrastructure 
to support responsive organizational dynamism. This case provides a 
method in which IT can offer a means of handling technology as new 
information and, through the formation of communities of practice, it 
can generate new knowledge that leads to organizational transforma-
tion and performance.
The case study regarding ICAP again shows why technology, as an 
independent variable, provides an opportunity, if taken, for an inter-
national firm to move into a new competitive space and improve its 
competitive advantage. ICAP was only successful because it under-
stood the need for organizational learning, communities of practice, 
and the important role of the CEO in facilitating change. We also 
saw why independent consultants and executive boards need to par-
ticipate. ICAP symbolizes the ways in which technology can change 
organizational structures and cultural formations. Such changes are 
at the very heart of why we need to understand responsive organi-
zational dynamism. The creation of a new firm, ETC, shows us the 
importance of these changes. Finally, it provides us with an example 
of how technology can come to the forefront of an organization and 
became the major driver of performance.
HTC, on the other hand, described two additional features of how 
responsive organizational dynamism can change internal processes 
that lead to direct returns. The CEO, as in the ICAP case, played an 
important, yet different, role. This case showed that the CTO could 
also be used to facilitate organizational learning, becoming the nego-
tiator and coordinator between the CEO, IT department, and cre-
ative user departments.
All three of these cases reflect the importance of recognizing that 
most technology information exists outside the organization and needs 
to be integrated into existing cultures. This result is consistent with the 
findings of Probst et al. (1998), which show that long-term sustained 
competitive advantage must include the “ incorporation and integration 

234
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
of information available outside the borders of the company”  (p. 247). 
The reality is that technology, as an independent and outside variable, 
challenges organizations in their abilities to absorb external informa-
tion, assimilate it into their cultures, and inevitably apply it to their 
commercial activities as a function of their existing knowledge base.
These case studies show that knowledge creation most often does 
not get created solely by individuals. It is by using communities of 
practice that knowledge makes its way into the very routines of the 
organization. Indeed, organizational learning must focus on the 
transformation of individual skills into organizational processes that 
generate measurable outcomes. Probst et al. (1998) also shows that the 
development of organizational knowledge is mediated via multiple 
levels. Walsh (1995) further supports Probst et al.’ s findings that there 
are three structures of knowledge development in an organization. 
The first is at the individual level; interpretation is fostered through 
reflective practices that eventually lead to personal transformation and 
increased individual knowledge. The second structure is at the group 
level; individual knowledge of the group is combined into a consen-
sus, leading to a shared belief system. The third structure resides at the 
organizational level; knowledge emanates from the shared beliefs and 
the consensus of the groups, which creates organizational knowledge. 
It is important to recognize, however, that organizational knowledge 
is not established or created by combining individual knowledge. This 
is a common error, particularly among organizational learning prac-
titioners. Organizational knowledge must be accomplished through 
social discourse and common language interactions so that knowl-
edge can be a consensus among the communities of practice.
Each of the case studies supported the formation of tiers of learning 
and knowledge. The individuals in these cases all created multiple lay-
ers that led to structures similar to those suggested by scholars. What 
makes these cases so valuable is that technology represented the exter-
nal knowledge. Technological dynamism forced the multiple struc-
tures from individual-based learning to organizational-level learning, 
and the unique interactions among the communities in each example 
generated knowledge leading to measurable performance outcomes. 
Thus, as Probst and Bü chel (1996, p. 245) conclude, “ Organizational 
learning is an increase in organizational knowledge base, which leads 
to the enhancement of problem-solving potential of a company.”

235
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
However, these case studies also provide important information 
about the process of the interactions. Many tiered structures tend 
to be viewed as a sequential process. I have presented theories sug-
gesting that knowledge management is conditioned either from the 
top‑down, middle-up-down, or bottom‑up. It has been my posi-
tion that none of these processes should be seen as set procedures 
or methodologies. In each of these cases, as well as in the Ravell 
case, the flow of knowledge occurs differently and, in some ways, 
uniquely to the culture and setting of the organization. This suggests 
that each organization must derive its own process, adhering more to 
the concept of learning, management, and outcomes, as opposed to a 
standard system of how and when they need to be applied. Table  8.2 
summarizes the different approaches of organizational learning of 
the three case studies.
Such is the challenge of leaders who aspire to create the learning 
organization. Technology plays an important role because, in reality, 
it tests the very notions of organizational learning theories. It also 
creates many opportunities to measure organizational learning, and 
its impact on performance. Indeed, technology is the variable that 
provides the most opportunity to instill organizational learning, and 
knowledge management in a global community.
Table  8.2   Summary of Organizational Learning Approaches
SUBJECT
SIEMENS
ICAP/ETC
HTC
Knowledge 
management 
participation
CIO as 
middle-up-down
Top-down from CEO 
and bottom-up 
from operations
Top-down from CEO 
and middle-up-down 
from CTO
Community of 
practices
President’ s Council 
CFO
CIO advisory board
Executive Board 
Operations 
Management 
Implementation
CEO/CTO
CTO operations
Participating entities
Presidents
CFOs
Global CIO
Corporate CIOs
Regional CIOs
Operating CIOs
Central CIOs
Executive board 
Outside 
consultants
CEO
Senior management
Middle management
Operations
CEO
CTO
Middle management
Creative operations
Common thread
Corporate CIO
CEO
Senior management
Middle management
CTO

236
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The case studies also provided an understanding of the 
­transformational process and the complexities of the relationships 
between the different learning levels. It is not a single entity that 
allows a company to be competitive but the combination of knowl-
edge at each of the different tiers. The knowledge that exists through-
out a company is typically composed of three components: processes, 
technology, and organization (Kanevsky & Housel, 1998). I find that, 
of these three components, technology is more variable than the oth-
ers and, as stated many times in this book, at a dynamic and unpre-
dictable fashion (that condition, called technological dynamism). 
Furthermore, the technology component has direct effects on the 
other two. What does this mean? Essentially, technology is at the 
core of organizational learning and knowledge creation.
This chapter has shown the different ways in which technology has 
been valued and how, through organizational learning, tacit knowl-
edge is transformed into explicit knowledge, and used for competitive 
advantage. We have seen that not all of this value creation can be 
directly attributed to technology; in fact, this is rarely the case. Most 
value derived from technology is indirect, and it must be recognized 
by management as maximizing outcomes. Two of the case studies 
looked at the varying roles and responsibilities of the CEO. I believe 
their involvement was critical. Indeed, the conclusions reached from 
the Ravell case showed further support that the absence of the CEO 
will limit results. Furthermore, the CEO was crucial to sustaining 
organizational learning and the responsive organizational dynamism 
infrastructure.
Much has been written about the need to link learning to knowl-
edge and knowledge to performance. This process can sometimes be 
referred to as a value chain.  Kanevsky and Housel (1998) created what 
they call a “ learning-knowledge-value spiral,”  comprised of six spe-
cific steps to creating value from learning and ultimately, changing 
product or process descriptions, as shown in Figure  8.13.
I have modified Figure  8.13 to include “ technology” ; that is, how 
technology affects learning, learning affects knowledge, and so on. 
Table  8.3 is a matrix that reflects the specific results, in each phase, 
for the three case studies.
Table  8.3 reflects the ultimate contribution that technology made 
to the learning-knowledge-value chain. I have also notated the ROI 

237
SYNERGISTIC UNION OF IT
Table  8.3   IT Contribution to the Learning-Knowledge-Value Chain
COMPANY
TECHNOLOGY
LEARNING
GENERATED KNOWLEDGE
PROCESS
PRODUCT
VALUE
Siemens
E-business
Communities of 
practice
Consensus across multiple 
communities on how to 
relate tacit knowledge about 
technology to strategic 
business processes.
90-Day “ reinvention”  
life-cycle method.
Consolidated 
e-commerce Websites 
providing consistency 
of product and service 
offerings.
Leveraging of same 
clients;  providing 
multiple product 
offerings to same 
client base.
ROI: Indirect
ICAP
Electronic 
trading
CEO/executive 
committee
Ability to provide and 
integrate business and 
technology knowledge to 
create new product.
Establish new 
company, ETC, to 
support cultural 
assimilation and 
evolution.
Electronic trading.
Created most 
competitive product in 
the financial industry.
Leveraging 
independent 
consultants.
Infiltration into new 
markets.
Group learning.
ROI: Direct.
Multiple communities 
of practice.
HTC
E-mail
CEO at 
organizational‑level;  
individual learning 
using reflective 
practices.
Understanding how to 
integrate IT department 
with creative management 
group.
Establish new 
procedures for using 
e-mail to record client 
billable hours.
New client billing 
system.
Clients happy.
More competitive.
Additional revenues.
ROI: Direct.

238
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
generated from each investment. It is interesting that two of the three 
cases generated identifiable direct revenue streams from their invest-
ment in technology.
This chapter has laid the foundation for Chapter  9, which focuses 
on the ways IT can maximize its relationship with the community 
and contribute to organizational learning. To accomplish this objec-
tive, IT must begin to establish best practices.
Change in
product/process
description
Learning
Value
Market
Competition
Product
Knowledge
Process
Figure  8.13   The learning-knowledge-value cycle. (From Kanevsky, V., et al. (Eds.), Knowing in 
Firms: Understanding, Managing and Measuring Knowledge , Sage, London, 1998, pp. 240– 252.)

239
9
Forming a Cyber 
Security Culture
Introduction
Much has been written regarding the importance of how companies 
deal with cyber threats. While most organizations have focused on 
the technical ramifications of how to avoid being compromised, few 
have invested in how senior management needs to make security a 
priority. This chapter discusses the salient issues that executives must 
address and how to develop a strategy to deal with the various types 
of cyber attack that could devastate the reputation and revenues of any 
business or organization. The response to the cyber dilemma requires 
evolving institutional behavior patterns using organizational learning 
concepts.
History
From a historical perspective we have seen an interesting evolution 
of the types and acceleration of attacks on business entities. Prior to 
1990, few organizations were concerned with information security 
except for the government, military, banks and credit card companies. 
In 1994, with the birth of the commercial Internet, a higher volume of 
attacks occurred and in 2001 the first nation-state sponsored attacks 
emerged. These attacks resulted, in 1997, in the development of com-
mercial firewalls and malware. By 2013, however, the increase in 
attacks reached greater complexity with the Target credit card breach, 
Home Depot’ s compromise of its payment system, and JP Morgan’ s 
exposure that affected 76 million customers and seven million busi-
nesses. These events resulted in an escalation of fear, particularly in 
the areas of sabotage, theft of intellectual property, and stealing of 
money. Figure  9.1 shows the changing pace of cyber security

240
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Pre-1990
1994
1997
2000
2001
2014
Birth of 
commercial 
Internet 
Firewalls and 
malware 
Y2K 
Increased number of attacks 
with greater complexity 
Fear factor 
escalates. Sabotage, 
theft of intellectual 
property and money 
become a constant 
threat. Daily headline 
risk is a new reality. 
Commercialized cyber 
security: 
1994: Netscape 
Develops secure sockets 
layer encryption, 
commercially available 
security software, to 
secure online transactions.  
Few groups concerned 
with information 
security except 
government, military, 
banks and credit card 
companies. 
9/11 
Evolution of cyber attacks: 
Higher volume of 
attacks: 
2001:  Nation state-
sponsored attacks 
emerge in a  
meaningful way.
2013–2014: Target has 70 million customers’ credit
cards breached.   
2013: Booz Allen 
employee and contractor 
for the NSA, Edward 
Snowden steals and leaks 
details of several top-secret 
U.S. and British government 
mass surveillance programs 
to the press.   
Timeline of events 
2014: Home Depot suﬀers a 6-month breach of its
payment system aﬀecting more than 53 million credit
and debit cards. 
2014:  JPMorgan Chase suﬀers a breach aﬀecting 76
million customers and seven million businesses. 
Figure  9.1   The changing pace of cyber security. (From Russell Reynolds Associates 2014 presentation.)

241
Forming a Cyber Security Culture
The conventional wisdom among cyber experts is that no business 
can be compromise proof from attacks. Thus, leaders need to realize 
that there must be (1) other ways beyond just developing new anti-
software to ward off attacks, and (2) internal and external strategies to 
deal with an attack when it occurs. These challenges in cyber security 
management can be categorized into three fundamental components:
•	 Learning how to educate and present to the board of directors
•	 Creating new and evolving security cultures
•	 Understanding what it means organizationally to be 
compromised
Each of these components is summarized below
Talking to the Board
Board members need to understand the possible cyber attack expo-
sures of the business. They certainly need regular communication 
from those executives responsible for protecting the organization. 
Seasoned security executives can articulate the positive processes that 
are in place, but without overstating too much confidence since there 
is always risk of being compromised. That is, while there may be expo-
sures, C-level managers should not hit the panic button and scare the 
board. Typically, fear only instills a lack of confidence by the board in 
the organization’ s leadership. Most important is to always relate secu-
rity to business objectives and, above all, avoid “ tech”  terms during 
meetings. Another important topic of discussion is how third‑party 
vendors are being managed. Indeed, so many breaches have been 
caused by a lack of oversight of legacy applications that are controlled 
by third‑party vendors. Finally, managers should always compare the 
state of security with that of the company’ s competitors.
Establishing a Security Culture
The predominant exposure to a cyber attack often comes from care-
less behaviors of the organization’ s employees. The first step to avoid 
poor employee cyber behaviors is to have regular communication with 
staff and establish a set of best practices that will clearly protect the 
business. However, mandating conformance is difficult and research 

242
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
has consistently supported that evolutionary culture change is best 
accomplished through relationship building, leadership by influence 
(as opposed to power-centralized management), and ultimately, a 
presence at most staff meetings. Individual leadership remains the 
most important variable when transforming the behaviors and prac-
tices of any organization.
Understanding What It Means to Be Compromised
Every organization should have a plan of what to do when security 
is breached. The first step in the plan is to develop a “ risk”  culture. 
What this simply means is that an organization cannot maximize 
protection of all parts of its systems equally. Therefore, some parts of a 
company’ s system might be more protected against cyber attacks than 
others. For example, organizations should maximize the protection 
of key company scientific and technical data first. Control of network 
access will likely vary depending on the type of exposure that might 
result from a breach. Another approach is to develop consistent best 
practices among all contractors and suppliers and to track the move-
ment of these third parties (e.g., if they are merged/sold, disrupted 
in service, or even breached indirectly). Finally, technology execu-
tives should pay close attention to Cloud computing alternatives and 
develop ongoing reviews of possible threat exposures in these third-
party service architectures.
Cyber Security Dynamism and Responsive Organizational Dynamism
The new events and interactions brought about by cyber security 
threats can be related to the symptoms of the dynamism that has 
been the basis of ROD discussed earlier in this book. Here, however, 
the digital world manifests itself in a similar dynamism that I will 
call  cyber dynamism . 
Managing cyber dynamism, therefore, is a way of managing the 
negative effects of a particular technology threat. As in ROD, cyber  
strategic integration and cyber  cultural assimilation remain as distinct 
categories, that present themselves in response to cyber dynamism. 
Figure  9.2 shows the components of cyber  ROD.

243
Forming a Cyber Security Culture
Cyber Strategic Integration
Cyber strategic integration is a process that firms need to use to address 
the business impact of cyber attacks on its organizational processes. 
Complications posed by cyber dynamism, via the process of strategic 
integration, occurs when several new cyber attacks overlap and create a 
myriad of problems in various phases of an organization’ s ability to oper-
ate. Cyber attacks can also affect consumer confidence, which in turn 
hurts a business’s ability to attract new orders. Furthermore, the problem 
can be compounded by reductions in productivity, which are complicated 
to track and to represent to management. Thus, it is important that orga-
nizations find ways to develop strategies to deal with cyber threats such as:
	
1.	How to reduce occurrences by instituting aggressive organi-
zation structures that review existing exposures in systems.
Cyber attacks as
an independent
variable
Organizational
dynamism
Requires
How to formulate risk-
related strategies to deal
with cyber attacks
Symptoms and
implications
Cyber
cultural
assimilation
Requires
Cyber
strategic
integration
Figure  9.2   Cyber responsive organizational dynamism. (From Langer, A., Information Technology 
and Organizational Learning: Managing Behavioral Change through Technology and Education , CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2011.)

24 4
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
2.	What new threats exist, which may require ongoing research 
and collaborations with third-party strategic alliances?
	
3.	What new processes might be needed to combat new cyber 
dynamisms based on new threat capabilities?
	
4.	Creating systems architectures that can recover when a cyber 
breach occurs.
In order to realize these objectives, executives must be able to
•	 Create dynamic internal processes that can function on a 
daily basis, to deal with understanding the potential fit of new 
cyber attacks and their overall impact to the local department 
within the business, that is, to provide for change at the grass-
roots level of the organization.
•	 Monitor cyber risk investments and determine modifications 
to the current life cycle of idea-to-reality.
•	 Address the weaknesses in the organization in terms of how 
to deal with new threats, should they occur, and how to better 
protect the key business operations.
•	 Provide a mechanism that both enables the organization to 
deal with accelerated change caused by cyber threats and that 
integrates them into a new cycle of processing and handling 
change.
•	 Establish an integrated approach that ties cyber risk account-
ability to other measurable outcomes integrating acceptable 
methods of the organization.
The combination of evolving cyber threats with accelerated and 
changing consumer demands has also created a business revolution that 
best defines the imperative of the strategic integration component of 
cyber ROD. Without action directed toward new strategic integration 
focused on cyber security, organizations will lose competitive advan-
tage, which will ultimately affect profits. Most experts see the danger 
of breaches from cyber attacks as the mechanism that will ultimately 
require the integrated business processes to be realigned, thus provid-
ing value to consumers and modifying the customer-­vendor relation-
ship. The driving force behind this realignment ­emanates from cyber 
dynamisms, which serve as the principle accelerator of the change in 
transactions across all businesses.

245
Forming a Cyber Security Culture
Cyber Cultural Assimilation
Cyber cultural assimilation is a process that addresses the organiza-
tional aspects of how the security department is internally organized, 
its relationship with IT, and how it is integrated within the organiza-
tion as a whole. As with technology dynamism, cyber dynamism is 
not limited only to cyber strategic issues, but cultural  ones as well. A 
cyber culture is one that can respond to emerging cyber attacks, in 
an optimally informed way, and one that understands the impact on 
business performance and reputation.
The acceleration factors of cyber attacks require more dynamic 
activity within and among departments, which cannot be accom-
plished through discrete communications between groups. Instead, 
the need for diverse groups to engage in more integrated discourse 
and to share varying levels of cyber security knowledge, as well as 
business-end perspectives, requires new organizational structures that 
will give birth to a new and evolving business social culture.
In order to facilitate cyber cultural assimilation, organizations must 
have their staffs be more comfortable with a digital world that contin-
ues to be compromised by outside threats. The first question becomes 
one of finding the best structure to support a broad assimilation of 
knowledge about any given cyber threat. The second is about how that 
knowledge can best be utilized by the organization to develop both 
risk efforts and attack resilience. Business managers therefore need 
to consider cyber security and include the cyber staff in all  decision-
making processes. Specifically, cyber assimilation must become fun-
damental to the cultural evolution.
While many scholars and managers suggest the need to have a 
specific entity responsible for cyber security governance; one that is 
to be placed within the organization’ s operating structure, such an 
approach creates a fundamental problem. It does not allow staff and 
managers the opportunity to assimilate cyber security-driven change 
and understand how to design a culture that can operate under ROD. 
In other words, the issue of governance is misinterpreted as a problem 
of structural positioning or hierarchy when it is really one of cultural 
assimilation. As a result, many business solutions to cyber security 
issues often lean toward the prescriptive instead of the analytical in 
addressing the real problem.

246
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Summary
This section has made the argument that organizations need to excel 
in providing both strategic and cultural initiatives to reduce exposure 
to cyber threats and ultimate security breaches. Executives must design 
their workforce to meet the accelerated threats brought on by cyber 
dynamisms. Organizations today need to adapt their staff to operate 
under the auspices of ROD by creating processes that can determine 
the strategic exposure of new emerging cyber threats and by establish-
ing a culture that is more “ defense ready.”  Most executives across indus-
tries recognize that cyber security has become one of the most powerful 
variables to maintaining and expanding company markets.
Organizational Learning and Application Development
Behavioral change, leading to a more resilient cyber culture, is just 
one of the challenges in maximizing protection in organizations. 
Another important factor is how to design more resilient applications 
that are better equipped to protect against threats; that is, a decision 
that needs to address exposure coupled with risk. The general con-
sensus is that no system can be 100% protected and that this requires 
important decisions when analysts are designing applications and sys-
tems. Indeed, security access is not just limited to getting into the sys-
tem, but applies to the individual application level as well. How then 
do analysts participate in the process of designing secure applications 
through good design? We know that many cyber security architec-
tures are designed from the office of the chief information security 
officer (CISO), a new and emerging role in organizations. The CISO 
role, often independent of the chief information officer (CIO), became 
significant as a result of the early threats from the Internet, the 9/11 
attacks and most recently the abundant number of system compro-
mises experienced by companies such as JP Morgan Chase, SONY, 
Home Depot, and Target, to name just a few.
The challenge of cyber security reaches well beyond just archi-
tecture. It must address third-party vendor products that are part of 
the supply chain of automation used by firms, not to mention access 
to legacy applications that likely do not have the necessary securities 
built into the architecture of these older, less resilient technologies. This 

247
Forming a Cyber Security Culture
challenge has established the need for an enterprise cyber security solu-
tion that addresses the need of the entire organization. This approach 
would then target third‑ party vendor design and compliance. Thus, 
cyber security architecture requires integration with a firm’ s Software 
Development Life Cycle (SDLC), particularly within steps that include 
strategic design, engineering, and operations. The objective is to use a 
framework that works with all of these components.
Cyber Security Risk
When designing against cyber security attacks, as stated above, there 
is no 100% protection assurance. Thus, risks must be factored into 
the decision-making process. A number of security experts often ask 
business executives the question, “ How much security do you want, 
and what are you willing to spend to achieve that security?” 
Certainly, we see a much higher tolerance for increased cost given the 
recent significance of companies that have been compromised. This sec-
tion provides guidance on how to determine appropriate security risks.
Security risk is typically discussed in the form of threats. Threats 
can be categorized as presented by Schoenfield (2015):
	
1.	Threat agent: Where is the threat coming from, and who is 
making the attack?
	
2.	Threat goals: What does the agent hope to gain?
	
3.	Threat capability: What threat methodology, or type of 
approach is the agent possibly going to use?
	
4.	Threat work factor: How much effort is the agent willing to 
put in to get into the system?
	
5.	Threat risk tolerance: What legal chances is the agent willing 
to take to achieve his or her goals?
Table  9.1 is shown as a guideline.
Depending on the threat and its associated risks and work factors, 
it will provide important input to the security design, especially at the 
application design level. Such application securities in design typically 
include:
	
1.	The user interface (sign in screen, access to specific parts of 
the application).

248
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
2.	Command-line interface (interactivity) in online systems.
	
3.	Inter-application communications. How data and password 
information are passed, and stored, among applications across 
systems.
Risk Responsibility
Schoenfield (2015) suggests that someone in the organization is 
assigned the role of the “ risk owner.”  There may be many risk owners 
and, as a result, this role could have complex effects on the way sys-
tems are designed. For example, the top risk owner in most organiza-
tions today is associated with the CISO. However, many firms also 
employ a chief risk officer (CRO). This role’ s responsibilities vary.
But risk analysis at the application design level requires different 
governance. Application security risk needs involvement from the 
business and the consumer and needs to be integrated within the risk 
standards of the firm. Specifically, multiple levels of security often 
require users to reenter secure information. While this may maximize 
safety, it can negatively impact the user experience and the robust-
ness of the system interface in general. Performance can obviously 
also be sacrificed, given the multiple layers of validation. There is no 
quick answer to this dilemma other than the reality that more secu-
rity checkpoints will reduce user and consumer satisfaction unless 
cyber security algorithms become more invisible and sophisticated. 
However, even this approach would likely reduce protection. As with 
all analyst design challenges, the IT team, business users, and now 
the consumer must all be part of the decisions on how much security 
is required.
As my colleague at Columbia University, Steven Bellovin, states 
in his new book, Thinking Security , security is about a mindset. This 
mindset to me relates to how we establish security cultures that can 
Table  9.1:  Threat Analysis
THREAT AGENT
GOALS
RISK TOLERANCE
WORK FACTOR
METHODS
Cyber criminals
Financial
Low
Low to medium
Known and proven
Source :	  Schoenfield, B.S.E., Securing Systems: Applied Security Architecture and Threat Models , 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2015.

249
Forming a Cyber Security Culture
enable the analyst to define organizational security as it relates to new 
and existing systems. If we get the analyst position to participate in 
setting security goals in our applications, some key questions accord-
ing to Bellovin (2015) are:
	
1.	What are the economics to protect systems?
	
2.	What is the best protection you can get for the amount of 
money you want to spend?
	
3.	Can you save more lives by spending that money?
	
4.	What should you protect?
	
5.	Can you estimate what it will take to protect your assets?
	
6.	Should you protect the network or the host?
	
7.	Is your Cloud secure enough?
	
8.	Do you guess at the likelihood and cost of a penetration?
	
9.	How do you evaluate your assets?
	 10.	Are you thinking like the enemy?
The key to analysis and design in cyber security is recognizing that 
it is dynamic; the attackers are adaptive and somewhat unpredictable. 
This dynamism requires constant architectural change, accompanied 
with increased complexity of how systems become compromised. 
Thus, analysts must be involved at the conceptual model, which 
includes business definitions, business processes and enterprise stan-
dards. However, the analysts must also be engaged with the logical 
design, which comprises two sub-models:
	
1.	Logical architecture : Depicts the relationships of different data 
domains and functionalities required to manage each type of 
information in the system.
	
2.	Component model : Reflects each of the sub-models and appli-
cations that provide various functions in the system. The 
component model may also include third-part vendor prod-
ucts that interface with the system. The component model 
coincides, in many ways, with the process of decomposition.
In summary, the ROD interface with cyber security is more com-
plex than many managers believe. Security is relative, not absolute, 
and thus leaders must be closely aligned with how internal cultures 
must evolve with changes environments.

250
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Driver /Supporter Implications
Security has traditionally been viewed as a support function in most 
organizations, particularly when it is managed by IT staff. However, 
the recent developments in cyber threats suggest, as with other aspects 
of technology, that security too has a driver side.
To excel in the role of security driver, leaders must:
•	 Have capabilities, budgets and staffing levels, using 
benchmarks.
•	 Align even closer with users and business partners.
•	 Have close relationships with third parties.
•	 Extend responsibilities to include the growing challenges in 
the mobile workforce.
•	 Manage virtualized environments and third‑party ecosystems.
•	 Find and/or develop cyber security talent and human capital.
•	 Have a strategy to integrate millennials with baby boomer 
and Gen X managers.

251
10
Digital Transformation 
and Changes in 
Consumer Behavior
Introduction
Digital transformation is one of the most significant activities of the 
early twenty-first century. Digital transformation is defined as “ the 
changes associated with the applications of digital technology in all 
aspects of human society”  (Stolterman & Fors, 2004, p. 689). From a 
business perspective, digital transformation enables organizations to 
implement new types of innovations and to rethink business processes 
that can take advantage of technology. From this perspective, digital 
transformation involves a type of reengineering, but one that is not 
limited to rethinking just how systems work together, but rather, that 
extends to the entire business itself. Some see digital transformation 
as the elimination of paper in organizations. Others see it as revamp-
ing a business to meet the demands of a digital economy. This chapter 
provides a link between digital transformation and what I call “ digital 
reengineering.”  To explain this better, think of process reengineering 
as the generation that brought together systems in the way that they 
talked to one another— that is, the integration of legacy systems with 
new application that used more robust software applications.
The advent of digital transformation requires the entire organization 
to meet the digital demands of their consumers. For some companies, the 
consumer is another company (B2B, or ­business-to-business), that is, the 
consumer is a provider to another company that inevitably supports a con-
sumer. For other businesses, their consumer is indeed the ultimate buyer. 
I will discuss the differences in these two types of consumer concepts later 
in this chapter. What is important from an IT perspective is that reengi-
neering is no longer limited to just the needs of the internal user, but rather 
the needs of the businesses consumer as well. So, systems must change, 

252
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
as necessary, with the changes in consumer behavior. The challenge with 
doing this, of course, is that consumer needs are harder to obtain and 
understand, and can differ significantly among groups, depending on 
variables, such as ethnicity, age, and gender, to name just a few.
As a result, IT managers need to interact with the consumer more 
directly and in partnership with their business colleagues. The con-
sumer represents a new type of user for IT staff. The consumer, in 
effect, is the buyer of the organization’ s products and services. The 
challenge becomes how to get IT more engaged with the buyer com-
munity, which could require IT to be engaged in multiple parts of 
the business that deals with the consumer. Below are six approaches, 
which are not mutually exclusive of each other:
	
1.	Sales/Marketing : These individuals sell to the company’ s buy-
ers. Thus, they have a good sense of what customers are look-
ing for, what things they like about the business, and what 
they dislike. The power of the sales and marketing team is 
their ability to drive realistic requirements that directly impact 
revenue opportunities. The limitation of this resource is that 
it still relies on an internal perspective of the consumer; that 
is, how the sales and marketing staff perceive the consumer’ s 
needs.
	
2.	Third-party market analysis/reporting : There are outside 
resources available that examine and report on market trends 
within various industry sectors. Such organizations typically 
have massive databases of information and, using various 
search and analysis tools, can provide a better understand-
ing of the behavior patterns of an organization’ s consumers. 
These third parties can also provide reports that show how the 
organization stacks up against its competition and why con-
sumers may be choosing alternative products. Unfortunately, 
if the data is inaccurate it likely will result in false generaliza-
tions about consumer behavior, so it is critical that IT digital 
leaders ensure proper review of the data integrity.
	
3.	Predictive analytics : This is a hot topic in today’ s competitive 
landscape for businesses. Predictive analytics is the process 
of feeding off large data sets (big data) and predicting future 

253
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
behavior patterns. Predictive analytics approaches are usually 
handled internally with assistance from third-party products 
or consulting services. The limitation is one of risk— the risk 
that the prediction does not occur as planned.
	
4.	Consumer support departments: Internal teams and external 
vendors (outsourced managed service) have a good pulse 
on consumer preferences because they interact with them. 
More specifically, these department respond to questions, 
hande problems and get feedback from consumers on a reg-
ular basis. These support departments typically depend on 
applications to help the buyer. As a result, they are an excel-
lent resource for providing up-to-date things that the sys-
tem does not provide consumers. Unfortunately, consumer 
support organizations limit their needs to what they expe-
rience as opposed to what might be future trends of their 
consumers.
	
5.	Surveys: IT and the business can design surveys (question-
naires) and send them to consumers for feedback. Using 
surveys can be of significant value in that the questions can 
target specific issues that the organization wants to address. 
Survey design and administration can be handled by third-
party firms, which may have an advantage in that the ques-
tions are being forwarded from an independent source and 
one that does not identify the interested company. On the 
other hand, this might be considered a negative— it all 
depends on what the organization is seeking to obtain from 
the buyer.
	
6.	Focus groups: This approach is similar to the use of a survey. 
Focus groups are commonly used to understand consumer 
behavior patterns and preferences. They are often conducted 
by outside firms. The differences between the focus group 
and a survey are (1) surveys are very quantitative based and 
use scoring mechanisms (Likert scales) to evaluate outcomes. 
Consumers sometimes may misinterpret the question thus 
resulting in distorted feedback, and (2) focus groups are more 
qualitative and allow IT digital leaders to engage with the 
consumer in two-way dialogues.

254
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Figure  10.1 reflects a graphic depiction of the sources for under-
standing consumer behaviors and needs.
Table  10.1 further articulates the methods and deliverables that IT 
digital leaders should consider when developing system strategies.
Requirements without Users and without Input
Could it be possible to develop digital strategies and requirements for 
a system without user input or even consumer opinions? Could this be 
a reality for future design of strategic systems?
Perhaps we need to take a step back historically and think about 
trends that have changed the competitive landscape. Digital trans-
formation may indeed be the most powerful agent of change in the 
history of business.
Product
requirements
Sales/marketing
Staﬀ
competitive analysis
Surveys
Internal/external
targeted consumers
Consumer support
departments
Internal support
groups, third-party
call centers,
shared services
organization
Tird-party studies
and databases
Trends
Data analysts
Predictive analytics
Focus groups
Internal/external
consumer sessions
Figure  10.1  Sources for understanding consumer behavior.

255
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
We have seen large companies lose their edge. IBM’ s fall as the 
leading technology firm in the 1990s is an excellent example, when 
Microsoft overtook them. Yet Google was able to take the lead away 
from Microsoft, particularly in relation to analytical consumer com-
puting. And what about the comeback Apple made with its new array 
Table 10.1  Langer’ s Methods and Deliverables for Assessing Consumer Needs
ANALYST’ S 
SOURCES
METHODS
DELIVERABLES
Sales/
Marketing
Interviews
Should be conducted in a similar way to typical end user 
interviews. Work closely with senior sales staff. Set up 
interviews with key business stakeholders.
Win/loss sales 
reviews
Review the results of sales efforts. Many firms hold formal 
win/loss review meetings that may convey important 
limitations of current applications and system 
capabilities.
Third-Party 
Databases
Document 
reports 
reviews
Obtain summaries of the trends in consumer behavior and 
pinpoint shortfalls that might exist in current applications 
and systems.
Data analysis
Perform targeted analytics on databases to uncover trends 
not readily conveyed in available reports.
Predictive 
analytics
Interrogate data by using analytic formulas that may 
enable predictive trends in consumer behavior.
Support 
Department
Interviews
Interview key support department personnel (internal and 
third party) to identify possible application deficiencies.
Data/reports
Review call logs and recorded calls between consumers 
and support personnel to expose possible system 
deficiencies.
Surveys
Internal and 
external 
questionnaires
Work with internal departments to determine application 
issues when they support consumers. Use similar surveys 
with select populations of customers to validate and 
fine-tune internal survey results.
Use similar surveys targeted to consumers who are not 
customers and compare results. Differences between 
existing customer base and non-customers may expose 
new trends in consumer needs.
Focus Groups
Hold internal 
and external 
sessions
Internal focus groups can be facilitated by marketing 
personnel. Select survey results, that had unexpected 
results or mixed feedback can be reviewed. Internal 
attendees should come from operations management and 
sales. External focus groups should be facilitated by a 
third-party vendor and held at independent sites. 
Discussions with customers should be compared with 
internal focus group results. Consumer focus groups 
should be facilitated by professional third-party firms.

256
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
of smart phone-related products? The question is, Why and how do 
these shifts in competitive advantage occur so quickly?
Technology continues to generate change and that change is 
typically referred to today as a “ digital disruption.”  The challenge 
in disruption is the inability to predict what consumers want and 
need; furthermore, the consumer may not know! The challenge, 
then, is for IT digital leaders to forecast the changes that are 
brought about by technology disruptions. So, digital transforma-
tion is more about predicting consumer behavior and providing 
new products and services, which we hope consumers will want. 
This is a significant challenge for IT leaders, of course, given that 
the profession was built on the notion that good specifications 
accurately depicted what users want. Langer (1997) originally 
defined this as the “ Concept of the Logical Equivalent.”  So, we 
may have created an oxymoron— how do we develop systems that 
the user cannot specify? Furthermore, requirements that depict 
consumer behavior are now further complicated by the globaliza-
tion of business. Which consumer behavior are we attempting to 
satisfy and across what societal cultural norms? The reality is that 
new software applications will need to be built with some uncer-
tainty. That is, some business rules may be vague and risks will 
need to be part of the process of system functionality. To see an 
example of designing systems based on uncertainty, we need only 
to analyze the evolution of the electronic spreadsheet. The first 
electronic spreadsheet, called VisiCalc, was introduced by a com-
pany called VisiCorp. It was designed for the Apple II and eventu-
ally the IBM personal computer. The electronic spreadsheet was 
not designed based on consumer input per se, rather on perceived  
needs by visionary designers who saw a need for a generic calcula-
tor and mathematical worksheet. VisiCorp took a risk by offer-
ing a product to the market that consumers would find useful. Of 
course, history shows that it was a very good risk. The electronic 
spreadsheet, which is now dominated by Microsoft’ s Excel product 
has gone through multiple product generations. The inventors of 
the electronic spreadsheet had a vision and the market responded 
favorably. Although VisiCorp’ s vision of the market need was cor-
rect, the first version was hardly 100% accurate of what consumers 
would want in a spreadsheet. For example, additional features, such 

257
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
as a database interface, three-dimensional spreadsheets to support 
budgeting and forward referencing, are all examples of responses 
from consumers that resulted in new product enhancements.
Allen and Morton (1994) established an excellent graphic depic-
tion of the relationship between technology advancements and mar-
ket needs (Figure  10.2)
Figure  10.2 shows an interesting life cycle of how product innovations 
relate to the creation of new products and services. The diagram reflects 
that innovations can occur as a result of new technology capabilities or 
inventions that establish new markets— like the electronic spreadsheet. 
On the other hand, the market can demand more features and ­functions 
the technology organizations or developers need to respond to that— like 
the upgrades made over the years to spreadsheet applications. Responding 
to market needs are what most organizations have practiced over the past 
60 years, usually working with their end user populations (those internal 
users that supported the actual consumer). The digital revolution; how-
ever, is placing more emphasis on “ generic”  applications that resemble the 
object paradigm (one that requires applications to be able to fit into any 
business application). This trend will drive new and more advanced object-
driven applications. These applications will reside in a more robust object 
functioning library that can dynamically link these modules together to 
form specific applications that can support ­mul ­consumer devices (what is 
now being called the “ Internet of Things” ).
Another useful approach to dealing with consumer preferences is 
Porter’ s Five Forces Framework. Porter’s framework consists of the 
following five components:
	
1.	Competitors : What is the number of competitors in the market 
and what is the organization’ s position within the market?
Technology
Market
Innovation
Figure  10.2  Technology, innovation, and market needs.

258
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
2.	New entrants : What companies can come into the organiza-
tion’ s space and provide competition?
	
3.	Substitutes : What products or services can replace what you do?
	
4.	Buyers : What alternatives do buyers have? How close and 
tight is the relationship between the buyer and seller?
	
5.	Suppliers : What is the number of suppliers that are available, 
which can affect the relationship with the buyer and also 
determine price levels?
Porter’ s framework is graphically depicted in Figure  10.3.
Cadle et al. (2014) provide an approach to using Porter’ s model as 
part of the analysis and design process. Their approach is integrated 
with Langer’ s Analysis Consumer Methods in Table  10.2.
Concepts of the S-Curve and Digital 
Transformation Analysis and Design 
Digital transformation will also be associated with the behavior of the 
S-curve. The S-curve has been a long-standing economic graph that 
depicts the life cycle of a product or service. The S-curve is shown in 
Figure  10.4
New
entrants
Suppliers
Consumer
support dept.
Buyers
Industry
competitors
(sales and
marketing)
Substitutes
New products
or services
Sales and
marketing
Figure  10.3  Porter’ s Five Forces Framework.

259
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
The left and lower portion of the S-curve represents a growing 
market opportunity that is likely volatile and exists where demand 
exceeds supply. As a result, the market opportunity is large and prices 
for the product are high. Thus, businesses should seek to capture as 
much of the market share at this time before competitors catch up. 
This requires the business to take more risk and assumes that the mar-
ket will continue to demand the product. The shape of the S-curve 
suggests the life of this opportunity (the length of the x-axis repre-
sents the lifespan of the product).
As the market approaches the middle of the center of the S-curve, 
demand begins to equal supply. Prices start to drop and the market, in 
general, becomes less volatile and more predictable. The drop in price 
reflects the presence of more competitors. As a product or service 
approaches the top of the S, supply begins to exceed demand. Prices 
begin to fall and the market is said to have reached maturity. The 
uniqueness of the product or service is now approaching commodity. 
Table  10.2  Langer’ s Analysis Consumer Methods
PORTER’ S FIVE FORCES
CADEL ET AL’ S APPROACH
LANGER’ S SOURCES OF INPUT
Industry competitors
How strong is your market 
share?
Third-party market studies
New entrants
New threats
Third-party market studies
Surveys and focus groups
Suppliers
Price sensitivity and closeness 
of relationship.
Consumer support and end user 
departments
Buyers
Alternative choices and brand 
equity.
Sales/marketing team
Substitutes
Consumer alternatives
Surveys and focus groups
Sales and marketing team
Third‑party studies
Figure  10.4  The S-curve.

260
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Typically, suppliers will attempt to produce new features and func-
tions to extend the life of the curve as shown in Figure  10.5
Establishing a new S-curve, then, extends the competitive life of 
the product or service. Once the top of the S-curve is reached, the 
product or service has reached the commodity level, where supply is 
much greater than demand. Here, the product or service has likely 
reached the end of its useful competitive life and should either be 
replaced with a new solution or considered for outsourcing to a third-
party who can deliver the product at a very low price.
Langer’ s Driver/Supporter depicts the life cycle of any application 
or product as shown in Figure  10.6
Organizational Learning and the S-Curve
When designing a new application or system, the status of that 
product’ s S-curve should be carefully correlated to the source of the 
Figure  10.5  Extended S-curve.
Mini loop technology enhancements
Technology
driver
Evaluation
cycle
Driver
maturation
Support
status
Replacement or
outsource
Economies
of scale
Figure  10.6  Langer’ s drive/supporter life cycle.

261
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
requirements. Table  10.3 reflects the corresponding market sources 
and associated risk factors relating to the dependability of require-
ments based on the state of the consumer’ s market. Leaders engaged 
in this process obviously need to have an abstract perspective to sup-
port a visionary and risk-oriented strategy. Table  10.3 includes the 
associated complexity of staff needed to deal with each period in the 
S-curve.
Communities of Practice
As stated in Chapter  4, Communities of Practice (COP) have been 
traditionally used as a method of bringing together people in orga-
nizations with similar talents, responsibilities and/or interests. Such 
communities can be effectively used to obtain valuable information 
about the way things work and what is required to run business opera-
tions. Getting such information strongly correlates to the challenges of 
obtaining dependable information from the consumer market. I dis-
cussed the use of surveys and focus groups earlier in this chapter, but 
COP is an alternative approach to bringing together similar types of 
consumers grouped by their interests and needs. In digital transforma-
tion we find yet another means of obtaining requirements by engaging 
in, and contributing to, the practices of specific consumer communities. 
This means that working with COP offers another way of developing 
relations with consumers to better understand their needs. Using this 
Table  10.3  S-Curve, Application Requirement Sources, and Risk
S-CURVE STATUS
ANALYSIS INPUT 
SOURCE
RISK FACTOR
Early S-curve
Consumer
High; market volatility and uncertainty.
High S-curve
Consumer 
Lower; market is less uncertain as product becomes 
more mature.
End users
Medium; business users have experience with 
consumers and can provide reasonable requirements.
Crest of the 
S-curve
End users
Low; business users have more experience as product 
becomes mature.
Consumer
High; might consider new features and functions to 
keep product more competitive. Attempt to establish 
new S-curve.
End of S-curve
End user
None; seek to replace product or consider third-party 
product to replace what is now a legacy application. 
Also think of outsourcing application.

262
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
approach inside an organization, as we saw in Chapter  4, provides a 
means of better learning about issues by using a sustained method of 
remaining interconnected with specific business user groups, which can 
define what the organization really knows and contributes to the busi-
ness that is typically not documented. IT digital leaders need to become 
engaged in learning if they are to truly understand what is needed to 
develop more effective and accurate software applications.
It seems logical that COP can provide the mechanism to assist IT 
digital leaders with an understanding of how business users and con-
sumers behave and interact. Indeed, the analyst can target the behavior 
of the community and its need to consider what new organizational 
structures can better support emerging technologies. I have, in many 
ways, already established and presented what should be called the 
“ community of IT digital leaders”  and its need to understand how to 
restructure, in order to meet the needs of the digital economy. This new 
era does not lend itself to the traditional approaches to IT strategy, but 
rather to a more risk-based process that can deal with the realignment 
of business operations integrated with different consumer relationships.
The relationship, then, between COP and digital transformation is 
significant, given that future IT applications will heavily rely on infor-
mal inputs. While there may be attempts to computerize knowledge 
using predictive analytics software and big data, it will not be able 
to provide all of the risk-associated behaviors of users and consum-
ers. That is, a “ structured”  approach to creating predictive behavior 
reporting, is typically difficult to establish and maintain. Ultimately, 
the dynamism from digital transformations creates too many uncer-
tainties to be handled by sophisticated automated applications on how 
organizations will react to digital change variables. So, COP, along 
with these predictive analytics applications, provides a more thorough 
umbrella of how to deal with the ongoing and unpredictable interac-
tions established by emerging digital technologies.
The IT Leader in the Digital Transformation Era
When we discuss the digital world and its multitude of effects on how 
business is conducted, one must ask how this impacts the profession 
of IT Leader. This section attempts to address the perceived evolution 
of the role.

263
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
	
1.	The IT leader must become more innovative. While the 
business has the problem of keeping up with changes in 
their markets, IT needs to provide more solutions. Many 
of these solutions will not be absolute and likely will have 
short shelf lives. Risk is fundamental. As a result, IT lead-
ers must truly become “ business”  leaders by exploring new 
ideas from the outside and continually considering how 
to implement the needs of the company’ s consumers. As 
a result, the business analyst will emerge as an idea bro-
ker (Robertson & Robertson, 2012) by constantly pursuing 
external ideas and transforming them into automated and 
competitive solutions. These ideas will have a failure rate, 
which means that companies will need to produce more 
applications than they will inevitably implement. This will 
certainly require organizations to spend more on software 
development.
	
2.	Quality requirements will be even more complex. In order to 
keep in equilibrium with the S-curve the balance between 
quality and production will be a constant negotiation. 
Because applications will have shorter life cycles and there 
is pressure to provide competitive solutions, products will 
need to sense market needs and respond to them quicker. As 
a result, fixes and enhancements to applications will become 
more inherent in the development cycle after products go 
live in the market. Thus, the object paradigm will become 
even more fundamental to better software development 
because it provides more readily tested reusable applications 
and routines.
	
3.	Dynamic interaction among users and business teams will 
require the creation of multiple layers of communities of prac-
tice. Organizations involved in this dynamic process must 
have autonomy and purpose (Narayan, 2015).
	
4.	Application analysis, design, and development must be treated 
and managed as a living process; that is, it never ends until the 
product is obsolete (supporter end). So, products must con-
tinually develop to maturity.
	
5.	Organizations should never outsource a driver technology 
until it reaches supporter status.

264
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
How Technology Disrupts Firms and Industries
The world economy is transforming rapidly from an analogue to a 
digital-based technology-driven society. This transformation requires 
businesses to move from a transactional relationship to one that that 
is “ interactional”  (Ernst & Young, 2012). However, this analogue to 
digital transformation, while essential for a business to survive in the 
twenty-first century, is difficult to accomplish. Langer’ s (2011) theory 
of responsive organizational dynamism (ROD), as discussed earlier in 
this book, is modified to show that successful adaptation of new digi-
tal technologies called Digital Dynamisms  requires cultural assimila-
tion of the people that comprise the organization. 
Dynamism and Digital Disruption
The effects of digital dynamism can also be defined as a form of 
disruption or what is now being referred to as digital disruption . 
Specifically, the big question facing many enterprises is around how 
they can anticipate the unexpected threats brought on by technologi-
cal advances that can devastate their business. There are typically two 
disruption factors:
	
1.	A new approach to providing products and services to the 
consumer.
	
2.	A strategy not previously feasible, now made possible using 
new technological capabilities.
Indeed, disruption occurs when a new approach meets the right 
conditions. Because technology shortens the time it takes to reach 
consumers, the changes are occurring at an accelerated and exponen-
tial pace. As an example, the table below shows the significant accel-
eration of the time it takes to reach 50 million consumers:
Radio
38  years
Television
13  years
Internet
4  years
Facebook
3.5  years
Twitter
9  months
Instagram
6  months
Poké mon GO
19  days

265
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
The speed of which we can accelerate change has an inverse effect 
on the length of time the effect lasts. We use the S-curve to show how 
digital disruption shortens the competitive life of new products and 
services. Figure  10.7 represents how the S-curve is shrinking along 
the x-axis, which measures the length or time period of the product/
service life.
Figure  10.7 essentially reflects that the life of a product or service is 
shrinking, thus enterprises have less time to capture a market oppor-
tunity and far less time to enjoy the length of its competitive suc-
cess. As a result, business leaders are facing a world that is changing 
at an accelerating rate and trying to cope with understanding how 
new waves of “ disruptive”  technologies will affect their business. 
Ultimately, digital disruption shifts the way competitive forces deliver 
services, requires change in the way operations are managed and mea-
sured, and shortens the life of any given product or service success.
Critical Components of “ Digital”  Organization 
A study conducted by Westerman et al. (2014), who interviewed 157 
executives in fifty large companies, found four capabilities that were 
key to successful digital transformation:
	
1.	A unified digital platform : Integration of the organization’ s 
data and processes across its department silos is critical. One 
reason why web-based companies gain advantage over tradi-
tional competitors is their ability to use analytics and customer 
personalization from central and integrated sources. Thus, 
the first step toward a successful digital transformation is for 
companies to invest in establishing central repositories of data 
and common applications that can access the information. 
Figure  10.7  The shrinking S-curve.

266
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
This centralization of digital data is key to competing globally 
since firms must be able to move data to multiple locations 
and use that data in different contexts.
	
2.	Solution delivery : Many traditional IT departments are not 
geared to integrating new processes into their legacy opera-
tions. A number of firms have addressed this problem by 
establishing independent “ innovation centers”  designed to 
initiate new digital ideas that are more customer solution ori-
ented. These centers typically focus on how new mobile and 
social media technologies can be launched without disturb-
ing the core technology systems that support the enterprise. 
Some of these initiatives include partnerships with high-tech 
vendors; however, a number of executives have shown concern 
that such alliances might result in dependencies because of 
the lack of knowledge inside the organization.
	
3.	Analytics capabilities : Companies need to ensure that their 
data can be used for predictive analytics purposes. Predictive 
analytics provide actors with a better understanding of their 
consumer’ s behaviors and allow them to formulate competi-
tive strategies over their competitors. Companies that inte-
grate data better from their transactional systems can make 
more “ informed and better decisions”  and formulate strate-
gies to take advantage of customer preferences and thus, turn 
them into business opportunities. An example is an insurance 
company initiative that concentrates on products that meet 
customer trends determined by examining their historical 
transactions across various divisions of the business. Analytics 
also helps organizations to develop risk models that can assist 
them to formulate accurate portfolios.
	
4.	Business and IT integration : While the integration of the IT 
department with the business has been discussed for decades, 
few companies have achieved a desired outcome (Langer, 
2016). The need for digital transformation has now made this 
integration essential for success and to avoid becoming a vic-
tim of disruption. True IT and business integration means 
more than just combining processes and decision making; but 
rather, the actual movement of personnel into business units 
so they can be culturally assimilated (Langer & Yorks, 2013).

267
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
Assimilating Digital Technology Operationally and Culturally
When considering how to design an organization structure that 
can implement digital technologies, firms must concentrate on how 
to culturally assimilate a new architecture. The importance of the 
architecture first affects the strategic integration component of 
ROD. Indeed, the actor-oriented architecture must be designed to 
be agile enough to react to increased changes in market demands. 
The consumerization of technology, defined as changes in technol-
ogy brought on by increased consumer knowledge of how digital 
assets can reduce costs and increase competitive advantage, have 
created a continual reduction in the length of any new competitive 
products or services life. Thus, consumerization has increased what 
Eisenhardt and Bourgeouse (1988) define as “ high-velocity”  market 
conditions. 
This dilemma drives the challenge of how organizations will cope 
to avoid the negative effects of digital disruption. There are four over-
all components that appear to be critical factors of autonomy from 
disruption:
	
1.	Companies must recognize that speed and comfort of service 
can be more important than just the cost: our experience is 
that enterprises who offer multiple choices that allow con-
sumers to choose from varying levels of service options are 
more competitive. The more personal the service option, the 
higher the cost. Examples can be seen in the airline indus-
try where passengers have options for better seats at a higher 
price, or a new option being offered by entertainment parks 
that now provide less wait time on shorter lines, for higher 
paying customers. These two examples match the price with 
a desired service and firms that do not offer creative pricing 
options are prime for disruption.
	
2.	Empower your workforce to try new ideas without over con-
trols. Companies are finding that many young employees have 
new service ideas but are blocked from trying them because 
of the “ old guard”  in their management reporting lines. Line 
managers need to be educated on how to allow their staffs to 
quickly enact new processes, even though some of them may 
not be effective.

268
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
3.	Allow employees and customer to have choice of devices. 
Traditionally IT departments desire to create environments 
where employees adhere to standard hardware and software 
structures. Indeed, standard structures make it easier for IT 
to support internal users and provide better security across 
systems. However, as technology has evolved, the relation 
between hardware and software, especially in mobile devices, 
has become more specialized. For example, Apple smart-
phones have proprietary hardware architectures that in many 
cases require different versions of application software as well 
as different security considerations than its major competi-
tor, Samsung. With the consumerization of technology, these 
IT departments must now support multiple devices because 
both their customers and employees are free to select them. 
Therefore, it is important to allow staff to freely integrate 
company applications with their personal device choices.
	
4.	Similar to (3), organizations who force staff to adhere to strict 
processes and support structures are exposed to digital dis-
ruption. Organizational structures that rely on technological 
innovation must be able to integrate new digital opportuni-
ties seamlessly into their current production and support pro-
cesses. Specifically, this means having the ability to be agile 
enough to provide services using different digital capabilities 
and from different geographical locations.
Conclusion
This chapter has provided a number of different and complex aspects 
of digital transformation, its effects on how organizations are struc-
tured and how they need to compete to survive in the future. The 
technology executive is, by default, the key person to lead these digi-
tal transformation initiatives because of the technical requirements 
that are at the center of successfully completing these projects. As 
such, these executives must also focus on their own transformation as 
leaders that allows them to help form the strategic goals to meet the 
dynamic changes in consumer behavior.

269
11
Integrating Generation Y 
Employees to Accelerate 
Competitive Advantage
Introduction
This chapter focuses on Gen Y employees who are also known as 
“ digital natives”  and “ millennials.”  Gen Y employees possess the 
attributes to assist companies in transforming their workforce to 
meet the accelerated change in the competitive landscape. Most 
executives across industries recognize that digital technologies are 
the most powerful variable to maintaining and expanding company 
markets. Gen Y employees provide a natural fit for dealing with 
emerging digital technologies. However, success with integrating 
Gen Y employees is contingent upon baby boomer and Gen X man-
agement to adapt new leadership philosophies and procedures suited 
to meet the expectations and needs of these new workers. Ignoring 
the unique needs of Gen Y employees will likely result in an incon-
gruent organization that suffers high turnover of young employees 
who will seek more entrepreneurial environments. 
I established in Chapter  10 that digital transformation is at the 
core of change and competitive survival in the twenty-first cen-
tury. Chapter  10 did not address the changes in personnel that 
are quickly becoming major issues at today’ s global firms. While I 
offered changes to organizational structures, I did not address the 
mixture of different generations that are at the fabric of any typical 
organization. This chapter is designed to discuss how these multiple 
generations need to “ learn”  how to work together to form productive 
and effective organizations that can compete in the digital economy. 
Furthermore, this chapter will address how access to human capital 
will change in the future and the different types of relationships 
that individuals will have with employers. For example, the “ gig”  

270
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
economy will use non-traditional outside workers who will provide 
sources of talent for shorter-term employment needs. Indeed, the 
gig economy will require HR and IT leaders to form new and intri-
cate employee relationships.
As discussed in Chapter  10, companies need to transform their 
business from analogue to one that uses digital technologies. Such 
transformation requires moving from a transactional relation-
ship with customers to one that is more “ interactional”  (Ernst & 
Young, 2012). Completing an analogue to digital transformation, 
while essential for a business to survive in the twenty-first century, 
is difficult to accomplish. Responsive organizational dynamism 
(ROD) showed us that successful adaptation of new digital tech-
nologies requires strategic integration and cultural assimilation of 
the people that comprise the organization. As stated earlier, these 
components of ROD can be categorized as the essential roles and 
responsibilities of the organization that are necessary to utilize 
new technological inventions that can strategically be integrated 
within a business entity. The purpose here is to explore why Gen 
Y employees need to be integrated with baby boomers and Gen X 
staff to effectively enhance the success of digital transformation 
initiatives.
The Employment Challenge in the Digital Era
Capgemini and MIT (2013) research shows that organizations need 
new operating models to meet the demands of a digital‑driven era. 
Digital tools have provided leaders with ways to connect at an unprec-
edented scale. Digital technology has allowed companies to invade 
other spaces previously protected by a business’ s “ asset specificities”  
(Tushman & Anderson, 1997), which are defined as advantages 
enjoyed by companies because of their location, product access, and 
delivery capabilities. Digital technologies allow those specificities to 
be neutralized and thus, change the previous competitive balances 
among market players. Furthermore, digital technology acceler-
ates this process, meaning that changes in market share occur very 
quickly. The research offers five key indicators that support successful 
digital transformation in a firm:

271
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
	
1.	A company’ s strategic vision is only as effective as the people 
behind it. Thus, winning the minds of all levels of the organi-
zation is required.
	
2.	To become digital is to be digital. Companies must have a 
“ one-team culture”  and raise their employees’  digital IQ.
	
3.	A company must address the scarcity of talented resources 
and look more to using Gen Y individuals because they have 
a more natural adaptation to take on the challenges of digital 
transformation.
	
4.	Resistant managers are impediments to progress and can 
actually stop digital transformation.
	
5.	Digital leadership starts at the top.
As stated in Chapter 10, Eisenhardt and Bourgeouis (1988) first 
defined dynamic changing markets as being “ high-velocity.”  Their 
research shows that high-velocity conditions existed in the technol-
ogy industry during the early 1980s in Silicon Valley, in the United 
States. They found that competitive advantage was highly dependent 
on the quality of people that worked at those firms. Specifically, they 
concluded that workers who were capable of dealing with change and 
less subjected to a centralized totalitarian management structure out-
performed those that had more traditional hierarchical organizational 
structures. While “ high-velocity”  during the 1980s was unusual, dig-
ital disruption in the twenty-first century has made it a market norm.
The combination of evolving digital business drivers with acceler-
ated and changing customer demands has created a business revolution 
that best defines the imperative of the strategic integration component 
of ROD. The changing and accelerated way businesses deal with their 
customers and vendors requires a new strategic integration to become 
a reality, rather than remain a concept without action. Most experts 
see digital technology as the mechanism that will require business 
realignment to create new customer experiences. The driving force 
behind this realignment emanates from digital technologies, which 
serve as the principle accelerator of the change in transactions across 
all business units. The general need to optimize human resources 
forces organizations to rethink and to realign business processes, in 
order to gain access to new business markets, which are weakening 
the existing “ asset specificities”  of the once dominant market leaders.

272
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Gen Y Population Attributes
Gen Y or digital natives are those people who are accustomed to the 
attributes of living in a digital world and are 18– 35  years old. Gen Y 
employees are more comfortable with accelerated life changes, par-
ticularly change brought on by new technologies. Such individuals, 
according to a number of commercial and academic research studies 
(Johnson Controls, 2010; Capgemini, 2013; Cisco, 2012; Saxena & 
Jain, 2012), have attributes and expectations in the workplace that 
support environments that are flexible, offer mobility, and provide 
collaborative and unconventional relationships. Specifically, millen-
nial workers
•	 want access to dedicated team spaces where they can have 
emotional engagements in a socialized atmosphere;
•	 require their own space; that is, are not supportive of a “ hotel-
ing”  existence where they do not have a permanent office or 
workspace;
•	 need a flexible life/work balance;
•	 prefer a workplace that supports formal and informal collab-
orative engagement.
Research has further confirmed that 79% of Gen Y workers pre-
fer mobile jobs, 40% want to drive to work, and female millennials 
need more flexibility at work than their male counterparts. As a result 
of this data, businesses will need to compete to recruit and develop 
skilled Gen Y workers who now represent 25% of the workforce. In 
India, while Gen Y represents more than 50% of the working popula-
tion, the required talent needed by businesses is extremely scarce.
Advantages of Employing Millennials to Support Digital Transformation
As stated, Gen Y adults appear to have many identities and capabilities 
that fit well in a digital-driven business world. Indeed, Gen Y peo-
ple are consumers, colleagues, employees, managers, and innovators 
(Johnson Controls, 2010). They possess attributes that align with the 
requirements to be an entrepreneur, a person with technology savvy 
and creativity, someone who works well in a mobile environment, and 
is non-conformant enough to drive change in an organization. Thus, 

273
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
the presence of Gen Y personnel can help organizations to restrat-
egize their competitive position and to retain key talent (Saxena & 
Jain, 2012). Furthermore, Gen Y brings a more impressive array of 
academic credentials than their predecessors.
Most important is Gen Y’ s ability to deal better with market 
change— which inevitably affects organizational change. That is, the 
digital world market will constantly require changes in organizational 
structure to accommodate its consumer needs. A major reason for Gen 
Y’ s willingness to change is its natural alignment with a company’ s 
customers. Swadzba (2010) posits that we are approaching the end of 
what he called the “ work era”  and moving into a new age based on 
consumption. Millennials are more apt to see the value of their jobs 
from their own consumption needs. Thus, they see employment as 
an act of consumption (Jonas & Kortenius, 2014). Gen Y employees 
therefore allow employers to acquire the necessary talent that can lead 
to better consumer reputation, reduced turnover of resources and, ulti-
mately, increased customer satisfaction (Bakanauskiené  et al., 2011). 
Yet another advantage of Gen Y employees is their ability to transform 
organizations that operate on a departmental basis into one that is 
based more on function; an essential requirement in a digital economy.
Integration of Gen Y with Baby Boomers and Gen X
The prediction is that 76 million baby boomers (born 1946– 1964) 
and Gen X workers (born 1965– 1984) will be retiring over the next 
15  years. The question for many corporate talent executives is how to 
manage the transition in a major multigenerational workforce. Baby 
boomers alone still inhabit the most powerful leadership positions in 
the world. Currently, the average age of CEOs is 56, and 65% of all 
corporate leaders are baby boomers. Essentially, corporations need to 
produce career paths that will be attractive to millennials. Thus, the 
older generation needs to
•	 Acknowledge some of their preconceived perceptions of cur-
rent work ethics that are simply not relevant in today’ s com-
plex environments.
•	 Allow Gen Y to escalate in ranks to satisfy their ambitions 
and sense of entitlement.

274
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
•	 Implement more flexible work schedules, offer telecommut-
ing, and develop a stronger focus on social responsibility.
•	 Support more advanced uses of technology, especially those 
used by Gen Yers in their personal lives.
•	 Employ more mentors to help Gen Y employees to better 
understand the reasons for existing constraints in the organi-
zations where they work.
•	 Provide more complex employee orientations, more timely 
personnel reviews, and in general more frequent feedback 
needed by Gen Y individuals.
•	 Establish programs that improve the verbal communications 
skills of Gen Y workers that are typically more comfortable 
with nonverbal text-based methods of communication.
•	 Implement more continual learning and rotational programs 
that support a vertical growth path for younger employees.
In summary, it is up to the baby boomer and Gen X leaders to 
modify their styles of management to fit the needs of their younger 
Gen Y employees. The challenge to accomplish this objective is com-
plicated, given the wide variances on how these three generations 
think, plan, take risks, and most important, learn.
Designing the Digital Enterprise
Zogby completed an interactive poll of 4,811 people on perceptions 
of different generations. 42% of the respondents stated that baby 
boomers would be remembered for their focus on consumerism and 
self-indulgence. Gen Y, on the other hand, are considered more self-
interested, entitled narcissists who want to spend all their time post-
ing “ selfies”  to Facebook. However, other facts offer an expanded 
perception of these two generations, as shown in Table  11.1
Research completed by Ernst and Young (2013) offers additional 
comparisons among the three generations as follows:
	
1.	Gen Y individuals are moving into management positions 
faster due to retirements, lack of corporate succession plan-
ning, and their natural ability to use technology at work. 
Table  11.2 shows percentage comparisons between 2008 
and 2013.

275
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
	
	
The acceleration of growth to management positions among 
Gen Y individuals can be further illuminated in Table  11.3 by 
comparing the prior five-year period from 2003 to 2007.
	
2.	While responders of the survey felt Gen X were better 
equipped to manage than Gen Y, the number of Gen Y man-
agers is expected to double by 2020 due to continued retire-
ments. Another interesting result of the research relates to 
Gen Y expectations from their employers when they become 
managers. Specifically Gen Y managers expect (1) an oppor-
tunity to have a mentor, (2) to receive sponsorship, (3) to have 
more career-related experiences, and (4) to receive training to 
build their professional skills.
	
3.	Seventy-five percent of respondents that identified themselves 
as managers agree that managing the multiple generations is 
a significant challenge. This was attributed to different work 
expectations and the lack of comfort with younger employees 
managing older employees.
Table  11.4 provides additional differences among the three 
generations:
Table  11.1   Baby Boomers versus Gen Y
BABY BOOMERS
GEN Y
Married later and less children
Not as aligned to political parties
Spend lavishly
More civically engaged
More active and selfless
Socially active
Fought against social injustice, supported civil 
rights, and defied the Vietnam War
Cheerfully optimistic
Had more higher education access
More concerned with quality of life than 
material gain
Table  11.2   Management Roles 2008– 2013
Baby boomer (ages 49– 67)
19%
Gen X (ages 33– 48)
38%
Gen Y (18– 32)
87%
Table  11.3   Management Roles 2003– 2007
Baby boomer (ages 49– 67)
23%
Gen X (ages 33– 48)
30%
Gen Y (18– 32)
12%

276
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Assimilating Gen Y Talent from Underserved 
and Socially Excluded Populations
The outsourcing of jobs outside of local communities to countries with 
lower employment costs has continued to grow during the early part 
of the twenty-first century. This phenomenon has led to significant 
social and economic problems, especially in the United States and 
in Western Europe as jobs continue to migrate to foreign countries 
where there are lower labor costs and education systems that provide 
Table  11.4  Baby Boomer, Gen X and Gen Y Compared
BABY BOOMERS
GEN X
GEN Y
Seek employment in large 
established companies that 
provide dependable 
employment.
Established companies no 
longer a guarantee for 
lifetime employment. Many 
jobs begin to go offshore.
Seek multiple experiences with 
heavy emphasis on social 
good and global experiences. 
Re-evaluation of offshoring 
strategies.
Process of promotion is well 
defined, hierarchical and 
structured, eventually leading 
to promotion and higher 
earnings—concept of 
waiting your turn.
Process of promotion still 
hierarchical, but based more 
on skills and individual 
accomplishments. Master’s 
degree now preferred for 
many promotions.
Less patience with hierarchical 
promotion policies. More 
reliance on predictive 
analytics as the basis for 
decision making.
Undergraduate degree 
preferred but not mandatory.
Undergraduate degree required 
for most professional job 
opportunities.
More focus on specific skills. 
Multiple strategies developed 
on how to meet shortages of 
talent. Higher education is 
expensive and concerns 
increase about the value of 
graduate knowledge and 
abilities.
Plan career preferably with one 
company and retire. 
Acceptance of a gradual 
process of growth that was 
slow to change. Successful 
employees assimilated into 
existing organizational 
structures by following the 
rules.
Employees begin to change 
jobs more often, given growth 
in the technology industry, 
and opportunities to increase 
compensation and accelerate 
promotion by switching jobs.
Emergence of a “gig” economy, 
and the rise of multiple 
employment relationships
Entrepreneurism was seen as 
an external option for those 
individuals desiring wealth 
and independence and 
willing to take risks.
Corporate executives’ 
compensation dramatically 
increases, no longer requiring 
starting businesses as the 
basis for wealth.
Entrepreneurism promoted 
in Higher Education as the 
basis for economic growth, 
given the loss of jobs in 
the U.S.

277
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
more of the skills needed by corporations. Most impacted by the loss 
of jobs have been the underserved or socially excluded Gen Y youth 
populations. Indeed, the European average for young adult unem-
ployment (aged 15– 25) in 2013 was nearly 25%, almost twice the 
rate for their adult counterparts (Dolado, 2015). Much of the loss of 
local jobs can be attributed to expansion of the globalized economy, 
which has been accelerated by continued technological advancements 
(Wabike, 2014). Thus, the effects of technology gains have negatively 
impacted efforts toward social inclusion and social equality. 
Langer, in 2003, established an organization called Workforce 
Opportunity Services (WOS), as a means of utilizing a form of action 
research using adult development theory to solve employment problems 
caused by outsourcing. Langer’ s approach is based on the belief that 
socially excluded youth can be trained and prepared for jobs in areas such 
as information technology that would typically be outsourced to lower 
labor markets. WOS has developed a talent-finding model that has suc-
cessfully placed over 1400 young individuals in such jobs. Results of over 
12  years of operation and research have shown that talented youth in 
disadvantaged communities do exist and that such talent can economi-
cally and socially contribute to companies (Langer, 2013). The following 
section describes the Langer Workforce Maturity Arc (LWMA), pres-
ents data on its effectiveness as a transformative learning instrument, 
and discusses how the model can be used as an effective way of recruit-
ing Gen Y talent from underserved and socially excluded populations.
Langer Workforce Maturity Arc
The Langer Workforce Maturity Arc (LWMA) was developed to help 
evaluate socially excluded youth preparation to succeed in the workplace. 
The LWMA, initially known as the Inner-City Workplace Literacy Arc:
charts the progression of underserved or ‘ excluded’  individuals along 
defined stages of development in workplace culture and skills in relation 
to multiple dimensions of workplace literacy such as cognitive growth 
and self-reflection. When one is mapped in relation to the other (work-
place culture in relation to stages of literacy assimilation), an Arc is 
created. LWMA traces the assimilation of workplace norms, a form of 
individual development. (Langer, 2003: 18)

278
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The LWMA addresses one of the major challenges confronting an 
organization’ s HR group: to find talent from diverse local populations 
that can successfully respond to evolving business norms, especially those 
related to electronic and digital technologies. The LWMA provides a 
method for measuring the assimilation of workplace cultural norms and 
thus, can be used to meet the mounting demands of an increasingly 
global, dynamic, and multicultural workplace. Furthermore, if organi-
zations are to attain acceptable quality of work from diverse employees, 
assimilation of socially or economically excluded populations must be 
evaluated based on (1) if and how individuals adopt workplace cultural 
norms, and (2) how they become integrated into the business (Langer, 
2003). Understanding the relationship between workplace assimila-
tion and its development can provide important information on how 
to secure the work ethic, dignity, solidarity, culture, cognition, and 
self-esteem of individuals from disadvantaged communities, and their 
salient contributions to the digital age.
Theoretical Constructs of the LWMA
The LWMA encompasses sectors of workplace literacy  and stages of lit­
eracy development , and the arc charts business acculturation require-
ments as they pertain to disadvantaged young adult learners. The 
relationship between workplace assimilation and literacy is a chal-
lenging subject. A specific form of literacy can be defined as a social 
practice that requires specific skills and knowledge (Rassool, 1999). 
In this instance, workplace literacy addresses the effects of workplace 
practices and culture on the social experiences of people in their work-
day, as well as their everyday lives. We need to better understand how 
individual literacy in the workplace, which subordinates individuality 
to the demands of an organization, is formulated for diverse groups 
(Newman, 1999). Most important, are the ways in which one learns 
how to behave effectively in the workplace— the knowledge, skill, and 
attitude sets required by business generally, as well as by a specific 
organization. This is particularly important in disadvantaged commu-
nities, which are marginalized from the experiences of more affluent 
communities in terms of access to high-quality education, informa-
tion technologies, job opportunities, and workplace socialization. For 
example, Friedman et al. (2014) postulate that the active involvement 

279
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
of parents in the lives of their children greatly impacts a student’ s 
chances of success. It is the absence of this activism that contributes 
to a system of social exclusion of youth. Prior to determining what 
directions to pursue in educational pedagogies and infrastructures, it 
is necessary to understand what workplace literacy requirements are 
present and how they can be developed for disadvantaged youth in the 
absence of the active support from families and friends.
The LWMA assesses individual development in six distinct sectors  
of workplace literacy:
	
1.	Cognition : Knowledge and skills required to learn and com-
plete job duties in the business world, including computational 
skills; ability to read, comprehend, and retain written infor-
mation quickly; remembering and executing oral instructions; 
and critically examining data.
	
2.	Technology : An aptitude for operating various electronic and 
digital technologies.
	
3.	Business culture : Knowledge and practice of proper etiquette 
in the workplace including dress codes, telephone and in-per-
son interactions, punctuality, completing work and meeting 
deadlines, conflict resolution, deference and other protocols 
associated with supervisors and hierarchies.
	
4.	Socio-economic values : Ability to articulate and act upon main-
stream business values, which shape the work ethic. Such val-
ues include independent initiative, dedication, integrity, and 
personal identification with career goals. Values are associated 
with a person’ s appreciation for intellectual life, cultural sen-
sitivity to others, and sensitivity for how others view their role 
in the workplace. Individuals understand that they should 
make decisions based on principles and evidence rather than 
personal interests.
	
5.	Community and ethnic solidarity : Commitment to the educa-
tion and professional advancement of persons in ethnic minor-
ity groups and underserved communities. Individuals can use 
their ethnicity to explore the liberating capacities offered in 
the workplace without sacrificing their identity (i.e., they can 
assimilate workplace norms without abandoning cultural, 
ethnic, or self-defining principles and beliefs).

280
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
6.	Self-esteem : The view that personal and professional success 
work in tandem, and the belief in one’ s capacity to succeed 
in both arenas. This includes a devotion to learning and self-
improvement. Individuals with high self-esteem are reflective 
about themselves and their potential in business. They accept 
the realities of the business world in which they work and 
can comfortably confirm their business disposition, indepen-
dently of others’  valuations.
Each stage in the course of an individual’ s workplace development 
reflects an underlying principle that guides the process of adopting 
workplace norms and behavior. The LWMA is a classificatory scheme 
that identifies progressive stages in the assimilated uses of workplace 
literacy. It reflects the perspective that an effective workplace partici-
pant is able to move through increasingly complex levels of thinking 
and to develop independence of thought and judgment (Knefelkamp, 
1999). The profile of an individual who assimilates workplace norms 
can be characterized in five developmental stages:
	
1.	Concept recognition : The first stage represents the capacity to 
learn, conceptualize, and articulate key issues related to the 
six sectors of workplace literacy. Concept recognition provides 
the basis for becoming adaptive to all workplace requirements.
	
2.	Multiple workplace perspectives : This refers to the ability to 
integrate points of view from different colleagues at various 
levels of the workplace hierarchy. By using multiple perspec-
tives, the individual is in a position to augment his or her 
workplace literacy.
	
3.	Comprehension of business processes : Individuals increase their 
understanding of workplace cooperation, competition, and 
advancement as they build on their recognition of busi-
ness concepts and workplace perspectives. They increasingly 
understand the organization as a system of interconnected 
parts.
	
4.	Workplace competence : As assimilation and competence increase, 
the individual learns not only on how to perform a particu-
lar job adequately but how to conduct oneself professionally 
within the workplace and larger business environment.

281
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
	
5.	Professional independence : Individuals demonstrate the ability 
to employ all sectors of workplace literacy to compete effec-
tively in corporate labor markets. They obtain more respon-
sible jobs through successful interviewing and workplace 
performance and demonstrate leadership abilities, leading to 
greater independence in career pursuits. Professionally inde-
pendent individuals are motivated and can use their skills for 
creative purposes (Langer, 2009).
The LWMA is a rubric that charts an individual’ s development 
across the six sectors of workplace literacy. Each cell within the matrix 
represents a particular stage of development relative to that sector of 
workplace literacy, and each cell contains definitions that can be used 
to identify where a particular individual stands in his or her develop-
ment of workplace literacy. 
The LWMA and Action Research
While the LWMA serves as a framework for measuring growth, 
the model also uses reflection-with-action methods, a component 
of action research theory, as the primary vehicle for assisting young 
adults to develop the necessary labor market skills to compete for a 
job and inevitably achieve some level of professional independence 
(that is, the ability to work for many employers because of achiev-
ing required market skills). Reflection-with-action is used as a rubric 
STAGES OF WORKPLACE LITERACY
SECTORS OF 
WORKPLACE 
LITERACY 
CONCEPT 
RECOGNITION
MULTIPLE 
WORKPLACE 
PERSPECTIVES
COMPREHENSION 
OF BUSINESS 
PROCESSES
WORKPLACE 
COMPETENCE
PROFESSIONAL 
INDEPENDENCE
Cognition 
Technology 
Business 
Culture 
Socio-
Economic 
Values 
Community 
and Ethnic 
Solidarity
Self-Esteem

282
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
for a variety of methods, involving reflection in relation to learning 
activities. Reflection has received a number of definitions from differ-
ent sources in the literature. Here, “ reflection-with-action”  carries the 
resonance of Schö n’ s (1983) twin constructs: “ reflection-on-action”  
and “ reflection-in-action,”  which emphasize (respectively) reflec-
tion in retrospect and reflection to determine what actions to take in 
the present or immediate future (Langer, 2003). Dewey (1933) and 
Hullfish and Smith (1978) also suggest that the use of reflection sup-
ports an implied purpose. Their formulation suggests the possibility 
of reflection that is future oriented; what we might call “ reflection-to-
action.”  These are methodological orientations covered by the rubric. 
Reflection-with-action is critical to the educational and workplace 
assimilation process of Gen Y. While many people reflect, it is in 
being reflective that people bring about “ an orientation to their every-
day lives”  (Moon, 2000). The LWMA incorporates reflection-with-
action methods as fundamental strategies for facilitating development 
and assimilation. These methods are also implemented interactively, 
for example in mentoring, reflective learning journals, and group dis-
cussions. Indeed, as stated by De Jong (2014), “ Social exclusion is 
multi-dimensional, ranging from unemployment, barriers to educa-
tion and health care, and marginalized living circumstances”  (p. 94). 
Ultimately, teaching socially excluded youth to reflect-with-action is 
the practice that will help them mature across the LWMA stages 
and inevitably, achieve levels of inclusion in the labor market and in 
citizenship.
Implications for New Pathways for Digital Talent
The salient implications of the LWMA, as a method of discover-
ing and managing disadvantaged Gen Y youth in communities, 
can be categorized across three frames: demographic shifts in talent 
resources, economic sustainability and integration and trust among 
vested local interest groups.
Demographic Shifts in Talent Resources
The LWMA can be used as a predictive analytic tool for capturing 
and cultivating the abilities in the new generation of digital natives 

283
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
from disadvantaged local communities. This young talent has the 
advantage of more exposure to technologies, which senior workers 
had to learn later in their careers. This puts them ahead of the curve 
with respect to basic digital skills. Having the capacity to employ tal-
ent locally and provide incentives for these individuals to advance can 
alleviate the significant strain placed on firms who suffer from high 
turnover in outsourced positions. Investing in viable Gen Y under-
served youth can help firms close the skills gap that is prevalent in the 
emerging labor force.
Economic Sustainability
As globalization ebbs and flows, cities need to establish themselves 
as global centers, careful not to slip into market obsolescence, espe-
cially when facing difficulties in labor force supply chains. In order to 
alleviate the difficulty in supplying industry-ready professionals to a 
city only recently maturing into the IT-centric business world, firms 
need to adapt to an “ on-demand”  gig approach. The value drawn from 
this paradigm lies in its cyclical nature. By obtaining localized  human 
capital at a lower cost, firms can generate a fundable supply chain of 
talent and diversity as markets change over time.
Integration and Trust
Porter and Kramer (2011) postulate that companies need to formulate 
a new method of integrating business profits and societal responsi-
bilities. They state, “ the solution lies in the principle of shared value, 
which involves creating economic value in a way that also creates value 
for society by addressing its needs and challenges”  (p. 64). Porter and 
Kramer suggest that companies need to alter corporate performance 
to include social progress. The LWMA provides the mechanism, the-
ory, and measurement that is consistent with this direction and pro-
vides the vehicle that establishes a shared partnership of trust among 
business, education, and community needs. Each of the interested 
parties experiences progress toward its financial and social objectives. 
Specifically, companies are able to attract diverse and socially excluded 
local talent, and have the constituents trained specifically for its needs 
and for an economic return that fits its corporate models. As a result, 

284
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
the community adds jobs, which reduces crime rates and increases tax 
revenue. The funding corporation then establishes an ecosystem that 
provides a shared value of performance that underserved and excluded 
youth bring to the business.
Global Implications for Sources of Talent
The increasing social exclusion of Gen Y youth is a growing prob-
lem in almost every country. Questions remain about how to establish 
systemic solutions that can create sustainable and scalable programs 
that provide equity in access to education for this population. This 
access to education is undoubtedly increasing employability, which 
indirectly contributes to better citizenship for underserved youth. 
Indeed, there is a widening gap between the “ haves”  and the “ have-
nots”  throughout the world. Firms can use tools like the LWMA to 
provide a model that can improve educational attainment of under-
served youth by establishing skill-based certificates with universities, 
coupled with a different employment-to-hire model. The results have 
shown that students accelerate in these types of programs and ulti-
mately, find more success in labor market assimilation. The data sug-
gests that traditional degree programs that require full-time study at 
university as the primary preparation for labor market employment 
may not be the most appropriate approach to solving the growing 
social inequality issue among youth.
Conclusion
This chapter has made the argument that Gen Y employees are “ digi-
tal natives”  who have the attributes to assist companies to transform 
their workforce and meet the accelerated change in the competitive 
landscape. Organizations today need to adapt their staff to operate 
under the auspices of ROD by creating processes that can determine 
the strategic value of new emerging technologies and establish a cul-
ture that is more “ change ready.”  Most executives across industries 
recognize that digital technologies are the most powerful variable to 
maintaining and expanding company markets.
Gen Y employees provide a natural fit for dealing with emerg-
ing digital technologies. However, success with integrating Gen Y 

285
INTEGRATING GENERATION Y
employees is contingent upon baby boomer and Gen X manage-
ment adapting new leadership philosophies and procedures that are 
suited to meet the expectations and needs of millennials. Ignoring the 
unique needs of Gen Y employees will likely result in an incongruent 
organization that suffers high turnover of young employees who will 
ultimately seek a more entrepreneurial environment. Firms should 
consider investing in non-traditional Gen Y youth from underserved 
and socially excluded populations as alternate sources of talent.


287
12
Toward Best Practices
Introduction
The previous chapters provided the foundation for the formation of 
“ best practices”  to implement and sustain responsive organizational 
dynamism (ROD). First, it is important to define what we mean by 
best practices and specify which components comprise that definition. 
Best practices are defined as generally accepted ways of doing spe-
cific functions or processes by a particular profession or industry. Best 
practices, in the context of ROD, are a set of processes, behaviors, and 
organizational structures that tend to provide successful foundations 
to implement and sustain organizational learning. I defined respon-
sive organizational dynamism as the disposition of a company to 
respond at the organizational level to the volatility of advancing tech-
nologies— ones that challenge the organization to manage a ­constant 
state of dynamic and unpredictable change. Second, best practices are 
those that need to be attributed to multiple communities of practice 
as well as to the different professions or disciplines within a learning 
organization.
However, these multiple tiers of best practices need to be integrated 
and to operate with one another to be considered under the rubric. 
Indeed, best practices contained solely within a discipline or com-
munity are limited in their ability to operate on an organization-wide 
level. It is the objective of this chapter, therefore, to formulate a set of 
distinctive yet integrated best practices that can establish and support 
ROD through organizational learning. Each component of the set of 
best practices needs to be accompanied by its own maturity arc, which 
defines and describes the stages of development and the dimensions 
that comprise best practices. Each stage defines a linear path of con-
tinued progress until a set of best practices is reached. In this way, 
organizations can assess where they are in terms of best practices and 
determine what they need to do to progress. Ultimately, each maturity 

288
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
arc will represent a subset of the overall set of best practices for the 
organization.
The discipline that lays the foundation for ROD is information 
technology (IT). Therefore, the role of the chief IT executive needs to 
be at the base of organizational best practices. As such, I start build-
ing the organizational best practices model with the chief IT execu-
tive at the core.
Chief IT Executive
I use the title “ chief IT executive”  to name the most senior IT indi-
vidual in an organization. Because of the lack of best practices in this 
profession, a number of different titles are used to describe this job. 
While these titles are distinct among themselves, I have found that 
they are not consistently followed in organizations. However, it is 
important to understand these titles and their distinctions, particu-
larly because an organizational learning practitioner will encounter 
them in practice. These titles and roles are listed and discussed next:
Chief information officer (CIO) : This individual is usually the most 
senior IT executive in an organization, although not every 
organization has such a person. The CIO is not necessarily 
the most technical of people or even someone who has come 
through the “ ranks”  of IT. Instead, this individual is consid-
ered an executive who understands how technology needs to 
be integrated within the organization. CIOs typically have 
other general IT executives and managers who report directly 
to them. As shown in the Siemens case study, there can be a 
number of alternate levels of CIOs, from corporate CIOs to 
local CIOs of a company division. For the purposes of this 
discussion, I look at the corporate CIO, who is considered part 
of the senior executive management team. My research on 
chief executive officer (CEO) perceptions of technology and 
business strategy showed that only a small percentage of CIOs 
report directly to the CEO of their organization, so it would 
be incorrect to generalize that they report to the most senior 
executive. In most cases, the CIO reports to the chief oper-
ating officer (COO) or the chief financial officer (CFO). As 

289
Toward Best Practices
stated, the role of the CIO is to manage information so that it 
can be used for business needs and strategy. Technology, then, 
is considered a valuable part of knowledge management from a 
strategic perspective as opposed to just a technical one.
Chief technology officer (CTO) : This individual, unlike the CIO, is 
very much a senior technical person. The role of the CTO is to 
ensure that the organization is using the best and most cost-
effective technology to achieve its goals. One could argue that 
the CTO holds more of a research-and-development type of 
position. In many organizations, the CTO reports directly to the 
CIO and is seen as a component of the overall IT infrastructure. 
However, some companies, like Ravell and HTC, only have a 
CTO and view technology more from the technical perspective.
Chief knowledge officer (CKO) and chief digital officer (CDO) : This 
role derives from library management organizations because of 
the relevance of the word knowledge and/or data.  It also com-
petes somewhat with the CIO’ s role when organizations view 
technology from a perspective that relates more to knowledge. 
In larger organizations, the CKO/CDO may report directly 
to the CIO. In its purest role, the CKO/CDO is responsible 
for developing an overall infrastructure for managing knowl-
edge, including intellectual capital, sharing of information, 
and worker communication. Based on this description, the 
CKO/CDO is not necessarily associated with technology but 
is more often considered part of the technology infrastructure 
due to the relevance of knowledge and data to technology.
To define best practices for this function, it is necessary to under-
stand the current information and statistics about what these people 
do and how they do it. Most of the statistical data about the roles and 
responsibilities of chief IT executives are reported under the auspices of 
the CIO. According to an article by Jerry Gregoire in CIO  magazine in 
March 2002, 63% of IT executives held the title CIO, while 13% were 
CTOs; there were few to no specific statistics available on the title of 
CKO and CDO, however, the CDO role has become more relevant 
over the past five years given the importance of social media and digital 
transformations. This report further supported the claim that there is 
limited use of the CKO title and function in organizations at this time.

290
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
From a structural point of view, 63% of IT organizations are cen-
trally structured, while 23% are decentralized with a central reporting 
structure. However, 14% are decentralized without any central head-
quarters or reporting structure. From a spending perspective, orga-
nizations spend most of their budgets on integrating technology into 
existing applications and daily processing (36% of budget). Twenty-
six percent is related to investments in emerging or new technologies, 
24% is based on investing in e-commerce activities, and 24% is spent 
on customer relationship management (CRM), which is defined as 
applications that engage in assisting organizations to better under-
stand and support their customer base. Twenty-five percent is spent 
on staff development and retention.
Compensation of IT chief executives still comes predominantly 
from base salary, as opposed to bonus or equity positions with the 
company. This suggests that their role is not generally viewed as top 
management or partner-level in the business. This opinion was sup-
ported by the results of my CEO study, discussed in Chapter  2. The 
issue of executive seniority can be determined by whether the chief 
IT executive is corporate driven or business unit driven. This means 
that some executives have corporate-wide responsibilities as opposed 
to a specific area or business unit. The issue of where IT depart-
ments provide value to the organization was discussed in Chapter  3, 
which showed that there are indeed different ways to manage and 
structure the role of IT. However, in general, corporate IT execu-
tives are responsible for IT infrastructure, shared technology services, 
and global technology architecture, while business unit CIOs con-
centrate on strategically understanding how to use applications and 
processes to support their business units. This is graphically depicted 
in Figure  12.1.
From a best practices perspective, the following list has historically 
suggested what chief IT executives should be doing. The list empha-
sizes team building, coaching, motivating, and mentoring as tech-
niques for implementing these best practices.
Strategic thinking : Must understand the business strategy and 
competitive landscape of the company to apply technology in 
the most valuable way to the organization.

291
Toward Best Practices
Industry expertise : Must have the ability to understand the prod-
uct and services that the company produces.
Create and manage change : Must have the ability to create 
change, through technology, in the operating and business 
processes of the organization to gain efficiency and competi-
tive advantage.
Communications : Must have the ability to communicate ideas, 
to give direction, to listen, to negotiate, to persuade, and to 
resolve conflicts. Executives must also be able to translate 
technical information to those who are not technologically 
literate or are outside IT and need to be comfortable speaking 
in public forums and in front of other executives.
Relationship building : Must have the ability to interface with 
peers, superiors, and customers, by establishing and main-
taining strong rapport, bond, and trust between individuals.
Business knowledge : Must have the ability to develop strong busi-
ness acumen and having peripheral vision across all functional 
areas of the business.
Technology proficiency : Must have the knowledge to identify 
appropriate technologies that are the most pragmatic for the 
business, can be delivered quickly at the lowest cost, produce 
an impact on the bottom line (ROI), and have longevity.
Local applications
Standard IT applications
Shared IT technology
services
Public available infrastructure
(Internet, portals, etc.)
IT infrastructure
Business level CIOs
Corporate CIOs
Figure  12.1    Business-level versus corporate-level CIOs.

292
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Leadership : Must be a visionary person, inspirational, influential, 
creative, fair, and open minded with individuals within and 
outside the organization.
Management skills : Must have the ability to direct and supervise 
people, projects, resources, budget, and vendors.
Hiring and retention : Must have the ability to recognize, culti-
vate, and retain IT talent.
While this list is not exhaustive, it provides a general perspec-
tive, one that appears generic; that is, many management positions 
in an organization might contain similar requirements. A survey of 
500 CIOs conducted by CIO  magazine (March 2002) rated the top 
three most important concerns among this community in terms of 
importance:
	
1.	Communications: 70%
	
2.	Business understanding: 58%
	
3.	Strategic thinking: 46%
What is interesting about this statistic is that only 10% of CIOs 
identified technical proficiency as critical for their jobs. This find-
ing supports the notion that CIOs need to familiarize themselves 
with business issues, as opposed to just technical ones. Furthermore, 
the majority of a CIO’ s time today has been recorded as spent com-
municating with other business executives (33%) and managing IT 
staffs (28%). Other common activities reported in the survey were as 
follows:
•	 Operating the baseline infrastructure and applications
•	 Acting as technology visionary
•	 Implementing IT portions of new business initiatives
•	 Designing infrastructure and manage infrastructure projects
•	 Allocating technology resources
•	 Measuring and communicate results
•	 Serving as the company spokesperson on IT-related matters
•	 Selecting and managing product and service providers
•	 Recruiting, retaining, and developing IT staff
•	 Participating in company and business unit strategy 
development

293
Toward Best Practices
These results further confirm that chief IT executives define best 
practices, based on understanding and supporting business strategy.
This survey also reported common barriers that chief IT executives 
have to being successful. The overarching barrier that most IT execu-
tives face is the constant struggle between the business expectation to 
drive change and improve processes, and the need to reduce costs and 
complete projects faster. The detailed list of reported problems by rank 
was as follows:
	
1.	Lack of key staff, skill sets, and retention: 40%
	
2.	Inadequate budgets and prioritizing: 37%
	
3.	Shortage of time for strategic thinking: 31%
	
4.	Volatile market conditions: 22%
	
5.	Ineffective communications with users: 18%
	
6.	Poor vendor support and service levels, and quality: 16%
	
7.	Overwhelming pace of technological change: 14%
	
8.	Disconnection with executive peers: 12%
	
9.	Difficulty proving the value of IT: 10%
	 10.	Counterproductive office politics: 6%
Chief IT executives also felt that their roles were ultimately influ-
enced by two leading factors: (1) changes in the nature and capabilities 
of technology, and (2) changes in the business environment, includ-
ing marketplace, competitive, and regulatory pressures. This can be 
graphically viewed in Figure 12.2.
Figure  12.2 has a striking similarity to Figure  3.1 outlining ROD. 
That diagram represented technology as an independent variable cre-
ating the need for ROD, which is composed of strategic integration 
and cultural assimilation, as shown in Figure  12.3.
Figure  12.3 shows many similarities to Figure  12.2. The difference 
between these two diagrams defines what is missing from many best 
practices: the inclusion of organizational learning practices that would 
enable chief IT executives to better manage business and technology 
issues. In effect, if organizational learning techniques were included, 
they could reduce many barriers between business and IT. Thus, the 
solution to providing best practices for the IT community rests with 
the inclusion of organizational learning along the constructs of ROD.
The inclusion of organizational learning is crucial because the best 
practices, as reported among the community of chief IT executives, has 

294
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Technology
drivers
Business
environment
Strategic
options
Imposes
Inspires
Figure  12.2    Chief IT executives— factors influencing strategic options.
Technology
creates
Symptoms and
implications
Responsive
organizational
dynamism
Acceleration of events that
require diﬀerent
infrastructures and
organizational processes
Requires
Strategic
integration
Cultural
assimilation
Organization
structures
(system)
Individual
actions
Renegotiation of
relationship
Organizational learning techniques
Figure  12.3    ROD and organizational learning techniques.

295
Toward Best Practices
not produced the performance outcomes sought by chief executives. 
I refer to Chapter  2, in which I first defined the IT dilemma. While 
many IT initiatives are credible, they often fall short of including 
critical business issues. As a result, IT project goals are not ­completely 
attained. This suggests that the problem is more related to the process 
and details of how to better implement good ideas. As further sup-
port for this position, the Concours Group (an international executive 
managing consulting organization) published a list of emerging roles 
and responsibilities that chief IT executives will need to undertake as 
part of their jobs in the near future (Cash & Pearlson, 2004):
Shared services leader : More companies are moving to the shared 
services model for corporate staff functions. CIOs’  experi-
ences may be invaluable in developing and managing these 
organizations.
Executive account manager : More companies today are involv-
ing the CIO in the management of relationships between the 
company and its customers.
Process leader : As companies move toward organizing around 
major business processes, a CIO is in a good role to temporar-
ily lead this effort since applications and databases are among 
the business resources that must be revamped to implement 
process management.
Innovation leader : A CIO is starting to act as the innovation 
leader of the corporation when a company is seeking to 
achieve substantial improvements in process performance or 
operational efficiencies, or to implement IT, since innovation 
may center on the application of IT.
Supply chain executive:  Purchasing, warehousing, and transpor-
tation are among the most information-intensive activities 
undertaken by a business. As companies look to improve these 
overall processes, the CIO may become the most knowledge-
able executive about the supply chain.
Information architect : Companies are recognizing the benefit of 
a consolidated view of customers, vendors, employees, and so 
on. CIOs are finding themselves taking on the leadership role 
of information architect by cultivating commitment and con-
sensus around this challenging task.

296
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Change leader : CIOs are playing an increasingly important role 
in business change management. Their role is in either direct 
change leadership (developing new business models) or, more 
often, indirect; that is, change process is behind the scenes 
(get other leaders to think about new possibilities).
Business process outsourcing leader : CIOs tend to have some of 
the most extensive experience in company outsourcing. This 
makes them a logical internal consultant and management 
practice leader in business process outsourcing.
These issues all suggest that the role of the chief IT executive is 
growing and that the need for these executives to become better inte-
grated with the rest of their organizations is crucial for their success. 
Much more relevant, though, is the need for ROD and the role that 
the chief IT executive has as a member of the overall community. To 
create best practices that embrace organizational learning and foster 
ROD, a chief IT executive maturity arc needs to be developed that 
includes the industry best practices presented here integrated with 
organizational learning components.
The chief IT executive best practices arc is an instrument for assess-
ing the business maturity of chief IT executives. The arc may evaluate 
a chief IT executive’ s business leadership using a grid that measures 
competencies ranging from essential knowledge in technology to 
more complex uses of technology in critical business thinking. Thus, 
the chief IT executive best practices arc provides executives with a 
method of integrating technology knowledge and business by present-
ing a structured approach of self-assessment and defined milestones.
The model measures five principal facets of a technology executive: 
cognitive, organization culture, management values, business ethics, 
and executive presence. Each dimension or sector is measured in five 
stages of maturation that guide the chief IT executive’ s growth. The 
first facet calls for becoming reflectively aware  about one’ s existing knowl-
edge of technology and what it can do for the organization. The second 
calls for other centeredness , in which chief IT executives become aware 
of the multiplicity of technology perspectives available (e.g., other busi-
ness views of how technology can benefit the organization). The third is 
comprehension of the technology process , in which a chief IT executive can 
begin to merge technology issues with business concepts and functions.

297
Toward Best Practices
The fourth is stable technology integration , meaning that the chief 
IT executive understands how technology can be used and is resilient 
to nonauthentic sources of business knowledge. Stage 4 represents an 
ongoing implementation of both technology and business concepts. 
The fifth stage is technology leadership , in which chief IT executives 
have reached a stage at which their judgment on using technology and 
business is independent and can be used to self-educate from within. 
Thus, as chief IT executives grow in knowledge of technology and 
business, they can become increasingly more other centered, inte-
grated, stable, and autonomous with the way they use their business 
minds and express their executive leadership and character.
Definitions of Maturity Stages and Dimension Variables 
in the Chief IT Executive Best Practices Arc
Maturity Stages
	
1.	Technology competence and recognition : This first stage repre-
sents the chief IT executive’ s capacity to learn, conceptualize, 
and articulate key issues relating to cognitive technological 
skills, organization culture/etiquette, management value sys-
tems, business ethics, and executive presence needed to be a 
successful chief IT executive in business.
	
2.	Multiplicity of technology perspectives : This stage indicates the 
chief IT executive’ s ability to integrate multiple points of view 
about technology from others in various levels of workplace 
hierarchies. Using these new perspectives, the chief IT execu-
tive augments his or her skills with the technology necessary 
for career success, expands his or her management value sys-
tem, is increasingly motivated to act ethically, and enhances 
his or her executive presence.
	
3.	Comprehension of technology process : Maturing chief IT executives 
accumulate increased understanding of workplace cooperation, 
competition, and advancement as they gain new cognitive skills 
about technology and a facility with business culture/etiquette, 
expand their management value system, perform business/
workplace actions to improve ethics about business and technol-
ogy, and develop effective levels of executive presence.

298
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
4.	Stable technology integration : Chief IT executives achieve inte-
gration with the business community when they have levels 
of cognitive and technological ability, organization etiquette/
culture, management values, business ethics, and execu-
tive presence appropriate for performing job duties not only 
adequately but also competitively with peers and even higher-
ranking executives in the workplace hierarchy.
	
5.	Technology leadership : Leadership is attained by the chief IT 
executive when he or she can employ cognitive and tech-
nological skills, organization etiquette, management, a 
sense of business ethics, and a sense of executive presence 
to compete effectively for executive positions. This chief IT 
executive is capable of obtaining increasingly executive-level 
positions through successful communication and workplace 
performance.
Performance Dimensions
	
1.	Technology cognition : Concerns skills specifically related 
to learning, applying, and creating resources in IT, which 
include the necessary knowledge of complex operations. This 
dimension essentially establishes the CIO as technically pro-
ficient and forms a basis for movement to more complex and 
mature stages of development.
	
2.	Organizational culture : The knowledge and practice of proper 
etiquette in organizational settings with regard to dress, tele-
phone and in-person interactions, punctuality, work comple-
tion, conflict resolution, deference, and other protocols in 
workplace hierarchies.
	
3.	Management values : Measures the individual’ s ability to articu-
late and act on mainstream organizational values credited with 
shaping the work ethic— independent initiative, dedication, 
honesty, and personal identification with career goals, based 
on the organization’ s philosophy of management protocol.
	
4.	Business ethics : Reflects the individual’ s commitment to the 
education and professional advancement of other employees 
in technology.

299
Toward Best Practices
	
5.	Executive presence : Involves the chief IT executive’ s view of 
the role of an executive in business and the capacity to succeed 
in tandem with other executives. Aspects include a devotion 
to learning and self-improvement, self-evaluation, the ability 
to acknowledge and resolve business conflicts, and resilience 
when faced with personal and professional challenges.
Figure  12.4 shows a graphical view of the chief IT executive best 
practices arc. Each cell in the arc provides the condition for assess-
ment. The complete arc is provided in Table  12.1.
Chief Executive Officer
When attempting to define CEO best practices, one is challenged with 
the myriad material that attempts to determine the broad, yet impor-
tant, role of the CEO. As with most best practices, they are typically 
based on trends and percentages of what most CEOs do— assuming, 
of course, that the companies they work for are successful. That is, if 
their organization is successful, then their practices must be as well. 
This type of associative thinking leads to what scholars often term 
false generalizations. Indeed, these types of inadequate methods lead 
to false judgments that foster business trends, which are misinter-
preted as best practices. Reputation is what would better define these 
trends, which usually after a period of time can become ineffective 
Developmental dimensions of maturing
Dimension skill
Technology 
competence 
and recognition
Multiplicity 
of  technology 
perspectives
Comprehension 
of technology 
process
Stable 
technology 
integration
Technology 
leadership
Technology 
cognition
Organization 
culture
Management 
values
Business 
ethics
Executive 
presence
Figure  12. 4    Chief IT executive best practices arc - conditions for assessment.

300
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  12.1    The Chief IT Executive Best Practices Arc
DIMENSION VARIABLE
TECHNOLOGY COMPETENCE AND 
RECOGNITION
MULTIPLICITY OF TECHNOLOGY 
PERSPECTIVES
Technology Cognition
Understands how technology 
operates in business. Has mastered 
how systems are developed, 
hardware interfaces, and the 
software development life cycle. 
Has mastery of hardware, 
compilers, run-time systems. Has 
core competencies in distributed 
processing, database development, 
object-oriented component 
architecture, and project 
management. Is competent with 
main platform operating systems 
such as UNIX, WINDOWS, and MAC. 
Has the core ability to relate 
technology concepts to other 
business experiences. Can also 
make decisions about what 
technology is best suited for a 
particular project and organization. 
Can be taught how to expand the 
use of technology and can apply it 
to other business situations.
Understands that technology 
can have multiple 
perspectives. Able to analyze 
what are valid vs. invalid 
opinions about business uses 
of technology. Can create 
objective ideas from multiple 
technology views without 
getting stuck on individual 
biases. An ability to identify 
and draw upon multiple 
perspectives available from 
business sources about 
technology. Developing a 
discriminating ability with 
respect to choices available. 
Realistic and objective 
judgment, as demonstrated by 
the applicability of the 
technology material drawn for 
a particular project or task 
and tied to functional/
pragmatic results.
Organization Culture
Understands that technology can be 
viewed by other organizations in 
different ways. Uses technology as 
a medium of communication. 
Understands that certain 
technological solutions, Web pages, 
and training methods may not fit 
all business needs and preferences 
of the business. Has the ability to 
recommend/suggest technological 
solutions to suite other business 
needs and preferences
Seeks to use technology as a 
vehicle to learn more about 
organization cultures and 
mindsets. Strives to care 
about what others are 
communicating and embraces 
these opinions. Tries to 
understand and respect 
technologies that differ from 
own. Understands basic 
technological needs of others.
(Continued)

301
Toward Best Practices
Table  12.1 (Continued)    The Chief IT Executive Best Practices Arc
COMPREHENSION OF 
TECHNOLOGY PROCESS 
STABLE TECHNOLOGY 
INTEGRATION 
TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP 
Has the ability to relate 
various technical concepts 
and organize them with 
non-technical business 
issues. Can operate with 
both automated and manual 
business solutions. Can use 
technology to expand 
reasoning, logic, and what-if 
scenarios. Ability to use the 
logic of computer programs 
to integrate the elements of 
non-technological tasks and 
business problems. Ability to 
discern the templates that 
technology has to offer in 
order to approach everyday 
business problems. This 
involves the hypothetical 
(inductive/deductive) logical 
business skill.
Knowledge of technology is 
concrete, accurate, and precise, 
broad and resistant to interference 
from non-authentic business 
sources. Ability to resist or recover 
from proposed technology that is 
not realistic— and can recover 
resiliently.
Methods and judgment in a 
multidimensional business 
world is independent, critical 
discernment. Knowledge of 
technology and skills in 
technology can be transferred 
and can be used to 
self-educate within and 
outside of technology. Can 
use technology for creative 
purposes to solve business 
challenges and integrate with 
executive management views.
Can deal with multiple 
dimensions of criticism 
about technology. Can 
develop relationships 
(cooperative) that are 
dynamic and based on 
written communication and 
oral discourse. Ability to 
create business relations 
outside of technology 
departments. Has an 
appreciation of cyberspace 
as a communication 
space— a place wide open to 
dialogue (spontaneous), to 
give and take, or other than 
voyeuristic, one-sidedness. 
Ability to produce in 
teamwork situations, rather 
than solely in isolation.
Loyalty and fidelity to relations in 
multiple organizations. 
Commitment to criticism and 
acceptance of multiple levels of 
distance and local business 
relationships. Ability to sustain 
non-traditional types of inputs 
from multiple sources.
Can utilize and integrate 
multidimensions of business 
solutions in a self-reliant way. 
Developing alone if necessary 
using other technical 
resources. Can dynamically 
select types of interdependent 
and dependent organizational 
relationships. Ability to 
operate within multiple 
dimensions of business 
cultures, which may demand 
self-reliance, independence of 
initiative, and interactive 
communications.
(Continued)

302
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  12.1 (Continued)    The Chief IT Executive Best Practices Arc
DIMENSION VARIABLE 
TECHNOLOGY COMPETENCE AND 
RECOGNITION 
MULTIPLICITY OF 
TECHNOLOGY PERSPECTIVES 
Management Values
Technology and cultural sensitivity. 
Global communication, education, 
and workplace use of technology 
can be problematic— subject to 
false generalizations and 
preconceived notions. Awareness 
of assumptions about how 
technology will be viewed by other 
organizations and about biases 
about types of technology (MAC vs. 
PC).
Can appreciate need to obtain 
multiple sources of 
information and opinion. The 
acceptance of multi-
dimensional values in human 
character.
Business Ethics
Using technology with honesty re: 
privacy of access and information. 
Development of ethical policies 
governing business uses of the 
Internet, research, intellectual 
property rights and plagiarism.
The use of information in a fair 
way— comparison of facts 
against equal sources of 
business information. 
Compassion for business 
information for which sources 
are limited because of 
inequality of technology 
access. Compassion for 
sharing information with 
other business units from a 
sense of inequality.
Executive Presence
Has accurate perception of one’ s 
own potential and capabilities in 
relation to technology in the 
business— the technologically 
realizable executive self.
Understands how other 
executives can view self from 
virtual and multiple 
perspectives. Understands or 
has awareness of the 
construction of self that occurs 
in business. Focuses on views 
of other executives in multiple 
settings. Understands that the 
self (through technology) is 
open for more fluid 
constructions, able to 
incorporate diverse views in 
multiple settings.
(Continued)

303
Toward Best Practices
and unpopular. We must also remember the human element of suc-
cess; certain individuals succeed based on natural instincts and talent, 
hard work and drive, and so on. These components of success should 
not be confused with theories that are scalable and replicable to prac-
tice; that is, what best practices need to accomplish.
This section focuses on technology best practices of the CEO. These 
best practices are based on my research as well as other positions and 
Table  12.1 (Continued)    The Chief IT Executive Best Practices Arc
COMPREHENSION OF 
TECHNOLOGY PROCESS 
STAB LE TECHNOLOGY 
INTEGRATION 
TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP 
Can operate within multiple 
dimensions of value systems 
and can prioritize multi-
tasking events that are 
consistent with value priorities. 
Ability to assign value to new 
and diverse technology 
alternatives—integrating 
them within a system of 
pre-existing business and 
technology values.
Testing value systems in new ways 
due to technology is integrated 
with long-term values and goals 
for business achievement. Some 
concepts are naturally persistent 
and endure despite new arenas in 
the technological era.
Use of technology and business 
are based on formed 
principles as opposed to 
dynamic influences or 
impulses. Formed principles 
establish the basis for 
navigating through, or 
negotiating the diversity of 
business influences and 
impulses.
Consistent values displayed on 
multiple business 
communications, 
deliverables of content, and 
dedication to authenticity. 
Maintains consistency in 
integrating values within 
technology business issues.
Technology is a commitment in all 
aspects of value systems, 
including agility in managing 
multiple business commitments. 
Commitment to greater openness 
of mind to altering traditional and 
non-technological methods.
Technological creativity with 
self-defined principles and 
beliefs. Risk-taking in 
technology-based ventures. 
Utilizing technology to expand 
one’ s arenas of business 
freedom. Exploring the 
business-liberating 
capacities of technology.
Operationalizes technology to 
unify multiple components of 
the self and understands its 
appropriate behaviors in 
varying executive situations.
Has regulated an identity of self 
from a multiplicity of executive 
venues. Methods of business 
interaction creates positive value 
systems that generate confidence 
about operating in multiple 
business communities.
Acceptance and belief in a 
multidimensional business 
world of the self. Can determine 
comfortably the authenticity of 
other executives and their view 
of the self. Can confirm 
disposition independently from 
others’  valuations, both 
internally and from other 
organization cultures. Beliefs 
direct and control 
multidimensional executive 
growth.

304
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
facts that provide a defendable context of how and why they appear to be 
effective. However, as with the chief IT executive model, best practices 
cannot be attained without an arc that integrates mature organizational 
learning and developmental theories. Many of the CEO best practices 
reconcile with my interviews with CEOs and, in particular, with the two 
CEO case studies (of ICAP and HTC) discussed in Chapter  8. Other 
published definitions and support are referenced in my presentation.
In February 2002, Hackett Benchmarking, a part of Answerthink 
Corporation, issued its best practices for IT. Its documentation stated:
In compiling its 2002 best practices trend data, Hackett evaluated the 
effectiveness (quality and value) and efficiency (cost and productivity) 
of the information technology function across five performance dimen-
sions: strategic alignment with the business; ability to partner with 
internal and external customers; use of technology; organization; and 
processes.*
The findings, as they apply to the CEO function, provide the fol-
lowing generalizations:
•	 There was an 85% increase in the number of CIOs who 
reported directly to the CEO. This increase would suggest 
that CEOs need to directly manage the CIO function because 
of its importance to business strategy.
•	 CEOs supporting outsourcing did not receive the cost-cut-
ting results they had hoped for. In fact, most broke even. This 
suggests that CEOs should not view outsourcing as a cost-
cutting measure, but rather foster its use if there are identifi-
able business benefits.
*	Hackett Benchmarking has tracked the performance of nearly 2,000 complex, 
global organizations and identified key differentiators between world-class and aver-
age companies, across a diverse set of industries. In addition to information tech-
nology, staff functions studied include finance, human resources, procurement, and 
strategic decision making, among others. Study participants comprised 80% of the 
Dow Jones Industrials, two‑thirds of the Fortune 100, and 60% of the Dow Jones 
Global Titans Index. Among the IT study participants are Agilent Technologies, 
Alcoa, Capital One Financial Corporation, Honeywell International, Metropolitan 
Life Insurance, SAP America, and TRW. (From PR Newswire, February 2002.)

305
Toward Best Practices
•	 CEOs have found that IT organizations that have centralized 
operations save more money, have fewer help-line calls than 
decentralized organizations, and do not sacrifice service qual-
ity. This suggests that the CEOs should consider less busi-
ness-specific support structures, especially when they conduct 
their business at multiple locations.
•	 CEOs are increasingly depending on the CIO for advice 
on business improvements using technology. As a result, 
their view is that IT professionals need advanced business 
degrees.
•	 CEOs should know that consistent use of IT standards has 
enabled firms to trim IT development costs by 41%, which 
has reduced costs for end-user support and training opera-
tions by 17%.
•	 CEOs need to increase support for risk management. Only 
77% of average companies maintained disaster recovery plans.
As we can see from these generalizations, they are essentially 
based on what CEOs are doing, and what they have experienced. 
Unfortunately, this survey addressed little about what CEOs know 
and exactly what their role should be with respect to overall man-
agement, participation, and learning of technology. These “ best 
practices”  are particularly lacking in the area of organizational 
learning and the abilities of the firm to respond to changing condi-
tions as opposed to searching for general solutions. Let us look at 
each of these generalizations and discuss what they lack in terms of 
organizational learning.
CIO Direct Reporting to the CEO
The fact that more CIOs are reporting directly to the CEO shows an 
escalation of their importance. But, what is more relevant as a best 
practice is what that relationship is about. Some report about how 
often they meet. What is more important is the content of the inter-
actions. What should the CEOs know, how should the CEOs con-
duct themselves? What management and learning techniques do they 
apply? How do they measure results? My CEO interview research 
exposed the fact that many CEOs simply did not know what they 

306
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
needed to do to better manage the CIO and what they needed to 
know in general about technology.
Outsourcing
Outsourcing can be a tricky endeavor. In Chapter  3, I introduced 
the concept of technology as a driver and a supporter. I presented a 
model that shows how emerging technologies are initially drivers and 
need to be evaluated and measured using similar models embraced by 
marketing-oriented communities. I then showed how, through matu-
ration, emerging technologies become supporters, behaving more as a 
­commodity within the organization. I explained that only then can a 
technology be considered for outsourcing because supporter operations 
are measured by their economies of scale, reduced costs, increased 
productivity, or both (efficiency). Figure  12.5 shows that cycle.
Thus, what is missing from the survey information is the knowl-
edge of where such technologies were with respect to this technology 
life cycle. Knowing this dramatically affects what the CEO should be 
expecting and what organizational learning concepts and factors are 
needed to maximize benefit to the organization.
Centralization versus Decentralization of IT
The entire question of how IT should or should not be organized 
must be based on a business that implements ROD. ROD includes 
the component called cultural assimilation, which provides a process, 
Mini loop technology enhancements
Technology
driver
Evaluation
cycle
Driver
maturation
Support
status
Replacement or
outsource
Economies
of scale
Figure  12.5   Driver-to-supporter life cycle.

307
Toward Best Practices
using organizational learning, to help businesses determine the best 
IT structure. To simply assume that centralizing operations saves 
money is far too narrow; the organization may need to spend more 
money on a specific technology in the short term to get long-term 
benefits. Where is this included in the best practices formula? My 
research has shown that more mature uses of technology in organiza-
tions require more decentralization of IT personnel within the busi-
ness units. The later stages of IT organizational structure at Ravell 
supported this position.
CIO Needs Advanced Degrees
I am not sure that anyone could ever disagree with the value of 
advanced degrees. Nevertheless, the survey failed to provide content 
on what type of degree would be most appropriate. It also neglected to 
address the issue of what may need to be learned at the undergradu-
ate level. Finally, what forms of education should be provided on the 
job? What exactly are the shortfalls that CIOs need to know about 
business? And, equally important is the consideration of what educa-
tion and learning is needed by CEOs and whether they should be so 
dependent on advice from their CIOs.
Need for Standards
The need for standards is something that most organizations would 
support. Yet, the Siemens case study showed us that too much con-
trol and standardization can prove ineffective. The Siemens model 
allowed local organizations to use technology that was specific to 
their business as long as it could be supported locally. The real chal-
lenge is to have CEOs who understand the complexity of IT stan-
dards. They also need to be cognizant that standards might be limited 
to the structure of their specific organization structure, its business, 
and its geographical locations.
Risk Management
The survey suggested that CEOs need to support risk management 
because their backup recovery procedures may be inadequate. The 

308
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
question is whether the problem stems from a lack of support or from 
a lack of knowledge about the topic. Is this something that the chief 
IT executive needs to know, or is it just about the CEO’ s unwilling-
ness to spend enough funds? The best practices component of risk 
management must be broader and answer these questions.
By contrast to the survey, we may consider a report issued by 
Darwin Research (“ A CRM Success Story,”  November 1, 2002), 
which cited the recommended best practices of Christopher Milliken, 
CEO of Boise Cascade Office Products. He offered the kind of in-
depth view of best practices that I feel is needed to be consistent with 
my research on ROD. Milliken participated in the implementation of 
a large-scale CRM system needed to give his customers a good reason 
to choose Boise. The project required an investment of more than $20 
million. Its objective was to provide customers with better service. At 
the time of the investment, Milliken had no idea what his ROI would 
be, only that the project was necessary to distinguish Boise Cascade 
from myriad competitors in the same industry.
After the successful implementation of the project, Milliken was 
now in a position to offer his own thoughts about technology-related 
best practices that a CEO might want to consider. He came up with 
these six:
	
1.	The CEO must commit to a technology project : Milliken was keen 
to express the reasons why the CRM project was important; 
he was intimately involved with its design, and made it clear 
that he had to be consulted, should there be any delays in the 
project schedule. KPMG (a major consulting firm) was also 
hired as a consultant to help implement the schedule and was 
held to the same level of excellence. What Milliken accom-
plished, significantly, was to show his interest in the project 
and his willingness to stay involved at the executive level. 
Milliken’ s best practice here lies in his commitment, which 
is consistent with that of McDermott from ICAP and the 
CEO from HTC. They both realized, as Milliken did, that 
the CEO must have an active role in the project and not just 
allow the management team to get it done. Milliken, as did 
McDermott and the CEO of HTC, issued specific perfor-
mance-related requirements to his employees and consultants. 

309
Toward Best Practices
His participation sent a valuable message: The CEO is part 
of the supporting effort for the project and is also part of 
the learning process of the organization. Indeed, the situa-
tion that Milliken faced and resolved (i.e., to jump in without 
knowing the expected returns of the project) is exemplary of 
the core tenets of ROD, which require the ability for an orga-
nization to operate with dynamic and unpredictable change 
brought about by technology. In this case, the technology was 
crucial to distinguishing Boise Cascade, in the same way that 
electronic trading was for ICAP, and the billing system was 
for HTC. Yet, all three of these situations required a cer-
tain behavior and practice from the company CEO. Thus, 
the most important best practice lies in the commitment and 
learning to the learning organization format.
	
2.	Think business first, then technology : To understand why a tech-
nology is needed, there must first be a supporting business 
plan; that is, the business plan must drive the technology or 
support its use. This best practice concept is consistent with 
my research. Indeed, Dana Deasy from Siemens realized it 
after a three-year investment in e-business, and McDermott 
clearly advocated the importance of a business plan over 
embellished technology. Another interesting and important 
result of the business plan was that it called for the creation 
of a centralized CRM system. Therefore, it became necessary 
to consolidate the separate business units at Boise into one 
corporate entity— providing central support and focus. This 
is another example of how ROD operates. The CRM project, 
through a validation process in a business plan, provided the 
strategic integration component of ROD. The strategy then 
influenced cultural assimilation and required a ­reorganization 
to ­implement the strategy or the new CRM system. 
Furthermore, Boise Cascade allowed its staff to experiment in 
the project, to make mistakes, without criticizing them. They 
were, in effect, implementing the driver-related concepts of 
technology. These driver concepts must be similar to the way 
organizations support their marketing activities, by which 
they accept a higher error ratio than when implementing a 
supporter activity. The CEO wanted everyone to give it their 

310
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
best and to learn from the experience. This position is a key 
best practice for the CEO; it promotes organizational learn-
ing throughout the business.
	
3.	Handcuff business and technology leaders to each other : Milliken 
understood that technology projects often fail because of a 
lack of communication between IT and other business enti-
ties. The project represented many of the IT dilemmas that I 
discussed in Chapter  2, particularly relating to the new CRM 
system and its integration with existing legacy applications 
and, at the same time, creating a culture that could imple-
ment the business strategy. To address this, Milliken first 
appointed a new CIO to foster better communication. He 
also selected a joint project leader from the business side, thus 
creating a joint project leadership team. What Milliken did 
was to form a new community of practice that did not exist 
before the project. The project, as with Ravell, represented 
an event that fostered the creation of organizational learning 
opportunities. As with ICAP, Milliken’ s company enlisted 
the support of executive-level consultants to help finalize the 
business plan and marketing strategy, as well as assist with 
change management. What exactly did Milliken do that rep-
resents a best practice? From an organizational learning per-
spective, he created communities of practice between IT and 
the business. That then is a true best practice for a CEO.
	
4.	Get the show on the road : There was a not-to-be-questioned 
deadline that was instituted by Milliken. As I noted in 
Chapter  4, this type of management seems undemocratic, 
but it should not be confused with being nonparticipatory. 
Someone had to get this going and set expectations. In this 
case, both IT and business users were set to make things 
­happen. Senior management endorsed the project and openly 
stated that it represented what could be a one-time opportu-
nity to “ do something of great magnitude”  (Dragoon, 2002). 
From a best practices perspective, this means that the CEO 
can and should provide the leadership to get projects done 
and that part of that leadership could be setting strategic 
dates. However, CEOs should not confuse this leadership 
with power-centralized management over IT-related projects. 

311
Toward Best Practices
Communities of practice still need to be the driving force for 
inevitable success in ROD. Another important factor was 
Milliken’ s decision to create dual management over the proj-
ect. Thus, Milliken was able to create an environment that 
required discourse between IT and the business.
	
5.	Win over the masses for massive changes : As stated, the business 
plan called for a reorganization of other business units. This 
also required executives to rethink job descriptions and titles 
in relation to new processes. It also eliminated six redundant 
management-level jobs. Milliken engaged employees in a 
massive “ external-internal”  marketing campaign. Employees 
participated in ad campaigns, and brochures were created for 
all staff. A video was also produced that defined the benefits 
to Boise Cascade customers. In essence, Milliken was com-
mitted to communication and training. Similar to my experi-
ence at Ravell, not everyone is comfortable with change, and 
resistance in the ranks is inevitable. As a result, the educa-
tion and training programs at Boise were not enough. What 
was lacking was true organizational learning and knowledge 
management. There are two best practices that were defined 
from this experience. First, the CEO needs to engage in 
actively showing the importance that technology has to the 
organization, not only from an economic perspective, but also 
from a staff development point of view. The second best prac-
tice comes from the example of what Boise Cascade did not 
do enough of: provide organizational transformation through 
knowledge management, reflective practices, and commu-
nities of practice. This suggests that CEOs need to better 
understand and incorporate organizational learning concepts, 
so that they can be the catalyst for change as they are in other 
areas of the business. We saw support for this concept from 
both ICAP and HTC, where the actions of the CEO came 
from an organizational learning perspective.
	
6.	Know that technology projects never end : ROD assumes, by def-
inition, that technology is a variable, albeit an insistent one. 
Milliken’ s experience further supported this notion, in that 
he realized that Boise Cascade must continue to assess the 
impact of the CRM application. Another way of saying this 

312
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
is that the technology will continue to be viewed as a means to 
transform the business on an ongoing basis. Indeed, Milliken 
was planning to spend another $10 million on the next phase. 
So, from a best practices perspective, CEOs must recognize 
that technology investment never ends, but it moves to other 
phases of maturation, similar to the driver/supporter life 
cycle. Finally, the buy-in to this reality ensures the recogni-
tion of organizational dynamism.
Based on the case studies and research presented thus far in this 
book, I can now formulate a list of 11 key planks that represent the 
core of what constitutes a technology CEO’ s set of best practices:
	
1.	The chief IT executive should report directly to the CEO.
	
2.	CEOs should be actively committed to technology on an 
ongoing basis, as opposed to project-by-project involvement.
	
3.	CEOs should be willing to be management catalysts to sup-
port new technology-driven projects. They, in effect, need to 
sometimes play the role of technology champion.
	
4.	CEOs should focus on business concepts and plans to drive 
technology. In other words, technology should not drive the 
business.
	
5.	CEOs should use consultants to provide objective input to 
emerging technology projects.
	
6.	CEOs should establish organizational infrastructures that 
foster the creation of communities of practice. They need 
to create joint ownership of IT issues by fostering discourse 
between IT, business managers, and staff.
	
7.	CEOs may need to take control of certain aspects of tech-
nology investments, such as setting milestones and holding 
management and staff to making critical project dates.
	
8.	CEOs need to foster cultural assimilation, which may lead to 
reorganization, since technology changes processes.
	
9.	CEOs need to understand organizational learning and knowl-
edge management theories and participate in organizational 
transformation.
	 10.	CEOs need to understand how the technology life cycle 
behaves, with specific attention to the transition from driver 
activities to supporter functions. To that end, CEOs need to 

313
Toward Best Practices
understand the short- and long-term investments that need to 
be made in technology.
	 11.	CEOs should create organizations that can effectively oper-
ate within technological dynamism. This process will educate 
management and staff to handle the dynamic and unpredict-
able effects of emerging technologies. It will also foster the 
development of both middle-up-down and bottom-up man-
agement of technology.
The issue is now to provide a linear development model for CEOs 
that enables them to measure where they are in relation to ROD and 
the best practices outlined.
The CEO Best Practices Technology Arc
Similar to the chief IT executive arc, the CEO best practices arc is 
an instrument for assessing the technology best practices of CEOs. 
The arc evaluates a CEO’ s strategic uses of technology and leader-
ship by using a grid that charts competencies ranging from conceptual 
knowledge about technology to more complex uses of technology and 
business and how they are integrated in strategic business planning.
As with all arc models, the CEO version measures five principal 
stages of a CEO’ s maturity with respect to business applications of 
technology: conceptual, structural, executive values, executive eth-
ics, and executive leadership. Each dimension or sector is measured 
in five stages of maturation that guide the CEO’ s executive growth 
managing technological dynamism. The first stage is being reflec-
tively aware about their conceptual knowledge of technology and 
what it can do for the organization. The second is other centered-
ness, by which CEOs become aware of the multiplicity of business 
uses of technology and the different views that can exist inside and 
outside the organization. The third is integration of business use of 
technology; a CEO can begin to combine how business plans foster 
the need for technology. The fourth is implementation of business/
technology process, meaning that the CEO understands how busi-
ness applications and technology are used together and is resilient 
to nonauthentic sources of emerging technologies. Stage four rep-
resents an ongoing commitment to implementing both technology 

314
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and business applications. The fifth refers to strategic uses of tech-
nology; CEOs have reached a stage at which their judgment on 
using technology and business is independent and can be used to 
self-educate. Thus, as CEOs grow in knowledge of business uses 
of technology, they can become increasingly more understanding of 
the multiplicity of uses, can become more integrated in how they 
conceptualize technology, can manage its implementation from an 
executive position, and can apply strategies to support new applica-
tions of technology in the organization.
Definitions of Maturity Stages and Dimension Variables 
in the CEO Technology Best Practices Arc
Maturity Stages
	
1.	Conceptual knowledge of technology : This first stage represents 
the CEO’ s capacity to learn, conceptualize, and articulate key 
issues relating to business uses of technology, organizational 
structures available, executive value methods, executive ethi-
cal issues surrounding technology, and leadership alternatives 
that are needed to be successful with technology applications.
	
2.	Multiplicity of business perspectives of technology : This stage 
indicates the CEO’ s ability to integrate multiple points of 
view from management, staff, and consultants about technol-
ogy applications in business. Using these new perspectives, 
the CEO augments his or her conceptual skills with technol-
ogy, has an expanded view of what organizational structures 
might work best, expands his or her executive values about 
technology uses, is increasingly aware of the ethical dilemmas 
with technology, and enhances his or her leadership abilities.
	
3.	Integration of business uses of technology : Maturing CEOs accu-
mulate increased understanding of how technology can sup-
port the business, provide more competitive advantage, and 
have a more integrated understanding of how to use their 
conceptual skills about technology, of the alternative organi-
zational structures available, of how to combine their business 
executive value and ethical systems, and how to develop effec-
tive levels of executive leadership.

315
Toward Best Practices
	
4.	Implementation of business/technology process : CEOs achieve 
integration when they can regularly apply their conceptual 
knowledge of technology, organization structures, executive 
values and ethics about technology, and executive leadership, 
appropriate for performing their job duties, not only ade-
quately, but at a level that provides a competitive advantage 
for the organization.
	
5.	Strategic uses of technology : Leadership is attained by the 
CEO when he or she can employ conceptual skills, develop 
new organizational structures as necessary, establish new 
values and ethics that are appropriate for the organization, 
and create a sense of executive presence to lead the organiza-
tion strategically. This CEO is capable of having new vision 
about how business and technology can be expanded into 
new endeavors.
Performance Dimensions
	
1.	Technology concepts : Concerns conceptual skills, specifically 
related to understanding how technology can be used in the 
business. This dimension essentially establishes the CEO 
as technically proficient, conceptually, and forms a basis for 
movement to more complex and mature stages of business/
technology development.
	
2.	Organizational structures : The knowledge of the alternative 
organizational structures that can support the application 
of emerging technology in corporate settings with regard to 
roles, responsibilities, career paths, and organizational report-
ing alternatives.
	
3.	Executive values : Measures the CEO’ s ability to articulate and 
act on mainstream technological values credited with shaping 
the work ethic: independent initiative, dedication, honesty, 
and personal identification with career goals, based on the 
philosophy of the management protocol of the organization.
	
4.	Executive ethics : Reflects the CEO’ s commitment to the edu-
cation and professional advancement of the behavior of the 
organization as it relates to business uses of technology.

316
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
	
5.	Executive leadership : Involves the CEO’ s view of the role of 
an executive in business, and the capacity to succeed in tan-
dem with his or her organizational resources. Aspects include 
a devotion to organizational learning and self-improvement, 
self-evaluation, the ability to acknowledge and resolve busi-
ness/technology conflicts, and resilience when faced with per-
sonal and professional challenges.
Figure  12.6 shows a graphic view of the CEO technology best 
practices arc. Each cell in the arc provides the condition for assess-
ment. The complete arc is provided in Table  12.2.
Middle Management
Middle management, which comprises a number of tiers, is perhaps 
the most challenging of best practices to define. In Chapter  3, I strati-
fied the different types of positions that make up middle managers 
into three tiers: directors, line managers, and supervisors. What is 
most important at this point is to determine the set of technology 
best practices for managers so that they can effectively operate under 
ROD. That is, technology best practices must be designed to contain 
the insights and skills for effective management of technology. This 
must include
	
1.	Working with IT personnel
	
2.	Providing valuable input to the executive management team, 
including the CEO
	
3.	Participating and developing a technology strategy within 
their business units
	
4.	Effectively managing project resources, including technical 
staff
	
5.	Leading innovative groups in their departments
	
6.	Incorporating technology into new products and services
	
7.	Developing proactive methods of dealing with changes in 
technology
	
8.	Investigating how technology can improve competitive 
advantage.

317
Toward Best Practices
Developmental dimensions of maturing 
Dimension skill 
Conceptual 
knowledge of 
technology 
Multiplicity of 
business 
perspectives of 
technology 
Integration of 
business uses of 
technology 
Implementation of 
business/technology 
process 
Strategic uses 
of technology
Technology cognition
Organizational 
structures 
Executives values
Executives ethics
Executive leadership
Figure  12.6    CEO technology best practices arc.

318
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  12.2    CEO Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
DIMENSION VARIABLE
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE OF 
TECHNOLOGY
MULTIPLICITY OF BUSINESS 
PERSPECTIVES OF 
TECHNOLOGY
Technology Concept
Understands concepts and 
definitions about technology 
and how it relates to 
business. Has conceptual 
knowledge of the software 
development life cycle. 
Understands high-level 
concepts about distributed 
processing, database 
development, and project 
management. Understands 
the definition and role of 
operating systems such as 
UNIX, WINDOWS, and MAC. 
Has the ability to relate 
technology concepts to other 
business experiences. 
Understands that different 
technology may be required 
for a particular project and 
organization. Can 
conceptualize how to expand 
the use of technology and 
apply it to business 
situations.
Seeks to manage by appreciating 
that technology can have 
multiple perspectives. Able to 
manage a process that requires 
validation about different 
opinions about business uses of 
technology. Can manage the 
different objective ideas from 
multiple technology views 
without getting stuck on 
personal biases. Has an ability 
to identify and draw upon 
multiple perspectives available 
from business sources about 
technology, particularly from 
independent sources. Developing 
a discriminating ability to create 
an infrastructure that can 
operate with multiple views. 
Committed to creating an 
organization that can learn 
through realistic and objective 
judgment, as demonstrated by 
the applicability of the 
technology material drawn for a 
particular project or task and 
tied to business outcomes.
Organizational Structures
Understands that technology 
can be viewed by other 
organizations in different 
ways and may need different 
organizational structures. 
Can use technology as a 
medium of communication. 
Understands that certain 
technologies may need to be 
managed differently and 
need specific types of 
structures and expertise. Has 
the ability to comprehend 
recommend/suggested 
technological solutions to 
suite business needs and 
preferences.
Seeks to manage technology as a 
vehicle to learn more about what 
alternative organization 
structures are available from 
others. Strives to create a 
learning organization that cares 
about what other staff perceive 
as solutions. Committed to 
cultural assimilation that can 
change the need to restructure 
the organization. Tries to 
understand and respect 
technologies that differ from 
what the organization is currently 
using. Understands that the 
organization has multiple and 
different technological needs.
(Continued)

319
Toward Best Practices
Table  12.2 (Continued)    CEO Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
INTEGRATION OF BUSINESS 
USES OF TECHNOLOGY  
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
BUSINESS/TECHNOLOGY 
PROCESS 
STRATEGIC USES OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
Creates an organization 
that has the ability to 
relate various technical 
concepts and organize 
them with non-technical 
business issues. Can 
manage by operating with 
both automated and 
manual business 
solutions. Can use 
technology to expand 
business reasoning, logic, 
and what-if scenarios. 
Establishes business 
templates that allow 
technology to offer 
everyday business 
solutions. This involves 
the hypothetical 
(inductive/deductive) 
logical business issues.
Organization’ s use of 
technology is concrete, 
accurate, and precise, broad 
and resistant to interference 
from non-authentic 
technology business sources. 
Ability to resist or recover 
from faulty uses of 
technology that is not 
realistic without a supporting 
business plan.
Methods and judgment as a 
multidimensional CEO is 
independent, has critical 
discernment. Conceptual 
knowledge of technology can be 
transferred and can be used to 
self-educate within and outside 
of technology. Can use 
technology for creative 
purposes to create new 
business initiatives and 
integrate them with short- and 
long-term business goals.
Can deal with multiple 
dimensions of criticism 
about how technology can 
be used in the 
organization. Can develop 
relationships (cooperative) 
that are dynamic and 
based on written 
communication and oral 
discourse about how 
business can drive 
technological investments. 
Ability to create new 
business relations using 
technology with new and 
existing customers. Has an 
appreciation of cyberspace 
as a new market— a place 
wide open to dialogue 
(spontaneous), to provide 
new opportunities for 
business growth.
Commitment to open 
discussion of alternating 
opinions on technology and 
acceptance of varying types 
of structures to accommodate 
technology opportunities. 
Ability to sustain dynamic 
organizational structures.
Can design new structures to 
integrate multidimensions of 
business and technology 
solutions. Can dynamically 
manage different types of 
interdependent and dependent 
organizational relationships. 
Ability to manage within 
multiple dimensions of 
business cultures, which may 
demand self-reliance and 
confidence in independence of 
initiatives.
(Continued)

320
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  12.2 (Continued)    CEO Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
DIMENSION VARIABLE 
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
MULTIPLICITY OF BUSINESS 
PERSPECTIVES OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
Executive Values
Understanding of technology 
and cultural differences. 
Conceptually understands 
that global communication, 
education, and workplace use 
of technology can be 
problematic— subject to 
false generalizations and 
preconceived notions. 
Management awareness of 
responsibilities to address 
assumptions about how 
technology will be viewed by 
other departments and 
customers.
Sets conditions that foster the 
need to obtain multiple sources 
of information and opinion 
about how technology values. 
The propagation 
organizationally of acceptance 
that there can be 
multidimensional values in 
human character.
Executive Ethics
Understands that there is a 
need to use technology with 
honesty re: privacy of access 
and information. Supports 
the development of ethical 
policies governing business 
uses of the Internet, research, 
intellectual property rights, 
and plagiarism.
Committed to creating an 
organization that uses 
information in a fair 
way— comparison of facts 
against equal sources of 
business information. 
Understands and is 
compassionate that business 
and technology information may 
have different levels of 
knowledge access. Recognizes 
the need for sharing information 
with other business units from a 
sense of inequality.
Executive Leadership
Conceptualizes the need to 
have a leadership role with 
respect to technology in the 
business— the business and 
technologically realizable 
executive self.
Understands how other 
executives can view technology 
leadership differently. 
Understands or has awareness 
of the construction of self that 
occurs when taking on the 
integration of technology in 
business operations. Focuses 
on views of other CEOs in 
multiple settings. Understands 
that the self (through 
technology) is open for more 
fluid constructions, able to 
incorporate diverse views in 
multiple technology settings.
(Continued)

321
Toward Best Practices
As with CEO research, there are myriad best practices that have 
been offered as a method of dealing with the subject of technology 
management. Unfortunately, these practices usually are vague and 
intermingle management levels and departments; that is, it is diffi-
cult to know whether the best practice is for the chief IT executive, 
Table  12.2 (Continued)    CEO Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
INTEGRATION OF BUSINESS 
USES OF TECHNOLOGY 
IMPLEMENTATI ON OF 
BUSINESS/TECHNOLOGY 
PROCESS 
STRAT EGIC USES OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
Can manage multiple 
dimensions of value 
systems and can prioritize 
multi-tasking events that 
are consistent with value 
priorities. Ability to assign 
value to new and diverse 
technology business 
alternatives— linking 
them to legacy systems 
and processes.
Managing value systems in 
new ways because technology 
changes long-term values 
and goals for business 
objectives. Recognition that 
some concepts remain 
unchanged despite emerging 
technologies.
Management of technology and 
business are based on formed 
principles as opposed to 
dynamic influences or 
impulses. Formed executive 
principles establish the basis 
for navigating through or 
negotiating the diversity of 
business opportunities and 
impulses for investment in 
technologies.
Consistent management 
values displayed on 
multiple business goals, 
mission, and dedication 
to authenticity. Maintains 
management consistency 
in combining values 
regarding technology 
issues.
Business and technology are a 
commitment in all aspects of 
management value systems, 
including agility in managing 
multiple business 
commitments. Commitment 
to greater openness of mind 
to altering traditional and 
non-technological 
management methods.
Technology management 
creativity with self-defined 
principles and beliefs. 
Risk-taking in technology-
based ventures. Utilizing 
technology to expand one’ s 
arenas of business 
development. Manages the 
business liberating capacities 
of technology.
Manages technology to 
unify multiple parts of 
the organization and 
understands how the 
process behaves in 
different business 
situations.
Has developed an executive 
identity of self from a 
multiplicity of management 
venues. Method of 
management creates positive 
value systems that generate 
confidence about how 
multiple business 
communities need to operate.
Acceptance and belief in a 
multidimensional business 
world of how to lead with 
technology. Can determine 
comfortably, authenticity of 
organization’ s executives and 
their view of the self. Can 
confirm disposition on 
technology independently from 
others’  valuations, both 
internally and from other 
organizations. Beliefs direct 
and control multi-dimensional 
leadership growth.

322
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
the CEO, or some other level of management. We know from the 
research from Bolman and Deal (1997) that middle managers feel 
torn by conflicting signals and pressures they get from both senior 
management and the operations that report to them: “ They need to 
understand the difference in taking risks and getting punished for 
mistakes”  (p. 27). According to Bolman and Deal (1997), best prac-
tices for middle managers need to cover the following areas:
	
1.	Knowledge management
	
2.	Alignment
	
3.	Leadership and commitment
	
4.	Organization
	
5.	Human resources
	
6.	Opportunity management
	
7.	Leveraging
	
8.	Performance assessment
Their study covered more than 400 companies in the eight areas 
of concern. I extracted 10 middle management-related best practices 
from their study results and concluded that middle managers need to
	
1.	Understand how to take a strategy and implement it with 
technology; that is, they need to create tactics for completing 
the project.
	
2.	Establish team-building measures for linking technology 
with daily operations of the staff.
	
3.	Foster the aggregation and collaboration of business unit 
assets to form peer groups that can determine joint efforts for 
implementing new technologies.
	
4.	Stimulate their staffs using innovative strategies of value 
propositions and reward systems.
	
5.	Create multifunctional teams that can focus on particu-
lar aspects of how technology affects their specific area of 
expertise.
	
6.	Follow common project management practices so that mul-
titier and department projects can be globally reviewed by 
senior management.
	
7.	Form project teams that can respect and perform on an action 
basis; that is, teams that are action oriented.

323
Toward Best Practices
	
8.	Understand how to communicate with, and use, IT staff on 
projects.
	
9.	Have a systematic process for gathering intelligence relating 
to pertinent technology developments.
	 10.	Understand that customers are the drivers for technology 
tools provided by the organization.
On reviewing the different aspects of middle manager best practices 
with technology research, it appears that there are two focal points: 
(1) those best practices that address the needs of senior management, 
the CIO, and the CEO; and (2) those that are geared toward the 
management of the staffs who need to implement emerging technol-
ogy projects.
This makes sense, given that the middle manager, notwith-
standing whether a director, line manager, or supervisor, needs 
to deal with executive productivity-related issues as well as staff 
implementation ones. They are, as Bolman and Deal (1997) state, 
“ torn”  by these two competing organizational requirements. 
Table  12.3 represents the combined list of technology-based best 
practices organized by executive best practices and implementation 
best practices.
Table  12.3 exemplifies the challenge that middle managers 
have in balancing their priorities. In accordance with the research, 
the best practices mentioned are implemented using methods of 
knowledge management, alignment, leadership and commitment, 
human resources, opportunity management, leveraging, and per-
formance assessment. As with the other best practices, the middle 
manager technology best practices are limited because they do not 
address the specific needs of ROD, particularly organizational 
learning theories (with the exception of knowledge management). 
This shortfall is integrated into another developmental arc model 
that combines these theories with the preceding definitions of best 
practices.
The Middle Management Best Practices Technology Arc
The middle management best practices technology arc, as with others, 
can be used to evaluate a middle manager’ s strategic and operational 

324
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
uses of technology by using a grid that measures competencies rang-
ing from conceptual knowledge about technology to more complex 
uses of technology and business operations.
The five principal stages defined by the arc determine the middle 
manager’ s maturity with business implementations of technology: 
cognitive, organization interactions, management values, project eth-
ics, and management presence. There are five stages of maturation 
that guide the middle manager’ s growth. The first is becoming reflec-
tively aware about one’ s existing knowledge with business ­technology 
and how it can be implemented. The second is the recognition of the 
Table  12.3      Middle Manager Executive and Implementation Best Practices
EXECUTIVE-BASED MIDDLE MANAGER BEST 
PRACTICES
IMPLEMENTATION-BASED MIDDLE MANAGER BEST 
PRACTICES
	 1.	Provide valuable input to the executive 
management team, including the CEO.
	 1.	Understand how to communicate with and use 
IT staff on projects.
	 2.	Incorporate technology into new 
products and services.
	 2.	Effectively manage project resources, 
including technical staff.
	 3.	Participate in developing a technology 
strategy within their business units.
	 3.	Lead innovative groups in their departments.
	 4.	Have proactive methods of dealing 
with changes in technology.
	 4.	Understand how to take a strategy and 
implement it with technology;  that is, create 
tactics for completing the project.
	 5.	Focus on how technology can improve 
competitive advantage.
	 5.	Establish team-building measures for linking 
technology with staff’ s daily operations.
	 6.	Have a systematic process for 
gathering intelligence, relating to 
pertinent technology developments.
	 6.	Foster the aggregation and collaboration of 
business unit assets to form peer groups that 
can determine joint efforts for implementing 
new technologies.
	 7.	Understand that customers are the 
drivers for technology tools provided by 
the organization reward.
	 7.	Stimulate their staffs using innovative 
strategies of value propositions and systems.
	 8.	Create multifunctional teams that can focus 
on particular aspects of how technology 
affects their specific area of expertise.
	 9.	Follow common project management practices 
so that multitier and department projects can 
be globally reviewed by senior management.
	10.	Form project teams that can respect and 
perform on an action basis;  that is, teams 
that are action oriented.

325
Toward Best Practices
multiplicity of ways that technology can be implemented on projects 
(e.g., other business views of how technology can benefit the organiza-
tion). The third is integration of business implementation with tech-
nology, in which a middle manager can begin to combine technology 
issues with business concepts and functions on a project basis. The 
fourth is stability of business/technology implementation, in which 
the middle manager has integrated business/technology as a regu-
lar part of project implementations. The fifth is technology project 
leadership, in which the middle manager can use their independent 
judgment on how best to use technology and business on a project-by-
project basis. Thus, as middle managers grow in knowledge of tech-
nology and business projects, they can become increasingly more open 
to new methods of implementation and eventually, autonomous with 
the way they implement projects and provide leadership.
Definitions of Maturity Stages and Dimension Variables 
in the Middle Manager Best Practices Arc
Maturity Stages
	
1.	Technology implementation competence and recognition:  This 
first stage represents the middle manager’ s capacity to learn, 
conceptualize, and articulate key issues relating to cogni-
tive business technological skills, organizational interactions, 
management value systems, project management ethics, and 
management presence.
	
2.	Multiplicity of business implementation of technology:  Indicates 
the middle manager’ s ability to integrate multiple points of 
view during technical project implementations. Using these 
new perspectives, the middle manager augments his or her 
skills with business implementation with technology career 
advancement, expands his or her management value system, 
is increasingly motivated to act ethically during projects, and 
enhances his or her management presence.
	
3.	Integration of business implementation of technology:  Maturing 
middle 
managers 
accumulate 
increased 
understand-
ing of how business and technology operate together and 
affect one another. They gain new cognitive skills about 

326
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
technology and a facility with how the organization needs 
to ­interact, expand their management value system, perform 
­business/technology actions to improve ethics about busi-
ness and ­technology, and develop effective levels of manage-
ment presence.
	
4.	Stability of business/technology implementation:  Middle manag-
ers achieve stable integration when they implement projects 
using their cognitive and technological ability; have organi-
zation interactions with operations; have management values 
with their superiors, peers, and subordinates; possess project 
ethics; and have the management presence appropriate for 
performing job duties, not only adequately, but also competi-
tively (with peers and higher‑ranking executives in the orga-
nization hierarchy).
	
5.	Technology project leadership:  Leadership is attained by the 
middle manager when he or she can employ cognitive and 
technological skills, organization interactions, management, a 
sense of business ethics, and a sense of management presence 
to compete effectively for executive positions. This middle 
manager is capable of obtaining increasingly executive-level 
positions through successful interviewing and organization 
performance.
Performance Dimensions
	
1.	Business technology cognition : Pertains to skills specifically 
related to learning, applying, and creating resources in busi-
ness and technology, which include the necessary knowledge 
of complex operations. This dimension essentially establishes 
the middle manager as “ operationally”  proficient with tech-
nology and forms a basis for movement to more complex and 
mature stages of development when managing technology 
projects.
	
2.	Organizational interactions : This focuses on the middle man-
ager’ s knowledge and practice of proper relationships and 
management interactions during technology projects. This 
pertains to in-person interactions, punctuality of staff, work 

327
Toward Best Practices
completion, conflict resolution, deference, and other protocols 
in technology projects.
	
3.	Management values : Measures the middle manager’ s ability 
to articulate and act on mainstream corporate values credited 
with shaping technology project work ethic: independent ini-
tiative, dedication, honesty, and personal identification with 
technology project goals, based on the philosophy of manage-
ment protocol of the organization.
	
4.	Project ethics:  Reflects the middle manager’ s commitment to 
the education and professional advancement of other persons 
in technology and in other departments.
	
5.	Management presence:  Involves the middle manager’ s view 
of the role of a project-based manager during a technology 
project implementation and the capacity to succeed in tandem 
with other projects. Aspects include a devotion to learning 
and self-improvement, self-evaluation, the ability to acknowl-
edge and resolve business conflicts, and resilience when faced 
with personal and professional challenges during technology 
implementations.
Figure  12.7 shows a graphic view of the middle management tech-
nology best practices arc. Each cell in the arc provides the condi-
tion for assessment. The complete arc is provided in Table  12.4. The 
challenge of the middle management best practices arc is whether 
to emphasize executive management concepts (more organizationally 
intended) or event-driven concepts (project oriented). This arc focuses 
on project implementation factors and deals with best practices that 
can balance executive pressures with implementation realities. I sug-
gest that senior middle managers, at the director level, who do not 
participate in implementation, set their best practices, based on the 
CEO maturity arc. Indeed, creating a separate arc for upper manage-
ment would contain too many overlapping cells.
Summary
The formation of best practices to implement and sustain ROD is a 
complex task. It involves combining traditional best practice methods 
(i.e., what seems to work for proven organizations and individuals) 

328
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Developmental dimensions of maturing 
Business technology
Organizational
Management values
Project ethics
Management presence
Dimension skill 
Technology 
implementation 
Multiplicity of 
business 
Integration of 
business 
Stability of 
business/technology 
Technology 
project 
Figure  12.7    Middle management technology best practices arc.

329
Toward Best Practices
Table  12.4    Middle Management Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
DIMENSION VARIABLE
TECHNOLOGY 
IMPLEMENTATION 
COMPETENCE AND 
RECOGNITION
MULTIPLICITY OF BUSINESS 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
TECHNOLOGY
Business Technology 
Cognition
Understands how technology 
operates during projects. Has 
conceptual knowledge about 
hardware interfaces, and the 
software development life 
cycle. Has the core ability to 
relate technology concepts to 
other business experiences. 
Can also participate in the 
decisions about what 
technology is best suited for 
a particular project. Can be 
taught how to expand the use 
of technology and can apply 
it to other business 
situations.
Understands that technology 
projects can have multiple 
perspectives on how to 
implement them. Able to 
analyze what is valid vs. 
invalid opinions about 
business uses of technology. 
Can create objective ideas from 
multiple technology views 
without getting stuck on 
individual biases. An ability to 
identify and draw upon 
multiple perspectives available 
from project sources about 
technology. Developing a 
discriminating ability with 
respect to choices available. 
Realistic and objective 
judgment, as demonstrated by 
the applicability of the 
technology material drawn for 
a particular project or task and 
tied to functional/pragmatic 
outcomes.
Organizational Interactions
Understands that technology 
projects require the opinions 
of other departments and 
staff in multiple ways. 
Understands that certain 
technological solutions and 
training methods may not fit 
all project needs and 
preferences of the business. 
Has the ability to 
recommend/suggest 
alternative technological 
solutions to suite other 
business and project needs 
and preferences.
Seeks to use technology projects 
as a vehicle to learn more 
about organization interactions 
and mindsets. Strives to care 
about what others are 
communicating and embraces 
these opinions on a project 
basis. Tries to understand and 
respect technologies that differ 
from own. Understands basic 
technological project needs of 
others.
(Continued)

330
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  12.4 (Continued)    Middle Management Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
INTEGRATION OF BUSINESS 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
STABILITY OF BUSINESS/
TECHNOLOGY 
IMPLEMENTATION 
TECHNOLOGY PROJECT 
LEADERSHIP 
Has the ability to relate 
various technical project 
concepts and organize 
them with non-technical 
business issues. Can 
operate with both 
business and technical 
solutions. Can use 
technology to expand 
reasoning, logic, and 
what-if scenarios. Ability 
to discern the templates 
that technology has to 
offer in order to approach 
everyday technology 
project problems. This 
involves the hypothetical 
(inductive/deductive) 
logical business and 
technology skills.
Knowledge of technology 
projects are concrete, 
accurate, and precise, broad 
and resistant to interference 
from non-authentic business 
and technical project 
sources. Ability to resist or 
recover from proposed 
technology that is not 
realistic— and can recover 
resiliently.
Methods and judgment in 
multidimensional technology 
projects are independent and 
use critical discernment. 
Operational knowledge of 
technology and project 
management skills can be 
transferred and can be used to 
self-educate within and 
outside of technology. Can use 
technology for creative 
purposes to solve business and 
project challenges and 
integrate with executive 
management views.
Can deal with multiple 
dimensions of criticism 
about technology-based 
projects. Can develop 
relationships 
(cooperative) that are 
dynamic and based on 
discourse. Ability to create 
project relations with IT, 
other departments, and 
customers. Has an 
appreciation of project 
communication— to 
foster open dialogue 
(spontaneous), to give 
and take, or other than 
voyeuristic, one-sidedness 
about the project. Ability 
to produce in teamwork 
situations, rather than 
solely in isolation.
Loyalty and fidelity to relations 
in multiple organizations. 
Commitment to criticism and 
acceptance of multiple levels 
of IT and business 
relationships. Ability to 
sustain non-traditional types 
of inputs from multiple 
sources during projects.
Can utilize and integrate 
multidimensions of project 
solutions in a self-reliant way. 
Developing alone if necessary 
using other technical and 
non-technical resources. Can 
dynamically select types of 
interdependent and dependent 
organizational relationships. 
Ability to operate within 
multiple dimensions of 
business cultures, which may 
demand self-reliance, 
independence of initiative, and 
interactive communications 
during project 
implementations.
(Continued)

331
Toward Best Practices
Table  12.4 (Continued)    Middle Management Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
DIMENSION VARIABLE 
TECHNOLOGY 
IMPLEMENTATION 
COMPETENCE AND 
RECOGNITION 
MULTIPLICITY OF BUSINESS 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
Management Values
Technology and cultural 
sensitivity during project 
implementations. Global 
communication, education, 
and project use of technology 
can be problematic— subject 
to false generalizations and 
preconceived notions. 
Awareness of assumptions 
about how technology will be 
viewed by other departments 
and staff and about biases 
about types of technology 
used (MAC vs. PC).
Can appreciate need to obtain 
multiple sources of information 
and opinions during project 
implementations. The 
acceptance of 
multidimensional values in 
human character as value 
during project design and 
completion.
Project Ethics
Using technology on the 
project with honesty re: 
privacy of access and 
information. Development of 
ethical policies governing 
project uses of the Internet, 
research, intellectual 
property rights, and 
plagiarism.
The use of information in a fair 
way— comparison of facts 
against equal sources of 
project information. 
Compassion for differences in 
project information for which 
sources are limited because of 
inequality of technology 
access. Compassion for 
sharing information with other 
business units from a sense of 
inequality.
Management Presence
Has accurate perception of 
one’ s own potential and 
capabilities in relation to 
technology projects— the 
technologically realizable 
manager.
Understands how other 
managers can view self from a 
virtual and multiple 
perspectives. Understands or 
has awareness of the 
construction of self that occurs 
in projects. Understands views 
of other executives and 
managers in multiple project 
settings. Understands that the 
self (thru technology projects) 
are open for more fluid 
constructions, able to 
incorporate diverse views in 
multiple settings.
(Continued)

332
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
with developmental theory on individual maturation. The combina-
tion of these two components provides the missing organizational 
learning piece that supports the attainment of ROD. Another way 
of comprehending this concept is to view the ROD arc as the over-
arching or top-level model. The other maturity arcs and best practices 
Table  12.4 (Continued)    Middle Management Technology Best Practices Arc—Detail
INTEGRATION OF BUSINESS 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
TECHNOLOGY 
STABILITY OF BUSINESS/
TECHNOLOGY 
IMPLEMENTATION 
TECHNOLOGY PROJECT 
LEADERSHIP 
Can operate project within 
multiple dimensions of 
value systems and can 
prioritize multitasking 
events that are consistent 
with value priorities. 
Ability to assign value to 
new and diverse 
technology project 
alternatives— integrating 
them within a system of 
pre-existing business and 
technology project 
implementation values.
Testing technology value 
systems in new ways during 
the project implementation is 
integrated with long-term 
values and goals for 
business achievement. Some 
project concepts are naturally 
persistent and endure 
despite new arenas in the 
technological era
Use of technology and business 
during project implementation 
are based on formed principles 
as opposed to dynamic 
influences or impulses. Formed 
principles establish the basis 
for navigating through, or 
negotiating the diversity of 
business influences and 
impulses during the project.
Consistent values 
displayed on multiple 
project communications, 
deliverables of content, 
and dedication to 
authenticity. Maintains 
consistency in integrating 
values within technology 
business issues during 
project implementation.
Technology is a commitment in 
all aspects of value systems, 
including agility in managing 
multiple project 
commitments. Commitment 
to greater openness of mind 
to altering traditional and 
non-technological methods 
on project implementations.
Technological project creativity 
with self-defined principles 
and beliefs. Risk-taking in 
technology-based projects. 
Utilizing technology to expand 
one’ s arenas of project 
freedom. Exploring the project 
management liberating 
capacities of technology.
Operationalizes technology 
projects to unify multiple 
components of the self 
and understands its 
appropriate behaviors in 
varying management 
situations.
Has regulated an identity of 
self from a multiplicity of 
management venues. Method 
of project interaction creates 
positive value systems that 
generate confidence about 
operating in multiple 
organizational communities.
Can determine comfortably, 
authenticity of other managers 
and their view of the self. Can 
confirm project-related 
disposition independently from 
others’  valuations, both 
internally and from other 
department cultures. Has 
direct beliefs and controls 
multidimensional management 
growth.

333
Toward Best Practices
represent the major communities of practice that are the subsets of 
that model. This is graphically depicted in Table  12.5.
Thus, the challenge is to create and sustain each community and, at 
the same time, establish synergies that allow them to operate together. 
This is the organizational climate created at ICAP, where the execu-
tive board, senior and middle managers, and operations personnel all 
formed their own subcommunities; at the same time, all had the abil-
ity for both downward and upward communication. In summary, this 
particular model relies on key management interfaces that are needed 
to support ROD.
Ethics and Maturity
The word ethics  is defined in many different ways. Reynolds (2007) 
defines ethics as “ a set of rules that establishes the boundaries of gen-
erally accepted behaviour”  (p. 3). Ethics can also mean conforming to 
social norms and rules, which can be challenged by deviant behaviors 
of “ others.”  Still other groups construct ethics as a moral code that a 
community agrees to uphold. Ethics often map to our values— like 
integrity and loyalty to others. What is ethical for one person may not 
be ethical for another. This issue frames yet another question: How 
does ethics relate to leadership, specifically leadership in technology?
Ethics became a heightened issue after the Enron scandal in the 
United States. The scandal had a huge effect on the IT industry 
because it resulted in Congress enacting the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) 
Act, which placed significant audit trail requirements on document-
ing processes. Most of these processes existed in automated applica-
tions; thus, IT was required to comply with the rules and regulations 
that the SOX Act mandated. Implementing the SOX Act became an 
immense challenge for IT organizations mostly because the rules of 
compliance were vague.
Most would agree that ethics are a critical attribute for any leader. 
The challenge is how to teach it. The SOX Act “ teaches”  ethics by 
establishing governance by control— control of unethical behavior 
through catching deviants. However, history has shown us that devi-
ants are not cured by laws and punishment; rather, they are simply 
contained. Unfortunately, containment does not eliminate or cure 
unethical behavior. Furthermore, deviants tend to find new ways to 

334
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Table  12.5    ROD and Best Practices Arcs
UNDERLINING BEST PRACTICES  
Strategic-inking
Industry expertise
Change management
Communications
Business knowledge
Technology proficiency
Hiring and retention
Innovation and outsourcing leadership
Information architect
UNDERLINING BEST PRACTICES  
Committed to technology
Technology catalyst and champion
Business first, then technology
Use consultants for objective input
Support communities of practice
Set project milestones
Foster cultural assimilation
Understand organizational learning
Understand technology life cycle
Have chief it exec report directly
Support organizational dynamism
UNDERLINING BEST PRACTICES
MANAGEMENT-BASED  
Interact with executive management
Incorporate technology into new products
Use technology for competitive advantage
Process for evaluating new technologies
Understand driver role of customers
IMPLEMENTATION-BASED  
Utilization of it staff on projects
Leading innovative groups
Effectively managing project resources
Strategic use of technology
Establish team-building measures
Foster aggregation and collaboration
Stimulate staff with value propositions
Create multi-functional teams
Support common project management practices
Form action-oriented teams

335
Toward Best Practices
bypass controls and get around the system in time. On the other hand, 
educators more often see the solution as transforming behavior of the 
individual; that is, ethics can only be taught if the individual realizes 
its value. Value in ethical behavior becomes a systemic transforma-
tion when the individual believes in its self-realization. Being ethical 
is then aligned with self-actualization and adult maturity. So, ethics 
can be aligned with maturity in the same ways that the maturity arcs 
presented were mapped to leadership. Why is this so important for 
IT leaders? The SOX Act answered this question because it clearly 
identified the IT function as the most critical component of com-
pliance. Unethical behavior in technology-based systems can damage 
the greater good, which places a big responsibility on the IT function.
I would suggest that IT ethics and leadership are very much linked. 
It is a very important responsibility for technology executives to pro-
vide direction to their firms on how technology and ethics are inte-
grated and how they can transform individuals to value conformance 
without the overuse of governing controls. Firms must use organi-
zational learning tools as the vehicle to promote such conformance 
through changes in behavior. Unfortunately, many executives, includ-
ing those in IT, practice governance much more than influence. I am 
not suggesting the elimination of controls, but rather, that leadership 
should depend less on governance and more on effecting behavioral 
change. In other words, the key to developing strong ethics within an 
IT organization is leadership, not governance. An important compo-
nent of leadership is the ability to influence the behaviors of others 
(without exerting control or power). The real power of leadership is to 
use influence to effect ethical behavior as opposed to demanding it.
How do we create ethical IT organizations? Further, how can a 
technology executive provide the necessary strategy and influence to 
accomplish firm-wide ethical transformation? The first strategy, for a 
number of reasons, should be to create an ethical IT organization as 
the model:
	
1.	The technology executive has control over that organization.
	
2.	Most IT ethical problems today emanate from technology per-
sonnel because of their unusual access to data and information.
	
3.	IT is positioned to lead the direction, since it is its area of 
expertise.

336
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
So, IT can set the example for technology-related ethics for the 
entire organization by establishing its own level of compliance by a 
“ way of being,”  as opposed to a way of being managed. Often, this 
way of being can evolve into a code of behavior that can become the 
cultural “ code”  of the organization itself. This code of ethics should 
address and be limited to such IT-related issues as:
•	 Privacy : Because of their access to transactions over the 
Internet, IT professionals must respect the privacy of infor-
mation of others. Their code of ethics should go beyond just 
e-mail transactions to include access to personal data that 
may be stored on desktops or data files.
•	 Confidentiality : This differs from privacy because the data are 
available to IT in the normal transactions of business. That 
is, the data are captured or used in the development of an 
application. IT personnel need to keep such information con-
fidential at all times— not only for the employees of the firm 
but also for clients and vendors.
•	 Moral responsibility : IT needs to protect the organization from 
outside abuses or questionable transactions coming into and 
leaving the company. Protection can also include blocking 
access to certain websites that are dangerous or inappropriate. 
This practice should not be regarded as a control, but rather, 
as a moral responsibility of any employee. Of course, there 
needs to be careful objectivity in how the moral code is actu-
ally executed when a problem is identified.
•	 Theft : Removing information that belongs to someone else 
can be construed as a form of theft. Theft should always be 
regarded as an offense punishable by law— that is, above and 
beyond rules and regulations of the company.
These are only examples of areas in which an ethical code might 
be applied. Such a code must be implemented in IT as a framework 
for how people are employed and as a basis for promotion. Again, 
governance plays an important part because unfortunately there will 
always be individuals who violate ethics. What we need are organiza-
tions that promote and defend ethics to the greatest possible extent. 
This way of being is consistent with the core definition of a learn-
ing organization in that ethics must inevitably be part of the fabric 

337
Toward Best Practices
of the culture and evolved within it. With IT serving as a model, 
the technology executive can act as the champion for implementation 
company-wide. This chapter has shown that ethics are intrinsically 
linked to maturity. Indeed, every arc contained a dimension that con-
tained an ethical dimension. Perhaps if such ethical practices existed 
at Enron, the “ learning organization”  there could have stopped the 
abuses.


339
13
Conclusion
Introduction
This book has explored many conceptual aspects of information tech-
nology (IT) and organizational learning and how they can be utilized 
together to help firms compete in a rapidly changing world. Case stud-
ies were presented to show how these concepts, and the theories they 
derive from, could be implemented into practice. It is most important, 
however, to remember that each organization is unique and that the 
implementation of organizational learning methods must therefore 
be tailored to the particular dynamics at play in a given organiza-
tion. Hence, there can be no boilerplate methodology for the strategic 
employment of technology; such an approach could never guarantee 
maximum benefit to the organization. My position involves employ-
ing various organizational learning methods that must be carefully 
chosen and implemented, based on the projected target audience and 
on the particular stage of growth of the organization and its mature 
use of technology.
In my study of chief executive officer (CEO) perceptions of IT, 
I found that the role of IT was not generally understood in most of the 
organizations I surveyed, especially at the CEO level. There appear 
to be inconsistent reporting structures within the IT organization, 
and there is a lack of IT-related discussion at the strategic and senior 
executive levels. Furthermore, most executives are not satisfied with 
IT performance, and while most agree that technology should play a 
larger role in marketing, few have been able to accomplish this. The 
general dilemma has involved an inability to integrate technology 
effectively into the workplace.
Certainly, a principle target of this book is to answer the question 
of what chief IT executives need to do and in what directions their 

340
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
roles need to evolve regarding IT. Other concerns center on general 
organizational issues surrounding who IT people are, where they 
report, and how they should be evaluated. IT must also provide better 
leadership with respect to guiding a company through the challenges 
of unproven technologies. While technology behaves dynamically, we 
still need processes that can validate its applicability to the organiza-
tion. Another way of viewing this is to accept the idea that certain 
technologies need to be rejected because of their inappropriateness to 
drive strategy.
IT is unique in that it is often viewed from a project perspective; for 
instance, that which is required to deliver technology and the cultural 
impact it has on the organization, and tends to be measured by project 
deliverables due to the pressure to see measurable outcomes. From a 
project perspective, IT staff members typically take on the role of 
project managers, which requires them to communicate with multiple 
business units and management layers. They need to establish shorter 
project life cycles and respond to sudden changes to the requirements. 
No longer does a traditional project life cycle with static dates and 
deliverables work with the fast-paced businesses of today. Rather, 
these projects are living and breathing entities that must be in balance 
with what is occurring in the business at all times. Most important is 
that project measurable outcomes must be defined and seen in balance 
with expected organizational transformations.
I began my explanation of the role of technology by establishing 
it as a dynamic variable, which I termed technological dynamism. 
Responsive organizational dynamism (ROD) represents my attempt 
to think through a range of responses to the problems posed by tech-
nological dynamism, which is an environment of dynamic and unpre-
dictable change resulting from the advent of innovative technologies. 
This change can no longer be managed by a group of executives or 
managers; it is simply too complex, affecting every component of a 
business. A unilateral approach does not work; the problem requires 
an environmental approach. The question is how to create an orga-
nization that can respond to the variability of technologies in such 
a way that its responses become part of its everyday language and 
discourse. This technological state of affairs is urgent for two major 
reasons. First, technology not only is an accelerator of change but also 
requires accelerated business responses. Organizations cannot wait 

341
Conclusion
for a committee to be formed or long bureaucratic processes to act. 
Second, the market is unforgiving when it comes to missing business 
opportunities. Every opportunity missed, due to lack of responding in 
a timely fashion, can cost an organization its livelihood and future. As 
stated by Johansen et al. (1995):
The global marketplace requires constant product innovation, quick 
delivery to market, and a large number of choices for the consumer, all 
of which are forcing us to rethink the way we structure our business 
organizations to compete. Indeed, many businesses are finding their 
traditional structure cumbersome— the way they work is more of an 
obstacle than help in taking advantage of global opportunities. (p. 1)
While ROD is the overarching approach for a firm that can perform 
in a dynamic and unpredictable environment, there are two major 
components to that approach that I raised for further consideration. I 
discussed how technology, as a variable, is unique in that it affects two 
areas of any organization. The first is the technology itself and how it 
operates with business strategy. I called this the strategic integration 
component of responsive organizational dynamism. The challenge 
here is to have organizations create processes that can formally and 
informally determine the benefit of new and emerging technologies 
on an ongoing basis. The second component is cultural assimilation, 
which is about managing the cultural and structural changes that are 
required when new strategies are adopted by the organization.
Creating an environment of ROD requires processes that can fos-
ter individual and organizational-level thinking, learning, and trans-
formation. Organizational learning techniques best fit the need as 
they contain the core capabilities to assist organizations in reinvent-
ing themselves as necessary, and to build an organization that can 
evolve with technology, as opposed to one that needs to be reorga-
nized. I have presented many organizational learning concepts and 
modified them to provide specific remedies to the challenges required 
to create responsive organizational dynamism. I have also presented 
the complex vectors that determine which learning theory should be 
applied and integrated with others, so that every aspect of individual 
and organizational evolution can be supported. I chose to use the term 
vector  to describe this force or influence because of the different ways 

342
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
in which these learning methods can help in creating and sustaining 
firm-wide responses to technological dynamism. 
Perhaps the most important learning process among these is that 
of linear development leading to maturation. My use of maturity arcs 
permits me a framework for the development and integration of mod-
els that can measure where individuals and organizations are in their 
trajectory toward the integration of emerging technologies in their 
business strategies. These maturity arcs provide a basis for how to mea-
sure where the organization is, what types of organizational learning 
methods to consider, and what outcomes to expect. Indeed, providing 
measurable outcomes in the form of strategic performance is the very 
reason why executives should consider embracing this model.
I also discussed a number of methods to manage organizational 
learning, modifying theories of knowledge management and change 
management, so that they specifically addressed the unique aspects 
of change brought about by new technologies. I looked at how the 
CEO needs to become more knowledgeable about technology, and, 
based on case studies and research, I provided sets of best practices to 
suggest that staff members cannot become part of a learning organi-
zation without the participation of the CEO and his or her executive 
committees. On the other hand, I investigated the interesting work 
of Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) and their middle-up-down theory 
of middle management. I modified Nonaka and Takeuchi’ s idea by 
complicating the strata that can be used to define the middle, and I 
established three tiers of middle management and integrated them 
into organizational learning theories. Finally, I used the Ravell case 
study to show how operations personnel continue to play an impor-
tant role in organizational learning, and how the maturity arc can be 
used to transform individual learning practices into less event-driven 
learning at the organizational level. I formulated best practices for 
each of these three major organizational structures, along with corre-
sponding maturity arcs to lay the foundation of what each community 
needs to do to properly participate in the transformations indicated 
for responsive organizational dynamism. To this end, I proposed cer-
tain road maps that, if followed, could provide the mechanisms that 
lead to the kind of organizational transformation that is empowered 
to handle the challenges of new technologies. This process is sum-
marized in Figure  13.1.

343
Conclusion
I have taken a strong position regarding the debate over whether 
learning occurs best on the individual level or at the system-orga-
nizational one, particularly as learning affects the establishing and 
sustaining of responsive organizational dynamism. My response to 
this debate is “ yes” — yes, in the sense that both are very much needed 
and part of a process that leads to a structured way of maturing the 
use of organizational learning by an organization to improve strategic 
performance. I believe the Ravell case study provides an example of 
how learning maturation operates in a dynamic environment. We see 
that operations personnel tend to rely on event-driven and individual-
based reflective practices before being able to think at an organiza-
tional level. My prior research (Langer, 2002) on reflective practices 
clearly shows that many adults do not necessarily know how to reflect. 
Technology
dynamism
Te
“technology”
variable
Requirements for
organizational
change
Responsive organizational
dynamism
Strategic
integration
Cultural
assimilation
Strategic
performance
Organizational
learning
Figure  13.1    Technology “ road map.” 

34 4
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The important work of Argyris and Schö n (1996) on introducing and 
sustaining individual learning, specifically using double-loop learn-
ing, should be used when implementing an organizational learning 
program. Ravell also showed us that time is an important factor for 
individual development and that political factions are part of that pro-
cess. With patience and an ongoing program, group learning activi-
ties can be introduced to operations personnel, thereby supporting the 
kind of system-level thinking proposed by Senge (1990).
A critical part of organizational learning, in particular the nec-
essary steps to establish a learning organization, is the formation of 
communities of practice. Communities of practice, in all of the case 
studies, were the cornerstones in the transition from individual-based 
learning to group learning. Communities of practice begin the matu-
ration process of getting organizations to change to learning based 
on organizational goals. This is critical for ROD because technology 
requires planning and vision that are consistent with business strat-
egy. While much of the literature integrates the notion of communi-
ties of practice with knowledge management, I expanded its use and 
defined the community as the single most important organizational 
structure for dealing with emerging technologies. The reason for this 
is the very challenge facing IT organizations today: to be able to inte-
grate their efforts across business units. This has been proven to be the 
most difficult challenge for the chief information officers (CIOs) of 
today. This was further supported by the Siemens AG case study, in 
which Dana Deasy, the corporate CIO of the Americas, provided a 
detailed picture of the complex world of a CIO in a global firm, with 
over 400,000 employees. Yet, it is the creation of multiple layers of 
communities of practice that enables firms to create what I call “ com-
mon threads”  of communication. Thus, the linkage across communi-
ties of practice is a central theme of this book, providing guidance and 
education to organizations to establish processes that support their 
evolution in a responsive way.
The key word that I have used here is evolution.  In the past, infor-
mation traveled much slower, and there was more time to interpret 
its impact on the organization. Today, the travel time is shrinking; 
therefore, evolution can and should occur at a quicker pace. Indeed, 
organizational evolution is intertwined with the dynamics of com-
munity legitimization (Aldrich, 2001). Technological development 

345
Conclusion
for a particular population has widespread consequences for the rest 
of the organization. In these cases, technological innovations repre-
sent a form of collective learning that is different from direct learning 
from experience alone (Miner & Haunschild, 1995). There are many 
scholars who believe that change management must be implemented 
through top-down management approaches. However, I hope this 
book demonstrates that leadership through top-down management 
will never be solely sufficient to establish the organizational struc-
ture needed to handle technological innovations properly. Many 
such efforts to reorganize or reengineer organizations have had dis-
appointing results. Many of these failures, I believe, are attributable 
to a dependence on management intervention as opposed to strate-
gic integration and cultural assimilation. Technology only serves to 
expose problems that have existed in organizations for decades: the 
inability to drive down responsibilities to the operational levels of the 
organization.
My case studies provide, I trust, a realistic and pragmatic view 
toward the attainment of responsive organizational dynamism, 
assuming the appropriate roles and responsibilities are available. 
Furthermore, the case studies also reflect that progress toward orga-
nizational learning and maturity is a gradual one. As such, I deter-
mined that organizational transformation must be addressed along 
the same basis; that is, transformation is a gradual process as opposed 
to a planned specific outcome. I showed that organizations could and 
should look at transformation in much shorter “ chunks,”  as opposed 
to long-term “ big-bang”  approaches that rarely work and are difficult 
to measure. Measurement was applied to organizational transforma-
tion via the implementation of the balanced scorecard. The scorecard 
model I modified is tied to the chunk approach.
Another important concept in this book is the reconciliation 
between control and empowerment. As organizations find that their 
traditional structures are cumbersome when dealing with emerging 
technologies, they realize the need to empower employees to do more 
dynamically. With this empowerment, employees may make more 
mistakes or seem less genuine at times. When this occurs, there may 
be a need for management controls to be instituted and power-central-
ized management styles to be incorporated. Unfortunately, too many 
controls end any hope of creating a learning organization that can 

346
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
foster the dynamic planning and needs of responsive organizational 
dynamism. They also block the molding of communities of practice 
that require common threads of discourse and language. Indeed, it 
is communities of practice and discourse that lay the foundations for 
addressing the dilemma of employee control versus empowerment.
We are really beginning to experience the results of emerging tech-
nologies, particularly for products traded internationally. We have 
seen an unusual trend occur in which off shore product development 
and maintenance is at an all-time high, local employment is down, 
and corporate earnings are growing. The advent of this cycle lays a 
foundation for the new trends of global worker operations, many of 
which are shifting from a labor-intensive process to needs for think-
ing, planning, and management.
Unskilled or less-skilled workers, partly because of new technolog-
ical automation, are allowing organizations to displace higher-costing 
local labor to international outsourced operations. This means an 
increase in management learning related to supervision and coordina-
tion in a technology-driven world. We must be aware of the concern 
expressed by O’ Sullivan (2001) that “ new technologies have created 
unemployed workers with no rights”  (p. 159). The way individuals 
communicate, or the rules of their engagement, are quickly chang-
ing, particularly in the need to create more research and develop-
ment (R&D) infrastructures that can respond quicker to innovation 
opportunities brought about by emerging technologies. We saw this 
dilemma occur at Siemens, where business strategy and technology 
became a major investment, and the realization that e-business was 
more about business than just technology.
To address the lack of understanding of the technology life cycle, I 
presented my concept of driver and supporter functions and mapped 
them onto evolutionary transformation. This life cycle is one that 
ties business strategy into technology and should be used to convey 
ROD to executives. Driver functions explain why strategic integra-
tion is so important and present a case that requires more market-
ing-based philosophies when investing in technologies. This means 
that early adaptation of technology requires, as Bradley and Nolan 
(1998) call it, “ sense-and-respond”  approaches, by which IT organi-
zations can experiment with business units on how a technology may 

347
Conclusion
benefit the business. Siemens and ICAP provided good examples of 
different ways of creating infrastructures that can support technology 
exploration, including Deasy’ s 90-day program, by which technol-
ogy investments were reviewed periodically to see what adjustments 
are required to maximize the investment. It also provided a way to 
cancel those investments that were not paying off as originally fore-
cast. Understanding that changes along the way are needed, or that 
there are technologies that do not provide the intended benefits, must 
become a formal part of the process, one that CEOs must recognize 
and fund.
On the other hand, the supporter role is one that addresses the 
operational side of IT, such that executives and managers under-
stand the difference. I treated the concept of supporter as an eventual 
reality, the reality that all technologies, once adopted by operations, 
must inevitably become a commodity. This realization paves the way 
to understanding when and how technologies can be considered for 
outsourcing, based on economies of scale. The adoption of this phi-
losophy creates a structured way of understanding the cost side of the 
IT dilemma and requires business units to integrate their own plans 
with those offered by emerging technologies. The supporter aspect 
of technology became the base of cultural assimilation because once 
a technology is adapted by operations, there must be a correspond-
ing process that fosters its impact on organizational structures and 
cultural behaviors. It also provides the short- and long-term expected 
transformations, which ultimately link technology and strategic 
performance.
The driver/supporter philosophy also shows the complexity of the 
many definitions of technology, and that executives should not attempt 
to oversimplify it. Simply put, technology must be discussed in differ-
ent ways, and chief IT executives need to rise to the occasion to take a 
leadership role in conveying this to executives, managers, and opera-
tions, through organizational learning techniques. Organizations 
that can implement driver/supporter methods will inevitably be better 
positioned to understand why they need to invest in certain technolo-
gies and technology projects. My initial case study at Ravell exposed 
the potential limit of only operating on the unit levels and not getting 
executives involved in the system thinking and learning phases.

348
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
These general themes can be formulated as a marriage between 
business strategy and technological innovation and can be represented 
as follows:
	
1.	Organizations must change the business cycles of technology 
investment; technology investment must become part of the 
everyday or normative processes, as opposed to specific cycles 
based on economic opportunities or shortfalls. Emerging 
technologies tend to be implemented on a “ stop-and-go”  
basis, or based on breakthroughs, followed by discontinuities 
(Tushman & Anderson, 1997).
	
2.	The previous experiences that organizations have had 
with technology are not a good indicator for its future use. 
Technology innovations must evolve through infrastructure, 
learning, and process evaluation.
	
3.	Technology is central to competitive strategy. Executives 
need to ensure that technology opportunities are integrated 
with all discussions on business strategy.
	
4.	Research and development ( R&D) is at the center of sys-
tems/organizational-level thinking and learning. Companies 
need to create R&D operations, not as separate entities, but 
as part of the evaluation processes within the organizational 
structure.
	
5.	Managing technology innovations must be accomplished 
through linkages. Thus, interfaces across communities of 
practice via common threads are essential to have learning 
improve the ability of the organization to operate within 
responsive organizational dynamism.
	
6.	Managing intellectual capital is an exercise of linking the var-
ious networks of knowledge in the organization. Managing 
this knowledge requires organizational learning, to transfer 
tacit knowledge to explicit knowledge. The cultural assimi-
lation component of ROD creates complex tacit knowledge 
between IT and non-IT business units.
	
7.	There are multiple and complex levels of management that 
need to be involved in responsive organizational dynamism. 
Successful management utilizes organizational learning prac-
tices to develop architectures, manage change, and deal with 

349
Conclusion
short- and long-term projects simultaneously. Strong leader-
ship will understand that the communities of practice among 
the three primary levels (executive, middle management, 
and operations) constitute the infrastructure that best sus-
tains the natural migration toward responsive organizational 
dynamism.
This book looked at business strategy from yet another perspective, 
beyond its relationship with emerging technologies. Because organi-
zational learning is required to foster responsive organizational dyna-
mism, strategy must also be linked to learning. This linkage is known 
as strategic learning,  which, if implemented, helps organizations to 
continually adapt to the changing business environment, including 
changes brought about by technology.
However, due to the radical speed, complexity, and uncertainty, 
traditional ways of doing strategy and learning can no longer ignore 
the importance of technology. The old methods of determining busi-
ness strategy were based on standard models that were linear and 
“  plug-in.”  As stated, they were also very much based on projects that 
attempted to design one-time efforts with a corresponding result. As 
Pietersen (2002) explains, “ These processes usually produce operating 
plans and budgets, rather than insights and strategic breakthroughs”  
(p. 250). Technological dynamism has accelerated the need to replace 
these old traditions, and I emphasized that organizations that practice 
ROD must
•	 Evaluate and implement technology in an ongoing process 
and embed it as part of normal practices. This requires a 
change in integration and culture.
•	 Comprehend that the process of ROD is not about planning; 
it is about adaptation and strategic innovation.
•	 Have a process that feeds on the creation of new knowledge 
through organizational learning toward strategic organiza-
tional transformation.
Many scholars might correlate strategic success with leadership. 
While leadership, in itself, is an invaluable variable, it is just that. To 
attain ongoing evolution, I believe we need to move away from relying 
on individual leadership efforts and move toward an infrastructure 

350
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
that has fewer leaders and more normative behavior that can support 
and sustain responsive organizational dynamism. Certainly, this fos-
ters the important roles and responsibilities of CEOs, managers, and 
boards, but to have an ongoing process that changes the thinking and 
the operational fundamentals of the way the organization functions 
is more important and more valuable than individual leadership. That 
is why I raised the issues of discourse and language as well as self-
development. Therefore, it is the ability of an organization to trans-
form its entire community that will bring forth long-term strategic 
performance.
What this book really commits to is the importance of lifelong 
learning. The simple concept is that adults need to continually chal-
lenge their cultural norms if they are to develop what Mezirow (1990) 
calls “ new meaning perspectives.”  It is these new meaning perspec-
tives that lay the foundation for ROD so that managers and staff can 
continually challenge themselves to determine if they are making the 
best strategic decisions. Furthermore, it prepares individuals to deal 
with uncertainty as well as the ongoing transitions in the way they 
do their jobs. It is this very process that ultimately fosters learning in 
organizations.
While on-the-job training is valuable, Ravell shows us that move-
ment, or rotation of personnel, often supports individual learning. 
Specifically, the relocation of IT personnel to a business unit environ-
ment during Ravell phase I served to get IT staff more acclimated to 
business issues. This relocation helped IT staff members to begin to 
reflect about their own functions and their relationship to the over-
all mission of the organization. Ravell phase III showed yet another 
transition; taking a group of IT staff members and permanently inte-
grating them in a non-IT business-specific department. Ravell also 
teaches us that reflection must be practiced; time must be devoted to 
its instruction, and it will not occur automatically without interven-
tions from the executive rank. The executive must be a “ champion”  
who demonstrates to staff that the process is important and valued. 
Special sessions also need to be scheduled that make the process of 
learning and reflection more formal. If this is done and nurtured 
properly, it will allow communities to become serious about best prac-
tices and new knowledge creation.

351
Conclusion
Although I used technology as the basis for the need for responsive 
organizational dynamism, the needs for its existence can be attributed 
to any variable that requires dynamic change. As such, I suggest that 
readers begin to think about the next “ technology”  or variable that 
can cause the same needs to occur inside organizations. Such accel-
erations are not necessarily limited to technology. For example, we 
are experiencing the continuation of organizational downsizing from 
acquisitions. These acquisitions present similar challenges in that 
organizations must be able to integrate new cultures and “ other”  busi-
ness strategies and attempt to form new holistic directions— direc-
tions that need to be formed quickly to survive.
The market per se also behaves in a similar way to technology. The 
ability to adjust to consumer needs and shifting market segments is 
certainly not always related to technological change. My point is that 
ROD is a concept that should be embraced notwithstanding whether 
technology seems to have slowed or to have no effect on a specific 
industry at a particular moment. Thus, I challenge the organizations 
of today to develop new strategies that embrace the need to become 
dynamic throughout all of their operations and to create communi-
ties of practice that plan for ongoing strategic integration and cultural 
assimilation.
This book looked at the advent of technology to uncover a dilemma 
that has existed for some time. Perhaps a more general way of defining 
what ROD offers is to compare it to another historical concept: “ self-
generating organizations.”  Self-generating organizations are known 
for their promotion of autonomy with an “ underlying organic sense 
of interdependence”  (Johansen et al., 1995). Based on this definition, 
a self-generating organization is like an organism that evolves over 
time. This notion is consistent with organizational learning because 
they both inherently support inner growth stemming from the orga-
nization as opposed to its executives. The self-generating organization 
works well with ROD in the following ways:
•	 Traditional management control systems do not apply.
•	 Risks are higher, given that these organizational workers 
are granted a high degree of autonomy and empowerment 
that will lead to processes that break with the norms of the 
business.

352
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
•	 Adjustments and new processes should be expected.
•	 These organizations tend to transform political activity into 
strong supporting networks.
•	 Leadership definitions do not work. You cannot lead what 
you cannot control.
Self-generating organizations have scared traditional managers in 
the past, due to the fear they have of losing control. ROD provides 
a hybrid model that allows for self-generating infrastructures while 
providing certain levels of control fostered by organizational learn-
ing. Specifically, this means that the control is not traditional con-
trol. Responsive organizational dynamism, for example, embraces the 
breaking of rules for good reasons; it allows individuals to fail yet to 
reflect on the shortfall so that they do not repeat the same errors. It 
also allows employees to take risks that show promise and lead to 
increased critical thinking and to strategic action. Indeed, manage-
ment and leadership become more about framing conditions for oper-
ations, observing the results, and making adjustments that maintain 
stability. Thus, seeing ROD as a form of self-generation is the basis 
for sustaining innovative infrastructures that can respond to dynamic 
variables, like technology.
I have emphasized the need for organizational learning as the key 
variable to make ROD a reality. While I have modified many of the 
organizational learning theories to fit this need, I must acknowledge 
that a portion of the “ learning”  should be considered “ organizing.”  
Vince (2002) provides an analysis of how organizational learning 
could be used to sustain an “ organized”  reflection. He provides an 
interesting matrix of how the two theories can be integrated. After 
reviewing many of the ways in which organizational learning affects 
responsive organizational dynamism, I have developed a modified 
chart of Vince’ s original framework, as shown in Table  13.1.
Table  13.1 shows the three kinds of reflective practices that can 
operate in an organization: individual, group, and organizational. 
I emphasized in Chapter  9 that the extent of organizational learn-
ing maturation is directly related to the sophistication of reflections 
among the communities of practice. The more learning that occurs, 
based on individual reflection, the earlier the stage at which organi-
zational learning maturity occurs. Thus, more mature organizations 

353
Conclusion
Table  13.1    Individual, Group, and Organizational and Reflective Practices
INDIVIDUAL RELATIONS BETWEEN THE 
PERSON, ROLE, AND THE 
ORGANIZATION-IN-THE-MIND
GROUP RELATIONS ACROSS THE IT 
BOUNDARIES OF SELF OR OTHER AND 
OF SUBDEPARTMENTS WITHIN IT
ORGANIZATIONAL THE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN IT AND OTHER BUSINESS 
UNITS
Peer consulting groups  (nonmanagerial 
self-governing IT groups of at least 
three individuals)
Making connections for the self: 
Review and reflection within IT 
community, by friendship, and 
mutuality of interests and needs.
Making connections in small groups 
with “ others”  across IT organization:  
Develop interpersonal communication 
and dialogue within IT communities.
Making connections with the entire 
organization: Reflection on ways that 
technology affects other groups in the 
organization.
Organizational role analysis  (linking 
individuals with “ others”  inside the IT 
organization)
Organizational role analysis: 
Understanding the connections 
between the person, the person in IT, 
and his or her role in organization.
Role analysis groups: The ways in 
which technology roles and the 
understanding of those roles 
interweave within an IT community or 
department.
Technology role provides the framework 
within which the person and 
organization are integrated.
Communities of practice  (groups of 
individuals united in actions that 
contribute to the production of IT ideas 
in practice)
Involvement: Providing personal 
experience as the vehicle to organize 
the use of technology.
Engagement: Experience used to apply 
technology across IT organization;  
understanding of importance of IT 
interdepartment communication.
Establishment: Experience of power 
relations as they react and respond to 
technology uses among communities of 
practice
Group relations conferences  (reveal the 
complexities of feelings, interactions, 
and power relations that are integral to 
the process of organizing technology 
implementations)
Experiencing and rethinking technology 
authority and the meaning and 
consequences of leadership and 
followership.
Experiencing defensive mechanisms 
and avoidance strategies across IT 
departments.  Experience of 
organizing, belonging, and 
representing across IT organizations.
Experiencing the ways in which IT and 
the organization become integrated 
using collective emotional experience, 
politics, leadership, authority, and 
organizational transformation.

354
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
reflect at the group and organizational level. Becoming more mature 
requires a structured process that creates and maintains links between 
reflection and democratic thinking. These can be mapped onto the 
ROD arc, showing how, from an “ organizing”  perspective, reflective 
practice serves as a process to “ outline what is involved in the pro-
cess of reflection for learning and change”  (Vince, 2002, p. 74). Vince 
does not, however, establish a structure for implementation, for which 
ROD serves that very purpose, as shown in Figure  13.2.
Figure  13.2 graphically shows how organized reflection maps to 
the linear stages of the ROD arc (the organizational-level maturity 
arc), which in turn maps onto the three best practices arcs, discussed 
in Chapter  9. Each of the management arcs represents a level of man-
agement maturity at the organizational level, with Vince’ s (2002) 
matrix providing the overarching concepts on how to actually orga-
nize the progression from individual-based thinking and reflection to 
a more comprehensive and systems-level thinking and learning base. 
Organizational-level
maturity arc
Chief IT executive
best practices
maturity arc
CEO technology
best practices
maturity arc
Middle
management
technology best
practices
maturity arc
Vince’s “organizing” reﬂection matrix
Strategic integration
Cultural assimilation
Organizational learning constructs
Varying levels of management 
participation
Individual
reﬂection
Organizational
reﬂection
Linear stages learning maturation
Individual
reﬂection
Group
reﬂection
Organizational
reﬂection
Figure  13.2    ROD and Vince’ s reflection matrix.

355
Conclusion
The emphasis, overall, is that individual learning alone will under-
mine collective governance. Therefore, the movement from individual 
to organizational self-management remains a critical part of under-
standing how technology and other dynamic variables can foster new 
strategies for competitive advantage.
Perhaps the most important conclusion of this third edition is the 
impact that digital technologies are having on the acceleration of 
change being experienced throughout the world. Indeed, digital tech-
nology has begun to change not only the business world but the very 
fabric of our lives. Particular to this change is the continual emer-
gence of social media as a driver of new and competitive products and 
services. I also discussed the changing work philosophy and expecta-
tions of our new generation of employees, and how they think differ-
ently and want a more complex experience in the places in which they 
work. The Gen Y population is clearly a new breed of employees and 
the Gen Z behind them will be even more accustomed to using digi-
tal technologies in every fabric of the ways they want to learn, their 
preferences in communicating with others, and their role in society. 
Most important are the ways that technology has changed consumer 
behavior. I truly believe that future generations will look back on this 
period and indeed say, this was truly a consumer revolution!


357
Glossary
baby boomers: The generation of individuals who were born between 
the years of 1946 and 1964.
business process reengineering:  a process that organizations under-
take to determine how best to use technology to improve 
business performance
customer relationship management (CRM):  the development and 
maintenance of integrated relationships with the customer 
base of an organization. CRM applications provide organiza-
tions with integrated tools that allow individuals to store and 
sustain valuable information about their customers.
data mapping:  the process of comparing the data fields in one data-
base to another, or toward a new application database
decision‑support systems (DSS):  systems that assist managers to 
make better decisions by providing analytical results from 
stored data
digital disruption: When new digital technology advancements 
impact the value of goods and services.
digital transformation: The repositioning of or a new investment 
in technology and business models in efforts to compete in 
a rapidly changing digital economy and create a newfound 
sense of value for customers.

358
Glossary
enterprise resource planning (ERP):  a set of multimodule applica-
tions that support an entire manufacturing and business oper-
ation, including product planning, purchasing, maintaining 
inventories, interacting with suppliers, providing customer 
service, accounting interfaces, and tracking order shipments. 
These systems are also known as enterprise-level applications.
garbage can:  an abstract concept for allowing individuals a place to 
suggest innovations, brought about by technology. The inven-
tory of technology opportunities needs regular evaluation
Gen X: The generation of individuals who were born between the 
years of 1965 and 1980.
Gen Y/Millennials: The generation of individuals who were born 
between the years of 1981 and 1992. There is disagreement 
on the exact end dates of Gen Y individuals.
internet:  a cooperative message-forwarding system that links com-
puter networks all over the world. 
intranet:  a network confined to a single organization or unit. 
ISO 9000:  a set of quality assurance standards published by the 
91-nation International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO). ISO 9000 requires firms to define and implement 
quality processes in their organization.
legacy:  an existing software application or system that is assumed to 
operate. By definition, all applications in production become 
legacies.
operational excellence:  a philosophy of continuous improvement 
throughout an organization by enhancing efficiency and qual-
ity across operations
outsourcing: A practice utilized by corporations which involves hav-
ing external suppliers complete internal work in efforts to 
reduce costs.
storyboarding:  the process of creating prototypes that allow users to 
actually see examples of technology, and how it will look and 
operate. Storyboarding tells a story and can quickly educate 
executives, without being intimidating.
technology definitions branding:  the process of determining how an 
organization wants to be viewed by its customers. Branding 
includes not only the visual view, but also the emotional, 

359
Glossary
rational, and cultural image that consumers associate with an 
organization, its products, and services.
user interface:  the relationship with end users that facilitates the pro-
cess of gathering and defining logical requirements
user level:  the tier of computer project experience of the user. There 
are three levels: (1) knowledgeable, (2) amateur, and (3) novice
virtual teams:  groups of people, geographically disbursed, and linked 
together using communication technologies
World Wide Web (web):  loosely organized set of computer sites that 
publish information that anyone can read via the Internet 
using mainly HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
Year 2000 (Y2K):  a monumental challenge to many organizations 
due to a fear that software applications could not handle the 
turn of the century. Specifically, calculations that used the 
year portion of a date would not calculate properly. As such, 
there was a huge investment in reviewing legacy systems to 
uncover where these flaws existed.
Organizational Learning Definitions
action science:  pioneered by Argyris and Schö n (1996), action science 
was designed to promote individual self-reflection, regarding 
behavior patterns and to encourage a productive exchange 
among individuals. Action science encompasses a range of 
methods to help individuals learn how to be reflective about 
their actions. A key component of action science is the use 
of reflective practices— including what is commonly known 
among researchers and practitioners as reflection in action, 
and reflection on action.
balanced scorecard:  a means for evaluating transformation, not only 
for measuring completion against set targets, but also, for 
defining how expected transformations map onto the strate-
gic objectives of the organization. In effect, it is the ability of 
the organization to execute its strategy.
communities of practice:  are based on the assumption that learning 
starts with engagement in social practice and that this prac-
tice is the fundamental construct by which individuals learn. 

360
Glossary
Thus, communities of practice are formed to get things done 
using a shared way of pursuing interest.
cultural assimilation:  a process that focuses on the organizational 
aspects of how technology is internally organized, including 
the role of the IT department, and how it is assimilated within 
the organization as a whole. It is an outcome of responsive 
organizational dynamism.
cultural lock-in:  the inability of an organization to change its corpo-
rate culture, even when there are clear market threats (Foster 
& Kaplan, 2001)
double-loop learning:  requires individuals to reflect on a prior action 
or habit that needs to change in behavior and change to oper-
ational procedures. For example, people who engage in dou-
ble-loop learning, may need to adjust how they perform their 
job as opposed to just the way they communicate with others.
drivers:  those units that engage in frontline or direct revenue-­
generating activities
experiential learning:  a type of learning that comes from the experi-
ences that adults have accrued over the course of their individ-
ual lives. These experiences provide rich and valuable forms of 
“ literacy”  that must be recognized as important components 
to overall learning development.
explicit knowledge:  documented knowledge found in manuals, doc-
umentation, files, and other accessible places and sources
flame:  a lengthy, often personally insulting, debate in an elec-
tronic community that provides both positive and negative 
consequences
frame-talk:  focuses on interpretation to evaluate the meanings of talk
knowledge management:  the ability to transfer individual tacit 
knowledge into explicit knowledge
left-hand column:  a technique by which individuals use the right-hand 
column of a piece of paper to transcribe dialogues that they feel 
have not resulted in effective communication. In the left-hand 
column of the same page, participants write what they were 
really thinking at the time of the dialogue but did not say.
management self-development:  increases the ability and willingness 
of managers to take responsibility for themselves, particularly 
for their own learning (Pedler et al., 1988)

361
Glossary
mythopoetic-talk:  communicates ideogenic ideas and images that 
can be used to communicate the nature of how to apply tool-
talk and frame-talk, within the particular culture or society. 
This type of talk allows for concepts of intuition and ideas for 
concrete application.
organizational knowledge:  is defined as “ the capability of a company 
as a whole to create new knowledge, disseminate it through-
out the organization, and embody it in products, services, and 
systems”  (Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995, p. 3)
organizational transformation:  changes in goals, boundaries, and 
activities. According to Aldrich (2001), organizational trans-
formations “ must involve a qualitative break with routines 
and a shift to new kinds of competencies that challenge exist-
ing organizational knowledge”  (p. 163).
reflection with action:  term used as a rubric for the various methods 
involving reflection in relation to activity
responsive organizational dynamism:  the set of integrative 
responses, by an organization, to the challenges raised by 
technology dynamism. It has two component outcomes: stra-
tegic integration and cultural assimilation.
single-loop learning:  requires individuals to reflect on a prior action 
or habit that needs to be changed in the future but that does 
not require individuals to change their operational procedures 
with regard to values and norms
strategic integration:  a process that addresses the business-strategic 
impact of technology on organizational processes. That is, 
the business-strategic impact of technology requires imme-
diate organizational responses and, in some instances, zero 
latency. It is an outcome of responsive organizational dyna-
mism, and it requires organizations to deal with a variable 
that forces acceleration of decisions in an unpredictable 
fashion.
supporters:  units that do not generate obvious direct revenues but 
rather are designed to support frontline activities
tacit knowledge:  an experience-based type of knowledge and skill, 
with the individual capacity to give intuitive forms to new 
things; that is, to anticipate and preconceptualize the future 
(Kulkki & Kosonen, 2001)

362
Glossary
technological dynamism:  characterizes the unpredictable and accel-
erated ways in which technology, specifically, can change 
strategic planning and organizational behavior/culture. This 
change is based on the acceleration of events and interactions 
within organizations, which in turn create the need to better 
empower individuals and departments.
tool-talk:  includes instrumental communities required to discuss, 
conclude, act, and evaluate outcomes

363
References 
Aldrich, H. (2001). Organizations Evolving.  London: Sage.
Allen, F., & Percival, J. (2000). Financial strategies and venture capital. In 
G. S. Day & P. J. Schoemaker (Eds.), Wharton on Managing Emerging 
Technologies (pp. 289– 306). New York: Wiley.
Allen, T. J., & Morton, M. S. (1994). Information Technology and the 
Corporation.  New York: Oxford University Press.
Applegate, L. M., Austin, R. D., & McFarlan, F. W. (2003). Corporate 
Information Strategy and Management  (2nd edn.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Argyris, C. (1993). Knowledge for Action: A Guide to Overcoming Barriers to 
Organizational Change.  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Argyris, C., & Schö n, D. A. (1996). Organizational Learning II.  Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Arnett, R. C. (1992). Dialogue Education: Conversation about Ideas and between 
Persons.  Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Bakanauskiené , I., BendaravicIiené , R., Krikstolaitis, R., & Lydeka, Z. 
(2011). Discovering an employer branding: Identifying dimensions of 
employers’  attractiveness in University. Management of Organizations: 
Systematic Research , 59, pp. 7– 22.
Bazarova, N. N., & Walther, J. B. (2009). Virtual groups: (Mis)attribution 
of blame in distributed work. In P. Lutgen-Sandvik & B. Davenport 
Sypher (Eds.), Destructive Organizational Communication: Processes, 
Consequences, and Constructive Ways of Organizing  (pp. 252– 266). New 
York: Routledge.
Bellovin. S. M. (2015). Thinking Security: Stopping Next Year’ s Hackers . Boston, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.

364
References 
Bensaou, M., & Earl, M. J. (1998). The right mind-set for managing informa-
tion technology. In J. E. Garten (Ed.), World View: Global Strategies for 
the New Economy  (pp. 109– 125). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Bertels, T., & Savage, C. M. (1998). Tough questions on knowledge manage-
ment. In G. V. Krogh, J. Roos, & D. Kleine (Eds.), Knowing in Firms: 
Understanding, Managing and Measuring Knowledge  (pp. 7– 25). London: 
Sage.
Boland, R. J., Tenkasi, R. V., & Te’ eni, D. (1994). Designing information 
technology to support distributed cognition. Organization Science , 5, 
456– 475.
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (1997). Reframing Organizations: Artistry, 
Choice, and Leadership  (2nd edn.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bradley, S. P., & Nolan, R. L. (1998). Sense and Respond: Capturing Value in 
the Network Era.  Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational learning and communities 
of practice. Organization Science , 2, 40– 57.
Burke, W. W. (2002). Organizational Change: Theory and Practice.  London: 
Sage.
Cadle, J., Paul, D., & Turner, P. (2014). Business Analysis Techniques: 99 
Essential Tools for Success  (2nd edn.). Swindon, UK: Chartered Institute 
for IT.
Capgemini Consulting. (2013). Being Digital: Engaging the Organization to 
Accelerate Digital Transformation  [White Paper]. Retrieved from http://
www.capgemini-consulting.com/resource-file-access/resource/pdf/
being_digital_engaging_the_organization_to_accelerate_digital_
transformation.pdf
Cash, J. I., & Pearlson, K. E. (2004, October 18). The future CIO. Information 
Week .  Available at http://www.informationweek.com/story/showArti-
cle.jhtml?articleID=49901186
Cassidy, A. (1998). A Practical Guide to Information Strategic Planning.  Boca 
Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press.
Cisco (2012). Creating an Office from an Easy Chair  [White Paper]. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/enterprise/
cisco-on-cisco/Trends_in_IT_Gen_Y_Flexible_Collaborative_
Workspace.pdf
Collis, D. J. (1994). Research note: How valuable are organizational capabili-
ties? Strategic Management Journal , 15, 143– 152.
Cross, T, & Thomas, R. J. (2009). Driving Results through Social Networks. 
How Top Organizations Leverage Networks for Performance and Growth.  
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. G. (1963). The Behavioral Theory of the Firm.  
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
De Jong, G. 2014. Financial inclusion of youth in the Southern provinces of 
Santander: Setting up a participatory research in Columbia. In P. Wabike 
& J. van der Linden (Eds.), Education for Social Inclusion  (pp. 87– 106). 
Groningen, the Netherlands: University of Groningen.

365
References 
Dewey, J. (1933). How We Think.  Boston, MA: Health.
Dodgson, M. (1993). Organizational learning: A review of some literatures. 
Organizational Studies , 14, 375– 394.
Dolado, J. (Ed.) (2015). No Country for Young People? Youth Labour Market 
Problems in Europe , VoxEU.org eBook, London: CEPR Press.
Dragoon, A. (2002). This changes everything. Retrieved December 15, 2003, 
from http://www.darwinmag.com
Earl, M. J. (1996a). Business processing engineering: A phenomenon of orga-
nizational dimension. In M. J. Earl (Ed.), Information Management: The 
Organizational Dimension  (pp. 53– 76). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Earl, M. J. (1996b). Information Management: The Organizational Dimension.  
New York: Oxford University Press.
Earl, M. J., Sampler, J. L., & Short, J. E. (1995). Strategies for business pro-
cess reengineering: Evidence from field studies. Journal of Management 
Information Systems , 12, 31– 56.
Easterby-Smith, M., Araujo, L., & Burgoyne, J. (1999). Organizational 
Learning and the Learning Organization: Developments in Theory and 
Practice.  London: Sage.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Bourgeois, L. J. (1988). Politics of strategic decision 
making in high-velocity environments: Toward a midrange theory. 
Academy of Management Journal , 31, 737– 770.
Elkjaer, B. (1999). In search of a social learning theory. In M. Easterby-
Smith, J. Burgoyne, & L. Araujo (Eds.), Organizational Learning and 
the Learning Organization  (pp. 75– 91). London: Sage.
Ernst & Young, (2012). The digitization of everything: How organisations 
must adapt to changing consumer behaviour [White Paper]. Retrieved 
from http://www.ey.com/Publication/ vwLUAssets/The_digitisation_
of_everything_-_How_organisations_must_adapt_to_changing_con-
sumer_behaviour/$FILE/ EY_Digitisation_of_everything.pdf
Fineman, S. (1996). Emotion and subtexts in corporate greening. Organization 
Studies , 17, 479– 500.
Foster, R. N., & Kaplan, S. (2001). Creative Destruction: Why Companies 
That Are Built to Last Underperform the Market: And How to Successfully 
Transform Them .  New York: Currency.
Franco, V., Hu, H., Lewenstein, B. V., Piirto, R., Underwood, R., & Vidal, 
N. K. (2000). Anatomy of a flame: Conflict and community build-
ing on the Internet. In E. L. Lesser, M. A. Fontaine, & J. A. Slusher 
(Eds.), Knowledge and Communities  (pp. 209– 224). Woburn, MA: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Friedman, T. L. (2007). The World Is Flat.  New York: Picador/Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux.
Friedman, V. J, Razer, M., Tsafrir, H., & Zorda, O. (2014). An action science 
approach to creating inclusive teacher-parent relationships. In P. Wabike 
& J. van der Linden (eds.), Education for Social Inclusion  (pp. 25– 51). 
Groningen, the Netherlands: University of Groningen.

366
References 
Garvin, D. A. (1993). Building a learning organization. Harvard Business 
Review , 71 (4), 78– 84.
Garvin, D. A. (2000). Learning in Action: A Guide to Putting the Learning 
Organization to Work.  Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Gephardt, M. A., & Marsick, V. J. (2003). Introduction to special issue on 
action research: Building the capacity for learning and change. Human 
Resource Planning , 26(2), 14–18.
Glasmeier, A. (1997). The Japanese small business sector (Final report to the 
Tissot Economic Foundation, Le Locle, Switzerland, Working Paper 
16). Austin: Graduate Program of Community and Regional Planning, 
University of Texas at Austin.
Grant, D., Keenoy, T., & Oswick, C. (Eds.). (1998). Discourse and Organization.  
London: Sage.
Grant, R. M. (1996). Prospering in a dynamically-competitive environ-
ment: Organizational capability as knowledge integration. Organization 
Science ,  7,  375– 387. 
Gregoire, J. (2002, March 1). The state of the CIO 2002: The CIO title, 
What’ s it really mean? CIO .  Available at http://www.cio.com/arti-
cle/30904/The_State_of_the_CIO_2002_The_CIO_Title_What_s_
It_Really_Mean_
Habermas, J. (1998). The Inclusion of the Other: Studies in Political Theory.  
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Halifax, J. (1999). Learning as initiation: Not-knowing, bearing witness, 
and healing. In S. Glazier (Ed.), The Heart of Learning: Spirituality in 
Education  (pp. 173– 181). New York: Penguin Putnam.
Hardy, C., Lawrence, T. B., & Philips, N. (1998). Talk and action: 
Conversations and narrative in interorganizational collaboration. In 
D. Grant, T. Keenoy, & C. Oswick (Eds.), Discourse and Organization  
(pp. 65– 83). London: Sage.
Heath, D. H. (1968). Growing Up in College: Liberal Education and Maturity.  
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hoffman, A. (2008, May 19). The social media gender gap. Business Week .  
Available 
at 
http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/
may2008/tc20080516_580743.htm
Huber, G. P. (1991). Organizational learning: The contributing processes and 
the literature. Organization Science , 2, 99– 115.
Hullfish, H. G., & Smith, P. G. (1978). Reflective Thinking: The Method of 
Education.  Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Huysman, M. (1999). Balancing biases: A critical review of the literature 
on organizational learning. In M. Easterby-Smith, J. Burgoyne, & L. 
Araujo (Eds.), Organizational Learning and the Learning Organization  
(pp. 59– 74). London: Sage.
Johansen, R., Saveri, A., & Schmid, G. (1995). Forces for organizational 
change: 21st century organizations: Reconciling control and empower-
ment. Institute for the Future , 6 (1), 1– 9.

367
References 
Johnson Controls (2010) Generation Y and the workplace: Annual report 
2010 [White Paper]. Retrieved from http://www.johnsoncontrols.com/
content/dam/WWW/jci/be/global_workplace_innovation/oxygenz/
Oxygenz_Report_-_2010.pdf
Jonas, L., & Kortenius, R. (2014) Beyond a Paycheck: Employment as an 
act of consumption for Gen Y talents (Master’ s Thesis) Retrieved from 
http://lup.lub.lu.se/luur/download?func=downloadFile&recordOId=44
56566&fileOId=4456569
Jones, M. (1975). Organizational learning: Collective mind and cognitiv-
ist metaphor? Accounting Management and Information Technology , 5(1), 
61– 77.
Kanevsky, V., & Housel, T. (1998). The learning-knowledge-value cycle. In G. 
V. Krogh, J. Roos, & D. Kleine (Eds.), Knowing in Firms: Understanding, 
Managing and Measuring Knowledge  (pp. 240– 252). London: Sage.
Kaplan, R. S., & Norton, D. P. (2001). The Strategy-Focused Organization.  
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kegan, R. (1994). In Over Our Heads: The Mental Demands of Modern life.  
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kegan, R. (1998, October). Adult Development and Transformative Learning.  
Lecture presented at the Workplace Learning Institute, Teachers 
College, New York.
Knefelkamp, L. L. (1999). Introduction. In W. G. Perry (Ed.), Forms of Ethical 
and Intellectual Development in the College Years: A Scheme (pp. xi–xxxvii).  
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Koch, C. (1999, February 15). Staying alive. CIO Magazine .  38– 45.
Kolb, D. (1984a) Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning 
and Development.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kolb, D. (1984b). Experiential Learning as the Science of Learning and 
Development.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kolb, D. (1999). The Kolb Learning Style Inventory.  Boston, MA: HayResources 
Direct.
Kulkki, S., & Kosonen, M. (2001). How tacit knowledge explains organiza-
tional renewal and growth: The case at Nokia. In I. Nonaka & D. Teece 
(Eds.), Managing Industrial Knowledge: Creation, Transfer and Utilization  
(pp. 244– 269). London: Sage.
Langer, A. M. (1997). The Art of Analysis.  New York: Springer-Verlag.
Langer, A. M. (2001a). Analysis and Design of Information Systems.  New York: 
Springer-Verlag.
Langer, A. M. (2001b). Fixing bad habits: Integrating technology person-
nel in the workplace using reflective practice. Reflective Practice , 2(1), 
100– 111.
Langer, A. M. (2002). Reflecting on practice: using learning journals in higher 
and continuing education. Teaching in Higher Education , 7, 337– 351.
Langer, A. M. (2003). Forms of workplace literacy using reflection-with 
action methods: A scheme for inner-city adults. Reflective Practice , 4, 
317– 336.

368
References 
Langer, A. M. (2007). Analysis and Design of Information Systems  (3rd edn.). 
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Langer A. M. (2009). Measuring self-esteem through reflective writing: 
Essential factors in workforce development. Journal of Reflective Practice , 
9(10): 45– 48.
Langer, A. (2011). Information Technology and Organizational Learning: 
Managing Behavioral Change through Technology and Education  (2nd 
edn.). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Langer, A. M. (2013). Employing young talent from underserved popula-
tions: Designing a flexible organizational process for assimilation and 
productivity. Journal of Organization Design , 2(1): 11– 26.
Langer, A. M. (2016) Guide to Software Development: Designing and Managing 
the Life Cycle (2nd edn.). New York: Springer.
Langer, A.M. & Yorks, L. 2013. Strategic IT: Best practices for Managers and 
Executives . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Lesser, E. L., Fontaine, M. A., & Slusher, J. A. (Eds.). (2000). Knowledge and 
Communities.  Woburn, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Levine, R., Locke, C., Searls, D., & Weinberger, D. (2000). The Cluetrain 
Manifesto.  Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Lientz, B. P., & Rea, K. P. (2004). Breakthrough IT Change Management: 
How to Get Enduring Change Results.  Burlington, MA: Elsevier 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Lipman-Blumen, J. (1996). The Connective Edge: Leading in an Independent 
World.  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lipnack, J., & Stamps, J. (2000). Virtual Teams  (2nd edn.). New York: Wiley.
Lounamaa, P. H., & March, J. G. (1987). Adaptive coordination of a learning 
team. Management Science , 33, 107– 123.
Lucas, H. C. (1999). Information Technology and the Productivity Paradox.  New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Mackenzie, K. D. (1994). The science of an organization. Part I: A new model 
of organizational learning. Human Systems Management , 13, 249– 258.
March, J. G. (1991). Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. 
Organization Science , 2, 71– 87.
Marshak, R. J. (1998). A discourse on discourse: Redeeming the meaning 
of talk. In D. Grant, T Keenoy, & C. Oswick (Eds.), Discourse and 
Organization  (pp. 65– 83). London: Sage.
Marsick, V. J. (1998, October). Individual strategies for organizational learn-
ing.  Lecture presented at the Workplace Learning Institute, Teachers 
College, New York.
McCarthy, B. (1999). Learning Type Measure.  Wauconda, IL: Excel.
McDermott, R. (2000). Why information technology inspired but cannot 
deliver knowledge management. In E. L. Lesser, M. A. Fontaine, & 
J. A. Slusher (Eds.), Knowledge and Communities  (pp. 21– 36). Woburn, 
MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
McGraw, K. (2009). Improving project success rates with better leadership: 
Project Smart. Available at www.projectsmart.co.uk/improving-project-
success-rateswith-better-leadership.html

369
References 
Mezirow, J. (1990). Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood: A Guide to 
Transformative and Emancipatory Learning.  San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
Milliken, C. (2002). A CRM success story. Computerworld .  Available at 
www.computerworld.com/s/article/75730?A_CRM_success-story
Miner, A. S., & Haunschild, P. R. (1995). Population and learning. In B. 
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior  
(pp. 115– 166). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Mintzberg, H. (1987). Crafting strategy. Harvard Business Review , 65(4), 72.
Mintzberg, H., & Waters, J. A. (1985). Of strategies, deliberate and emer-
gent. Strategic Management Journal , 6, 257– 272.
Moon, J. A. (1999). Reflection in Learning and Professional Development: Theory 
and Practice.  London: Kogan Page.
Moon, J. A. (2000). A Handbook for Academics, Students and Professional 
Development. London: Kogan Page.
Mossman, A., & Stewart, R. (1988). Self-managed learning in organiza-
tions. In M. Pedler, J. Burgoyne, & T. Boydell (Eds.), Applying Self-
Development in Organizations  (pp. 38– 57). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Mumford, A. (1988). Learning to learn and management self-development. In 
M. Pedler, J. Burgoyne, & T Boydell (Eds.), Applying Self-Development 
in Organizations  (pp. 23– 37). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Murphy, T. (2002). Achieving Business Practice from Technology: A Practical 
Guide for Today’ s Executive.  New York: Wiley.
Narayan, S. (2015). Agile IT Organization Design for Digital Transformation 
and Continuous Delivery . New York: Addison-Wesely.
Newman, K. S. 1999. No Shame in My Game: The Working Poor in the Inner 
City . New York: Vintage Books.
Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of knowledge creation. Organization 
Science , 5(1), 14– 37.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The Knowledge-Creating Company: How 
Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation.  New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Olson, G. M., & Olson, J. S. (2000). Distance matters. Human– Computer 
Interactions , 15(1), 139– 178.
Olve, N., Petri, C., Roy, J., & Roy, S. (2003). Making Scorecards Actionable: 
Balancing Strategy and Control.  New York: Wiley.
O’ Sullivan, E. (2001). Transformative Learning: Educational Vision for the 21st 
Century.  Toronto: Zed Books.
Peddibhotla, N. B., & Subramani, M. R. (2008). Managing knowledge in 
virtual communities within organizations. In I. Becerra-Fernandez & 
D. Leidner (Eds.), Knowledge Management: An Evolutionary View (229–
247).  Armonk, NY: Sharp.
Pedler, M., Burgoyne, J., & Boydell, T. (Eds.). (1988). Applying self-­
Development in Organizations .  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Peters, T. J., & Waterman, R. H. (1982). In Search of Excellence: Lessons from 
America’ s Best-Run Companies.  New York: Warner Books.

370
References 
Pietersen, W. (2002). Reinventing Strategy: Using Strategic Learning to Create 
and Sustain Breakthrough Performance.  New York: Wiley.
Porter, M. E., & Kramer, M. R. 2011. Creating shared value. Harvard Business 
Review ,  89(1/2): 62– 77.
Prange, C. (1999). Organizational learning: Desperately seeking 
­theory. In M. Easterby-Smith, J. Burgoyne, & L. Araujo (Eds.), 
Organizational Learning and the Learning Organization  (pp. 23– 43). 
London: Sage.
Probst, G., & Bü chel, B. (1996). Organizational Learning: The Competitive 
Advantage of the Future.  London: Prentice-Hall.
Probst, G., Bü chel, B., & Raub, S. (1998). Knowledge as a strategic resource. 
In G. V. Krogh, J. Roos, & D. Kleine (Eds.), Knowing in Firms: 
Understanding, Managing and Measuring Knowledge  (pp. 240– 252). 
London: Sage.
Rassool N. 1999. Literacy for Sustainable Development in the Age of Information  
(Vol. 14). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters Limited.
Reynolds, G. (2007). Ethics in Information Technology  (2nd edn.). New York: 
Thomson.
Robertson, S., & Robertson, J. (2012). Mastering the Requirements Process: 
Getting Requirements Right  (3rd edn.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Addison-Wesley.
Sabherwal, R., & Becerra-Fernandez, I. (2005). Integrating specific knowl-
edge: Insights from the Kennedy Space Center. IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management , 52, 301– 315.
Sampler, J. L. (1996). Exploring the relationship between information tech-
nology and organizational structure. In M. J. Earl (Ed.), Information 
Management: The Organizational Dimension  (pp. 5– 22). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Saxena, P., & Jain. R. (2012) Managing career aspirations of generation Y at 
work place. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science 
and Software Engineering ,  2(7), 114–118..
Schein, E. H. (1992). Organizational Culture and Leadership  (2nd edn.). San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schein, E. H. (1994). The role of the CEO in the management of change: The 
case of information technology. In T. J. Allen & M. S. Morton (Eds.), 
Information Technology and the Corporation  (pp. 325– 345). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Schlossberg, N. R. (1989). Marginality and mattering: Key issues in building 
community. New Directions for Student Services , 48, 5– 15.
Schoenfield, B. S. E. (2015). Securing Systems: Applied Security Architecture and 
Threat Models .  Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Schö n, D. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action.  
New York: Basic Books.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning 
Organization.  New York: Currency Doubleday.
Siebel, T. M. (1999). Cyber Rules: Strategies for Excelling at E-Business.  New 
York: Doubleday.

371
References 
Stolterman, E., & Fors, A. C. (2004). Information technology and the good 
life. Information Systems Research , 143, 687– 692.
Swadzba, U. (2010). Work or consumption: Indicators of one’s place in the 
Society. In Beyond Globalisation: Exploring the Limits of Globalisation in 
the Regional Context (Conference Preceedings)  (pp. 123– 129). Ostrava: 
University of Astrava Czech Republic.
Swieringa, J., & Wierdsma, A. (1992). Becoming a Learning Organization, 
beyond the Learning Curve.  New York: Addison-Wesley.
Szulanski, G., & Amin, K. (2000). Disciplined imagination: Strategy mak-
ing in uncertain environments. In G. S. Day & P.J. Schoemaker (Eds.), 
Wharton on Managing Emerging Technologies  (pp. 187– 205). New York: 
Wiley.
Teece, D. J. (2001). Strategies for managing knowledge assets: The role of 
firm structure and industrial context. In I. Nonaka & D. Teece (Eds.), 
Managing Industrial Knowledge: Creation, Transfer and Utilization  
(pp. 125– 144). London: Sage.
Teigland, R. (2000). Communities of practice at an Internet firm: Netovation 
vs. in-time performance. In E. L. Lesser, M. A. Fontaine, & J. A. 
Slusher (Eds.), Knowledge and Communities  (pp. 151– 178). Woburn, 
MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Tushman, M. L., & Anderson, P. (1986). Technological discontinuities 
and organizational environments. Administrative Science Quarterly , 31, 
439– 465.
Tushman, M. L., & Anderson, P. (1997). Managing Strategic Innovation and 
Change.  New York: Oxford University Press.
Vince, R. (2002). Organizing reflection. Management Learning , 33(1), 63– 78.
Wabike P. 2014. University-Community Engagement: Universities at a 
crossroad? In P. Wabike & J. van der Linden (eds.), Education for Social 
Inclusion  (pp. 131– 149). Groningen, the Netherlands: University of 
Groningen.
Wallemacq, A., & Sims, D. (1998). The struggle with sense. In D. Grant, T. 
Keenoy, & C. Oswick (Eds.), Discourse and Organization  (pp. 65– 83). 
London: Sage.
Walsh, J. P. (1995). Managerial and organizational cognition: Notes from a 
trip down memory lane. Organizational Science , 6, 280– 321.
Watkins, K. E., & Marsick, V. J. (1993). Sculpting the Learning Organization: 
Lessons in the Art and Science of Systemic Change.  San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
Watson, T. J. (1995). Rhetoric, discourse and argument in organizational 
sense making: A reflexive tale. Organization Studies , 16, 805– 821.
Wellman, B., Salaff, J., Dimitrova, D., Garton, L. Gulia, M., & 
Haythornthwaite, C. (2000). Computer networks and social networks: 
Collaborative work, telework, and virtual community. In E. L. Lesser, 
M. A. Fontaine, & J. A. Slusher (Eds.), Knowledge and Communities  
(pp. 179– 208). Woburn, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity.  
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

372
References 
Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice: The key to knowledge strategy. 
In E. L. Lesser, M. A. Fontaine, & J. A. Slusher (Eds.), Knowledge and 
Communities  (pp. 3– 20). Woburn, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
West, G. W. (1996). Group learning in the workplace. In S. Imel (Ed.), 
Learning in Groups: Exploring Fundamental Principles, New Uses, 
and Emerging Opportunities: New Directions for Adult and Continuing 
Education  (pp. 51– 60). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Westerman, G., Bonnet, D., & McAfee, A. (2014). Leading Digital: Turning 
Technology into Business Transformation . Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press.
Yorks, L., & Marsick, V. J. (2000). Organizational learning and transforma-
tion. In J. Mezirow (Ed.), Learning as Transformation: Critical Perspectives 
on a Theory in Progress (pp. 253– 281).  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Yourdon, E. (1998). Rise and Resurrection of the American Programmer  
(pp. 253– 284). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

373
Index
A
Abstract conceptualization, as 
learning preference, 84
Abstraction, leaps of, 10
Acceleration, xxi
Access control, social networking 
issues, 134
Access tracking, 137
Accountability, of IT staff, 5
Accounting, IT relevance to, 24
Action, emotional components 
of, 92
Action science, 3, 4, 74, 142, 
152, 359
Active experimentation, as learning 
preference, 84
Activity, relationship to content, 90
Activity systems, organizational 
transformation of, 139–141
Adaptive organizations, 83
Administrative departments, 
alignment with, 17–19
Adoptive approach, 63
Adversarial relationships, 2
Advertising business, 
transformation to media 
market, 231
Alignment
with administrative 
departments, 17–19
to business strategy, 148
with human resources, 18
with social networks, 138
of technology with business 
strategy, 149
Answerthink Corporation, 304
Applied individual learning for 
technology model, 87
Architecture, 46
Assimilation, 6
cultural, 7
Assumptions, unearthing
unspoken, 9–10
Attribution theory, 166
Autonomy, 351

374
Index
B
Back office issues
at ICAP, 204
as strategic business problems, 195
Balanced scorecard, 359
availability variable, 156
business stakeholder support 
for, 155
as checklist and tracking 
system, 154
competence variable, 156
discourse and, 156–158
enthusiasm requirements, 156
executive management support 
for, 156
implementing using application 
software, 155
information provider 
responsibilities, 155
learning pilots 
responsibilities, 155
as living document, 147
as measurement of knowledge 
creation, 158
modifications for ROD, 149
organizational transformation 
and, 139–161
for Ravell phase I, 153
roles and responsibilities, 156
rules of success, 160
schematic diagram, 149
scorecard designer, 155
responsibilities, 155
Behavioral shifts, 12, 140
in CIOs, 195
Benefits realization, five pillars of, 
45–46
Best practices, 37
CEO best practices technology 
arc, 313–314
for chief executive officers, 
299–313
chief IT executive best practices 
arc, 297–299
for chief IT executives, 288–297
ethics and maturity issues, 
333–337
middle management, 316–325
quest for, 287–288
unproven nature of, 56–57
Billable time records
financial returns from technology 
solution, 229
limitations at HTC, 225–226
value-added services solutions, 232
Board meetings, IT issues discussed 
at, 34
Boise Cascade Office Products, 308, 
309, 311
Bottom-up learning, xxix, 132, 
214, 235
at Siemens AG, 192, 193
Boundaries, organizational 
transformation of, 139, 140
Brain hemispheres, and learning 
preferences, 85
Budgetary cutbacks, 47, 293
Budgeting, IT strategies, 35
Business analysts, as 
intermediaries, 22
Business ethics, 296–298, 302, 326
Business knowledge, by chief IT 
executives, 291
Business plan, judging technologies 
based on, 212–213
Business process, implementation 
of, 314
Business process impact, 45
Business process outsourcing 
leaders, 296
Business process reengineering 
(BPR), 25, 47, 357
Business rules, 126
Business strategy, 31, 34–35
aligning technology with, xii, 149

375
Index
articulating through balanced 
scorecard, 151
balanced scorecards and, 159–160
CIO assimilation to, 195
as continual process, 148
and importance of balanced 
scorecards, 161
IT role in, 21, 23–24, 26
translating to operational 
terms, 148
Business technology cognition, 
326, 329
Business user involvement, risks, 126
C
Case studies, xxx, 187, 233–238; 
see also Ravell
Corporation case study
HTC, 225–232
ICAP, 203–224
learning-knowledge-value 
cycle, 238
organizational learning 
approaches summary, 235
Siemens AG, 187–203
Catch-up, playing, 120
Centralization issues, 290, 305–306
CEO best practices technology arc, 
313–314
CEO roles, in HTC case study, 
227–228
CEO technology best practices arc, 
313–314, 317, 334
detail, 318–321
maturity stages, 314–315
performance dimensions, 
315–316
CFO quarterly meetings, 193
at Siemens AG, 191, 192
Change, xxiv
evolutionary vs. revolutionary, 120
frequency of, 141
mobilizing through executive 
leadership, 148
need for accelerated, 68
overwhelming pace of, 293
pace of, 18
planned vs. unplanned, 120
rejection of technology-driven, 72
unpredictability of, 77
vs. transformation, 141, 152
Change agents, 38
CEOs as, 311
IT executives as, 39
technology, 68, 195
Change leaders, 296
Change management, xxiv, 45, 
120–123, 345
by chief IT executives, 291
goals for IT, 123
at ICAP, 209
for IT organizations, 123–133
Chief executive officers (CEOs), 
xxix; see also Executive 
perspective
advice for participation 
in organizational 
transformation, 222
best practices, 299–305, 312–313
business-first perspectives, 309
business uses of technology 
and, 314
as change agents, 311
CIO direct reporting to, 
305–306
commitment to technology 
projects, 308–309
conceptual knowledge of 
technology, 314
dependence on CIOs for business 
advice, 305
engaging in transformation, 208
executive decision making, 311
five stages of maturity, 313
ICAP case study, 206

376
Index
intervention in supporter 
departments, 230
and IT centralization/
decentralization issues, 
306–307
lack of cognizance about 
technology uses, 202
linear development model, 313
multiple business perspectives, 314
need for linking business and 
technology leaders, 310
need for standards, 307
outsourcing responsibilities, 306
perceptions of IT, xxix, 339
recognition of never-ending 
technology projects, 
311–312
reluctance to implement new 
technology, 25
risk management and, 307–313
role in examining own biases, 203
role in HTC transformation, 230
strategic technology uses by, 315
willingness to learn from 
staff, 208
Chief financial officer (CFO) CIOs 
reporting to, 188, 226, 288
lack of creativity, 226
Chief information officers (CIOs), 
288–289
business-level vs. 
corporate-level, 291
inability to establish corporate 
strategy, 211
integrating job functions into 
business strategy, 190
integration challenges, 344
interactions with board-level 
executives, 190
lack of involvement in business 
strategy, 190
need for advanced degrees, 307
need to educate, 188
reporting to CFOs, 188
as senior lower level, 193
training in business strategy, 202
transformation to proactive 
technologists, 195
Chief IT executives
best practices, 288
best practices arc, 299, 334
business environment 
influences, 293
business ethics, 298
business knowledge 
competence, 291
as business process outsourcing 
leaders, 296
change creation and management 
roles, 291
as change leaders, 296
common barriers to success, 293
communications roles, 291
compensation methods, 290
comprehension of technology 
processes, 297
detail, best practices arc, 300–303
emerging roles and 
responsibilities, 295–296
as executive account managers, 295
executive presence, 299
factors influencing strategic 
options, 294
hiring and retention roles, 292
implementation of business/
technology processes by, 315
industry expertise, 291
as information architects, 295
as innovation leaders, 295
lack of uniform titles, 288
leadership roles, 292
management skills, 292
management values, 298
multiplicity of technology 
perspectives, 297

377
Index
organizational culture 
competency, 298
as process leaders, 295
relationship building role, 291
roles and responsibilities, 
290–292
as shared services leaders, 295
stable technology integration, 298
strategic thinking role, 290
as supply chain executives, 295
technology cognition, 298
technology competence and 
recognition, 297
technology driver influences, 294
technology leadership, 298
technology proficiency, 291
Chief knowledge officer (CKO), 289
Chief technology officer (CTO), 289
intermediary role at HTC, 232
CIO advisory board, 191, 193
need for peer relationships, 192
at Siemens, 190
Citibank, use of technology as 
driver, 60
Code of ethics, 336
Cognitive schemata, 82
Collaborative inquiry, 142
Collective identity, 91
Collective knowledge, storage of, 81
Collective learning, 78, 345
Combination, and virtual teams, 
171–172
Combination dynamism, 173
Commitment, raising IT levels of, 6
Commoditization, 59, 61, 62, 207, 
224, 259, 260, 306, 347
Common threads of communication, 
156, 158, 159, 221, 344
at Siemens, ICAP/ETC, 
HTC, 233
Communications
by chief IT executives, 291
failures in virtual team efforts, 164
importance to chief IT executive 
role, 291
between IT organization and 
others, 49
tacit knowledge buried in, 172
in virtual teams, 168
Communities of practice, xii, xxi, 
45, 75–83, 87–90, 94, 103, 
130, 189, 344, 346, 351, 
359–360
application to virtual teams, 
168–172
blockage by organizational 
controls, 346
CIO-based, 191
and consensus building, 88
disagreements within, 196
discourse as basis of successful, 172
electronic, 78
extended seven steps, 79
formation of multiple, 233
at ICAP, 218–219
incorporating technology projects 
into, 149
knowledge creation through, 234
knowledge management in, 197
Milliken’s formation of, 310
and organizational learning, 144
overlapping, 215
participation at Siemens, ICAP/
ETC, HTC, 235
preparing CIOs for, 196
reliance on innovation, 78
technology as change agent 
for, 178
use in ROD, 75
virtual dynamism, 179
Communities of practice common 
threads, 159
Communities of practice 
threads, 157
Competitive advantage, 117, 233, 
236, 355

378
Index
centrality of technology to, 348
dependence on knowledge 
management, 116
importance of strategic 
integration to, 46
improvement at Siemens AG, 190
issues at ICAP, 205, 207
IT potential to provide, 28
loss without transformation, 139
technology as source of, 41, 72
Completion time, estimating, 56
Compliance monitoring, in virtual 
teams, 177
Concrete experience, as learning 
preference, 84
Confidentiality, 336
end of, 134
Consequential interoperability, 45
Consultants, use of outside, 32
Containers, 96
Content, vs. technology, 207
Content-activity relationship, 90, 91
Continual learning, in virtual 
teams, 179
Continuous innovation, 117
Control
organizational fear of losing, 352
vs. empowerment, 345–346
Conversion effectiveness, 21
Coopers & Lybrand, 58
Corporate culture, six myths of, 160
Corporate services standards, at 
Siemens AG, 200
Creative professionals, cultural 
assimilation challenges, 225
Cross-functional synergetic teams, 9
Cultural assimilation, xvii, xxiv, 42, 
48–49, 140, 187, 245, 293, 
306, 341, 343, 360
between brokers and 
technologists at ICAP, 212
changes caused by new 
technologies, 245
and communities of practice, 77
and creation of new cultures, 
50, 51
as foundation for organizational 
transformation, 143
in global organizations, 200
at implementation stage, 55–57
issues at HTC, 227
and IT organization 
communications with 
others, 49
and movement of traditional IT 
staff, 49–51
at product maturity phase, 61
in ROD, 43
at Siemens AG, 199, 202
in transition, 146
uniqueness to each 
organization, 50
in virtual teams, 179
Cultural awareness, 17
Cultural change, inevitability 
of, 122
Cultural differences, 181, 199
ICAP experiences, 215
regarding operational norms, 200
in virtual teams, 174, 177
Cultural history, and virtual 
teams, 175
Cultural lock-in, 120, 360
Cultural transformation, 8, 16–17
limitations of power approach, 17
Customer perspective
in balanced scorecard, 150
in Ravell Phase I balanced 
scorecard, 153
ROD adjustments, 150–151
Customer relationship 
management (CRM), 290, 
308–311, 357
Customer-vendor relationships, 
technology as change agent 
for, 46

379
Index
D
Data mapping, 126, 357
Deasy, Dana, 67, 187–190, 192, 195–
202, 207, 309, 344, 347
Decentralization, 24, 32, 306–307
with mature uses of 
technology, 307
Decision support systems (DSS), 
159, 357
Democratic leadership, importance 
to high-velocity 
environments, 123
Department/unit view as other, in 
ROD arc, 102, 103
Design/planning phase, 88
Development schedules
failures in, xxiv
shortening dynamic, 56
Direct return, 47
through technology investments, 
236, 238
Disagreements, in communities of 
practice, 196–197
Disciplines, 89
Discourse, xxi, 350; see also Social 
discourse
balanced scorecards and, 
156–158
as basis of successful COP 
implementation, 172
links to organizational learning 
and technology, 93
Distance workers, 81, 164; see also 
Virtual teams
Documentation, 125
and training materials, 126
Dot.com phenomenon, 23, 24
fallacies of, 212
and growth of e-business, 188
loss of commitment to learning 
organizations in, 112, 113
and negative perceptions of 
technology as business 
driver, 201
Double-loop learning, 4, 344, 360
Driver functions, 58, 113, 360
conversion to supporter 
functions, 62
and high-risk operations, 59
IT-related, 59
vacuum of IT presence in, 60
Driver to supporter life cycle, 141, 
306, 346–347
organizational transformation 
in, 145
Dynamic, xxi
E
E-business, 140
business vs. technology 
components, 346
expanding use at Siemens 
AG, 187
IT role at Siemens AG, 193
perception as IT 
responsibility, 201
top-down strategy 
introduction, 188
transferring emotion in, 181
E-business realignment, 46, 57
Economies of scale, 34, 58, 61, 62, 
130, 152, 347
in driver to supporter life cycle, 
141, 145
Education
through reflection, 14
and transformation, 14
Electronic communities, 78, 79
Electronic trading, 207, 223
growth at ICAP, 206
at ICAP, 205
and need for organizational 
transformation, 206

380
Index
as proportion of total trading 
dollars, 224
replacement of mediocre brokers 
by, 210
role in business strategy, 203
as supplement to voice broker, 209
Emerging technologies, xiii
challenges to business strategy, 28
as change agents, xxiv
communities of practice and, 344
impact on business strategy, 124
and mission modification, 207
Emotion
requirements for virtual team 
members, 174
and social discourse, 92–96
in virtual teams, 181–185
Employee evaluations, 17
Employee replacement, see Staff 
replacement
Empowerment, 91, 345–346
vs. control, 345–346
Enron Corporation, 333, 337
Enterprise resource planning 
(ERP), 358
Ethics
and best practices, 333–337
executive, 315, 320
Event-driven education
limits of, 109
at operations tier, 114
Evolution phase, 52
in technology business cycle, 57
Evolutionary change, 120–121
at Siemens, 196
Evolutionary learning, 77, 99
initiation by senior 
management, 189
in ROD, 112
Executive account managers, 295
Executive decision making, 196, 310
by Milliken, 310
Executive-driven programs, limits 
of, 109
Executive ethics, 315, 320
Executive interface, 150
earlier needs in virtual COPs, 
185
Executive leadership, 148, 313–316, 
320
Executive learning, systems 
perspective, 114
Executive participation, importance 
of direct, 232
Executive perspective, 9
consequences of exclusion, 214
importance of including in 
learning, 98
on IT, 29–31
lack of detail knowledge, 110
level of involvement with IT, 34
poor understanding of 
competitive dynamics, 
25–27
on role of IT, 32–33
and stimulus for cultural 
assimilation, 114
support for virtual teams, 174
Executive presence, 61, 296–299, 
302, 315
Executive sponsors, 54, 55, 150, 232
Executive tier, 114
Executive values, 313, 314
Expectations, and virtual 
teams, 176
Experiential learning, xxviii, 83–88, 
360
Explicit knowledge, 118, 171, 360
challenges for virtual COPs, 172
transformation to, 223
Externalization, and virtual teams, 
169–171
Externalization dynamism, 172
Eye-opening events, 15

381
Index
F
Facebook, 135
Facilitator role, 127
Factors of multiplicity, 44
False generalizations, 299
Feasibility phase, 52, 53, 87
Feedback, 7
negative IT responses to, 7
Financial measurements
in balanced scorecard, 150
inability to capture IT value, 147
in Ravell Phase I balanced 
scorecard, 153
ROD adjustments, 150
First-line managers, 111
Flame communities, 81, 360
Frame-talk, 93, 95, 181, 361
G
Garbage can model, 27, 53, 358
of IT value, 54
Gender participation, in social 
networks, 138
Generalizations, entrenched, 10
Globalization, 81, 256, 283
for scalable technologies, 199
Goals
organizational transformation of, 
139, 140
working towards, 15
Governance by control, 333
Governance issues, 245
Group discussions, 84, 85, 88, 282
Group relations conferences, 353
H
Hackett Benchworking, 304
Hardware upgrades, 124
High-risk operations, 59
High-velocity environments, 122
ICAP, 209
need for democratic leadership 
in, 123
HT/IT governance model, 18
HTC case study, xxx, 225–226, 308
billable time records problems, 225
cascading effect of increased 
profits, 229
CEO interactions, 227–228
CTO intermediary role, 232
follow-up developments, 231–232
IT contribution to learning-
knowledge-value chain, 237
IT history, 226–227
middle-ground solution, 228
organizational transformation, 
229–231
process, 228–229
similarities to Ravell, 231
Human resources (HR)
dedicated staff allocation to 
IT, 19
failure to align with, 18
social networking issues, 137–138
as undisclosed enemy, 18
Hype, about IT importance, 33
I
ICAP case study, xxx, 203–224, 
308, 347
B brokers, 210
broker classes, 209–210
A brokers, 209–210
C brokers, 209–210
communities of practice, 218–222
COP common threads, 221
expanding markets through 
technology, 213
five-year follow-up, 224
hybrid brokers, 210

382
Index
IT contribution to 
learning‑knowledge-value 
chain, 237
language discourse at, 215, 218
limitations of off-the-shelf 
solutions, 205
middle-management COP, 220
recognition of IT as business 
driver, 203
role of electronic trading in 
business strategy, 203
steps to transformation, 217
Y2K event and executive 
involvement, 214–215
Identity definition, 133
for IT, 10–12
Identity development, 91
in virtual teams, 179–180
Ideogenic issues, 181
in virtual teams, 182
Implementation phase, 52, 88
of technology business cycle, 
55–57
Indirect returns, 27, 29, 47, 213
need for management to 
recognize, 236
Individual learning, xxviii, 70, 83, 
171, 344
event driven, 76
at ICAP, 205
by middle managers, 115, 116
moving to system-level learning 
from, 143
personnel rotation and, 350
progression to systems thinking, 
354–355
in ROD arc, 183–184
with ROD arc, 104
shift to social, 97
simultaneously with 
organizational learning, 220
styles of, 69
vs. system-level, 344
Industry expertise, by chief IT 
executives, 291
Inferential learning, 64
Information architects, 295
Information overload, 119
Information Technology (IT), 
xxxii, 1
as agent for business 
transformation, 39
best organizational structure 
for, 28
and centralization/
decentralization, 24
centralization/decentralization 
issues, 306–307
CEO perceptions of, 339
combining with organizational 
learning, 339
contribution to 
learningknowledge-value 
chain, 237
defining role and mission, 30
difficulty proving value of, 293
executive knowledge and 
management of, 28–29
executive views of, 29–31
extent of non-IT executive 
knowledge in, 28
hype about, 33
identifying driver component at 
Siemens AG, 195
identity definition at Ravell, 
10–12
impacts on marketing and 
productivity, 35
importance to business strategy 
and organizational 
structure, 21, 30
improving performance through 
organizational learning, 1
integrating into organizational 
processes, xix
as key to success, xx

383
Index
lack of representation at strategic/
executive levels, 339
management and strategic issues, 
31, 34
means of evaluation, 28
need to provide greater 
leadership, 340
operation reductions, 38
perception and role, 30
potential to provide competitive 
advantage, 28
potential to reinvent business, 23
project perspective, 340
relationship to organizational 
structure, 28
relevance to operations, 
accounting, marketing, 24
role and mission, 30
role in behavioral 
transformation, 228
role in business strategy, 26–27
seamless relationship with 
organizational learning, xix
social networks and, 134–138
as strategic business tool, 26
strategic importance, 32
synergistic union with 
organizational learning, 187
view as cost center, 38
ways to evaluate, 27–28
Informational flows, importance 
of, 33
Innovation leaders, 295
Intangible assets, 147
Integrated disposition phase, in 
ROD arc, 103
Integration, see IT integration 
Intellectual capital 
management
Interactive culture, 48
Internal business processes
in balanced scorecard, 150
ROD adjustments, 150
Internal capacity, lack of, 188
Internal development, 32
Internalization, and virtual teams, 171
Internalization dynamism, 173
Internet, 358
as driving force for e-business 
realignment, 46
impact on business strategy, 32
increasing pressure to open, 134
Internet delivery, 23
impact on business strategy, 30
Intranets, 358
and accelerated learning pace, 142
Invisible organizations, 135, 137
ISO 9000, 77, 358
use for virtual team 
processes, 177
Isolation, xxvii, 10
of IT departments, 1–2, 21
physical, 2
IT departments
assimilation challenges, 21
change management for, 123–133
complex working hours, 18
concerns about elimination of 
integrity, 49–50
dichotomous relationship with 
communities of practice, 78
incorporating into true 
organizational learning, 68
integrating into organizational 
culture, 3
isolation of, 1
lack of executive presence in 
management teams, 61
marginalization, xv
as nucleus of all products and 
careers, 211
overhead-related functions, 59
perception as back office 
operations, 188, 211
perception as support function, 188
reporting to CFOs, 226

384
Index
restructuring of, 50
shifting salary structures, 18
silo operations, 18
subjection to budgetary 
cutbacks, 47
support functions, 59
view by other departments, 30
IT dilemma, xxiv, 21–39
day-to-day issues, 137
defining, 36–38
and developments in operational 
excellence, 38–39
executive knowledge and 
management, 28–29
executive perspective, 32–33
general results, 36
IT role in business strategy, 
25–27
management and strategic 
issues, 34
organizational context, 24
and organizational structure, 
24–25
recent background, 23–24
IT evaluation, 27
IT integration, 3–5, 14, 23, 109
blueprint for, 5–6
enlisting support for, 6–7
executive confusion about, 36
failures in strategic 
planning, 36
implementing, 12–14
progress assessment, 7
vs. outsourcing, 22
IT investment
historical phases, 44
risk identification for, 46
IT jobs, decline in U.S., 163
IT performance, measuring, 31
IT professionals
as individualists, 212
integrating with non-IT 
personnel, 49
movement into other 
departments, 49–51
outsider image, 22
poor interpersonal skills, 33
project management roles, 340
reluctance to take on responsibility 
for others, 212
as techies, 21
IT projects, failure of completion, xxiv
IT roles and responsibilities, 60–61
IT spending needs, failure of ROI to 
accommodate, 27
IT value, garbage can model, 53–54
IT virtual teams, 19
K
Knowledge creation, 53, 117, 
118, 234
balanced scorecards and, 158–161
as basis of transformation, 144
and communities of practice, 169
by electronic communities, 80
structured approach 
difficulties, 77
by technology, 222
Knowledge development, 64, 
83, 234
Knowledge management, xii, xxi, 
xxix, 45, 116–120, 360
in COPs, 197
four modes of, 172
instilling through 
technology, 234
participation at Siemens, ICAP/
ETC, HTC, 236
in virtual context, 174
KPMG, 308
L
Language use, xxviii, 89–91, 350
at ICAP, 215

385
Index
Latency problems, xxv
Leadership, xii
executive, 315, 320
movement away from individual, 
349–350
need for greater IT, 340
vs. governance, 335
Leaps of abstraction, 10
Learner centeredness, 127
Learning
converting to strategic 
benefit, 65
defining at organizational level, 
14–15
double-loop, 4
single-loop, 4
situated, 75
Learning and growth perspective
in balanced scorecard, 150
in Ravell Phase I balanced 
scorecard, 152, 153
ROD adjustments, 150–151
Learning and working, 75
Learning approaches, linear 
development in, 96–107
Learning contracts, 130
Learning-knowledge-value 
chain, 238
IT contributions to, 237
Learning maturation, 94, 96, 
104, 343
phases of, 98
Ravell case study example, 100
Learning organizations, xii, xviii, 9, 
45, 72–75
developing through reflective 
practice, 15, 20
and fallacy of staff 
replacement, 113
transitioning to through 
technology acceleration, 13
Learning preferences, xxviii, 83–88
and curriculum development, 85
Learning Style Inventory (LSI), 
84, 85
combined applied learning 
wheel, 87
McCarthy rendition, 86
Learning Type Measure 
instrument, 85
Learning wheel, 84, 86, 87, 95
Left-hand column, 9, 360
Legacy systems, xi, 124, 358
Lessons learned, Ravell Corporation 
case study, 14–17
Life-cycle maturation, shortening 
through strategic 
integration, 44
Lifelong learning, 350
Line management, 111
BPR buy-in by, 25
defined, 111
executive and operations 
perspectives, 9
as executives in training, 111
feedback from, 7
importance of support from, 6, 219
learning maturation among, 96–97
meeting attendance, 11
proximity to day-to-day activities, 
110
in Ravell case study, 109, 132
role in managing organizational 
learning, 109–111
role in product maturity phase, 62
strategic importance to IT 
integration, 8–9
technical knowledge, 9
as technology users, 54, 55
vs. first-line managers, 111
vs. supervisors, 112
Linear development, 342
in learning approaches, 96–107
Linkages, 348
Linkedln, 135
Lost jobs cycle, 163

386
Index
M
Management presence, 324–328, 331
Management pushback, 17
Management self-development, 
127, 360
Management skills, by chief IT 
executives, 292
Management support, importance 
of, 6
Management tiers, 113–114
Management values, 296–299, 302, 
324–327, 331
Management vectors, 112–116, 341
and three-tier organizational 
structure, 114
Mandatory services, at Siemens 
AG, 200
Marginality, 89
Marginalization, xxvii, 2, 22, 49
of nonadaptive virtual team 
members, 168
reducing, 18
Marketing
IT relevance to, 24
social networking issues, 138
Mastery learning, 128
Mature self, 182
role in virtual team success, 173
and virtual team 
complexities, 185
Maturity
ethics and, 327, 334
as gradual process, 345
Maturity arcs, xxviii, 173, 332, 
335, 342
Maturity stages
CEO best practices technology 
arc, 314–315
in chief IT executive best 
practices arc, 297–299
middle manager best practices 
arc, 325–326
McDermott, Stephen, 113, 203–
216, 222–224
learning philosophy, 204
Measurable outcomes, 45, 92, 110, 
142, 342
Measurement phase, 52, 88
in technology business cycle, 53
Mentorship, 127–130
in self-development process, 
129, 131
Middle manager best practices arc, 
323, 324
maturity stages, 325–326
performance dimensions, 
326–327
Middle managers, 110–112
avoidance of worker compliance 
demands, 227
balanced scorecard discourse, 
157–158
best practices, 316–325
challenges of defining best 
practices for, 316
community of practice at 
ICAP, 221
executive-based best 
practices, 324
first-line managers, 111
five stages of maturity, 323
implementation-based best 
practices, 322
importance to organizational 
learning, 109
issues at ICAP, 219
as key business drivers, 110
line managers, 111
multiple tiers of, 111, 113–114
organizational vs. individual 
learning by, 115, 116
representing required changes 
through, 220
stagnation and resistance to 
change among, 110–111

387
Index
supervisors, 112
three tiers of, 342
Middle-up-down approach, 110, 
112, 150, 214, 215, 235, 
313, 342
Milliken, Christopher, 308–312
Missed opportunities, consequences 
of, 341
Mission, 36
executive perspectives, 22
identifying IT, 10
modifying based on emerging 
technologies, 207
Moral responsibility, 336
Multiple locations, 166–169
for virtual teams, 178
Mythopoetic-talk, 93, 94, 181, 
182, 361
N
Networked organizations, 24
New meaning perspectives, 350
Non-IT executives, extent of 
technology knowledge, 
28, 31
Non-sense, 93
Normative behavior, vs. 
leadership, 350
Not knowing, 16
O
Off-the-shelf software, 124
limitations at ICAP, 205
Older workers, fallacy of 
replacing, 113
Online banking, 60
Operational efficiencies, 150, 213
Operational excellence, 358
developments in, 39
Operational knowledge, in ROD 
arc, 103, 106
Operational norms, cultural 
differences regarding, 200
Operations management, at 
ICAP, 219
Operations perspective, 9
IT relevance to, 24
Operations tier, 114
Operations users, 54
Opportunities matrix, 27, 29
Organizational change, 66
business case for, 122
cultural lock-in as barrier to, 120
external environment and, 121
and inevitability of cultural 
change, 122
internal organization and, 121
and organizational readiness, 121
requirements for, 343
sustaining, 122
Organizational culture, 298, 
300–301, 303
altering, 65–66
balanced scorecards and, 
158–161
integrating IT into, 3
technology support for evolution 
of, 42
transformation of, 16–17
Organizational discourse, 90
Organizational dynamism, 42–48
Organizational evolution, 94, 
341, 344
Organizational interactions, 
325–327, 329
Organizational knowledge creation, 
64, 116, 361
steps to, 117
with technology extension, 117
Organizational leadership phase, in 
ROD arc, 102104
Organizational learning, xi, xii, 1, 
20, 22, 38, 293, 295, 339, 
343, 348

388
Index
balanced scorecard applicability 
to, 154
balancing with individual 
learning, 70
CEO need to understand, 312
and communities of practice, 
75–83
and dealing with change 
agents, 69
defining, 14–15
evolution of, 144
at executive levels, 215
experiential learning and, 83–88
and explicit knowledge 
creation, 236
fostering through trust, 210
gradual process of, 345
HR/IT integration through, 18
instilling through 
technology, 234
IT department isolation from, 2
and IT role at Siemens, 193
and language use, 89–96
learning preferences and, 83–88
limitations of top-down and 
bottom-up approaches, 
109–110
linear development in learning 
approaches, 96–107
links to transformation and 
performance, 64
by middle managers, 115
need for executive involvement 
in, 215
and organizational knowledge 
creation, 116
ratio to individual learning by 
manager type, 116
reflective organizational 
dynamism arc model, 101
relationship to self-generating 
organizations, 351–352
and ROD, 71, 215
ROD and, 293
in ROD arc, 183
self-development and, 133
at Siemens AG, 192
simultaneously with individual 
learning, 220
and social discourse, 89–96
synergistic union with IT, 187
transformational results, 139
in virtual teams, 185
Organizational learning 
management, 109
change management, 120–133
knowledge management, 
116–120
management vectors and, 
112–116
mapping tacit knowledge to 
ROD, 119
role of line management, 109–111
social networks and IT issues, 
134–138
Organizational learning theory, 73
North American vs. global 
cultural norms in, 67
and technology, 64–72
Organizational memory, building, 1
Organizational readiness, 121
Organizational role analysis, 353
Organizational structure, 313–314
CEO performance dimensions, 315
IT and, 24–25
IT importance to, 21
Organizational theory, 63
Organizational transformation, 
xxviii, 63, 361
balanced scorecard and, 139–144, 
146–147
defined, 146
in driver to supporter life cycle, 
146
as event milestones, 146
evolutionary aspect of, 143

389
Index
HTC case study, 229–230
at ICAP, 217
and knowledge creation, 158–161
knowledge links to, 160
ongoing evaluation methods, 
146–156
as ongoing process, 146
stages, with ROD, 145
strategic integration and cultural 
assimilation as foundation 
for, 143
technology as driver of, 206
three dimension of, 139–141
validation of, 147
vs. change, 152
Organizations
as goal-oriented activity 
systems, 63
as interdependent members, 63–64
Organizing principles, and virtual 
teams, 176
Other centeredness, 296
in chief IT executives, 296
Outsourcing, xxx, 163–165
all-time highs, 346
by CEOs, 306
cost savings benefits, 163
executive opinions, 29
failure to achieve cost-cutting 
results with, 304
of IT, 178
of mature technologies, 62
perception by midsize firms, 32
talent supply benefits, 163
time zone challenges, 164
in virtual teams, 178
vs. internal development, 32
vs. IT integration, 22
P
Payback, 46
Peer consulting groups, 353
Performance
linking organizational learning 
to, 64, 65
reflective reviews, 6
Performance dimensions
CEO best practices technology 
arc, 315
middle manager best practices 
arc, 326, 327
Performance improvement, 3
Performance measurement, 31, 
35–37
Permanence, disappearance in 
organizations, 185
Personal transformation, through 
self-development, 128
Personnel rotation, and individual 
learning, 350
Persuasion, as skill to transform talk 
into action, 180–181
Pillars model, 45–48
Planning phase, 52
in technology business cycle, 
54–55
Politics, xxvi
blood cholesterol analogy, 67
negative impact of power 
centralization, 123
and organizational learning, 
66–67
Power approach, limitations for 
transformation, 13
Power centralization, 122
President’s Council, 193
CIO exposure to, 195
at Siemens AG, 191, 192
Privacy issues, 336
Problem-solving modes, in virtual 
teams, 175
Process comprehension, by chief IT 
executives, 297
Process leaders, 295
Process measurement, 126

390
Index
in Ravell Phase I balanced 
scorecard, 153
Product maturity, 61
Productivity, lagging returns in, 44
Project completion, 125
barriers to, 69
Project ethics, 324, 326–327, 331
Project managers
broad IT responsibilities, 57
as complex managers, 56
IT staff as, 340
Q
Quality, commitment to, 15–16
R
Ravell Corporation case study, xxvi, 
1–2, 51, 60, 120, 342, 347
alignment with administrative 
department, 17–19
balanced scorecard, 152–153
blueprint for integration, 5–6
BPR buy-in, 25
commitment to quality, 15–16
cultural evolution, 97
culture transformation, 16–17
decision-support systems, 159
defining reflection and learning, 
14–15
employee resistance, 8
enlisting support, 6–7
goal orientation, 15
implementing integration, 
12–14
IT identity definition, 10–12
IT self-reflection, 9–10
key lessons, 14–17
learning maturation analysis, 96, 
99, 343
line management importance, 
8–9, 109
new approach to IT integration, 
3–7
not knowing mindset, 16
performance evaluation, 133
phase I balanced scorecard, 153
reflective practices and 
measurable outcomes, 65
and self-development results, 132
technological acceleration at, 151
virtual team aspect, 164
Real date of delivery, 211
Reflection, 10
with action, 74, 76, 361
defining on organizational level, 
14–15
education through, 15
organization movement toward, 
12–14
Reflection matrix, 354
Reflective observation, as learning 
preference, 84
Reflective organizational dynamism 
arc model, 101
Reflective practices, xxviii, 4, 19, 38, 
96, 142, 143, 152, 219, 313, 
343
by chief IT executives, 296
fostering organizationally, 5
at ICAP, 205
importance to ROD, 74
individual, group, and 
organizational, 352, 353
by middle managers, 115
need to develop in virtual teams, 
165
in Ravell case study, 65
Reflective skills development, 9–10
Relationship building, by chief IT 
executives, 291
Replacement phase, in technology 
business cycle, 61–62
Reporting structures, 34, 37, 312
changes in, 38

391
Index
for CIOs, 288
of CIOs, 195
CIOs to CEOs, 305
CIOs to CFOs, 188
inconsistent, 339
increased reporting to 
CEOs, 304
and organizational change, 225
technological dynamism effects 
on, 209
Requirements definition, risks, 126
Research and development, 348
Resistance to change, 209
to integration, 8
Responsive organizational 
dynamism (ROD), 42–48, 
53, 70, 89, 165, 187, 340
and adaptation, 349
arc model, 102
attainment of, 345
balanced scorecard 
modifications, 149
and best practices arcs, 334
best practices to implement, 287
cultural assimilation in, 48–52
dependence on organizational 
learning, 72
developmental stages, 100
drivers and supporters concept, 
58–59
at HTC, 230–231, 233
at ICAP, 211, 217
importance of reflective practices 
to, 74
and individual learning, 123
integrating transformation theory 
with, 139
and IT roles and responsibilities, 
60–61
mapping tacit knowledge to, 117
in multinational companies, 203
organizational inability to 
manage, 97
and organizational learning, 
71, 294
relationship to self-generating 
organizations, 352
replacement/outsourcing decision, 
61–62
requirements, 349
role in economic survival, 232
role of social networks in, 136
at Siemens AG, 189, 199
situational and evolutionary 
learning in, 112
stages of organizational 
transformation with, 145
and strategic innovation, 349
and strategic integration, 43–48
and systems thinking, 123
technology as, 41
technology business cycle and, 
52–57
three-dimensional, 167
and Vince’s reflection matrix, 354
as way of life, 186
Retention
evaluation methods, 145
of IT talent by chief IT 
executives, 292
and organizational 
transformation, 144
Return-on-investment (ROI), 114
example of direct IT 
contributions to, 230
failure of traditional strategies, 
27, 29
for ICAP, 213
IT expenditure issues, 189
line management responsibilities, 
111
and measurement phase, 53
monetary and nonmonetary, 53
payback as basis for, 46
technology failures, 69
Revalidation, at Siemens AG, 198

392
Index
Revolutionary change, 120
Rippling effect, 154
Risk assessment, 46
in feasibility phase, 53
misunderstandings about, 48
Risk management, as CEO role, 
307–313
Risk minimization, with social 
networks, 134
Risk orientation, in virtual 
teams, 175
ROD arc, 99, 102, 144, 334
with applied individual learning 
wheel, 104
department/unit view as other 
stage, 100
example, 104
integrated disposition phase, 100, 
102, 103
operational knowledge stage, 100
organizational leadership 
phase, 103
stable operations phase, 102, 103
stages of individual and 
organizational learning, 
183–184
Roles and responsibilities
varying IT, 57
of virtual team members, 179
S
Santander Bank, 60
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act, 333
Scope changes, 56
risks, 126
Selection, and organizational 
transformation, 144
Self-development
evaluation phase, 131, 133
formal learning program phase, 
129–132
fostering of bottom-up 
management through, 132
implementation phase, 131
learning-to-learn phase, 129, 132
as management issue, 128
in organizational learning, 133
in Ravell case study, 132
setbacks to, 132
through discourse, 132
as trial-and-error method, 128
Self-generating organizations, 351, 
352
Self-governance, 6
Self-managed learning, 130
Self-management, 124
developing among IT staff, 127
by non-IT staff members, 127
and reflective practice theory, 128
Self-motivation, 123–124
Self-reflection, 9, 12, 16
promotion of, 4
Senior lower level, at Siemens AG, 
194
Senior management
initiation of evolutionary learning 
by, 189
sharing in learning, 196
Sense and respond, 58, 59, 199, 346
and IT, 59
Sense making, 63, 94
Shared leadership, 18
Shared services leaders, 295
Siemens AG, xxviii, 68, 344, 347
case study, 187–203
CEO quarterly meetings, 191
CFO quarterly meetings, 192
CIO advisory board, 190, 191
CIOs as senior lower level, 194
competitive advantage 
improvement, 190
corporate services standards, 20
five-year follow-up, 202–203

393
Index
interrelationships among 
CIO communities of 
practice, 191
IT contribution to 
learning‑knowledge-value 
chain, 237
local-to-global links, 194
mandatory services standards, 200
multiple levels of CIO s, 242
optional technologies 
standards, 200
President’s Council, 191, 192
quarterly CFO meetings, 190
revalidation concept at, 198
storyboarding process, 198
technology standards at, 200
Silo operations, 18, 50
Single-loop learning, 4, 361
Situated learning, 75
in ROD, 112
Skills, 92
in virtual teams, 180–181
Social discourse, 89–96, 234
application to virtual teams, 178
and content-activity 
relationships, 90
and emotion, 92–96, 180–182
and identity development, 91, 
179–180
Marshak’s model mapped to 
technology learning 
wheel, 93
as “passive” activity, 90
skills and, 92, 180
technology as driver of, 209
type of talk containers, 96
Social networks, xxix
ambiguous effects, 138
attempts to lock out 
capabilities, 134
gender participation issues, 138
invisible participants, 137
and IT, 134–138
management issues, 136
Socialization, in virtual teams, 172
Socialization dynamism, 173–177
Soft skills analysis, 180–181
Software packages, 124
Software upgrades, 124
Spiral conversion process, 110
Spy networks, 137
Stable operations phase, in ROD 
arc, 102, 103
Stable technology integration, 297, 
298, 326
Staff replacement
fallacy of, 113
vs. staff transformation, 4, 20
Standards, 307
CEO needs for, 307
lack of, 56–57
and reduced development 
costs, 305
at Siemens AG, 200
Storyboarding process, 358
at Siemens, 198
Strategic advocacy, 67
Strategic alignment, 45
Strategic innovation, 349
Strategic integration, xxviii, 42–48, 
82, 187, 197, 201, 293, 341, 
343, 361
and communities of practice, 78
consequential interoperability 
and, 45
as foundation for organizational 
transformation, 143
and need for increased cultural 
assimilation, 230
as outcome of ROD, 48
shortening life-cycle maturation 
through, 44
Strategic learning, 65, 110, 349
Strategic performance, 342, 343
improving through organizational 
learning, 63

394
Index
Strategic thinking
by chief IT executives, 290
importance to chief IT executive 
role, 292
shortage of time for, 293
Strategy, see Business strategy
Strategy map, 148, 151–158
Supervisors, 112
Supply chain executives, 295
Support, enlisting, 6–7
Supporter functions, 58, 113, 
312, 346
and organizational 
transformation, 144
and perception of IT, 188
at product maturity, 61
SWAT teams, 13
System upgrades, 124, 125
Systems thinking, 1, 83, 89, 94, 
123, 347
by executives, 114
progression to, 354–355
T
Tacit knowledge, 361
challenges for COP virtual 
organizations, 172
in e-mail communications, 171
IT manager practice at 
transforming, 197
mapping to ROD, 119, 174–176
protection by technology, 222
role in knowledge 
management, 118
transformation to explicit product 
knowledge, 223, 236
translating to explicit forms, 169
and virtual teams, 175–176
Talk, and discourse, 90
Talk-action cycles, 96
application to virtual teams, 178
role of persuasion in, 180
Teachers, as facilitators, 127
Techies, stereotyping as, 21
Technical knowledge, need for 
up-to-date, 125
Technical resources, strategic 
integration into core 
business units, 19
Technological acceleration, xxiv, 41, 
43, 66, 72, 208, 296, 307
enabling organizations to cope 
with, 45
in Ravell case study, 152
Technological dynamism, xxiv, 
41–42, 66, 209, 210, 340, 
343, 362
as 21st-century norm, 178
self-management 
requirements, 128
at Siemens AG, 193
Technological proficiency, as staff 
job requirement, 211
Technology, xxxii
aligning with business 
strategy, 149
basing on quality of business 
plan, 212
benefits at ICAP, 222–223
centrality to competitive 
strategy, 348
CEO conceptual knowledge 
of, 103
challenges of strategic use, xxii
as change agent, 70, 195
commoditization of, 224
as commodity, 207
and communities-individuals 
relationships, 76
and competitive advantage, 72
as component of discourse, 
xxvicontribution to 
learning-knowledge-value 
chain, 236
as driver of business strategy, xxiii

395
Index
as driver of organizational 
transformation, 206
as driver of virtual team 
growth, 163
effects on discourse, 94
effects on legacy systems, 47
evolution of, 223
executive need to recognize 
instability of, 199
expansion benefits, 223
failure to result in improved 
ROI, 69
feasibility stage, 87
flexibility benefits, 223
impact on ICAP business, 204
impatience with evolution of, 202
implementation risks, 126
impossibility of predicting impact 
of, 83
increasing organizational 
learning through, 68
as independent variable, 43
integration of business 
implementation, 314, 
325–326
as internal driver, 42
knowledge creation by, 223
learning maturation with, 100
linking to learning and 
performance, 71
multiplicity of business 
implementations, 325
multiplicity of business 
perspectives, 314
and need for interaction, 142
need to integrate into 
organizational 
learning, xviiiongoing 
implementation of, 349
perception as support function, 
206
phased-in implementation, 
149–150
role in knowledge 
management, 117
strategic uses, 315–316
in TQM, 140
unpredictability of, 41
untested, 56
variability of, 236
as variable, xxvii, 41, 112, 235, 
311, 340
Technology acceleration, 13, 20, 47
Technology-based organizations, xviii
Technology business cycle, 52, 63
evolution phase, 52, 57
feasibility phase, 52, 53
garbage can model of IT value, 54
implementation phase, 52, 55–57
measurement phase, 52–54
planning phase, 52, 54–55
stages of, 52
Technology business 
implementations, 
multiplicity of, 325
Technology cognition, 298–300
Technology competence, 300
by chief IT executives, 297
Technology concepts, 318
for CEOs, 316
Technology definitions branding, 
358–359
Technology evaluation, 149
Technology for technology’s sake, 26
Technology implementation
competence for middle 
managers, 325
stability of, 326
Technology implementation 
competence/recognition, by 
middle managers, 325
Technology investment, as 
normative process, 348
Technology leadership, 298
by chief IT executives, 298
Technology life cycle, xxiv, xxvii, 346

396
Index
Technology perspectives, 
multiplicity of, 297
Technology proficiency, by chief IT 
executives, 291
Technology project leadership, 326
Technology projects
reasons for failure, 310
risks to success, 125
Technology road map, 342, 343
Technology strategy map, 151
Technology users, three types of, 
54–55
Telephone brokers, 224
electronic trading as supplement 
to, 209
at ICAP, 204
Teleworkers, 81
Theft, 336
Three-tier organizational 
structure, 113
Throughput improvements, at 
ICAP, 213
Time zones, virtual team 
challenges, 177
Timeliness
barriers to, 69
issues with IT projects, 74
Timing, and learning 
maturation, 104
Tool-talk, 93, 95, 181, 361
Top-down strategy introduction, 
xxix, 214, 235, 345
at Siemens, 188, 192
Total quality management (TQM), 
technology in, 140
Training
for CIOs, 202
and documentation, 126
inadequacy of, 14
limitations of IT-based, 125
for Siemens CIOs, 196
for virtual team COPs, 173, 177
Transformation, vs. change, 141
Transformative learning, 142
Trust
based on corporate honesty, 210
in communities of practice, 197
organizational movement toward, 
12–14
Twitter, 135
Type of talk containers, 95, 181
virtual team applicability, 182
U
Uncertainty, in technology, 77
Unemployed workers, without 
rights, 346
Unpredictability, xxi
User interface, 359
User level, 359
V
Value-added services, 232
Variation, and organizational 
transformation, 143
Velocity fluxes, 122
Version control, 124
Videoconferencing, 81
Vince’s reflection matrix, 354
Virtual teams, xxx, 163, 359
combination and, 171–172
combination dynamism in, 173
communication failures in, 164
communities of practice with, 
170–171
contract administration, 164
cultural and language 
barriers, 163
distorted perceptions in, 166
executive support for, 174
externalization and, 169, 171
externalization dynamism in, 172
internalization and, 171
internalization dynamism in, 173

397
Index
lack of individual development in, 
165–166
management of, 19, 24, 164, 166
marginalization of nonadaptive 
members, 169
multi-company challenges, 177
multiple identities in, 179
multiple location challenges, 164, 
166–178
need for documented 
processes, 177
need for individual 
development, 344
need for mature individuals 
in, 185
operating differences from 
traditional teams, 168
outsourcing in, 177–178
quality checkpoints for, 164
readiness for participation, 173
socialization and, 172
socialization dynamism in, 
173–174, 177
soft skills assessment challenges, 
180–181
status, 165–166
as subset of organizations, 167
tacit knowledge and, 175–176
and three-dimensional 
ROD, 167
transient nature of members, 168
W
Web, 359
Women-centric 
communication, 138
Worldviews, and virtual teams, 176
Y
Y2K event, 214, 218, 359
Z
Zero latency, 43


