
United Nations
asd
f
By Daniel Stauffacher, William Drake, 
Paul Currion and Julia Steinberger
Preface by
Kofi Annan
Foreword by
Micheline Calmy-Rey
The Role of ICT in Preventing, 
Responding to and Recovering 
from Conflict
Information and 
Communication 
Technology 
for Peace

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2005 United Nations ICT Task Force 
 
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work or 
part of it in any form or by electronics, or other means now known or hereafter invented, 
including xerography, photocopying, recording, and in any information storage, transmission or 
retrieval system, including CD-ROM, online or via the Internet, is forbidden without the 
written permission of the publishers. 
 
The views expressed in this book are those of their individual authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the views or positions of the United Nations ICT Task Force, the United Nations itself, 
any of its organs or agencies, nor of any other organizations or institutions mentioned or 
discussed in this book, including the organizations to which the authors are affiliated. 
 
Published by 
The United Nations Information and Communication Technologies Task Force 
One United Nations Plaza 
New York, NY 10017 
unicttaskforce@un.org 

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The ICT4Peace project is indebted to many individuals and institutions. We 
would like to express our gratitude to former Finnish President Martti 
Ahtisaari, Kristiina Rinkineva, and the Crisis Management Initiative, 
Ambassadors Thomas Greminger, Yrjö Länsipuro, Peter Maurer and Teddy 
Winkler, Christian Catrina, Maurice Strong, Michael Moller, Georg Stein, 
Claude 
Bruderlein, 
Mathias 
Stiefel 
and 
Bodgan 
Lungulescu 
and 
WSPInternational, Heinz Krummenacher, Anja Ebnöther, Chris Pallaris, Juan 
Rada, Andreas Wenger, Alain Modoux, Linton Wells, Brian Fila, Markus 
Reisle, Tim Kelly, Rene Francis, Joutiar Saleh, Jean-Pierre Gontard, the 
Geneva Center for Humanitarian Dialogue, Denis and Bernard Barut of 
Startforyou, Johann Terretaz of Twice2 for designing the logo, and to the 
International Telecommunications Union and the United Nations Office for 
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for the kind permission to 
reprint the Tampere Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication 
Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations and OCHA and 
Reliefweb for the kind permission to reprint the OCHA 2002 Symposium 
Final Statement on Best Practices in Humanitarian Information Management 
and Exchange as annexes. We would like to express our sincere appreciation 
to all those who made this publication possible, the staff of the United Nations 
Task Force Secretariat, located in the Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs of the United Nations, who devoted many hours to proofreading the 
text, especially Enrica Murmura, and her collaborators Edoardo Zucchelli and 
Cheryl Stafford, and the Graphic Design Unit of the United Nations 
Department of Public Information Our recognition also goes to Sarbuland 
Khan and Sergei Kambalov for opening the United Nations ICT Task Force 
Series to our endeavour. The ICT4Peace project also wished to thank our 
sponsors: first and foremost the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs 
and the Swiss Federal Department of Defense, Civil Protection and Sport, and 
also WiseKey, the OISTE foundation,  the Corymbo Foundation, and 
l’Agence Intergouvernementale de la Francophonie. 
 
This report is a preliminary overview: despite our efforts, we are sure that we 
have overlooked important initiatives.  The online version of this report, 
which can be found at http://www.ict4peace.org/ will be kept “alive” and 
updated.  To assist us in this process, please email info@ict4peace.org with 
your comments, feedback and information about ICT4Peace activities.  

 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Preface – Kofi Annan ............................................................................iii 
Foreword – Micheline Calmy-Rey ........................................................ iv 
Introduction – Daniel Stauffacher.......................................................... v 
I. 
Background .................................................................................... 1 
1. 
Peace Issues in the First Phase of the WSIS .............................. 1 
2. 
The Challenge to Peace in the Twenty-first Century................. 3 
3. 
Defining ICT For Peace in the Second Phase of WSIS ............. 5 
4. 
The ICT4Peace Project .............................................................. 7 
a. 
Objectives and Process........................................................... 7 
b. 
The ICT4Peace Report........................................................... 8 
II. 
ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples...................................... 9 
1. 
The Impact of the Internet........................................................ 10 
a. 
Information Dissemination................................................... 10 
b. 
Networking and Learning .................................................... 15 
2. 
Early Warning and Conflict Prevention................................... 18 
3. 
Operations and Support............................................................ 23 
a. 
Field-based Projects ............................................................. 25 
b. 
Operational Support ............................................................. 30 
4. 
Technical Development ........................................................... 32 
a. 
Technical and Organizational Standards.............................. 32 
b. 
Application Development .................................................... 37 
5. 
Post-Conflict Reconstruction ................................................... 41 
a. 
The Role of the Media.......................................................... 44 
b. 
Reconciliation Processes...................................................... 47 
III. 
Conclusions.............................................................................. 52 
IV. 
Recommendations.................................................................... 57 
Annex 1: The Tampere Convention..................................................... 64 
Annex 2: OCHA 2002 Symposium Final Statement ........................... 81 
About The Authors............................................................................... 90 
Bibliography......................................................................................... 92 
Index of Organisations, Documents and Websites .............................. 96 
 

ii 

iii 
PREFACE 
 
Kofi A. Annan 
Secretary-General, United Nations  
 
We are all becoming more familiar with the extraordinary power of 
information and communication technologies.  From trade to telemedicine, 
from education to environmental protection, ICTs give us potential to improve 
standards of living throughout the world.  Our challenge is to harness that 
potential for the benefit of all people. 
 
Less well known than the role of ICTs in efforts to achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals is the contributions they make in our work to promote 
peace and help the victims of humanitarian emergencies. 
 
As the underpinning for early warning systems, ICTs are crucial in weather-
forecasting and in building resilient communities better able to respond to 
humanitarian emergencies.  When disaster does strike, ICTs are helping us to 
better coordinate complex relief missions.  This role has taken on even greater 
significance in the past year, following the Indian Ocean tsunami, hurricane-
related flooding in Central America and a devastating earthquake in Pakistan. 
 
ICTs are also critical tools in peacekeeping operations, including in logistics.  
Moreover, ICTs can help address the root causes of violent conflict.  By 
promoting access to knowledge, they can promote mutual understanding, an 
essential factor in conflict prevention and post-conflict reconciliation.  ICTs 
also offers ways to reveal human rights abuses, promote transparent 
governance, and give people living under repressive regimes access to 
uncensored information and an outlet to air their grievances and appeal for 
help.   
 
The technology by itself is no panacea or magic formula.  Political will is 
required to respond to information, to share it widely and equitably, and to 
ensure global dissemination of ICTs.  In that context, I strongly welcome the 
initiative taken by the Government of Switzerland to study the role of science 
and technology in advancing our work for peace.  This report showcases 
many instances of actors coming together to use technology to prevent, stop 
and remedy man-made disasters.  It also offers valuable policy 
recommendations covering such key issues as trust, security, inter-agency 
coordination, best practices and common standards.   I commend the 
information and analysis contained here to a wide global audience. 
 

iv 
FOREWORD 
 
Micheline Calmy-Rey 
Federal Councillor 
Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs 
 
In many countries today, armed forces, militia units and rebel groups are 
fighting for power, terrain and natural resources. They rob, rape, torture and 
kill, and people are being driven from their homes. Over the past ten years, 
some two million children have been killed and approximately six million 
have been injured. Millions never recover from the psychological damage 
they suffer. We must not tolerate their suffering. As fellow human beings, we 
have a clear duty to help them. 
 
Swiss foreign policy is active in many areas to promote human security. The 
promotion of human rights worldwide and the protection of the civilian 
population in armed conflicts, the fight against anti-personnel landmines, as 
well as the promotion of peace through conflict management and 
transformation: these are all part of my department's work. 
 
In past years, Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) have 
helped to improve the well being of individuals and communities at risk. They 
have given a new meaning to human rights, in particular the freedom of 
expression and information. They have allowed the creation of better 
communication and coordination mechanisms, the establishment of early 
warning systems as well as the development of other tools in the service of 
the humanitarian, human rights and peace communities. 
 
While every technology can be used for good or evil, and no technology is a 
magic remedy for human problems, understanding the potential and proper 
use of technologies can allow us to work more effectively and in ways that 
would not otherwise be possible. I am firmly convinced that ICTs in the 
service of peace and human rights, as well as social and economic 
development, deserve to be pursued further. In this context, my department as 
well as the Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports 
supported the research which resulted in this report. It is a significant and 
welcome contribution to understanding how ICTs can be used to prevent, 
respond to, and recover from conflict.  
 
 

v 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Ambassador Daniel Stauffacher 
Former Delegate of the Swiss Federal Council for the World Summit on the 
Information Society 
 
The idea of trying to understand the role of information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) in promoting and building peace came out of my 
involvement with the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). As a 
chief representative of Switzerland, the host country of the first phase of the 
Summit, which was held in 2003 in Geneva, I saw the scope of what was 
considered a mostly technical matter of communications and infrastructure be 
enlarged to encompass content and goals, in emergent fields such as e-health, 
e-education, and e-government. Information and communication technology 
has become a societal issue with opportunities and challenges. 
 
As the outcome of the WSIS Phase 1, the Geneva Declaration of Principles 
and Plan of Action were adopted. These documents emphasize the central role 
of ICTs in many areas of development. The risk of a growing 'digital divide', 
where ICTs could reinforce rather than reduce inequalities, was 
acknowledged, and recommendations were made in order to turn the digital 
divide into a digital opportunity for all. 
 
However, development and prosperity can only be achieved if the local 
situation is peaceful and stable. Peace is a necessary prerequisite to social and 
economic development. Throughout the world, many regions experiencing 
conflicts are cut off from development opportunities. Also, in recent years, we 
have witnessed decades-worth of excellent development work by countries 
and international organisations destroyed by conflict in a matter of weeks. 
The return on investing in conflict prevention, or in building lasting peace is 
indefinitely larger than the investments that are required to reconstruct 
countries and build peace after conflict. 
 
Although the idea of considering the use of ICTs in promoting peace was 
mentioned by some in the lead-up to WSIS 1, in particular by Maurice Strong, 
Senior Advisor to United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan, and by La 
Francophonie in their 2003 Rabat Declaration Contribution to the WSIS, the 
topic was forgotten in the focus on development, financing, security, and 
internet governance.  
 
This report aims to answer the following question: do ICTs have a special role 
in promoting peace? The examples of ICT use in warfare are well-known: 

vi 
propaganda, intelligence, communications and ICT-enabled weapons systems.  
But can ICTs be used in other ways, by other actors, to diffuse a situation 
leading to conflict, help end a conflict, or allow the stabilisation of a post-
conflict situation?  These were the questions to be answered, at least partially, 
before the second phase of the Summit. In May 2004, humanitarian consultant 
Paul Currion and myself developed the framework for the ICT4Peace project, 
drawing on his experience for guidance.  With the support of the Swiss 
Federal Department of Foreign Affairs and Department of Defense, Civil 
Protection and Sport, and the interest of the former Finnish President Martti 
Ahtisaari and Maurice Strong, I initiated the ICT4Peace project in 2004. 
 
At first, we held consultation meetings with actors in the field, usually as sub-
meetings of larger existing conferences.  These were as part of the 6th 
International Security Forum in Montreux in October 2004, at the IT for 
Crisis Management Conference in Nice in December 2004, at the WSIS 
PrepCom2 in Geneva, and with the Geneva Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue 
in early 2005.  Moreover, a valuable workshop with field practitioners was 
jointly organized with WSP International in Geneva in December 2004.  Out 
of these meetings and consultations emerged the sense that there is interest in 
ICT4Peace, it is a topic in need of analysis and research from both a 
practitioner and an academic perspective. It also became apparent that the 
many disparate actors (international agencies, NGOs, governments, military, 
business, media) would benefit from a topic survey from a neutral standpoint.  
The ICT4Peace project commissioned this research report, at the same time as 
we started a networking effort aimed at practitioners and interested parties, 
through the website ICT4Peace.org. 
 
Finland’s former President Ahtisaari encouraged me to pursue out the 
ICT4Peace project. His organisation, the Crisis Management Initiative, has 
conducted research and consultations on ICT4Peace issues. Swiss 
Ambassadors Peter Maurer and Thomas Greminger, and the director of the 
Program on Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research at Harvard 
University, Claude Bruderlein, were also very supportive of the project.  Dr. 
William Drake was the lead researcher.  Paul Currion, a knowledgeable and 
resourceful consultant, advised the project from the beginning, ran outreach 
and the website, and also contributed considerably to the research and writing 
the report. Kristiina Rinkineva, CMI’s Director for Conflict Prevention and 
Crisis Response, was also a consultant and imparted insightful and practical 
advice.  Dr. Julia Steinberger joined the team as my assistant in May, and has 
contributed to the various parts of the project as well.  I also wish to thank 
Georg Stein from the Political Division IV of the Swiss Federal Department 
of Foreign Affairs for his perspicacity and involvement. To these and to 
others who offered encouragement and interest along the way, I give my 

vii 
sincere gratitude. I sincerely hope that this effort can lead to more thoughtful 
and holistic consideration of ICT use and impact before, during, and after 
violent conflict, and perhaps to ways of better understanding among people, a 
true hope for peace. 

viii 
 
 

Background ▪ 1 
I. BACKGROUND 
 
1. Peace Issues in the First Phase of the WSIS 
 
In September 2000, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the 
UN Millennium Declaration as a reaffirmation of their faith in the United 
Nations Organization and the United Nations Charter as foundations for “a 
more peaceful, prosperous and just world.”  The Millennium Declaration 
emphasized the need for “a fully coordinated approach to the problems of 
peace and development”, while the eight Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) agreed at the same time formed a blueprint to meet the needs of the 
worlds poorest.  
 
Three years later, the First Phase of the World Summit on the Information 
Society (WSIS) issued the Geneva Declaration of Principles and a Plan of 
Action that emphasized the potential of ICTs to help achieve the MDGs.  The 
text of the Millennium Declaration distinguished clearly between “peace, 
security and disarmament” (section II) and “development and poverty 
eradication” (section III) – yet, while the concept of ICT for Development 
(ICT4D) has become commonly accepted, the relationship between ICTs and 
peace remained undefined.  The WSIS Plan of Action called on nations to 
“[take steps to promote respect for peace,”1 although without giving any 
indication on how the information society, or more specifically ICTs, might 
play a role in promoting peace. 
 
The WSIS Declaration of Principles went slightly further, stating that 
particular attention should be paid to a number of special needs and 
explaining that: 
 
“Our challenge is to harness the potential of information and 
communication technology to promote…the attainment of a more 
peaceful, just and prosperous world…We continue to pay special 
attention to…countries recovering from conflict and countries and 
regions with special needs as well as to conditions that pose severe 
threats to development, such as natural disasters…. We support the 
activities of the United Nations to prevent the potential use of ICTs for 
purposes that are inconsistent with the objectives of maintaining 
international stability and security …The Information Society should 
respect peace…”2 
                                                 
1 World Summit on the Information Society, Plan of Action, 2003, p. 11. 
2 World Summit on the Information Society, Declaration of Principles, 2003, pp. 3, 5, 

2 ▪ ICT for Peace 
 
At the same time, a Declaration to the Geneva Summit that was unanimously 
adopted by hundreds of Civil Society organizations included an entire section 
on the use of information and ICT in armed conflicts that was more detailed: 
 
“We recognise that the use of media can be both positive and negative 
in conflict situations, including post-conflict peace building. We 
therefore insist that the rights of journalists and of all people to gather 
and communicate information, using any media, be especially 
respected during conflicts. These rights should be inviolate at all times 
but are crucial during war, violent conflict, and non-violent protest. We 
are particularly concerned about the deployment of "information 
warfare" technologies and techniques, including the purposeful 
jamming, blocking, or destruction of civilian communication systems 
during conflict situations; the use of 'embedded' journalists coupled 
with the targeting of non-embedded journalists; the use of media and 
communication systems to promote hatred and genocide; by military, 
police, or other security forces, be they governmental, privately owned, 
or non-state actors, during conflict situations both international and 
domestic.   Information intervention in conflict situations should be 
bound by international law, and the WSIS should encourage work on a 
future convention against information warfare to address these 
concerns.  At the same time, the WSIS should not only limit 
information warfare and the control of media in conflict situations, but 
also actively promote media and communications for peace. To that 
end, we encourage governments to decrease public subsidy for military 
communications technology, and instead spend money directly on 
developing peaceful communications tools and applications.”3 
 
All of these references show that the concern at WSIS Phase 1 was “to 
prevent the potential use of ICTs for purposes that are inconsistent with the 
objectives of maintaining international stability and security.”  No reference is 
made to the positive role that ICTs might play in promoting peace, and no 
detailed discussion was held as to how specific technologies could support 
this aim. 
 
This lack of discussion of the potential positive role of ICTs in promoting 
peace is somewhat understandable.  A large part of the development focus of 
                                                                                                                     
and 8. 
3 Shaping Information Societies for Human Needs: Civil Society Declaration to the 
World Summit on the Information Society, 8 December 2003 
[www.itu.int/wsis/docs/geneva/civil-society-declaration.pdf], p.8. 

Background ▪ 3 
the WSIS was on building ICT infrastructure and reaching those currently 
without ICT access.  Areas suffering from conflict are seen as out of reach by 
traditional development actors.  
 
The Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, in the 2003 Rabat 
Declaration, a preliminary contribution to the WSIS first phase, described the 
potential of ICTs in promoting peace: 
 
“We consider that appropriate use of information and communication 
technologies should contribute to better management of crisis and 
conflict. It should also strengthen means of monitoring and 
prevention in order to consolidate peace.  Moreover, it should be a 
vector and catalyser of national reconciliation and reunification.”4 
 
Indeed, issues of peace and conflict are intimately connected to the entire 
WSIS endeavour and, as such, should be examined more closely.  The digital 
divide is often nowhere greater than in countries affected by conflict, and 
peace-related issues – or, more accurately, conflict-related issues – have a 
negative impact on the capacity of those countries and communities to 
achieve the MDGs.  The threat, occurrence and consequences of armed 
conflict all undermine progress towards the MDGs, and as such should be 
dealt with as an important and separate cross-cutting sector. 
 
2. The Challenge to Peace in the Twenty-first Century 
 
Globally the number of armed conflicts has increased massively since the end 
of the Cold War – particularly low-intensity conflicts within states.  In 2003 
there were 19 major armed conflicts in 18 locations worldwide5; however, to 
get a clearer picture of the cost of conflict, a wider view must be taken.  From 
1989 to 2000, there were more than 100 intrastate (but only seven interstate) 
armed conflicts around the world. They primarily occurred in developing and 
transitional countries, with up to 90% of victims being civilians.6  As well as 
the loss of life, such conflicts are accompanied by the destruction of economic 
                                                 
4Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie Contribution of the International 
Organisation of Francophonie to the World Summit on the Information Society 
(Rabat Declaration)  (Agence Intergouvernementale de la Francophonie, 2003) 
[http://smsi.francophonie.org/IMG/pdf/declaration_rabat_ang.pdf] 
5 SIPRI Yearbook 2004: Armaments, Disarmament and International Security 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004) 
[http://editors.sipri.se/pubs/yb04/aboutyb.html] 
6 Figures cited in Andreas Wenger and Daniel Möckli, Conflict Prevention: The 
Untapped Potential of the Business Sector (Boulder, CO and London: Lynne Rienner 
Publishers, 2003). 

4 ▪ ICT for Peace 
capacity and public infrastructure, undermining of public, private and civil 
society organizations, and subsequent difficulty in attracting new domestic 
and foreign investment.  All of these substantially set back the national 
development trajectories of the countries affected. 
 
Preventing armed conflict makes sense in both human and financial terms but 
– assuming that such conflicts will continue to arise – managing those 
conflicts and their consequences more effectively is also of prime importance. 
The rise in the number of conflicts has been matched by a rise in the number 
of international missions, and particularly in peace building and 
reconstruction operations managed by the United Nations.  The increase in the 
number of missions has also been matched by an increase in the complexity of 
those operations.7  The size and mandate of some UN missions such as 
Kosovo or East Timor would have been inconceivable ten years ago. 
 
These missions cost billions of dollars in humanitarian relief, disaster 
assistance and the tools necessary to promote stability and reconstruction - 
unfortunately the resources necessary to support them have not always been 
forthcoming.  There have been increasing calls for the reform of the UN, as 
well as questions about the capacity of other intergovernmental organizations 
to engage in large-scale reconstruction operations. 
 
At the same time, the rapid growth in the size and scope of civil society8 has 
seen responsibility for implementation increasingly shift toward non-
governmental actors – both public and private sector – and increasing pressure 
on governments and international organizations to become more effective and 
accountable.  New technology – especially the internet – has been an 
important factor in increasing the coverage and influence of these NGOs and 
other civil society organizations.9 
 
Although the international community has struggled to respond to these 
developments, it is generally agreed that existing mechanisms are not 
                                                 
7 Espen Barth Eide, Anja Therese Kaspersen, Randolph Kent and Karin von Hippel 
Report on Integrated Missions: Practical Perspectives and Recommendations 
(OCHA, May 2005) pp. 10-12. 
8 According to the Union of International Associations, there are now more than 
20,000 internationally-oriented NGOs.  Yearbook of International Organisations: 
Statistics, Visualizations and Patterns, Volume 5 (Brussels: UIA, 2005/2006) 
[http://www.uia.org/organizations/home.php]. 
9 Craig Warkentin, Reshaping World Politics: NGOs, the Internet, and Global Civil 
Society (Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2001); and, Steven Hick, 
Edward F. Halpin and Eric Hoskins, Human Rights and the Internet (New York: St. 
Martin’s Press, 2000). 

Background ▪ 5 
adequate.  The result has been an increasing need for effective management of 
conflict, and for those organizations involved in such activities to work more 
effectively.  New technologies offer new ways for such organizations to work, 
improving the speed of communication, opening new channels for dialogue, 
enabling swifter mobilization of resources, enabling organizations and 
individuals to share knowledge more easily, and a range of other benefits. 
 
Awareness of the importance of ICTs in complex emergencies is growing, as 
evidenced by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies’ World Disasters Report 2005 entitled “Focus on information in 
disasters”, which includes illuminating and detailed examples of the role of 
ICT before, during and after disasters: “Information and Communication 
Technology must be recognized as a form of aid in itself.”10 
 
3. Defining ICT For Peace in the Second Phase of WSIS 
 
The concept of ICT for Development (ICT4D) is now widely accepted; it 
includes all the diverse issues, actors, and activities involved in the promotion 
of ICT-enabled development.  However this concept does not generally take 
into account the impact that conflict has on development, with the result (as 
we saw above) that the issue of conflict was given little attention during WSIS 
Phase 1. 
 
As a result, and in contrast with ICT4D, there is no coherent approach to 
conflict-related issues.  This situation is unfortunate because, in the absence of 
a community that can be recognized both by those inside it and those outside, 
it is difficult to raise awareness of, build support for, and take forward these 
critical activities.  The absence of a community means that there is little 
policy dialogue, shared knowledge or good practices – in short, an absence of 
a community of actors.  Despite this, ICT is utilized by a wide range of 
organizations involved in these activities, and these organizations face many 
common issues. 
 
In addition, the use of ICT to promote conflict has received far more attention 
than ICT used to promote peace.  As noted above, the Civil Society 
Declaration to the Geneva Summit recognized that ICT can be used as a 
propaganda tool with the aim of controlling civilian populations – the 
example of Radio-Télévision Libre des Mille Collines in promoting the 
genocide in Rwanda is one of the best-known examples of this.  The 
                                                 
10 International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Wold Disasters 
Report 2005 – Focus on Information (Eurospan, London 2005) p. 33 
[http://www.ifrc.org/publicat/wdr2005/] 

6 ▪ ICT for Peace 
manipulation of the media is well-documented11 and has been a cause of 
increasing concern to many involved in the media, although a counter-
balancing force has emerged through the internet.  The internet has to some 
extent enabled the democratization of information, allowing individuals to 
share their own information through tools such as blogs (online web journals), 
discuss issues in open or closed forums such as bulletin boards, and in some 
cases to develop alternative, ‘independent’ news platforms12.  However, 
access to these tools are not guaranteed; many governments can and do 
prevent their citizens from free access to information regarded as potentially 
damaging to society. 
 
More than just controlling public information, however, a great deal has been 
written about the use of ICT in modern warfare at every level, from the use of 
smart weapons by the modern military, to the adoption of satellite 
communications by rebel groups in remote areas, to the ease of obtaining 
recipes for explosives on the internet, to the use of mobile phones as a means 
of triggering bombs.  Militaries rely on communications technology to 
coordinate their forces, and on computers to control advanced weapons 
systems; ICT is essential for all aspects of modern warfare 
 
To balance this, communication is also essential for ending conflict and 
building lasting peace, and ICT has a key role to play in improving 
communication, facilitating negotiations, increasing transparency, and 
building trust.  The consequences of conflict must also be dealt with, and ICT 
plays an increasingly important role in humanitarian response, peace 
operations and reconstruction processes.  ICT is often one of the most crucial 
tools used by those carrying out vital work.  In the WSIS context, ICT used in 
this way merits more consideration by the international community. 
 
This report therefore proposes that this is a clearly identifiable area of activity 
that can be labeled ICT for Peace, or ICT4Peace.  ICT4Peace activities are 
very broadly defined at present, and rightfully so; it is up to the actors 
themselves to further develop the definitions involved.  For the purposes of 
this report,  ICT4Peace encompasses the varying types of activity that are 
carried out in relation to armed conflict, including conflict prevention and 
management, peace operations, humanitarian relief and disaster assistance, 
and post-conflict peace building and reconstruction. 
 
                                                 
11 Philip Knightley The First Casualty: The War Correspondent as Hero, 
Propagandist, and Myth-maker from the Crimea to the Gulf War II (Andre Deutsch 
Ltd 2003). 
12 Such as www.indymedia.org . 

Background ▪ 7 
4. The ICT4Peace Project 
 
a. Objectives and Process 
 
To ensure that the issue of ICT4Peace received more attention in Phase 2, 
Switzerland (the host country of Phase 1), in consultation with Tunisia (the 
host country of Phase 2) and the Chairman of WSIS PrepCom, proposed a 
project that would bring together key actors in this community.   
 
Supported by the Government of Switzerland, the ICT4Peace project is led by 
Ambassador Daniel Stauffacher, former Delegate of the Swiss Federal 
Council for the World Summit on the Information Society.  This support 
reflects Switzerland’s long-standing commitment to conflict prevention and 
management, humanitarian relief, and post-conflict peace building activities, 
both individually and in collaboration with governments, international 
organizations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and research 
institutions.13 
 
The project aims to highlight the use of ICTs to promote peace (as defined 
broadly above), with the objectives of identifying a clear framework and 
elaborating good practice for developing and implementing ICT4Peace 
initiatives.  The project targeted projects that use ICT to support the activities 
described above, looking at both the political and technical aspects of this 
type of work.   
 
The project is based on the conviction that the best way to develop such a 
good practice approach is to build on the experience of those actors already 
working on these issues in the sector.  In order to do this, the first activities of 
the project were a series of consultation meetings with these stakeholders, in 
order to identify the key issues they faced and to begin the process of 
articulating the lessons that have been learned. 
 
These meetings then formed the basis for networking on the part of the 
project, starting the formation of a community of actors around these issues.  
As well as the face-to-face meetings, a website for ICT4Peace 
(http://www.ict4peace.org/) was established and participants were encouraged 
to register their projects online.  As support builds for the project, this website 
                                                 
13 On the Swiss approach to these issues, see the Swiss Federal Department of 
Foreign Affairs  Bill to Parliament concerning a credit facility for measures relating 
to conflict transformation 
and the promotion of human rights (2004–2007) (Bern, EDA, April 2004) 
[http://www.eda.admin.ch/eda/e/home/foreign/humsec.html] 

8 ▪ ICT for Peace 
will become a valuable community resource, and should act as a record of the 
progress of the ICT4Peace community as a whole. 
 
b. The ICT4Peace Report 
 
This report is the result of the processes described in the previous section, and 
has been prepared for release at the WSIS in Tunis, 16-18 November 2005.  
The aim of the report is to raise awareness of the topic, to profile a range of 
the ongoing activities, to identify the key issues and to make 
recommendations for next steps.  The Tunis Summit is a promising venue in 
which to call attention to the issues and initiatives involved, and to suggest 
that ICT4Peace should be mainstreamed into broader discussions regarding 
the information society.  In turn, the WSIS could contribute to the 
development of ICT4Peace as recognized and critically important area of 
activity that merits analysis, support and continuing development. 
 
With these considerations in mind, this report proposes that the use of ICT in 
conflict prevention and management, humanitarian relief, and post-conflict 
peace building and reconstruction constitute a coherent area of activity that 
we call ICT for Peace (ICT4Peace).  The report provides an overview of 
selected ICT4Peace issues and initiatives, describing some of the leading 
organizations and programs in the sector; it then offers some 
recommendations for moving forward.  The intention is not to exhaustively 
catalogue work in ICT4Peace, but to illustrate who is doing what, and to 
explore what might happen next to promote this important area of work. 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 9 
II. ICT4PEACE IN ACTION: SELECTED EXAMPLES 
 
Due to its relatively recent development, there does not yet exist a clear 
analytical framework for ICT4Peace.  One framework is that of the conflict 
cycle, with the key question being, how is ICT used before, during and 
immediately after a conflict?  These “phases” of a conflict have historically 
been seen as a chronological sequence, in a similar way as post-conflict 
transitions were seen as a progression from (immediate) relief to (short-term) 
rehabilitation to (long-term) development.  More recently, however, 
commentators have called for a more integrated approach14, acknowledging 
that conflicts do not follow a linear path. 
 
Conflict stages are best understood not as a continuum – a linear development 
– but as a "continuum,” where multiple stages in a given process may occur 
simultaneously.  As an example, if post-conflict peace processes begin to 
break down, it may prefigure the re-emergence of the conflict itself; the 
response will have to take into account both the ongoing peace process and 
the emergent conflict patterns.  Many uses of ICT are relevant at multiple 
stages of a conflict, and so the framework of the conflict cycle might not be 
the most suitable. 
 
Another potential analytic framework could be based on the technology itself: 
the hardware, software and standards that underpin information systems.  This 
framework also poses problems, however, since most ICT4Peace activities are 
not based on particular technologies, but draw on whatever is available, 
appropriate or even just familiar.  Alternatively, in keeping with 
communications theory, one could analyze ICT4Peace activities through 
focusing on the communities of broadcasters (governmental, international, 
non-governmental or private actors) and audiences, as well as the kind of 
information transmitted. 
 
This report approaches ICT4Peace by categorizing existing activities by their 
intended use.  By doing this, we hope to avoid the risk of becoming entangled 
in discussions about frameworks, rather than the actual functions of 
ICT4Peace.  The review is therefore divided between activities drawn from 
the conflict cycle (early warning, reconstruction), technology (the web, 
implementation of standards, and application development), field responses 
(operations and support) and communications (networking and learning) – 
                                                 
14 Jeroen de Zeeuw Building Peace in War-Torn Societies: From Concept to Strategy 
(Netherlands Institute of International Relations ‘Clingendael’ Conflict Research 
Unit, 2001), p. 12, and references therein 

10 ▪ ICT for Peace 
bearing in mind that some activities may fit into more than one section.  We 
hope that this offers the most comprehensive approach to the many issues 
around ICT4Peace – but we also hope that the report may form the basis for 
further development of a more rigorous framework. 
 
1. The Impact of the Internet 
 
Two “revolutions” allowed the creation of an information space that is global 
in scope.  First, a communications revolution made possible mass media that 
could reach around the world; now, the information revolution, based around 
the internet, has provided a medium (or rather, a range of media) through 
which a limitless number of individuals and organizations can have direct 
access to a global audience, subject to social and economic constraints. 
 
Unsurprisingly, many international organizations responding to conflict – and 
a growing number of national organizations operating at the local level within 
conflict zones – have established their own websites.  Organizational use of 
public websites has had two major impacts on our capacity to collectively 
follow and understand developments in countries or regions of concern: it has 
allowed vastly more effective information dissemination outside the 
organizations, and has enhanced capacity for networking and learning within 
or between organizations. 
 
a. Information Dissemination 
 
The first impact has been to vastly increase the amount of accessible 
information about these developments, and hence increase the visibility of 
potential and actual conflicts.  Until recently, conflict – particularly in remote 
locations – could go unreported for some time and, when information did get 
out to the wider world, it was in the form of scattered press reports, which 
would neither fully inform the public nor serve as the basis for public pressure 
for the international community to respond.   
 
The advent of global news networks made the arrival of such news faster and 
more comprehensive, but is still defined by resource constraints, the appeal of 
the story, and on the biases of news editors and whether they feel a story 
merits prominent position and ongoing coverage relative to other events.  
New York Times columnist Nicholas Kristof pointed out in June 2005 that the 
American news networks collectively aired 55 times as many stories about 
Michael Jackson as they did about Darfur15. While the “CNN effect” may 
                                                 
15 Nicholas D. Kristof All Ears for Tom Cruise, All Eyes on Brad Pitt (New York 
Times, July 26 2005) 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 11 
increase pressure on the international community to respond to a crisis, it also 
promotes on a very transitory approach to such crises; once the crisis ceases to 
be news, it ceases to require a response – the phrase “forgotten emergencies” 
is commonly used by NGOs such as MSF and Oxfam. 
 
The internet can also be used to rapidly disseminate false or inflammatory 
information, offer a global platform for causes that would otherwise not 
receive so much attention (whether legitimate or not) and act as a recruiting 
office for extremist groups.  The interactivity of the internet sometimes allows 
a response to rumors.  However, in a crisis situation, who can be seen by the 
different factions as a neutral, trusted party, to counter, verify or contextualize 
a possibly explosive piece of information?  The internet itself is neutral and 
offers no assistance in guaranteeing the accuracy of any given message, or in 
identifying the intent of those using it.  For those who know how to use it, 
however, the internet offers ways of raising the profile of forgotten 
emergencies, countering the misuse of the internet for promoting conflict, and 
many other activities besides. 
 
This is precisely because the web gives a potentially limitless number of 
individuals and organizations the ability to broadcast news without being 
filtered through the commercial and financial limitations of news networks.  
In addition, the information provided is not as transitory as the mass media; a 
website remains online for as long as the site administrator wants, can be 
shifted or mirrored on other sites, links to related information on other 
websites, and helps to build collective knowledge that becomes more detailed 
and accurate over time. 
 
As the humanitarian and peace operations community has expanded – both in 
terms of size and complexity – organizations have used the web to reach a 
potential audience of millions with whom to have this dialogue, both to 
inform – through discussing the issues on which they work and reporting on 
their own activities – and to solicit support – both in terms publicity and 
financial contributions.  In the case of the latter requirement, in the last two 
years there has been a marked shift in patterns of fundraising; in the UK, the 
Disasters Emergency Committee (or DEC, a consortium of the major UK and 
Irish NGOs) has raised more money through contributions via the net than 
through traditional telephone-based contributions. 
 
The extent to which these twin objectives of sharing information and 
soliciting support are achieved varies, but for organizations seeking a public 
mandate, the web has proven invaluable.  Most of these organizations, 
however, employ a fairly standard approach to their websites.  They 
principally use their sites to describe themselves and their activities, to convey 

12 ▪ ICT for Peace 
basic information about developments in the places where they work and to 
appeal for support.  These are important functions, but they do not make full 
use of the web’s potential; for example, while they offer substantial amounts 
of information, it is often not presented in a manner that is easy to search or 
store. 
 
In this context, while it is interesting to note the massive increase in the 
number of web sites operating in this sector, it is more important to note those 
organizations and projects that are making innovative use of the web in their 
work.  For all the changes already wrought by the arrival of the web, we are 
only at the beginning of an upward curve.  Increases in computing power and 
expansion of broadband access will make it increasingly easy to more rapidly 
disseminate a richer array of information, e.g. live audio and video, 
multimedia and mapping images, and so on.  In such circumstances, the 
problem of information overload becomes more pressing; the new frontier is a 
crowded place, and the difficulty for the web user is how to identify useful 
information and filter out the rest. 
 
Websites offering this type of filtering are referred to as portals, and in the 
fragmented ICT4Peace community, they can make significant contributions to 
development of a culture of information sharing and development of an 
ICT4Peace community.  Here the term ‘portal’ implies that the information is 
not created by the organization itself, but that the website collates information 
from other sources in order to act as a filter for the vast amount of information 
available on the web.16 
 
ReliefWeb [http://www.reliefweb.int/], a service of the United Nations Office 
for 
the 
Coordination 
of 
Humanitarian 
Affairs 
(OCHA) 
[http://ochaonline.un.org]17, is the hub for humanitarian information, 
                                                 
16 It is worth noting that some organisations present their website as portals as well as 
sources of their own information resources. 
17 In the UN system, OCHA plays a leading role in ensuring system-wide 
coordination.  In 1991 the General Assembly established the position of Emergency 
Relief Coordinator (ERC) to oversee both complex emergencies and natural disasters, 
chairing the newly-created Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC). Soon after, the 
Secretary-General established the Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) and 
assigned the ERC the status of Under-Secretary-General (USG) for Humanitarian 
Affairs.  In 1998 DHA was reorganized into OCHA, and its mandate was expanded to 
include the coordination of humanitarian response, policy development and 
humanitarian advocacy.  OCHA carries out its coordination functions primarily 
through the IASC, which is tasked with ensuring inter-agency decision-making in 
response to complex emergencies.  These responses include needs assessments, 
consolidated appeals, field coordination arrangements and the development of 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 13 
receiving approximately 1 million hits a day in 2004 – and 3 million hits a day 
following the South Asia Tsunami.  Over 70,000 people subscribe to its e-
mail services, the site offers a "web feed" service to deliver customized 
content to partners' web sites, and users can create password-protected 
profiles to manage material of particular interest to them.  ReliefWeb has 
offices in three time zones to ensure that its news items are updated around 
the clock, and posts some 150 maps and documents daily from over 2,000 
sources.  These are then categorized and kept in a searchable database 
containing nearly 300,000 items dating back to 1981. In addition to these and 
other resources pertaining to countries and crises, the site includes a guide to 
humanitarian web sites, a search engine, direct links to news sites, and 
professional tools.  The latter include directories of employment and training 
opportunities, thematic listings of "communities of practice" in different areas 
of specialization, and a contact directory of humanitarian organizations.   
 
OCHA also manages the Integrated Regional Information Network (IRIN) 
[http://www.irinnews.org/], an independent news service reporting on 
humanitarian crises.   IRIN produces updates, analysis and alerts on 
developments in 46 countries in Africa and eight in Central Asia.  The 
information is drawn from (and provided to) a network of UN agencies, 
NGOs and international organizations, national authorities, donors, human 
rights organizations, political parties, regional institutions, churches, 
academia, businesses and the media.  In addition to producing its own daily, 
weekly and special reports, IRIN distributes publications from its partners.   
Some 100,000 people worldwide read IRIN reports daily via e-mail with 
customizable preferences, and IRIN also operates a web radio service with 
content geared toward particular countries and region in crisis. 
 
Alertnet [http://www.alertnet.org/] is a project of the Reuters Foundation that 
focuses on rapidly developing humanitarian emergencies and on early 
warning of future emergencies.  It draws on the Reuters news agency’s 
unparalleled 24-hour news feed to provide up to the minute coverage of 
breaking events concerning natural disasters and complex emergencies, and 
provides a wealth of country profiles, satellite images, interactive maps, and 
databases.  The site attracts upwards of three million users a year and 
contributes to network development by providing links to 374 member 
organizations in 87 countries, a weekly email is received by more than 10,000 
readers, and a password-protected Professional Zone where members can post 
information and contacts of use to other humanitarian professionals.   
 
                                                                                                                     
humanitarian policies. 

14 ▪ ICT for Peace 
More recently, some projects have begun to offer more geographically 
specific portals for information.  Apart from the Humanitarian Information 
Centres (see section on Field-Based Responses, below), websites such as the 
OCHA Website in the Russian Federation [http://www.ocha.ru], AzerWeb 
[http://www.azerweb.com/] and Save the Children’s Assistance Georgia 
[http://www.assistancegeorgia.org.ge/]  have a perspective firmly based in the 
field.  These sites offer an essential complement to centralized information 
resources such as ReliefWeb and Alertnet. 
 
Some organizations go beyond “flat” displays of information by providing 
interactive tools.  Searchable databases, maps and Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) and electronic forums are featured on a number of these sites.  
For example, the Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters 
[http://www.cred.be/] 
offers 
the 
International 
Disasters 
Database; 
Development Gateway [http://home.developmentgateway.org/] has databases 
relating to conflict and post-conflict reconstruction, as well as online 
discussion forums.  The International Committee of the Red Cross  
[www.icrc.org], the oldest and probably the largest humanitarian 
organization, offers access to databases of treaties and related instruments.  
The Norwegian Refugee Council’s Global IDP Project [www.idpproject.org] 
monitors the movement of people who have been displaced within their own 
country by conflict or because of human rights violations, maintains a Global 
IDP database and related maps, and uses this information to promote the safe 
return or resettlement and reintegration of the displaced. 
 
Specific area resources are also available.  The Geneva-based International 
Documentation 
Network 
on 
the 
Great 
African 
Lakes 
Region 
[http://www.grandslacs.net/] is an international, inter-university program that 
collects, edits, and provides access to documents on recent events in Burundi, 
Rwanda and their regional context (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo).  The network’s goal is to make the largest 
possible range of documents available to decision-makers, academics, and 
NGOs in those countries and around the world. In order to develop a trusted 
resource and to foster a culture of critical reading of information, the Network 
only accepts complete and verified documents (to avoid mis-quotes or false 
attributions that often fuel strife in the Great Lakes region). Documents 
include reports and technical materials on development from various sources, 
letters, statements and studies by public personalities, and communications 
from within civil society.  These documents, which number in the thousands 
and often exist only in hard copy form, are scanned or re-typed and made 
available via a searchable Internet database and CD-ROMs.  Depending on 
the original documents, the project makes available resources in English, 
French, Kinyarwanda, and Kirundi.  

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 15 
 
Another Swiss-supported Program, on Humanitarian Policy and Conflict 
Research (HPCR) at the Harvard University School of Public Health 
[http://www.hpcr.org/] runs a Portal Development Unit, which gives 
policymakers and practitioners easy access to information on human security 
and conflict prevention and allows users to create virtual networks with 
counterparts to share common concerns.  Its Indonesia portal 
[http://www.preventconflict.org/portal/main] has become a trusted source for 
reports and other documents reflecting many points of view.  Another type of 
portal related to conflict issues supported by HPCR is the International 
Humanitarian Law Research Initiative (IHLRI) 
[http://www.ihlresearch.org/ihl/], allowing access to news articles and 
resources on the topic of international humanitarian law relevant to situations 
in ongoing conflicts.  
 
 
b. Networking and Learning 
 
The second impact has been the contribution of the web in weaving together 
these different organizations into something that can begin to be described as 
a sector – whether one labels that sector humanitarian response, peace 
operations, conflict management, or post-conflict reconstruction, or anything 
else.  While our emphasis in this section is on the World Wide Web, it should 
be noted that the Internet also provides the basis for other applications for 
information sharing, e.g. e-mail, newsgroups, file sharing and so on, some of 
which will be discussed later in the report.   
 
There have been suggestions that an opportunity to build coherent 
communities of practice is being missed; as one analyst summarized: 
 
“The World Wide Web is at present undoubtedly the most widely 
used information platform for the humanitarian community.  
Humanitarian organizations regularly visit each other’s web sites.  
These sites hardly reflect this reality: the public part of the web sites 
of most humanitarian organizations is aimed at a vast, anonymous 
audience, while the restricted part is reserved for staff.  Apart from 
information on the owner of the site and links to related 
organizations, the sites seldom provide IT services to visitors….More 
often than not, the web sites of humanitarian organizations are cut off 
from the rest of the organizations’ information system: most sites are 
managed as stand-alone tools, often connected to the organizations’ e-
mail-systems, but remaining under the strict and constant control of a 
single webmaster. The unrestricted part of these sites is conceived as 

16 ▪ ICT for Peace 
a number of static pages aimed at a vast, anonymous audience. This 
situation is at present a major obstacle to the integration of the 
information that is available throughout the humanitarian community: 
the barriers around some of the information on the local networks 
have been raised so high, that any sharing of information demands 
additional work.” 18 
 
In part, this missed opportunity can be attributed to a lack of understanding 
within the community of the potential of the web, combined with the facts 
that widespread web access is a relatively recent phenomenon and that many 
of these organizations work in countries on the other side of the digital divide, 
where the web has not been a major medium.  There is a growing 
understanding of the power of the web, as the fundraising experience of the 
DEC mentioned above shows, and networks are starting to discover the 
different ways that ICT can bring people together. 
 
In the NGO community, the web has made possible wider collaborations 
between NGOs across the world.  The two biggest networks in particular have 
used technology to improve member relations and advocacy work.  The 
Geneva-based 
International 
Council 
of 
Voluntary 
Agencies 
[http://www.icva.ch/], a global network of NGOs working on humanitarian 
relief, human rights, and refugee issues, uses its website to provide members 
with useful documents and access to policy briefings from the headquarters of 
relevant agencies such as UNHCR, as well as publishing a regular newsletter 
that reaches around the world in a way that a printed newsletter could not.  
The Washington-based InterAction [http://www.interaction.org/ict/], an 
alliance of more than 160 NGOs, has gone further and created a headquarters 
unit specifically to deal with ICT initiatives. This unit reviews access and 
appropriateness of technology and content for both the NGO and local 
communities. This work ties in with initiatives mentioned elsewhere in this 
document, such as NetHope. 
 
The Global Disaster Information Network (GDIN) [www.gdin.org] is a 
coalition of experts from NGOs, governments, international organizations, 
industry, academia, and donor organizations.  Its objectives are to assist in-
field disaster managers find information, particularly when other means have 
failed; to develop unique information sharing procedures that complement 
extant systems; and to foster the elaboration of technologies for peace as well 
                                                 
18 Marcel Hummelink,  Evaluation of IT Humanitarian Platforms and Their Possible 
Utilisation as Coordination Instruments (paper presented at the ECHO-Partners 
Annual Conference, Brussels, 14 & 15 October 2002), pp. 1:6 and 2:4-5 
[europa.eu.int/comm/echo/pdf_files/2002_partners/information.pdf]. 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 17 
as professional development.  A more recent initiative is the Disaster 
Resource Network (DRN) [http://66.223.23.193/index.html] of the World 
Economic Forum, which seeks to build cooperation between businesses and 
relief organizations during the emergency response and recovery phases of 
disasters. The DRN seeks to streamline and increase the delivery of industry 
resources (engineering, technology, transportation and logistics, insurance and 
others) to the disaster site.  Although in its early stages, the DRN could offer a 
new way to bring together the private and public sectors using the credibility 
and resources of the World Economic Forum. 
 
The Center for Security Studies at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
in Zurich [http://www.css.ethz.ch/index_EN] provides access to handbooks, 
studies, working papers, monographs, conference reports and books written 
from an academic/policy-making orientation.  The center is also a focal point 
for 
the 
Swiss 
International 
Relations 
and 
Security 
Network 
[http://www.isn.ethz.ch/], which links scholars and research institutions at a 
number of universities that work on international security issues, including 
conflict prevention and peace operations.  The next step is to link these more 
policy-oriented discussions with field practitioners, to ensure that both sides 
benefit from each other’s knowledge. 
 
A group seeking to do just that is the Active Learning Network for 
Accountability and Practice (ALNAP) [http://www.alnap.org/], based in the 
UK at the Overseas Development Institute (ODI) [http://www.odi.org.uk/].  
Knowledge management – of which communities of practice are an important 
sub-topic – is still not widely regarded in the ICT4Peace community, although 
organizations and individuals with military backgrounds (such as UN 
peacekeeping forces) benefit from the military’s focus on lesson learning.  
ALNAP makes available lessons learned documents drawn from its 
comprehensive online database of evaluations, as well as hosting discussions 
forums and meetings that provide a framework for learning in the 
humanitarian community. 
 
One of the most interesting learning initiatives in the last five years has been 
the development Aid Workers Network (AWN) [http://www.aidworkers.net/], 
a voluntary collaboration between field-based aid workers to share their 
knowledge and build a broader community of practice.  Launched as a pilot 
project in 2002, it rapidly grew to 6500 members in 163 countries in mid-
2004, offering moderated online discussion forums covering every aspect of 
aid work, from fundraising to programme management, from policy to 
administration.  Until mid-2004, a weekly newsletter (Aid Workers 
Exchange) was also published, featuring articles written by professional aid 
workers and question-and-answer sections.  This was achieved with almost no 

18 ▪ ICT for Peace 
core funding, and shows that the will to develop a community of practice 
exists in the aid world. 
 
Some organizations offer online training in various fields, notably conflict 
mediation and resolution.  A few examples would include: the Geneva 
Humanitarian Forum [http://www.genevahumanitarianforum.org/] which 
hosts e-dialogues on conflict and peace, including the role of media; and the 
Network University [http://www.euconflict.org/tnu/index2.html] and the 
Geneva-based UN University of Peace Institute for Media, Peace and Security 
[http://www.mediapeace.org/] both of which offer online courses.  This is a 
field which has great utility for practitioners, potentially offering distance 
learning that can be combined with field-based practice and be made 
accessible to remote participants, including national organizations and staff. 
 
The 
ODI 
also 
runs 
the 
Humanitarian 
Practice 
Network 
(HPN) 
[http://www.odihpn.org/], making use of a membership-based website and a 
mailing list facility to reach a far wider audience than would be possible with 
hard copies of its many publications.  These types of basic information 
resources, although not making full use of the web’s potential, still serve an 
important function in the ICT4Peace community, ensuring wider availability 
of previously hard-to-access materials, particularly for developing countries.  
Existing 
journals 
available 
online 
include 
Disasters  
[http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0361-3666], 
the 
Journal of Humanitarian Assistance [http://www.jha.ac/], the Humanitarian 
Review [http://www.humanitarian-review.org/], and the International Review 
of the Red Cross [http://www.icrc.org/eng/review].  
 
2. Early Warning and Conflict Prevention 
 
“Confronting the horrors of war and natural disasters, the United Nations has 
long argued that prevention is better than cure; that we must address root 
causes, not merely their symptoms,” urged UN Secretary General Kofi Annan 
in 1999.19  Although it is widely agreed that preventive action before a 
conflict is less costly than intervention during or after a conflict, successful 
prevention remains elusive.  There are many reasons for this, including 
concerns over issues of sovereignty, lack of political will and constraints on 
international diplomacy, as well as the problem of drawing attention to 
conflicts emerging away from the gaze of the world’s media.  Annan’s 
                                                 
19 Kofi Annan, Facing the Humanitarian Challenge. Towards a Culture of 
Prevention, (Introduction to the Secretary-General’s Annual Report on the Work of 
the Organisation, 1999), p. 1 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 19 
statement, however, reflects a growing concern to make early warning and 
conflict prevention a central part of the international community’s response. 
 
As a result of this concern, the past fifteen years have seen a growing volume 
of calls for the development of better early warning systems.  Early warning 
for disasters is not a new idea, but its application in conflict management is 
fairly new; the challenges involved are qualitatively different and more 
complex. 20   Indeed, the commingling of desires for early warning systems 
and recognition of the difficulties of making them work has often left experts 
of two minds on the matter.  For example, writing in 1995, one proponent of 
NGO-supported early warning systems summarized the issue this way: 
 
“A new network specifically devoted to early warnings, and linking 
local and international NGOs to a central facility, could in theory 
enhance the timely quality of those signals, legitimate them, and 
enable the outcries of smaller as well as larger NGOs to be heard in 
the headquarters of the UN and in Washington, London, Bonn, Paris, 
and Tokyo.  The central facility could evaluate incoming bells of 
alarm; faint noises would be amplified and transmitted with greater 
assurances that they would be heard, if not acted upon, down the 
world’s dominant corridors of power.  Had a recognizable channel 
existed in 1994, the Rwandan genocide might have been forestalled.  
The fears of local NGO leaders might then have been articulated more 
determinedly and forcefully; the world community might have 
responded; the UN mandate might have been broadened and 
preventive diplomacy and preventive interposition might have been 
possible.  But the details of the Rwandan experience, the continuing 
crisis of Burundi, and the experiences of both Guatemala and 
Macedonia imply that such a network would be almost impossible to 
deploy, and that using it would have been and might be much too 
dangerous for NGOs, especially local ones.”21 
 
                                                 
20 For a brief overview, see Howard Adelman, Humanitarian and Conflict-Oriented 
Early Warning: A Historical Background Sketch (in K. van Walraven, ed., Early 
Warning and Conflict Prevention: Limitations and Possibilities, Netherlands: 
Kluwever Law International, 1998) pp. 45-49. 
21 Robert I. Rotberg, Conclusions: NGOs, Early Warning, Early Action, and 
Preventive Diplomacy, in Rotberg, ed., Vigilance and Vengeance: NGOs Preventing 
Ethnic Conflict in Divided Societies (Washington D.C and Cambridge, MA.: The 
Brookings Institution Press and the World Peace Foundation, 1996), pp. 264-265.  For 
a less ambiguous view, see, Luise Druke, UNHCR and the Need for “Early Warning” 
(UNHCR Refugee Abstracts, 8, December 1989) 
[http://www.luisedruke.com/luise/unhcr_need_early_warning.htm] 

20 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Some experts maintain that early warning is not feasible, for several reasons. 
Predictions of conflict based on theoretical constructs and formal models 
cannot capture the unique circumstances on the ground in a given region.  It is 
logistically difficult – and potentially dangerous – for individuals to gather the 
sensitive information required for early warning in country and transmit it up 
to the international level.  Even if information can be promptly provided to 
decision makers, they may not know how to respond, and will probably lack 
the political will to do so if their national security interests are not threatened.  
Early warning may not translate into early action; for example, in the case of 
Rwanda, there were relatively unambiguous warning signs, and yet the 
international community failed to act.22  In the event that the international 
community does act, any intervention may be ill-considered and might even 
worsen the problem, e.g. by taking one side without providing sufficient 
deterrence or incentive to the other to cease hostilities. 
 
While these objections are understandable, they do not constitute a solid case 
against early warning.  The practical objections raised above simply 
underscore the obstacles that must be overcome with respect to system design.  
The difficulties of mustering political will and designing effective responses 
are not arguments against the utility of early warning per se, but are rather 
political-strategic problems endemic to the entire sector.  In any case, early 
warning systems should not be viewed as the sole basis for decision-making; 
they are an additional contribution to a larger set of capabilities. 
 
Although the central analytical capacity will always be human, ICT can assist 
in building early warning systems.  A number of initiatives have built on this 
to improve early warning across the international system.  Within the UN, 
OCHA takes the lead role for early warning on complex emergencies.  As 
noted above, OCHA manages ReliefWeb and IRIN, which offer a wealth of 
well organized and detailed information that can be drawn on in identifying 
potential hot spots.  In addition, the UN General Assembly has tasked the 
Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) with “maintaining an overview of all 
emergencies through the systematic pooling and analysis of early warning 
information,” and with providing “consolidated information, including early 
warning on emergencies, to all interested Governments and concerned 
authorities.” 
 
The 
OCHA 
Early 
Warning 
Unit 
[http://ochaonline.un.org/webpage.asp?Page=966] collaborates with other UN 
bodies, international NGOs, think tanks, and regional organizations in order to 
aggregate information and monitor and assess trends and events world-wide 
that may give rise to humanitarian crises.  The Unit monitors developments in 
                                                 
22 See Samantha Power, A Problem from Hell: America and the Age of Genocide 
(New York: Perennial, 2003) 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 21 
around thirty countries and shares its information with country teams on the 
ground and its other partners.  In addition, the Early Warning Unit has 
assembled a compendium of case studies that are made available to 
practitioners world-wide via the Internet Forum on Crisis Prevention (IFCP) 
[http://ochaonline.un.org/webpage.asp?Page=1327].  
 
Some UN bodies maintain their own programs.  For example, the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has established a Crisis 
Prevention 
and 
Peace 
Building 
area 
[http://www.undp.org/bcpr/conflict_prevention/index.htm] and is working 
with selected national governments to establish early warning systems and to 
build their capacities to foresee potential crises based on in-depth reports and 
regularly updated information about key indicators.  The World Food 
Programme (WFP) has developed an interesting initiative on behalf of the 
Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) working group on Preparedness 
and Contingency Planning.  The Humanitarian Early Warning Service 
(HEWSWeb) [http://www.hewsweb.org/home_page/default.asp] provides a 
“global multi-hazard watch to support humanitarian preparedness”; at present 
it covers only natural disasters and not complex emergencies, but it presents 
an interesting model for aggregating multiple information sources into an 
easy-to-use format. 
 
Initiatives for ICT-enabled early warning are also being developed outside the 
UN.  In the European Commission, a system called Tariqa has been 
developed for the external relations department (RELEX), enabling the EC’s 
63 delegations around the world to follow global developments relevant to 
their work through one portal.  User needs for the systems were identified 
through interviews with 40 desk officers over three months; according to 
those interviewed, the main problem was the absence of a single source for 
integrated information.  The first requirement was therefore to develop an 
integrated platform through which this information could be made available.  
Users wanted a system that was demand-driven; a system they could use as 
needed; and a system resistant to information overload. Tariqa integrates 
multiple public information sources, automatically filtering news from more 
than 2,000 print, radio, and television channels and building a customized 
portal for different geographical desks in the commission. The portal includes 
news services, specialized press resources, books and articles, maps, and 
remote sensing resources, as well as information from the commission and its 
partners. For example, the system allows the user to locate different projects 
funded by the European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO), or any 
other aid agency, in a certain country.  Tariqa provides a situational awareness 
tool that support many functions, not just early warning. 
 

22 ▪ ICT for Peace 
In 
a 
more 
active 
early 
warning 
mode, 
SwissPeace 
[http://www.swisspeace.org/], as well as hosting the KOFF Center for 
Peacebuilding (to strengthen Switzerland’s capacity to address violent 
conflicts) and the Afghan Civil Society Forum, has also established 
Frühanalyse von Spannungen und Tatsachenermittlung (FAST) International 
[http://www.swisspeace.org/fast/].   FAST was created in 1998 for the Swiss 
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) as an evolution from earlier 
early warning systems developed in the wake of the crises in Rwanda and the 
Balkans.  Today, FAST International is also supported by the Austrian, 
Canadian, Swedish and American governments’ respective development 
organizations.  The system is focused on twenty countries or regions in 
Africa, Europe and Asia.   
 
From a methodological perspective, FAST is widely considered to have been 
a major advance, employing both qualitative and quantitative methods by 
blending data analysis with the interpretations of country experts.  The precise 
balance or blend of these approaches is determined on a case-by-case basis 
according to customer needs.  That said, FAST is most known for its 
quantitative methodology, in which data on conflictive and cooperative events 
are collected from the organization’s own in-country teams and entered into a 
web-based software tool through a coding scheme called IDEA (Integrated 
Data for Event Analysis), which is based on the WEIS (World Events 
Interaction Survey) coding scheme. For each country/region monitored, 
unique sets of data are collected and analyzed to produce both general and 
customized information products that include specific policy options for 
decision makers in government and other sectors.  These products include the 
FAST Updates (including “flash” Special Updates), Analytical Frameworks, 
the FAST Reporter publication, and Country Risk Profiles. 23 
 
The second project of interest is the Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute’s (SIPRI) “Early Warning Indicators for Preventive Policy” 
[http://www.sipri.org/contents/it/ewi.html].   Launched in 2002, SIPRI’s 
project makes heavy use of the possibilities provided by new technology.  As 
with the FAST system, the project seeks to break new ground by using a 
sophisticated quantitative methodology that is complemented by expert 
analysis.  The former relies on the statistical analysis of a database comprising 
more than 1200 structural and event indicators culled from a wide range of 
different sources, including a monthly expert survey.  Trends are graphically 
                                                 
23 For an assessment of the system, see, Heinz Krummenacher and Susanne Schmeidl, 
Practical Challenges in Predicting Violent Conflict FAST: An Example of a 
Comprehensive Early-Warning Methodology (October 2001)  
http://www.swisspeace.org/publications/wp/working paper34.pdf 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 23 
displayed, a predictive model and ‘crisis index’ are employed, and the results 
of the current test phase will be made publicly available on the Internet.  The 
geographic focus is on West Africa, and SIPRI has developed a network of 
experts in the region that not only provide analysis and data, but also 
participate in the development of the methodology and indicators.  SIPRI is 
also developing an Integrating Fact Databases as part of its International 
Relations and Security Project, creating a federated system of databases at 
different geographical locations, accessible through a single user platform. 
 
Finally, the Rwanda Project of the Center for International Development and 
Conflict 
Management, 
University 
of 
Maryland 
at 
College 
Park 
[http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/rwanda/index.htm].  The project seeks to help 
advance reconciliation between Hutu and Tutsi; to assist in this effort, the 
scholars involved are developing an Africa-focused interactive tool to assist 
development managers, implementers, and architects in integrating ICT into 
peace building efforts.  Building on an index of forty conflict drivers, the tool 
will provide a web-based multi-layered matrix linking ICT program results 
and lessons learned to reduce the conflict potential of each driver and identify 
strategies for conflict sensitive development.  After undergoing an extensive 
period of prototype testing, the tool will be fully operational by the end of 
2005. 
 
Early warning systems continue to develop, but it is still unclear what role 
ICT can play in preventing conflict.  The best hope seems to be with 
promoting better communication between factions, communities and external 
actors in the hope of altering the dynamics of conflict to allow for a 
negotiated resolution.  For example, in Chiapas, Mexico, the Zapatista’s use 
of the Internet called international attention to the plight of the indigenous; 
this attention may have afforded them some protection and prevented a full-
scale violent conflict from developing by enabling their participation in a 
political process.  In this context, processes of social reconciliation (see 
section 5b, below) may offer more hope than higher-level diplomatic 
initiatives – at least in the context of ICT4Peace. 
 
3. Operations and Support 
 
An enormous variety of actors across a wide range of sectors have become 
involved in implementation of various aspects of peace operations; high-
profile operations such as Kosovo or Afghanistan attract international NGOs 
numbering in the hundreds.  In complex emergencies, with so many 
organizations on the ground, coordination becomes a priority.  Coordination is 
essential for a number of reasons; to reduce duplication and to fill gaps in 
assistance, to ensure efficient use of existing supply chains, to build local 

24 ▪ ICT for Peace 
knowledge to ensure that assistance is appropriate, and so forth.  Coordination 
should be geared towards one end – ensuring that the needs of beneficiaries 
are met in an appropriate and timely manner, and to avoid or mitigate 
unnecessary human suffering.  Coordination between civilian and military 
forces, between the public and private sector, and between different branches 
of national government is also pressing concerns. 
 
It is worth noting that the traditional concept of coordination has been joined 
recently by a newer idea; that of integration within a UN mission.  In the 
wake of multi-faceted missions such as Kosovo or East Timor – where the 
UN may be required to take on a wide range of activities in the same area – 
there has been extensive discussion about how to ensure that those activities – 
and the organizations that implement them – can work together more closely 
towards a perceived common end.  Although popular in policy circles, to 
whom the advantages are obvious, this idea has been contested on the ground, 
particularly by some humanitarian actors. 
 
The argument put forward by these critics is that the fundamental principles 
of humanitarianism – impartiality, neutrality, and independence – are not 
negotiable, that the provision of humanitarian aid should be based on human 
needs alone, and not influenced by political motivations.  Humanitarian 
organizations fear that their work may be used as a political tool; in more 
concrete terms, there is also considerable concern that any erosion of 
‘humanitarian space’ – the freedom of movement and activity to provide 
humanitarian assistance, usually on the basis of informal assent from or 
agreement with belligerent parties – will endanger both their ability to carry 
out their work – and endanger the security of their staff and assets. 24  The 
advocates of the integrated approach maintain that every action in a conflict 
zone has political ramifications – even supposedly ‘neutral’ ones – and that it 
is best to consider these in a holistic manner that takes into account those 
ramifications and seeks to use all available means to achieve the key political 
goal of building peace. 
 
These arguments are particularly relevant in the context of the debate over 
civil-military co-operation.25  Information-sharing between humanitarian 
workers and the military is a contentious topic.  Point Four of the Code of 
                                                 
24 Joanna Macrae and Nicholas Leader, Shifting Sands: the search for ‘coherence’ 
between political and humanitarian responses to complex emergencies  
(Humanitarian Practice Network, London, 2000) 
[http://www.odi.org.uk/hpg/papers/hpgreport8.pdf] 
25 Jane Barry and Anna Jefferys, A Bridge Too Far: aid agencies and the military in 
humanitarian response (Humanitarian Practice Network, London, 2002) 
[http://www.odihpn.org/documents/networkpaper037.pdf] 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 25 
Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and 
NGOs in Disaster Relief (which the majority of international NGOs have now 
signed up to) states that: 
 
“We will never knowingly – or through negligence – allow ourselves, 
or our employees, to be used for to gather intelligence of a political, 
military or economically sensitive nature for governments or other 
bodies that may serve purposes other than those which are strictly 
humanitarian, nor will we act as instruments of foreign policy of 
donor governments.” 26 
 
Civil-military relations are an extremely complex and contentious field, and it 
is not possible to explore them fully here, except to note that there is a clear 
impact on information-sharing between civil and military agencies in the 
field.  Although the extent and terms of civil-military relations are debated 
from emergency to emergency, there is agreement that such information-
sharing is a prerequisite for coordination. 
 
Amongst civilian agencies, coordination needs to occur both vertically – 
between organizational headquarters and their staff at different local levels – 
and horizontally – between the different actors, at both headquarters and field 
levels.  Horizontal (or inter-agency) coordination is usually more difficult, 
since differences in the mandates, resources and capacities of different 
organizations can impede cooperation – not to mention competition for 
funding.  All these factors can hinder coordination even in comparatively 
simple emergency situations such as natural disasters; in complex 
emergencies, they become even more difficult to manage.  Yet this very 
complexity increases the need for effective coordination.  In order to 
successfully manage such operations, more widespread use of ICT has 
become essential.  Modern humanitarian operations have been made possible 
by ICTs, and it is now difficult to imagine an operation without that 
technology.   
 
a. Field-based Projects 
 
Recently many organizations have begun to use technology in the field to 
support the work of others, both for communications support and information 
management; both of these have been seen to improve coordination in the 
field. 
                                                 
26 International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Code of 
Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in 
Disaster Relief (2004) 

26 ▪ ICT for Peace 
 
One widely-known concept are the Humanitarian Information Centers (HICs) 
[http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/] operated by the Field Information Support 
Unit (FIS) within the Advocacy, and Information Management Branch of 
OCHA (see section 1, above).  HICs are open access facilities established in 
conflict and post-conflict zones to support the humanitarian assistance 
through the provision of information resources.  They are coordinated through 
OCHA, have been endorsed by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee 
(IASC), and report to the UN’s Humanitarian/Resident Coordinator.   They 
bring together UN, NGO and sometimes governmental actors to support 
coordination in the field.  They create a common meeting point and 
framework of action for information managers from diverse organizations, 
most notably international agencies and NGOs, but hopefully also local actors 
as well; ensure that these organizations have access to the information 
management tools needed to assess, plan, implement and monitor 
humanitarian assistance given local conditions; facilitate standardized data 
collection, analysis and dissemination, as well as individual and joint 
initiatives; and promote a culture of information-sharing and awareness of 
good practices.  The kinds of information resources they make available can 
include everything from orientation materials and maps, contacts lists, 
meetings schedules to project management information, “Who’s doing What 
Where” databases, GIS data, incident reports, research studies and beyond.  
HICS have established in a number of complex emergency environments: 
notable examples include the Afghanistan Information Management Service, 
the Sierra Leone Information Service, and the Humanitarian Information 
Centre 
for 
Iraq 
[all 
of 
which 
can 
be 
accessed 
through 
http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/].27   
 
More broadly, FIS aims to strengthen and facilitate the use of data and 
information in order to strengthen the humanitarian community's capacity to 
carry out field-based information management functions in new and ongoing 
complex emergencies and natural disasters; enable OCHA and the 
humanitarian community to deploy information management specialists to the 
field to support agencies, governments and the UN as a part of a first wave 
response to new emergencies and disasters; and support the information 
management efforts of OCHA field offices through the provision of 
standardized tools and products and technical support.  A pilot project is 
                                                 
27 Paul Currion, Humanitarian Information Centres: Establishing Coherent 
Approaches to Field-Based Information Management in Emergencies (a report 
commissioned by the Field Information Support (FIS) Unit of the Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), March 2001)  
http://www.reliefweb.int/symposium/InfoCenters.htm 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 27 
currently underway to strengthen the information management capacity of 
individual OCHA offices in the field. 
 
OCHA also provides a number of other services that rely on ICT for their 
operations.  The Virtual Operations On-Site Coordination Center (Virtual 
OSOCC) is an Internet-based facility for the aggregation into databases and 
exchange of information from relief actors, who also can provide comments 
on existing information and discuss issues of concern with other stakeholders.   
The Joint UNEP/OCHA Environment Unit monitors the world’s situation and 
exchanges information through an international network of contacts, and 
provides an information clearing house that channels information, maps and 
images from diverse institutions to the relevant authorities in affected 
countries. A recent report summarizes the Joint Unit’s work.28 
 
Also providing system-wide coordination support is the UN Joint Logistics 
Centre [http://www.unjlc.org/].  An inter-agency facility operating under the 
custodianship of World Food Program, the UNJLC reports to the 
Humanitarian Coordinator in any given crisis, and overall to the IASC.  Its 
mandate is to coordinate and optimize the logistical capabilities of 
humanitarian organizations in large-scale emergencies.  Decisions to deploy a 
UNJLC can be taken within 24 hours taking into account situation 
assessments and the scale of the crisis, existing agency capabilities, and the 
possible use of military and civil defense forces. Once the decision is taken, 
relevant organizations are informed, rapid assessments detailing operational 
requirements are undertaken, and recruitment of staff is initiated. To facilitate 
a swift deployment, various standby capacities are drawn upon, including a 
special Flyaway Kit containing essential equipment and ICT support.  The 
staff will initially be integrated into the United Nations Disaster Assessment 
and Coordination (UNDAC) Team, and will provide support in logistics 
coordination 
and 
information 
management. 
 
The 
UNJLC’s 
main 
responsibilities normally will include identifying and eliminating logistical 
bottlenecks to avoid duplication and wasteful competition among 
organizations; tackling logistics policy issues; coordinating humanitarian 
movements with military authorities; undertaking assessments of roads, 
bridges, airports, ports and other logistics infrastructure and recommending 
actions for repair and reconstruction; serving as a platform for gathering, 
collating, and analyzing and disseminating information required by agencies, 
including by using mapping and GIS capabilities. Multiple information 
dissemination mechanisms are utilized, including inter-agency meetings, 
bulletins, CD-ROMs and a website. 
                                                 
28 Joint UNEP/OCHA Environment Unit Overview - Note by the Secretariat (June 
2005) [http://ochaonline.un.org/GetBin.asp?DocID=3365] 

28 ▪ ICT for Peace 
 
As the largest UN agency in terms of resources, the World Food Program 
(WFP) [http://www.wfp.org/] is perhaps the most advanced user of ICT for its 
field operations, with five key initiatives: 
 
1. ETNet is WFP's communications backbone, connecting its major 
operations 
through 
a 
satellite-based 
system 
that 
incorporates 
communication links with other UN agencies.  ETNet provides voice and 
data communication via phone, fax, e-mail and video-conferencing; 
2. The Deep Field Mailing System (DFMS) uses high-frequency short-wave 
radios to transfer e-mail without using commercial electricity or telephone 
lines. The system allows users in remote locations to send any data – text, 
spreadsheets and even images at very low cost.  It was first deployed in 
WFP’s Great Lakes operations in Africa, and has since grown to become 
the aid community's most extensive and independent network, serving 80 
WFP offices worldwide; 
3. The Commodity Movement Processing and Analysis System (COMPAS) 
is a database platform that allows food commodities to be tracked from 
procurement to arrival at WFP distribution points, allowing for oversight 
of thousands of tons of food supplies, whether in storage, in transit or at 
point of delivery; 
4. Field Communications (FieldComms) are a network of specialists based 
in Africa and Asia that can be dispatched anywhere in the world  within 
48 hours with the equipment necessary to get WFP communications 
running in an emergency; 
5. The Fast IT & Telecommunications Emergency and Support Team 
(FITTEST) [http://www.hiciraq.org/services/FITTEST/index.asp], based 
in Dubai, has participated in emergency operations in 89 countries.  In 
Iraq, a 65-person team helped install and maintain the communications 
network used by 2,000 humanitarians, and they have been central to the 
Asian tsunami response and other crises. 
 
NGOs are also involved in efforts to improve operational ICT support.  
Télécoms sans Frontières (TSF) [http://www.tsfi.org/] builds emergency 
telecommunications systems in the field to support humanitarian relief 
operations. TSF has a permanent monitoring center which can deploy 
specialized teams anywhere in the world in less than 48 hours.  Typically, the 
teams install small but powerful mobile satellite communications to help 
NGOs and other partners coordinate logistics and related matters.  Such 
satellite systems are especially useful in remote locations where fixed-line 
telecommunications are unavailable.  TSF is expanding its operations in 
several directions; for example, the organization is developing specialized 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 29 
operations in sectors like telemedicine and agriculture to bring expertise to 
remote areas. 
 
UK-based MapAction [http://www.mapaction.org/] is an NGO that specializes 
in using satellite earth imaging, data processing done in the UK, and locally 
deployed mapping teams to assist relief missions to supply up-to-date real-
time maps of disaster areas to relief operations.  MapAction is also part of a 
consortium that includes public and private sector organizations, RESPOND 
[http://www.respond-int.org/index.htm]  RESPOND combines the expertise 
of the geospatial private sector with the needs of the international 
humanitarian community, committing itself to making geospatial technologies 
more accessible to the humanitarian community, by improving access to 
maps, satellite imagery and geographic information.  Other NGOs are also 
looking at GIS application for emergencies, including MapRelief 
[http://www.maprelief.org/] 
and 
Global 
Map 
Aid 
[http://www.globalmapaid.rdvp.org/]; Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) has 
partnered with European firm KeyObs to produce dedicated humanitarian GIS 
products.  The NGO with most experience in this sector, however, is the 
Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation (VVAF), whose IMMAP project – 
while only a small part of VVAF’s work – has been instrumental in 
supporting both Mine Action initiatives and the HICs operated by OCHA.  
NGOs offer a different perspective and a different approach to GIS in the 
field, one that can complement that of international organisations, and it 
seems certain that these actors will expand their activities in coming years. 
 
NetHope [http://www.nethope.org/] is a network of international NGOs that 
enables its members to deliver information and accelerate responses to 
developing countries, including those dealing with complex emergencies and 
natural disasters.  The network has three main areas of activity.  First, it 
promotes information and knowledge exchange by providing forums in which 
member organizations can document and share their field experiences using 
and deploying ICT.  In regularly scheduled teleconference calls, members 
review existing projects and update each other about the status of various 
initiatives.  These discussions are archived in a database that can be searched 
for specific information and discussions so as to build a collective knowledge 
base. NetHope also holds annual meetings which deepen the dialogue and 
networking among members.  Second, it collaborates with NGOs and the 
private sector to identify best practices in the deployment and use of ICT to 
support humanitarian relief.  And third, NetHope tests and manages the 
deployment of technology that can give members Internet access from remote 
sites where humanitarian relief operations are underway.  By gathering 
information about potential deployment sites and then piloting programs to 
test the feasibility of different solutions, members are able to focus on the 

30 ▪ ICT for Peace 
varying implementation needs of various regions.  NetHope's support may 
include obtaining low-cost satellite, wireless and terrestrial communication 
facilities, including direct subscriber line (DSL) broadband networks and 
Internet telephony applications, and managing their deployment in countries 
where the absence the absence of functioning PSTNs constitute obstacles to 
humanitarian work.  One particularly interesting project was the deployment 
of the NetReliefKit providing portable Internet connectivity, so that local 
relief groups responding to the December 2004 South Asia tsunami could 
communicate via laptop computer on wireless local-area networks where 
conventional PSTNs were absent or destroyed. 
 
The private sector has also been involved in the field, with one notable 
example 
being 
the 
Ericsson 
Response 
Program 
[http://www.ericsson.com/about/ericssonresponse/], a special initiative of the 
telecommunications and electronic company to assist in relief and 
reconstruction.  The program has three major components.  First, it undertakes 
research and product design through the Ericsson Response Technical 
Reference Group to identify needs and develop applications to improve 
disaster response.  Second, it mobilizes Ericsson Response Units comprising 
equipment and the people in order to ensure the rapid deployment of 
communications systems.  A volunteer program allows Ericsson employees to 
participate in these efforts by conducting on the ground assessment, working 
with relief agencies on site, and installing and operating mobile cellular 
networks and other technologies.  Third, Ericsson participates in global 
advocacy for disaster response by working with governments, customers, 
other equipment and service suppliers, NGOs, and agencies like OCHA and 
UNDP to develop disaster preparedness programs around the world.   
 
Partners in Technology International (PACTEC) [http://www.pactec.org/] 
specializes in the installation of high frequency radio systems, radio e-mail, 
and satellite telephones in remote or austere environments. On the invitation 
of NGOs, international agencies and government, the company has worked 
undertaken projects in Afghanistan, Indonesia (Aceh), Kazakhstan, 
Mauritania, Morocco, Laos, and Senegal.  Beyond installing VSAT systems, 
Internet cafes, and related facilities, it has offered technical and business 
training for local populations to help them develop sustainable business 
models so that they can take over such operations.  PACTEC is in the process 
of spinning off a new non-profit organization to be called the Disaster Relief 
And 
Strategic 
Telecommunications 
Infrastructure 
Company 
[http://www.drasticom.net/]. 
 
b. Operational Support 
 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 31 
It is nearly impossible to work in the difficult environment of a complex 
emergency without support from organizational headquarters.  This is true for 
all large organizations, and no less true for field-based ICT projects such as 
those described above.  A number of initiatives have been created specifically 
to provide this type of support in terms of expertise and resources, using 
additional ICT capacities to provide technical support to projects in remote 
locations, as well as more general ongoing forums for specific areas such as 
GIS and logistics. 
 
The 
Geographic 
Information 
Support 
Team 
(GIST) 
[https://gist.itos.uga.edu/index.asp] is a US-funded collaboration among a 
number of governmental and intergovernmental organizations, with OCHA 
acting as the secretariat.  The GIST works to improve humanitarian response 
through the improved information flow and presentation, provide a forum for 
geographic and geo-referenced information and data exchange amongst 
humanitarian response agencies and donors, and develop and promote the use 
of techniques and standards to enhance data and information coordination and 
exchange.  It has provided such services with respect to complex emergencies 
in Afghanistan, Goma, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Kosovo, and 
Southern Africa, and supports the Data Exchange Platform for the Horn of 
Africa (DEPHA), the Sierra Leone Information Centre (SLIS) and the 
Southern Africa Humanitarian Information Service (SAHIMS). 
 
UNOSAT [http://www.unosat.org/] is a Geneva-based United Nations 
initiative involving a consortium of national and international institutions and 
private firms dedicated to offering the humanitarian community with access to 
satellite imagery and GIS. The core team consists of UN fieldworkers as well 
as satellite imagery experts, geographers, database programmers and internet 
communication specialists.  Coupling satellite image processing and Internet 
database hosting and distribution, UNOSAT provides the UN, implementing 
partners and local authorities with up to date images and analyses of natural 
disasters and complex emergencies.  One such product are the Conflict Maps 
illustrating the relationships between social and economic exclusion, ethnic 
distribution, level of access to social services and geographic location of 
conflict areas. A celebrated example of the service’s potential was the 
creation of a map of the barrier being erected between Israel and the Palestine 
Territories showing its relationship to social and demographic patterns, 
produced using UNOSAT’s data and technical analysis by the local HIC team 
(see section 3a, above, for more information about the HICs).  
 
At the Department of State (DoS) [http://www.state.gov/] of the United States 
government, 
the 
Humanitarian 
Information 
Unit 
(HIU) 
[http://www.state.gov/s/inr/hiu] is a part of the Bureau of Intelligence and 

32 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Research that serves as an interagency center to identify, collect, analyze, and 
disseminate unclassified information critical to the US government and its 
partners in humanitarian emergencies.  The HIU also works to promote best 
practices in humanitarian information management.  Some of its functions 
include identifying key sources of geospatial and georeferenced data 
customized to different organizations’ information requirements; collecting 
timely, verifiable, and relevant data by utilizing an extensive network of 
information partnerships; analyzing data using multi-agency expertise and 
applying ICT to identify significant trends and relationships; and 
disseminating information to all relevant actors, including policymakers and 
operational field managers.  
 
Another interesting area that has been facilitated by the internet is the 
development of tools that enable matching of needs with resources.  
ReliefGuide [http://www.reliefguide.com/] is an Internet platform that brings 
together buyers and sellers of relief-relevant products and services to promote 
deal making.  It includes an interactive list of sellers organized by categories 
and 
has 
a 
facility 
to 
make 
public 
tenders. 
 
Global 
Hand 
[http://www.globalhand.org/] works in a similar way, but operates on a 
request basis, aiming to match requirements of organizations (and potentially 
communities) 
in 
the 
field 
with 
private 
donors. 
 
AidMatrix 
[http://www.aidmatrix.org/] is a non-profit that seeks to build partnerships to 
bring items such as food, clothing, building supplies, medical and educational 
supplies to people in need during the time of need. Using such Internet 
platform, donors, NGOs and suppliers are better able to determine which 
items are needed most where and by whom, identify available supplies, 
coordinate the logistics of their delivery, and hence increase efficiency when 
responding to emergencies.  
 
4. Technical Development 
 
a. Technical and Organizational Standards 
 
ICT is both a focus for standardization programs, and a means for 
disseminating standards among the relevant actors.  Technical standards are 
essential for ICT in any sector; without agreement on which technology will 
be used for which purposes, it is difficult to build information systems that 
enable organizations to communicate with each other.  Professional standards 
provide a basis for individuals and organizations to implement those 
technologies, offering regulations and guidelines for good practice.  In order 
to be most effective, the ICT4Peace community needs to develop both of 
these types of standards.  The sector is relatively recent and, as a result, there 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 33 
is a lot of work to be done here; however, a few initiatives have already been 
somewhat successful. 
 
In terms of emergency telecommunications, the Tampere Convention on the 
Provision of Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief 
Operations [http://www.reliefweb.int/telecoms/tampere] is the most important 
standard in the ICT4Peace field.  The Convention was adopted in June 1998 
by sixty governments and came into force in January 2005, giving privileges 
and protections to persons and facilities related to the provision of emergency 
telecommunications assistance.  Although these rights are circumscribed by 
national sovereignty and are based on the assent of the national government, 
the Convention is a landmark agreement that should be implemented in all 
countries at risk from complex emergencies and natural disasters. 
 
Two organizations played a key role in promoting Tampere; the ITU and 
OCHA.  The International Telecommunication Union [http://www.itu.int/] is 
the UN agency responsible for international telecommunications standards 
and 
policies, 
global 
radio 
frequency 
spectrum 
management, 
and 
telecommunications for development.  ITU has undertaken a number of 
initiatives of relevant to humanitarian relief operations.  In terms of its 
internal operations, the ITU has adopted resolutions and recommendations on 
the provision and regulatory treatment of emergency telecommunications, and 
is working to establish an international telephone country code for 
humanitarian operations. 
 
OCHA convenes the UN Working Group on Emergency Telecommunications 
(WGET) [http://www.reliefweb.int/telecoms/intro/wget.html], which provides 
an open forum to facilitate the use of telecommunications in the service of 
humanitarian assistance.  It comprises UN entities (including the ITU), the 
ICRC, NGOs and experts from the private sector and academia. The WGET 
usually holds two plenary meetings per year, and its objectives include 
facilitating the promotion and implementation of the Tampere Convention, 
encouraging application of the resolutions and recommendations relative to 
telecommunications for disaster relief,  exchanging and disseminating 
information concerning emergency telecommunications, and promoting 
cooperation and interoperability of telecommunications with and in the field. 
 
With regard to technical standards, the Crisis Response Executive Advisory 
Committee (CREATE) [http://www.itcm.org/approach/create.html]has been 
created to facilitate structured cooperation between international organizations 
and ICT vendors.  CREATE is organized by the Crisis Management Initiative 
(see immediately below for more information about CMI) and the Object 
Management Group [http://www.omg.org/], a non-profit consortium that 

34 ▪ ICT for Peace 
produces and maintains computer industry specifications for interoperable 
enterprise applications.  The group holds bi-annual meetings and sustains 
online dialogue to advance its work program.  CREATE focuses on the 
technical standardization of management tools for administrative processes 
(e.g. international organizations’ reporting to member states using 
standardized formats), common situational awareness in the field (military, 
political, incident reporting, security status), risk management and early 
warning, and so on.   
 
Structured 
Humanitarian 
Assistance 
Reporting 
(SHARE) 
[http://www.proventionconsortium.org/files/share.pdf] 
is 
an 
approach 
developed by the GIST, as a systematic methodology of organizing critical 
information so that it can be used more effectively, improving accuracy and 
verifiability by structuring and labeling data from a variety of sources.  
SHARE uses geographic location codes (place codes, or p-codes) 
accompanied by useful metadata29 that allow specialists to precisely map 
events and objects on the ground.  This allows a common frame of reference 
to be established, leading to more coordinated decision-making, such as 
which areas to prioritize, who is responsible for what, and what kind of 
assistance is required. SHARE is not a new idea, but a distillation of an 
approach developed over a number of years by operational humanitarian 
assistance agencies. 
 
Although not dealing with conflict issues, Global Identifier Numbers 
(GLIDE) [http://www.glidenumber.net/] is an interesting initiative; a system 
of unique alphanumeric codes to identify natural disasters so that 
organizations collecting disaster information can easily share this information. 
Developed by the Centre for Research on Epidemiology of Disasters, the 
Asian Disaster Reduction Center and ReliefWeb, the system is being used by 
these organizations as well as other international institutions and national 
agencies. 
 
The development of professional standards is less advanced.  The most 
important event to date was the February 2002 Symposium on Best Practices 
in 
Humanitarian 
Information 
Exchange 
[http://www.reliefweb.int/symposium/], organized by OCHA.  Over two 
                                                 
29 “Metadata is structured data describing facts about documents, in such a way as to 
help users make sense of their content, their relationships and their history… 
Metadata have been often propose to help in organizing data, managing document 
effectively and obtain better results with search engines.  Data that do not have 
accompanying metadata are often hard to find, difficult to access, troublesome to 
integrate, and perplexing to understand or interpret.”  Fabio Vitali, Metadata for 
OCHA (21 Dec 2004) 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 35 
hundred participants, drawn from a range of international agencies, 
governments, donor organizations, and NGOs, developed a set of Operational 
Principles for Humanitarian Information Management and Exchange seven 
sets of best practice guidelines for ICT managers at headquarters and in the 
field.  Because they capture both the ICT-enabled emerging consensus about 
the conduct of key ICT4Peace activities and the kinds of issues and 
challenges practitioners face, these useful principles and guidelines are 
included in Annex 1 of this document.  The challenge now is to raise 
awareness of these norms within the conflict management, humanitarian relief 
and reconstruction communities, to encourage their development based on 
field experience, and to develop better mechanisms for applying and 
monitoring them. 
 
One organization attempting to do this has been the United States Institute for 
Peace [http://www.usip.org/] has long been a leading force in the 
development of conflict and peace thinking, and have produced a wide range 
of books, papers, and conference reports that are accessible via its website.  In 
addition, 
through 
its 
Virtual 
Diplomacy 
Initiative 
[http://www.usip.org/virtualdiplomacy/index.html], USIP is playing a role in 
catalyzing the emerging discussions about ICT4Peace, especially with respect 
to issues of organizational coordination and technological interoperability.  
USIP has a long-term interest in organizational standards through its Best 
Practices Project, and is also co-organizer of the Information Technology for 
Crisis Management (ITCM) conference series with the Crisis Management 
Initiative (CMI) [http://www.cmi.fi/].  
 
The work of CMI under the banner of the Information Technology and Crisis 
Management Project (ITCM) [http://www.itcm.org/] has also become 
increasingly important.  Led by Marti Ahtisaari, the former President of 
Finland, CMI is a prominent player in conflict prevention and management, 
including with respect to high-level mediation efforts.  In this context, ITCM 
works to improve sharing practices so as to overcome the problems of 
informational interoperability described above.  The project provides a forum 
in the various actors discuss the key challenges concerning communication 
and connectivity in crisis environments and agree on standards, system design 
principles, and inter-organisational and cross-border cooperation processes.  
In addition, ITCM promotes the development and piloting of concrete ICT 
initiatives (see section 4b, below, for a description of an ITCM project) to 
support operational activities of crisis management organisations, 
 
The Center of Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian 
Assistance [http://www.coe-dmha.org/] is a project mandated by the US 
Congress to improve the coordination and integration of the world's response 

36 ▪ ICT for Peace 
to natural disasters, humanitarian crises and peace operations.  The Hawaii-
based center is designed to help those active in the provision of relief or 
security to better coordinate and learn about the role of the other actors in the 
humanitarian community so that they can improve the performance of their 
own roles.  This is done through education, training, research and information 
management activities, many in a multinational, multidisciplinary setting. 
 
Despite the work of these organizations, however, the weak link in ICT4Peace 
is the absence of clear organizational standards, particularly relating to good 
practices.  Beyond continuing with the development of standards, the 
challenge is to identify ways to encourage their wider adoption and monitor 
their implementation.  Operational Guidelines such as those agreed by the 
2002 OCHA Symposium are of limited value if they are not widely 
disseminated and discussed. 
 
A growing number of experts and practitioners argue that what is needed most 
is a coherent and flexible doctrine that enjoys broad community support.  A 
culture of information sharing built on transparency and trust would help 
ensure that everyone has ready access to the information and knowledge they 
need to operate, and could progressively change the organizational cultures 
and incentives that produce fragmentation and reduce effectiveness.  As 
former Finnish President Martii Ahtisaari said at a recent conference, “We 
can no longer afford to be at the mercy of personal chemistry and ad hoc 
arrangements.” 30  But fleshing out the precise contours of a doctrine, thinking 
through its real-world application, and securing broad buy-in from the diverse 
organizations involved would require an organized, sustained dialogue. 
 
Voluntary standards may elicit statements of support when they are released 
that are not subsequently matched by organizational practice, particularly 
when more pressing matters arise – for instance, during an emergency.  In the 
ICT industry, there are a large number of standards whose production has 
absorbed significant resources but which remain agreements on paper only.  
In the absence of a combination of centralized guardian to maintain and 
develop such agreements with a decentralized community of practice to 
monitor compliance, the same dynamic could apply in ICT4Peace.  At 
present, there is no framework for discussions and neither centralized nor 
decentralized mechanisms through which to develop and implement 
standards. 
                                                 
30 Crisis Management Initiative, Security –the Common Denominator for 
Connectivity: Conference on Crisis Management and Information Technology, Saint-
Paul-de-Vence, 3-6 November 2004 (Helsinki: CMI, 2004), p. 21. 
http://www.itcm.org/pdf/ITCM_conference_report_2004.pdf 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 37 
 
b. Application Development 
 
Software developed specifically for peace operations – or, more specifically, 
for organizations involved in peace operations – is relatively rare.  However 
some important initiatives have emerged in the last few years, from both for-
profit and non-profit organizations.  These organizations are beginning to 
demonstrate that there is a market for such specialized applications, and 
hopefully they will lead the way for future developments. 
 
On the non-profit side, one of the most long-standing applications of this sort 
is the Information Management System for Mine Action (IMSA) 
[http://www.imsma.ethz.ch/].  IMSA is a management tool, continuously 
revised and upgraded based on input from users, that combines a relational 
database with a GIS to provide managers and practitioners with up-to-date 
information needed to facilitate decision making. It can be used to plan, 
manage, report and map demining and removal activities; manage victim 
information; and record, report on, and map related socio-economic 
information. The system is currently in use in more than 80 % of mine action 
programs around the world.  IMSMA was developed and distributed by the 
Geneva Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD) in collaboration with 
the Center for Security Studies at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
and the UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS). 
 
The Fritz Institute [http://www.fritzinstitute.org/] works to bring private 
sector expertise to bear on the logistical organization of humanitarian relief 
operations.  Recognizing that many humanitarian relief organizations have 
staff, mandate, and resource limitations, the institute seeks to foster the 
development of communities of logistical practice, develop solutions to 
challenges in the delivery of aid, improve learning through measurement, and 
accumulate and disseminate knowledge through an academic network and 
publications.  It is building a global network of donors, academics and 
humanitarian agencies to look at the complexities of measuring humanitarian 
impact. In addition, the Institute works with the private sector to develop 
technologies customized to the unique requirements of humanitarian 
operations. For example, its Humanitarian Logistics Software is a web-based 
supply chain software solution, created in collaboration with International 
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies that facilitates the 
delivery of precise relief services, enabling real-time matching of the needs of 
the affected population with the supplies that need to be mobilized, procured, 
tracked and delivered. 
 

38 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Provided by Benetech, a US-based technology non-profit, Martus 
[http://www.martus.org/] is a software tool that allows users to document 
incidents of human rights abuses by creating bulletins and uploading them for 
storage on redundant servers located around the world.  This free application 
is intended for use at the local level; Martus is not designed to control the 
flow of such information, but to help human rights groups to take more 
control over the information that is central to their work. 
 
Organizations could use ICT more effectively for their own management; 
frequently the potential of ICT is not realized.  There are some interesting 
exceptions, such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
(OSCE) [http://www.osce.org], which has developed an entirely new 
management application, the Integrated Resource Management System 
(IRMA).31  IRMA is a dedicated software application that incorporates all of 
OSCE’s management functions, enabling managers within the organization to 
deal with all financial and administrative matters quickly and easily – such as 
monthly accounts, or recruitment processes – and in a way that is completely 
integrated throughout the organization.  The intention behind IRMA is to 
eliminate the complicated and confusing bureaucratic processes that often 
hinder large international organizations, and use the enormous processing 
power of ICT to streamline and automate those processes. 
 
Similarly, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies’ FedNet [https://fednet.ifrc.org] maintains an extranet, a secure, 
password-protected private web site accessible via the Internet.  The system is 
intended to the posting and sharing of multilingual information – documents, 
photos, maps, contact lists, etc – by national societies, Geneva staff, and field 
delegations, and to serve as an interactive forum for online collaboration.  It 
builds on previous federation experiences with extranets, including the 
Disaster Management Information System.  To assist field workers in low 
bandwidth countries, the system has been designed so that pages load quickly 
by using mostly text in common spaces. 
 
In the private sector, there are two companies that notably target organizations 
working in the field as key markets: Groove [http://www.groove.net/] and 
Voxiva [http://www.voxiva.net/].  Previously a small technology start-up 
established by the creator of Lotus Notes, Groove has recently been acquired 
by Microsoft.  Groove has been used in Iraq, the Asia tsunami response and 
other emergencies, mainly by US organizations and particularly by the 
                                                 
31 Michael v. d. Schulenburg, OSCE’s Management Reforms and IRMA (2002-2005): 
Final Report (Vienna: Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, February 
2005). 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 39 
military.  They are now aiming to expand their services in the NGO market 
with the Groove Virtual Office, an application that offers advanced 
collaboration and communication tools, as well as the capacity to work both 
online and offline. Voxiva is another technology start-up with a specific 
philanthropic intent.  Originally providing reporting services (especially in the 
health sector) to governments in developing countries, Voxiva is now also 
targeting the NGO and UN market.  Voxiva offers an integrated monitoring 
and reporting function through an online platform, and they are currently 
developing a new application for programme management in the field. 
 
Larger technology corporations have also been involved in initiatives to 
develop new software.  Through its Disaster Assistance Technology Grants 
program, Microsoft Corporation [http://www.microsoft.com/] has teamed up 
with Mercy Corps [http://www.mercycorps.org/] and other NGOs to develop 
the Food and Commodity Tracking System (FACTS).  FACTS is a tool 
designed to promote the coordinated management of relief and development 
supplies during disaster response and reconstruction operations.  It allows 
relief workers to track commodities into, through and out of distribution 
channels at both the headquarters and field level via standardized Internet-
based inventory information that can be retrieved from offices and via 
personal digital assistants (PDAs). 
 
Similarly, the Oracle Corporation [http://www.oracle.com/] has been active 
on a number of fronts, most notably by working with the OSCE to develop its 
above-mentioned Integrated Resource Management System (IRMA) to 
facilitate the vertical coordination of conflict management operations.  In 
addition, Oracle has chaired a five-company task force on ICT systems for 
post-conflict reconstruction, and has participated in the evolving Government 
out of a Box (GooB) initiative (see section 5, below, for full description of 
GooB). 
 
The Crisis Management Initiative (CMI) [http://www.cmi.fi/] (see sections 
below for more details) has been involved in a number of these initiatives, and 
has also worked with Finnish private sector companies to begin development 
of key applications.   
 
One 
example 
of 
this 
is 
the 
ITCM/SKIES 
[http://www.itcm.org/approach/tools.html] 
system 
is 
a 
web-based 
communication, cooperation and management tool for humanitarian and crisis 
management field operations.  All communications within the system are 
encrypted and access to different functions and data can be flexibly 
controlled. A demonstration simulation of the SKIES system was held in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina in October 2004. The primary goal of the simulation 

40 ▪ ICT for Peace 
was to demonstrate the benefits of an information-exchange platform between 
agencies, including both civilian and military organizations. The system was 
used to report security incidents. In this sense it served as a "virtual 
knowledge warehouse" and allowed for efficient and accurate real-time 
information exchange. Eventually, such systems may improve decision 
making and benefit planning and conducting of operations. 
  
 
National governments pursue their own operations in conflict zones and by 
necessity engage in coordination.  Given its central role in leading or 
conducting humanitarian operations and military interventions and the vast 
technological and organizational resources and expertise at its disposal, the 
US government unsurprisingly is by far the most prominent player in this 
space.  The Department of Defense sponsors the Defense Advanced Projects 
Agency (DARPA) [http://www.darpa.mil/], which supports Strong Angel II 
[http://www.strongangel.telascience.org/], a civil-military operations exercise 
to simulate a crisis in an ‘austere environment’ (a phrase which the DoD uses 
to describe field-based relief operations).  The aim is to design and implement 
a capacity for rapid and appropriate information management drawing on 
resources within and across civil-military sectors.  This is to address the 
problems faced by US Civil-Military Operations Centers during previous 
interventions, which have been variably successful in providing trusted 
information sharing.  Strong Angel seeks to develop solutions for translation, 
collaboration, communication (voice and data), documentation, GIS, logistics, 
needs assessment and response tracking.  One interesting feature of the 
exercise is that it uses off-the-shelf hardware, and software ranging from 
Open Source products (such as OpenOffice) and proprietary tools from 
vendors such as Microsoft.  
 
The Open Source movement has grown rapidly in the last few years, with the 
success of software such as Firefox (a free web browser) leading the way.  
One project aiming specifically at the conflict management community is 
Sahana [http://www.sahana.lk/], a project originating in post-tsunami Sri 
Lanka, but aiming to grow into a global community of developers creating 
dedicated software for disaster and emergency management in the field.  
Although at an early stage in the process, Sahana is now working on Disaster 
Victim Registry and Camp Management database applications, which will be 
made available for free and be supported on a range of platforms, even in low-
bandwidth situations.  Another project deserving mention is AidWorld 
[http://www.aidworld.org/] a UK-based project to develop field solutions to 
connectivity problems for web browsing and email access; with input from 
the private sector, their first application LoBand is available for testing.  
Undoubtedly there will be many more Open Source projects in future, to 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 41 
complement and compete with the offerings of the private sector; while the 
former will be able to provide useful general tools based on open standards, 
the latter will still be better equipped to work with individual organizations to 
meet specific needs. 
 
5. Post-Conflict Reconstruction 
 
As a conflict stabilizes, and basic human needs are met, attention turns to the 
more complex processes of reconstruction.  Basic security is a prerequisite for 
successful reconstruction, although it is often difficult to draw a distinction 
between conflict and post-conflict phases – the two states may co-exist in 
different parts of the same country.  Without basic security, it can be difficult 
to promote social reconciliation, establish the rule of law or a government 
capable of providing services, and encourage economic activity.  These 
reconstruction processes must also be carefully planned and implemented to 
avoid generating new sources of tension – for instance, through inequitable 
distribution of resources, or political processes that do no enjoy popular 
support.  As well as physical reconstruction, social reconstruction must also 
take place; reconciliation requires dealing with the legacies of conflict without 
creating instabilities that might cause new conflicts.  Reliable information 
dissemination may allow the reconstruction and reconciliation to avoid such 
pitfalls. 
 
Post-conflict reconstruction is a challenge to the international community, 
particularly when combined with a nation-building mandate, such as in East 
Timor.  One key factor is that media and donor interest frequently decrease 
once a conflict is over, leading to fewer resources being available when they 
are perhaps most needed.  It is hard to point to unqualified successes in 
reconstruction efforts, particularly where those efforts are led by the 
international community rather than by a national government.  In some cases, 
reconstruction does take place, but in many places the best that is achieved is 
the avoidance of further conflict.  The record is mixed - despite international 
commitments in troop commitments, financial contributions and political 
support, despite the efforts of many thousands of organizations and 
individuals from around the world, and despite the increasing analytical 
sophistication, 
accumulated 
experience, 
lessons 
learned 
and 
local 
knowledge.32   
                                                 
32 For critical evaluations of the record and lessons learned in political and economic 
development, including in post-conflict reconstructions, see, Thomas Carothers, 
Aiding Democracy Abroad: The Learning Curve  (Washington DC: The Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, 1999); and William Easterly, The Elusive Quest 
for Growth: Economists' Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics (Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press, 2002), respectively. 

42 ▪ ICT for Peace 
 
A major barrier exists in that reconstruction by the more recent definition – 
i.e. moving beyond simply rebuilding infrastructure such as schools and 
hospitals – includes a wide range of different sectors and organizations.  
Curriculum development for the education system requires a vastly different 
approach than ensuring an independent and competent judiciary; the process 
of clarifying and establishing property rights does not use the same set of 
skills as building sewer systems for urban areas.  Most experts agree that post-
conflict reconstruction requires a more coherent approach if it is to succeed – 
although they do not agree on exactly what that approach should be. 
 
ICT has the potential to enhance post-conflict reconstruction processes, 
although that potential has barely been tapped.  As one observer concludes, 
“given the morass of issues that weigh upon societies enmeshed in conflict, 
ICT interventions can have more impact when used for peace building after a 
ceasefire agreement or peace agreement, when the dynamics on the ground 
are relatively more receptive on the need for sharing information, 
collaborating, appropriating technology and development mechanisms (both 
physical and virtual) for communities and peoples to deal with conflict 
creatively and non-violently.”33  For example, effective communications can 
disseminate the terms of a cease-fire agreement to warring factions and local 
communities, clarifying the situation and building support; or to raise 
awareness of war crimes tribunals or truth commissions, increasing common 
understanding of the processes necessary to support the rule of law. 
 
ICT should also be a focus for reconstruction, since basic ICT is essential for 
the management of a modern state.  This becomes clearer when we examine 
how technology functions in failed states.  In Somalia, state failure and the 
accompanying lack of regulatory systems has enabled the creation of one of 
Africa’s most extensive and resilient cellular telephone systems, accompanied 
by numerous satellite-based internet access points.  The problem now is that 
none of the numerous telephone networks are compatible, meaning that many 
Somalis carry multiple handsets – one for each network – and as a result this 
infrastructure is not adequate to build the national network necessary for 
sustainable telecommunications development.  This also illustrates how 
ICT4Development is also relevant here, since reconstruction, if successful, 
should quickly give way to longer-term development that places decision-
making in the hands of local authorities and civil society organizations.   
 
                                                 
33 Sanjana Hattotuwa , Untying the Gordian Knot: ICT for Conflict Transformation 
and Peacebuilding, (June 2004), p. 11. [www.info-
share.org/content/docs/untying_the_gordian_knot.doc] 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 43 
In the political sphere, the International Institute for Democracy and 
Electoral Assistance (IDEA) [http://www.idea.int/] is an international 
organization that assists countries build their capacity to develop and 
strengthen democratic institutions; provides a forum for dialogue between 
academics, policy-makers and practitioners; blends research and field 
experience to develop practical tools aiding democratic processes; promotes 
transparency, accountability and efficiency in election management; and 
facilitates in-country democracy assessment, monitoring and promotion by 
local citizens.  It has an active program focusing on conflict management and 
peace building for democratic transitions that includes ICT components, most 
notably 
in 
the 
form 
of 
Internet-supported 
dialogue 
and 
information/knowledge exchange on such subjects as constitution building, 
legislative processes, civil society empowerment, etc. 
 
The National Democratic Institute for International Affairs (NDI) 
[http://www.ndi.org/] is a nonprofit organization working to strengthen and 
expand democracy worldwide.  NDI works with democrats in every region of 
the world, including in conflict and post-conflict zones, to build political and 
civic organizations, safeguard elections, and to promote citizen participation, 
openness and accountability in government.  Increasingly, NDI has been 
implementing programs with strong ICT components.  Examples include 
developing legislative tracking systems and interactive websites for 
parliaments or NGO partners; creating Internet-connected parliamentary 
research and training centers; providing ICT strategic planning and 
infrastructure rollout assistance to partner institutions; building databases to 
support election observation missions and to forecast election results; and 
constructing general network and communications systems in the local 
government, legislative and civil society areas.  NDI also makes extensive use 
of the Internet to support its efforts.  For example, it has established web-
based collaborative networks and on-line databases of democratic 
development material, such as its Access Democracy database, which offers a 
library of materials and links to democracy partners around the world. The 
Institute’s e-programs pay particular attention to the need for sustainability by 
building systems and then training local organizations’ staff to maintain them 
and the public to use them. 
 
An example of innovative thinking applying ICT to reconstruction is the 
Government 
Out 
of 
a 
Box 
(GooB) 
initiative 
[http://www.cmi.fi/?content=cpcr_programme].  This concept, currently in the 
development phase, is "a concept for a ready-made public administration and 
management ICT based toolset for the purposes of state-building. The idea is 
to give a new national government an infrastructure to build a local civil 
service quickly, hence creating national ownership and a local capacity for 

44 ▪ ICT for Peace 
delivering services. The GooB-concept is aimed to support the existing 
international state-building efforts by involving local administrations early on 
and building their capacity to handle basic administrative things, such as 
citizens registers, financial flows, etc".  The concept originated with Michael 
von der Schulenburg (the former director of management at OSCE) and is 
being reviewed by a coalition convened by CMI. 
 
GooB seeks to address the problem of failed local and national government 
capacity, particularly the loss or absence of basic administrative areas such as 
land registries, tax records, central bank finances, and so forth. This not only 
impedes the administrative progress of reconstruction, but can also engender 
further social conflict due to competing claims regarding property, debts, and 
the like.  The GooB concept seeks to mitigate these potential problems by 
using a standardized but customizable technology and management tool kit 
that can be quickly deployed.  The kit would comprise networks and software 
services and operational procedures for the computerization and secure 
storage of databases and other public records for post-conflict retrieval and 
use.  While the track record of e-government projects in many developing and 
transitional countries is decidedly mixed, particularly with respect to the 
citizen-government interface, the GooB model could provide a foundation for 
at least the baseline restoration of core governmental information resources.  
A study of the feasibility of the model’s potential applicability in various 
post-conflict environments is now underway.  
 
In some cases, governments are themselves able to take on full responsibility 
for reconstruction, with minimal intervention by the international community.  
Although it was set up to deal with the aftermath of the Asian tsunami, the e-
Aceh portal [http://www.e-aceh.org/] set up by the Indonesian government to 
allow donor agencies to coordinate and report their activities is a good 
example of a government taking full responsibility for reconstruction; it will 
be interesting to see how this coordination effort converges with the 
requirements of post-conflict reconstruction following the signing of a peace 
agreement in Aceh in August 2005. 
 
a. The Role of the Media 
 
The international community can help to prevent conflict and assist 
communities to recover through building local capacity in broadcast and print 
media, and introducing new media, in order to produce and distribute 
objective and accurate local content.  Radio broadcasting is particularly 
important in many developing and transitional countries where literacy levels 
and access to other media are often very limited. Independent media can be a 
very risky affair in conflict zones, and local journalists and editors are often 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 45 
harassed or even killed.   Hence, in addition to providing technology, funding, 
and training, international actors may need to promote the independence of 
the media and emphasize the negative consequences of government attacks on 
the media.  
 
UNESCO [http://www.unesco.org] has long supported the development of 
local independent film, radio, television, and internet-based media in 
developing and transitional countries, including in conflict and post-conflict 
areas.  UNESCO’s extensive work program includes sponsoring research and 
knowledge-sharing conferences, defining best practices, offering in-field 
professional training and financial and operations support, working with 
governments on the establishment of enabling regulatory and policy 
environments.  For example, its International Programme for the 
Development of Communication promotes capacity building for electronic 
and print; the Programme for Community Multimedia Centers combines 
support for traditional community broadcasting and telecenter facilities, and 
develops training materials in close cooperation with key stakeholders. 
UNESCO also supports the development of editorially independent national 
public broadcasting services, and international, regional and national news 
collection and distribution institutions.  Beyond media development, it has 
employed innovative techniques in conflict zones; for example, funding 
NGOs in Afghanistan to create traveling cinemas that move from village to 
village to present educational and health information. 
 
The 
BBC 
Afghan 
Education 
Projects 
(BBC 
AEP)        
[http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/trust/projectsindepth/story/2003/09/0309
04_aep.shtml] aims to contribute to reconciliation among different groups and 
raise awareness of HIV/AIDS to avoid an epidemic in post-conflict 
Afghanistan.  BBC AEP produces programs including these themes in many 
(mainly radio) formats: drama, soap opera, educational features and cartoon 
magazine, and reaches roughly 50% of all Afghans.  BBC AEP is part of the 
BBC World Service Trust, a non-profit organization within the BBC World 
Service.  It is currently part of the South Asia Division of the Swiss Agency 
for Development and Cooperation (SDC).  The SDC also supports the Young 
Asia 
Television 
(YATV) 
‘Beyond 
the 
No 
War 
Zone’ 
[http://www.yatv.net/nowarzone.php] television series in Sri Lanka. This 
series aims to create an information-sharing forum between ethnic groups, and 
promote peace after the 2002 ceasefire agreement.  
 
NGOs are also very active in media development.  AllAfrica Global Media 
[http://allafrica.com/] is a multimedia content service provider, systems 
technology developer, and the largest electronic distributor of African news 
and information worldwide. It has content agreements with over 130 African 

46 ▪ ICT for Peace 
news organizations and aggregates, produces and distributes news to tens of 
millions of end users. The website posts over 1000 stories daily in English 
and French and offers multilingual programming as well as over 900,000 
articles in a searchable archive. 
  
Foundation Hirondelle [http://www.hirondelle.org/] is an organization of 
journalists that sets up and operates local language radio stations and news 
agencies in crisis or post-conflict areas.  Its objective is to promote tolerant 
and democratic societies characterized by the responsible, civic-minded 
exchange of opinions. The Foundation seeks to transfer skills, build 
capacities, and ensure security so that locally staffed independent media 
organizations can take root and assume full responsibility for the operations. 
To this end, it develops budgets and trains journalists, technicians and 
management, paying particular attention to administration, management, 
marketing, publicity and human resources. Some of its projects have included 
Radio Agatashya in the African Great Lakes region, Star Radio in Liberia, the 
Hirondelle News Agency at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 
in Tanzania, and Moris Hamutuk, a radio program for refugees in Timor.   
 
Intermédia Consultants [http://www.intermedia-consultants.ch/] is a study 
group and think tank based in Senegal, supported by the Swiss government 
and the Agence Intergouvernementale de la Francophonie.  Drawing on an 
international network of experts, the group helps to build rural and 
community radio stations and trains journalists, station managers, and 
technicians.  It also organizes workshops and conferences on development 
and conflict management issues. The goal is to promote "peace journalism" 
and overcome "hatred journalism" that employs sensationalist propaganda to 
promote social divisions.  
 
This is a growing field of interest which it is impossible to cover here.  A few 
other interesting projects might include: the Réseau de Partenaires des 
Médias Africains  [http://www.gret.org/mediapartner/index.htm], a network 
supporting independent media in Africa; SOS-Burundi  [http://www.sos-
burundi.org/], a peace-oriented news service; the Burundi Youth Council 
[http://www.burundiyouth.com/], offering news reports and publications and 
fosters on-line multi-ethnic dialogue; 34 the Association de Réflexion et 
                                                 
34 Rose M. Kadende-Kaiser, The Internet’s Mediation Potential in Protracted 
Conflicts: The Case of Burundi, in, Robert Latham, ed., Bombs and Bandwidth: The 
Emerging Relationship between Information Technology and Security (New York: 
The New Press, 2003), pp. 268-278. Equally interesting is the case of the 
Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan [formerly at 
www.rawa.org], a Pakistan-based web site geared toward raising awareness and 
mustering support among global civil society for women who challenged Taliban 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 47 
d'Information sur le Burundi [http://www.arib.info/] which maintains up-to-
date information about the government of Burundi and online articles 
discussing the situation; and the Conseil pour la Paix dans la Région des 
Grands Lacs Africains (CPRGLA)  [http://www.chez.com/cprgla], an NGO 
that offers news and views on the current environment and peace building 
efforts.  Also of interest is the growing role of community media centers, such 
as 
the 
Center 
for 
Media, 
Education, 
and 
Technology 
[http://www.cmetfreetown.org/] in Sierra Leone. 
 
International Media Support (IMS) [www.i-m-s.dk/] seeks to promote peace, 
stability and democracy in conflict zones and threatened areas by fostering the 
development of independent media.  To these ends, IMS works in 
collaboration with local partners to strengthen press freedom and professional 
journalism and to improve the working conditions of local journalists and 
media practitioners.   It also organizes international conferences, has 
published two handbooks on Conflict Sensitive Journalism and Media & 
Elections, and is developing tools and methods pertaining to conflict 
reporting, emergency assistance and the relationship between media 
development, peacekeeping and humanitarian aid.  In a similar vein, the 
Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) [http://www.iwpr.net/] works 
to strengthen local journalism in conflict areas by training reporters, 
facilitating dialogue, and providing reliable information.  The field offices 
build local networks, engage in extensive training and editing, and host 
practical workshops and discussion sessions.  IWPR’s approach is adapted to 
each country’s local conditions, and it has major programs in a range of 
countries.  
 
The programs mentioned above can make important contributions to short-
term de-escalation and long-term peace building.  Supporting sustainable 
communication across social and geographic divisions should be integral 
components of both conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction.  This 
sector seems to be an arena ripe for greater information sharing among project 
managers themselves, with many disparate initiatives underway with similar 
strategies and objectives that could benefit from opportunities share their 
experience and exchange lessons learned.  
 
b. Reconciliation Processes 
 
                                                                                                                     
orthodoxy.  See, Michael Dartnell, Information Technology and the Web Activism of 
the Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan (RAWA) – Electronic 
Politics and New Global Conflict, (in, Robert Latham, ed., Bombs and Bandwidth, 
2003), pp. 251-267. 

48 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Information is a key factor in conflicts around the world, as it has been 
throughout history.  Many examples come readily to mind; Somali militias 
displaying the remains of American soldiers for the cameras; Hutu extremists 
promoting anti-Tutsi sentiment on Radio Milles Collines; radical Islamists 
using the Internet and the mass media as a tool for terror, both to deliver their 
message and to recruit new supporters.  Conversely, groups promoting peace 
can use communication to challenge aggression and promote social 
reconciliation.  Once violence has erupted, it can be difficult to get people to 
focus on dialogue and mutual understanding; nevertheless, information 
operations intended to promote reconciliation are relevant in all stages of the 
conflict cycle. 
 
Information campaigns to promote reconciliation can take many forms.  ICT 
can be used to influence political leaders and audiences at an international 
level.  Influencing political elites is vital, since it is such groups that usually 
generate and sustain organized violence; tactics to influence them may 
include political or financial incentives; and political and military deterrents; 
however, ICT can also be used to promote information exchange and dialogue 
between local communities.  Rather than seeking to promote a solution from 
outside, the goal is simply to create space for collective problem solving 
between the protagonists.  Local exchanges can be supplemented by linking 
people to people, both in country and in Diaspora populations.  Sometimes 
this must be done with the acquiescence of local political elites; at other times 
it must bypass those elites and speak directly to the communities involved. 
 
Examples can be drawn from the experience of the Geneva-based War Torn 
Societies Project (WSP) [http://www.wsp-international.org/], which seeks to 
promote reconciliation and social integration among populations in crisis 
zones.  The project has developed a Participatory Action Research 
methodology to analyze and build consensus solutions to policy problems in 
various domains and build societies’ capacities for collective problem-solving 
in tense post-conflict situations.  WSP currently operates in Latin America, 
Africa, Israel / Palestine and nurtures locally initiated "second-generation" 
programs in Guatemala, Mozambique, Puntland and Somaliland.   
 
In an early ICT4Peace meeting, WSP field staff described how they employ 
audio-visual tools to promote reconciliation.  In Somaliland, for example, 
villagers were shown videos of elders from other clans talking about daily 
problems that are common to all communities, providing non-political 
messages from a respected source that humanize both sides.  In addition, 
digital photographs of rival communities and missing relatives or political 
prisoners were shared.  Similarly, in Israel and the Palestinian Territories, 
videos have been shown to communities demonstrating that both sides have 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 49 
people who suffer similar frustrations and desire peace.  In Sierra Leone, 
video clips of rebels saying they wanted to negotiate an end to conflict were 
shown in opposing villages and placed on websites for the Sierra Leonean 
Diaspora to see.  In Rwanda, video allowed Hutus and Tutsi to discuss the 
genocide and its aftermath in a more comfortable setting.   
 
This approach to reconciliation can also be developed for mass media.  In the 
former 
Yugoslavia, 
the 
Video 
Letters 
[http://www.videoletters.net/] 
documentary series appears to have had an impact on public consciousness.  
Almost all the public broadcasters in the region have shown the series’ 
messages from former friends, colleagues and neighbors who have been 
separated and traumatized by the wars.  Although it is difficult to measure the 
success of such initiatives, it has clearly been well-received, and is reflected 
in other locations, such as plans by North and South Korea to build a network 
linking the two countries so that families by war can be reunited via video. 
 
The World Wide Web also offers a home for reconciliation initiatives, such as 
the Gurtong Peace Project [http://www.gurtong.org/], a Swiss-funded NGO 
initiative to establish a coalition for peace among South Sudanese at home 
and abroad. The project’s website provides information about Sudanese 
developments and relevant meetings and resources.  It also provides an e-
forum intended to facilitate and encourage constructive discussions on the full 
range of issues, bridge the gap between different cultures, and link the 
members of the Diaspora.   
 
The international community also needs to explain its own actions, 
particularly where a military and/or civilian intervention takes place, and 
particularly where its presence might be manipulated by local leaders.  Here 
the record is mixed; while United Nations public information campaigns have 
been successful in places such as Cambodia and Namibia, weak strategies, 
inadequate resources, and lack of organizational support produced less 
satisfactory results in Kosovo and elsewhere.35  The Brahimi Report on peace 
keeping to the UN Secretary General called for additional resources and 
personnel to be mustered in the context of a comprehensive approach to UN 
information operations.36 
                                                 
35 For critical assessments of UN public information campaigns in conflict zones, see, 
Ingrid A. Lehmann, Peacekeeping and Public Information: Caught in the Crossfire  
(London: Frank Cass, 1999); and Monroe E. Price and Mark Thompson, eds., 
Forging Peace: Intervention, Human Rights and the Management of Media Space 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2002). 
36 See, Lakhdar Brahimi, et. al,  Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace 
Operations, A/55/305-S/2000/809 (New York: United Nations General Assembly, 
August 21, 2000), p. 26. [www.un.org/documents/ga/docs/55/a55305.pdf]. 

50 ▪ ICT for Peace 
 
ICT can also expand the range of options available to governments and 
international organizations for preventive diplomacy.37  Going beyond formal 
diplomatic efforts, ICT can advance the pursuit of unofficial initiatives 
(sometimes known as “Track II” diplomacy), which encompass many kinds of 
involvement aiming to resolve a conflict or lessen its impact. Civil society 
actors – including NGOs, the media and concerned private sector 
organizations can – use ICT at the national and international level to reach out 
both to elites and communities, to reinforce the messages provided by “Track 
I” diplomacy, or to offer their own messages.38  Given the suspicion with 
which people in conflict zones often place on information emanating from the 
international community, Track II efforts, particularly by locally-based 
organizations, may prove more effective in challenging violence. 
 
While traditional interstate mediation at conferences remains a key 
component in the conflict prevention/management toolkit, ICT helps non-state 
actors (such as NGOs and the media) to steer dialogue that supports 
traditional interstate efforts.39  Another NGO that seeks to transform the way 
people deal with conflict by encouraging collaborative problem solving is 
Search for Common Ground [http://www.sfcg.org/].  It is currently working in 
16 developing and transitional countries and uses the mediums of radio, TV, 
film and print, as well as mediation and facilitation, training, community 
                                                 
37 Preventive diplomacy is defined as action “taken in vulnerable places and times to 
avoid the threat or use of armed force and related forms of coercion by states or 
groups to settle the political disputes that can arise from the destabilizing effects of 
economic, social, political, and international change.” Michael S. Lund, Preventing 
Violent Conflicts: A Strategy for Preventive Diplomacy  (Washington DC: United 
States Institute of Peace Press, 1996), p. 37. 
38 On the NGO role, see, Francis Kofi Abiew and Tom Keating, “Defining a Role for 
Civil Society: Humanitarian NGOs and Peacebuilding Operations,” in, Tom Keating 
and W. Andy Knight, eds., Building Sustainable Peace (Alberta and Tokyo: The 
University of Alberta Press and the United Nations University Press, 2004), pp. 93-
117.  On the private sector’s possible role, Andreas Wenger and Daniel Mockli, 
Conflict Prevention: The Untapped Potential of the Business Sector, 2003 and  
Karolien Bais and Mijnd Huijser, The Profit of Peace: Corporate Responsibility in 
Conflict Regions, (Greenleaf Publishing, July 2005). 
39 On the traditional interestate approach, see, Chester A. Crocker, Fen Osler 
Hampson, and Pamela Aall, Multiparty Mediation and the Conflict Cycle, in, Chester 
A. Crocker, Fen Osler Hampson, and Pamela Aall, eds., Herding Cats: Multiparty 
Mediation in a  Complex World  (Washington DC: United States Institute for Peace, 
1999), pp. 19-45.  On the need for more holistic, multi-level mediation, see, John Paul 
Lederach, Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies  
(Washington DC: United States Institute for Peace, 1997). 

ICT4Peace in Action: Selected Examples ▪ 51 
organizing, sports, drama and music to help people in conflict understand 
their differences and build on their commonalities. 
 
Experimental uses of collaboration software can offer new approaches to 
mediation, as in the case of InfoShare [http://www.info-share.org/].  Based in 
Sri Lanka, this NGO platform uses the Groove Virtual Office software 
application to develop customized “Peace Tools” – adjustable analytical and 
management systems for conflict transformation and peace building in the Sri 
Lankan context.  These interactive tools allow users to undertake standardized 
assessments based on internationally accepted human development indicators, 
establish active and open source knowledge banks, disseminate training 
materials and conflict transformation and reconstruction approaches and case 
studies, build reconstruction networks between the various institutions and 
organizations, coordinate on logistics, and so on. 

52 ▪ ICT for Peace 
III. CONCLUSIONS 
 
The overview provided by this report, while not exhaustive, should provide an 
impression of the range and scale of activities that can be labeled as 
ICT4Peace.  Obviously there is a risk inherent in grouping such diverse 
activities together, when many of the actors described above might feel that 
they have very little in common with the others we have included.  This is 
understandable, and in many cases is justifiable, since these organizations 
have very limited (if any) contact with each other, particularly across sectoral 
boundaries. 
 
We must acknowledge the large differences between a conflict mediation 
exercise by international diplomats, and refugee camp management carried 
out by a national NGO.  While both are clearly wrestling with issues relating 
to conflict – and working towards peace – they have very different mandates, 
interests and constraints operating on them.   In the context of this report, 
however, these differences can be seen as symptomatic of the lack of 
communication between these organizations – indicating a need for more 
work in generating a separate identity for ICT4Peace, in the same way that 
ICT4Development has become a recognized subject with which many diverse 
organizations now voluntarily associate themselves with, even where there is 
no immediate benefit to their work. 
 
One challenge faced by the sector is identifying areas of common interest for 
these organizations, and working out ways to work together to address 
common issues and build common platforms.  Links between different sub-
sectors need to be encouraged, and external actors – such as the media or 
private sector organizations – should be engaged.  This networking will create 
new opportunities for innovation and growth, and quite possibly lead us in 
directions that we have not yet envisaged. 
 
However, in all these processes, the core issues raised by this paper should be 
kept in mind at all times.  These include basic problems around the digital 
divide – lack of infrastructure, lack of access, poor regulatory frameworks – 
as well as issues perhaps more specific to conflict situations, such as the need 
for higher levels of confidentiality and security.  There are technical issues, 
such as the question of data standards and interoperability of communications 
systems, and policy issues such as the perception of neutrality and 
impartiality.  In this conclusion, we touch on a few of these issues. 
 
During the ICT4P consultations in 2004-5, participants frequently complained 
about the inadequacy of existing coordination efforts, with the strongest 

Conclusions ▪ 53 
complaints coming from field-based staff.  In particular they raised issues of 
security – in the broadest sense, involving trust, judgment, competence and 
willingness to share – as impediments to more effective coordination.  These 
observations were in line with the views expressed in other meetings and 
conversations, including academic literature and policy papers on conflict 
management and humanitarian relief.  More can be done to enhance the utility 
of existing information infrastructure, for example by simultaneously 
employing both distributed networks to provide an overall framework and 
centralized “common services” accessible to all actors.  The biggest problems, 
however, are undoubtedly organizational rather than technological.   
 
There are a number of obstacles that must be overcome if organisations are to 
work together and collectively manage information resources in a manner that 
optimises their capabilities and responses.  The first is the “digital divide” – 
the global disparities in access to and use of ICT.  Complex emergencies 
frequently occur in places lacking the communication infrastructure needed 
for inter-organizational communication.  Often, public switched telephone 
networks (PSTN) are not fully deployed on a nationwide basis, and levels of 
teledensity (the ratio of telephone lines per 100 inhabitants) are staggeringly 
low.  For example, according to the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), in 2003 teledensity for the Democratic Republic of Congo and 
Afghanistan were 0.038 and 0.18 respectively, while for the United States and 
Switzerland they were 62.13 and 73.27 respectively.40  Cellular telephone 
networks have experienced rapid growth in recent years, jumping ahead of 
fixed line telephone deployment (notably in Africa), but costs are often high 
and access is limited in rural areas. Internet access via both public 
telecommunications operators and independent Internet service providers 
(ISPs) is correspondingly limited, normally to urban areas.  This is due not 
only to general economic and technological conditions, but also to poor policy 
decisions, e.g. the high charges and restrictive regulations imposed by the 
dominant operators on independent ISPs and users. 
 
To overcome these constraints, many international organizations import their 
own communication technologies, or secure services from specialist 
organizations.  Such measures have a limited utility, mainly during the 
immediate emergency phase, not just because of logistic constraints, but also 
because of resistance from local elites seeking to protect the revenues of 
politically connected national operators or legitimate government concerns 
over regulating communications. 
 
                                                 
40 International Telecommunication Union, Teledensity Main Telephone Lines per 
100 Inhabitants [http://www.itu.int/itudo 
c/itu-t/com3/focus/72404_v7.xls] 

54 ▪ ICT for Peace 
There also are often significant asymmetries between organizations in terms 
of their ICT resources, both technological and human, most acutely felt 
between civilian and military actors, headquarters and field levels, and 
international and local organizations. For example, headquarters often 
maintain heavy web sites and systems that assume that users have reliable and 
high bandwidth internet connectivity – which staff in the field frequently 
lacks. 
 
Interoperability is the second obstacle to communication and coordination.  In 
technical terms, hardware and software need to be based on common 
technical standards in order to be connected; organizations, however, procure 
proprietary technology from different vendors that are not interoperable.  Data 
needs to be in common formats so that it can be shared between 
organizations; organizations, however, tend to become very attached to their 
own formats and are unwilling to change in order to share with others.  In 
policy terms, information sharing is often not considered a priority, and 
systems are not put into place to ensure that staff has guidelines to help them 
decide when and how to share information.  Information is power, and 
organizations may be loath to share it if by so doing they could weaken their 
credibility or influence.  This is especially problematic when organizations are 
in competition for financial or political support. 
 
ICT managers have strong incentives to build their own internal information 
infrastructures, and much weaker incentives to focus on inter-organizational 
sharing.  In the absence of frameworks that significantly alter these incentive 
structures, the tendency is towards self-contained ICT profiles.  A study of 
ICT usage in the United Nations Mission in Kosovo concluded that each of 
the organizations involved, “refused to share costly assets and resources, 
which in turn inhibited their ability to interact as a network… [Their] focus on 
using ICTs within their own organizations but not between them was not 
readily recognized, reflecting and reinforcing the low level of identification 
with the mission as a whole.”41 
 
The third obstacle is the question of security.  When considering whether to 
share sensitive information, individuals and organizations need to have 
confidence that this information will not be shared with any unauthorized 
bodies, whether through intent or negligence.  These decisions are based on 
trust, and trust itself cannot be generated by technology – only by individual 
actors on the ground, acting in good faith.  Obviously this is particularly 
                                                 
41 Anne Holohan, Cooperation and Coordination in an International Intervention: 
The Use of Information and Communication Technologies in Kosovo, Information 
Technologies and International Development, 1 (Fall 2003), p. 27. 

Conclusions ▪ 55 
difficult in a conflict setting, and may appear to be impossible between actors 
with differing interests – such as between civilian and military actors.  
Inaccurate or misleading information can have serious consequences during a 
conflict, and even basic issues around quality of information can make people 
feel that sharing that information poses an unnecessary risk to their own 
credibility or security. 
 
However it has been demonstrated that it is possible to build these 
relationships, and ICTs can play a key role in facilitating trust relationships.  
Improved analytical capacity can improve the accuracy and reliability of 
information, and improved technical capacity – in areas such as encryption – 
can strengthen the mechanisms for sharing that information.  These technical 
solutions have their limits, and in some cases technology itself can lead to 
insecurity, such as we have found when NGOs in some parts of Afghanistan 
have become targets for aggression simply because their vehicles carry basic 
radio equipment.  This reinforces the need for a systems approach to ICTs, 
looking not just at the technology, but also the human resources and 
institutional frameworks for using that technology. 
 
All of these issues must be addressed in a transparent and open manner, in a 
framework of trust between the different stakeholders – otherwise there can 
be no real progress.  One basis for building this trust is to bear in mind that, in 
all cases, technology is a means to an end – and not an end in itself.  An 
example of a key issue that all organizations in the field share is the security 
of staff working on the ground, and it is around issues like this that co-
operation should be built.  Organizations working towards the same end goal 
– broadly speaking, to minimize human suffering, and enable people and 
communities to live with dignity – should be able to overcome institutional 
barriers to improve effectiveness and efficiency through leveraging ICTs to 
support their work.   
 
This overview demonstrates that, while there are significant overlaps 
(particularly during post-conflict reconstruction), ICT4Peace is a recognizably 
separate 
(although 
complementary) 
sector 
from 
ICT4Development. 
ICT4Peace can learn much from the ICT4Development sector; in turn, 
ICT4Development actors should be able to gain new insights into their work 
on conflict-related issues.  However ICT4Peace is less advanced and 
consequently receives less attention and fewer resources.  WSIS Phase 2 is a 
fitting platform for raising these issues, and to offer a new perspective to the 
broader information society.  It is our hope that this report will be the starting 
point for further research and further development of key ideas.  With this in 
mind, this report presents a series of recommendations for consideration by 

56 ▪ ICT for Peace 
stakeholders at WSIS Phase 2, and a wider audience with an interest in these 
issues. 

Recommendations ▪ 57 
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The primary objectives of this report have been to raise awareness among 
non-specialists about the range of issues and activities underway; to suggest 
that these are sufficiently interrelated to constitute a sector that can be called 
ICT4Peace; and to contribute to the development of dialogue and networking 
around this important policy area.  These objectives, worthwhile in 
themselves, are only the starting point; we can also identify some 
recommendations on next steps for the international community.  This list 
builds on the topics raised in the report, as well as the various dialogues with 
stakeholders held in the course of the ICT4Peace project. 
 
ICT4Peace in the Information Society 
 
1. Mainstream ICT4Peace into broader Information Society dialogues and 
processes.  ICT4Peace has not been a recognized theme in the WSIS 
dialogue over the past four years.  Specific ICT4Peace issues have been 
addressed by relevant specialized agencies – e.g. the ITU’s leading role in 
the Tampere Convention – but ICT4Peace has not featured in broader 
discussions about the information society.  The time is right to begin 
building bridges to strengthen both sides, especially with respect to 
linkages between ICT4Peace and ICT4D.  ICT4D programs that pay 
greater attention to conflict would not only be more successful in their 
own terms, but would contribute to more effective prevention and post-
conflict reconstruction.  The Tunis Summit should take note of the 
growing importance of ICT4Peace, and consider which related issues 
might be incorporated into WSIS follow-up activities. 
 
2. Create an inclusive multi-stakeholder mechanism to promote ongoing 
dialogue and collective learning on ICT4Peace issues.  Significant 
ICT4Peace activities are underway, but they are fragmented; 
opportunities to promote more effective knowledge sharing, development 
of standards and best practices, and coordination of organizational 
initiatives are being missed.  Without a framework for dialogue, actors are 
less likely to see themselves as working in the ICT4Peace community, or 
to recognize the potential benefits of connecting with counterparts in 
other specialized sub-sectors.  There are a range of options that could 
rectify this situation, and not all of them require significant resources or 
political sensitivity.  One example might be the global alliance model, 
such as has been employed for the Global AIDS Alliance; a similar 
alliance is currently being considered to address ICT4D policy issues.  
With a light secretariat, modest budget, multistakeholder participation, 

58 ▪ ICT for Peace 
and flexible working methods, the model can provide a framework for 
collaboration between organizations without binding agreements and 
resource commitments.  Such a mechanism could provide a forum for the 
vital task of prioritizing key areas within ICT4Peace for further attention, 
whether research, investment or discussion. 
 
The Role of the UN in ICT4Peace 
 
3. Develop mechanisms within the UN Secretariat and wider UN system for 
the effective management of ICT for both relief and peacekeeping 
operations.  Despite the scale and complexity of its ICT operations, the 
UN has not put in place structures and personnel for the strategic 
management of ICT.  For example, the Brahimi Report noted that, “The 
Secretary-General and the members of ECPS [Executive Committee on 
Peace and Security] need a professional system in the Secretariat for 
accumulating knowledge about conflict situations, distributing that 
knowledge efficiently to a wide user base, generating policy analyses and 
formulating long-term strategies”.42  Even below the policy level, there 
has been little progress in basic mechanisms, such as joint procurement of 
ICT equipment (in order to lower costs, but also to ensure interoperability 
of equipment between agencies in the field).  In light of current moves 
towards reform, the time is right for the UN to take a clear lead, 
recognizing the central role that ICT plays in its operations, both for the 
UN system and its many partners. 
 
4. Ensure that relevant UN agencies have the mandate and resources to 
carry out ICT4Peace initiatives.  The UN is uniquely placed in the 
international system to provide common services that make ICT 
capacities and capabilities available as widely as needed, as well as 
overarching frameworks for facilitating policy dialogue, knowledge 
management, operational and policy level coordination, and so forth.  A 
stronger political mandate and a corresponding increase in financial 
support will be required if the UN system is to realize its leading role in 
                                                 
42 Lakhdar Brahimi et al,  Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, 
(2000), pp.12&40.  The Report argues that the EISAS should have a Chief 
Information Officer and should be the system-wide lead for information gathering, 
analysis, knowledge management, and strategic planning with respect to intra-
organisational uses of ICT and public information campaigns in conflict zones.  
Further, it would manage an electronic data clearing house; ensure the integration and 
standardization of databases and related resources; support the development of peace 
operations capabilities in the UN Intranet and an extranet; and draw on the best 
available expertise inside and outside the UN system to devise plans and programs 
attuned to the specific conditions on the ground in different complex emergencies.  

Recommendations ▪ 59 
ICT4Peace, 
implement 
projects 
that 
increase 
the 
international 
community’s efficiency and effectiveness in managing armed conflicts. 
 
Learning Processes in ICT4Peace 
 
5. Follow participatory design principles and promote staff awareness.  
Organisations cannot fully realize the benefits of ICT unless staff is 
actively involved in implementing it within the organisation.  System 
design must be based on user needs; any ICT project developed without 
this basis will result in inappropriate technologies that staff will not 
support.  Systems and applications should be developed through a process 
of participatory design, defined as “the assessment, design, and 
development of technological and organisational systems that places a 
premium on the active involvement of workplace practitioners (usually 
potential or current users of the system) in design and decision-making 
processes.”43  Awareness raising, training and collaborative problem 
solving can also help staff think creatively about how these assets can 
enhance their own work.  This approach should be extended to all staff 
within an organisation, particularly local staff; where local staff will be 
users, and eventually managers, their engagement in the design process is 
essential. 
   
6. Identify and disseminate best practices in ICT4Peace, ensuring that 
standards-based interoperability is a guiding principle for ICT 
implementation.  Establishing technical and professional standards is 
essential to maximize the effectiveness of ICT4Peace initiatives.  
Standardization initiatives like CREATE, SHARE and GLIDE provide 
the basis for interoperability, but more work is needed to engage 
stakeholders in the development and implementation of standards.  To 
overcome the difficulties of proprietary technologies, greater focus on 
open source solutions may prove helpful.  In designing standards, a 
balance must be struck between accessibility and ease of use, on the one 
hand, and security, on the other.  Particular care must be taken to develop 
a framework that enables inter-organisation communication without 
compromising intra-organisation security.  Web-based collaboration 
would be the perfect way to build communities around such standards, 
and to promote their implementation and further development. 
 
7. Develop tools to evaluate the impact of ICT-based projects in conflict and 
post-conflict environments.  Although organisations may undertake 
                                                 
43 See Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR) Participatory Design 
http://www.cpsr.org/issues/pd/. 

60 ▪ ICT for Peace 
internal evaluations, there are no agreed methodologies for assessing the 
impact of ICT-based projects.  Counting the number of web page hits, for 
example, is not an indicator for whether information is reaching the right 
audience, and less still an indication of whether this affects their 
decisions.  In order to increase the impact of and build support for ICT-
based projects, stakeholders should develop common methodologies and 
metrics.  There are a number of possibilities that can be drawn from 
private-sector experience, but it is important to connect any such 
evaluation with the quality assurance initiatives (such as the SPHERE 
Project, Groupe-URD, the Humanitarian Accountability Project, etc) that 
already exist. 
 
Improving Response in ICT4Peace 
 
8. Rapidly deploy ICT in the early stages of interventions.  Slow ICT 
deployment in the early stages of a crisis will affect the entire operation; 
to avoid this, ICT deployment should be well-planned, including pre-
positioning ICT assets and agreeing logistics priorities for ICT equipment.  
It also includes ensuring that staff has the capability to use these assets 
effectively, which means investing in training (particularly for staff in the 
field) and awareness raising amongst decision-makers within response 
organisations.  These plans also need to take into account future 
transitions to reconstruction, including an exit strategy that includes 
mechanisms for handing over technical capacity to local authorities and 
capacity building to ensure those authorities can use the technology. 
 
9. Institutionalize collaborative agreements and working relationships for 
ICT4Peace projects that can be swiftly mobilized at the onset of a crisis.  
At the onset of a complex emergency there is routinely a scramble to 
mobilize and coordinate the many actors involved in an international 
response.  While some actors and challenges vary from one crisis to the 
next, in most cases there are continuities that could be given greater 
institutional support through standing agreements and networking to 
increase the speed – and the effectiveness – of response. 
 
10. Mainstream ICT capabilities into all applicable programs on a priority 
basis and establish coherent but flexible plans for the management of 
ICT4Peace assets.  Many organisations do not attach high enough priority 
to the strategic management and use of ICT.  There may be many reasons 
for this – limited mandates, competing objectives, budgetary limitations, 
organisational culture, and so on.  While these considerations are 
understandable, ICT should no longer be viewed as a specialized and 
peripheral activity that can be handled by back-office staff.  Instead, it 

Recommendations ▪ 61 
should be integrated fully into the strategic vision and modus operandi of 
any organisation working in complex emergencies, where information 
sharing is vital.  Given the increasing capacity and declining cost of many 
relevant technologies, the resources required to use ICT to add value 
should not be a major deterrent; properly managed, even small 
investments can have substantial returns if there is a commitment to 
becoming a learning organisation. 
 
11. Make protection of public information resources a priority before and 
during humanitarian operations. Armed conflicts sometimes result in the 
destruction of local and national government records needed for basic 
administration and subsequent reconstruction.  Loss of information 
pertaining to property rights, tax payments and similar resources can 
create new focal points for social and economic conflicts.  In some cases, 
this information cannot be recompiled; in others, it can only be 
reconstructed through lengthy and complex procedures.  The international 
community should develop programs to ensure that these resources are 
protected – possibly through external storage, or through creating capacity 
in-country – and to enable post-conflict governments to rebuild the 
information infrastructure they require. 
 
12. Expand support for the development of independent mass media and 
access to a diverse range of information systems.  These requirements are 
fundamental to conflict prevention and resolution, peace building, and 
post-conflict reconstruction.  Building the capacity of local actors is 
essential in this regard; this should extend beyond traditional broadcast, 
and print media to include support for independent and competitive 
internet service providers, the creation of community telecenters, and 
clear regulatory regimes for radio frequency allocation and internet 
provision.  Public information campaigns about international missions can 
remedy misconceptions about international objectives and activities, but 
these must be established in the early phases of the missions in order to be 
effective. The public needs to be engaged in a transparent manner to build 
trust and create support for policies; and international and local actors 
need to ensure consistency in their communications.  This does not have 
to be a one-way process – communities exposed to conflict should have 
access to locally-owned information resources that enable them to make 
informed decisions.  These resources might include community-based 
telecentres, to ensure communications even during times of insecurity 
when travel is impossible, or cell phone networks that can be used to 
transmit accurate messages between communities. 
 

62 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Building Partnerships for ICT4Peace 
 
13. Devise shared frameworks promoting trust and confidentiality in 
information sharing practices, particularly with respect to military forces.  
This is an important problem that is routinely highlighted as a priority by 
practitioners; unfortunately, a clear solution seems a distant prospect.  
Everyone recognizes the benefits that would accrue from increased trust 
between different stakeholders, particularly in civil-military relations.  
However there are strong pressures that make parties reluctant to share 
information, and these cannot be ignored.  Creative application of ICT 
can help somewhat, but this cannot effect real change simply from the 
aggregation of scattered efforts.  An organized and ongoing dialogue 
could help, especially if supported by analysis of the incentives and 
disincentives at work and the proposal of alternative solutions. 
 
14. Foster people-to-people links, both within conflict zones and on a 
transnational basis.  Public information campaigns revolving around 
goal-directed messages from international actors and local counterparts 
are unlikely to succeed by themselves.  To build mutual understanding, 
divided communities should be encouraged and enabled to engage each 
other directly in non-threatening settings.  The initiatives mentioned 
above – using audio-visual technologies to allow people to voice their 
concerns and learn the concerns of others – are particularly worth 
building on.  To date, these often have been undertaken as local 
experiments by innovative field staff without the benefit of coordination 
at the international level, with limited scope for sharing information and 
lessons learned.  The same is largely true with respect to building 
transnational links within Diaspora populations in favor of peace; there 
have been many promising individual efforts, but no coordinated 
approaches.  It would be helpful to create a space where experts and 
practitioners can evolve best practice guidelines and related tools, and to 
explore options for making people-to-people connections a more 
systematically utilized and supported component of information 
operations. 
 
15. Increase private sector participation in ICT4Peace.   There is growing 
recognition that more needs to be done to engage the private sector in 
supporting conflict prevention and management, and failure to leverage 
the business community’s expertise and resources will be missed 
opportunity.  This is particularly true in ICT, where technology 
companies have shown willingness to engage on pressing global issues.  
While some companies have established special initiatives to support 
ICT4Peace, the vast majority of firms and industry associations have yet 

Recommendations ▪ 63 
to follow suit.  Design and procurement of systems is clearly an area 
where more dialogue would be very productive. Personnel responsible for 
system planning and purchasing often find it difficult to interest vendors 
in providing services and applications that meet their specific needs, since 
vendors prefer to provide off-the-shelf products designed for a broad 
market. In consequence, field staff is forced to devise ad hoc solutions to 
local problems that may reduce overall interoperability.  Related problems 
arise when organisations become locked into long-term procurement 
contracts that make it difficult to move to new and more appropriate 
offerings from other suppliers, and when fragmentation on the demand-
side of the market reduces organisations’ individual abilities to negotiate 
attractive terms for pricing and support.  Efforts in the UN system to 
coordinate procurement have born some fruit, but many organisations 
(such as NGOs) are unable to derive similar benefits.  With these 
considerations in mind, it would be useful to establish a coherent dialogue 
with relevant firms about ways to meet the community’s technology 
requirements while also providing the necessary incentives. 
 
16. Stimulate more research into ICT4Peace issues.  In a relatively short 
space of time, a large amount of literature has built up around 
ICT4Development issues, giving it a substantial theoretical framework 
and enabling improvements in the sector to take place.  There is no 
corresponding body of knowledge around ICT4Peace, despite the large 
amount of activity outlined in this report.  There is much existing 
expertise in research, policy and academic institutions that could be 
brought to bear on building the necessary resources for ICT4Peace in 
areas such as strategic analysis, policy development and recording case 
studies.  Some of the key areas for study are clearly indicated in this 
report, and many institutions are now beginning this type of work, but it is 
at a very early stage and requires more funding, more publicity and a 
greater network of actors to build a research community to support the 
community of practice around ICT4Peace. 

64 ▪ ICT for Peace 
ANNEX 1: THE TAMPERE CONVENTION 
Tampere Convention  
on the Provision of Telecommunication Resources 
for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations 
 
Article 1 – 
Definitions 
 
 
Article 2 – 
Coordination 
 
 
Article 3 – 
General Provisions 
 
 
Article 4 – 
Provision of Telecommunication Assistance 
 
Article 5 – 
Privileges, Immunities, and Facilities 
 
 
Article 6 – 
Termination of Assistance  
 
Article 7 – 
Payment or Reimbursement of Costs or Fees 
 
Article 8 – 
Telecommunication Assistance Information Inventory 
Article 9 – 
Regulatory Barriers 
 
 
Article 10 – Relationship to Other International Agreements 
 
Article 11 – Dispute Settlement 
 
 
Article 12 – Entry into Force 
 
 
Article 13 – Amendments 
 
 
Article 14 – Reservations 
 
 
Article 15 – Denunciation 
 
 
Article 16 – Depository 
 
 
Article 17 – Authentic Texts 
 
 
 
THE STATES PARTIES TO THIS CONVENTION, 
recognizing 
that the magnitude, complexity, frequency and impact of disasters are 
increasing at a dramatic rate, with particularly severe consequences in 
developing countries, 
recalling 
that humanitarian relief and assistance agencies require reliable, flexible 
telecommunication resources to perform their vital tasks,  
further recalling 
the essential role of telecommunication resources in facilitating the safety of 
humanitarian relief and assistance personnel, 

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 65 
further recalling 
the vital role of broadcasting in disseminating accurate disaster information to 
at-risk populations, 
convinced 
that the effective, timely deployment of telecommunication resources and that 
rapid, efficient, accurate and truthful information flows are essential to 
reducing loss of life, human suffering and damage to property and the 
environment caused by disasters, 
concerned 
about the impact of disasters on communication facilities and information 
flows, 
aware 
of the special needs of the disaster-prone least developed countries for 
technical assistance to develop telecommunication resources for disaster 
mitigation and relief operations, 
reaffirming 
the absolute priority accorded emergency life-saving communications in more 
than fifty international regulatory instruments, including the Constitution of 
the International Telecommunication Union, 
noting 
the history of international cooperation and coordination in disaster mitigation 
and relief, including the demonstrated life-saving role played by the timely 
deployment and use of telecommunication resources, 
further noting 
the Proceedings of the International Conference on Disaster Communications 
(Geneva, 1990), addressing the power of telecommunication systems in disaster 
recovery and response, 
further noting 
the urgent call found in the Tampere Declaration on Disaster Communications 
(Tampere, 1991) for reliable telecommunication systems for disaster 
mitigation and disaster relief operations, and for an international Convention 
on Disaster Communications to facilitate such systems, 

66 ▪ ICT for Peace 
further noting 
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 44/236, designating 1990-2000 
the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, and Resolu-
tion  46/182, 
calling 
for 
strengthened 
international 
coordination 
of 
humanitarian emergency assistance, 
further noting 
the prominent role given to communication resources in the Yokohama 
Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World, adopted by the World 
Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction (Yokohama, 1994), 
further noting 
Resolution 7 of the World Telecommunication Development Conference 
(Buenos Aires, 1994), endorsed by Resolution 36 of the Plenipotentiary 
Conference of the International Telecommunication Union (Kyoto, 1994), 
urging governments to take all practical steps for facilitating the rapid 
deployment and the effective use of telecommunication equipment for disaster 
mitigation and relief operations by reducing and, where possible, removing 
regulatory barriers and strengthening cooperation among States, 
further noting 
Resolution 
644 
of 
the 
World 
Radiocommunication 
Conference 
(Geneva, 1997), urging governments to give their full support to the adoption 
of this Convention and to its national implementation, 
further noting 
Resolution 19 of the World Telecommunication Development Conference 
(Valletta, 1998), urging governments to continue their examination of this 
Convention with a view to considering giving their full support to its 
adoption, 
further noting 
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 51/194, encouraging the 
development of a transparent and timely procedure for implementing effective 
disaster relief coordination arrangements, and of ReliefWeb as the global 
information system for the dissemination of reliable and timely information 
on emergencies and natural disasters,  

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 67 
with reference 
to the conclusions of the Working Group on Emergency Telecommunications 
regarding the critical role of telecommunications in disaster mitigation and 
relief, 
supported 
by the work of many States, United Nations entities, governmental, inter-
governmental, and non-governmental organizations, humanitarian agencies, 
telecommunication equipment and service providers, media, universities and 
communication- and disaster-related organizations to improve and facilitate 
disaster-related communications, 
desiring 
to ensure the reliable, rapid availability of telecommunication resources for 
disaster mitigation and relief operations, and 
further desiring 
to facilitate international cooperation to mitigate the impact of disasters, 
have agreed as follows: 
Article 1 
Definitions 
 
Unless otherwise indicated by the context in which they are used, the terms 
set out below shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this 
Convention: 
1. 
“State Party” means a State which has agreed to be bound by this 
Convention. 
2. 
“Assisting State Party” means a State Party to this Convention 
providing telecommunication assistance pursuant hereto. 
3. 
“Requesting State Party” means a State Party to this Convention 
requesting telecommunication assistance pursuant hereto. 
4. 
“This Convention” means the Tampere Convention on the Provision 
of Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief 
Operations. 
5. 
“The depositary” means the depositary for this Convention, as set 
forth in Article 16. 
6. 
“Disaster” means a serious disruption of the functioning of society, 
posing a significant, widespread threat to human life, health, property or the 
environment, whether caused by accident, nature or human activity, and 

68 ▪ ICT for Peace 
whether developing suddenly or as the result of complex, long-term 
processes. 
7. 
“Disaster mitigation” means measures designed to prevent, predict, 
prepare for, respond to, monitor and/or mitigate the impact of, disasters. 
8. 
“Health hazard” means a sudden outbreak of infectious disease, such 
as an epidemic or pandemic, or other event posing a significant threat to 
human life or health, which has the potential for triggering a disaster. 
9. 
“Natural hazard” means an event or process, such as an earthquake, 
fire, flood, wind, landslide, avalanche, cyclone, tsunami, insect infestation, 
drought or volcanic eruption, which has the potential for triggering a disaster. 
10. 
“Non-governmental organization” means any organization, including 
private and corporate entities, other than a State or governmental or inter-
governmental organization, concerned with disaster mitigation and relief 
and/or the provision of telecommunication resources for disaster mitigation 
and relief. 
11. 
“Non-State entity” means any entity, other than a State, including 
non-governmental organizations and the Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement, concerned with disaster mitigation and relief and/or the provision 
of telecommunication resources for disaster mitigation and relief. 
12. 
“Relief operations” means those activities designed to reduce loss of 
life, human suffering and damage to property and/or the environment caused 
by a disaster. 
13. 
“Telecommunication assistance” means the provision of telecommu-
nication resources or other resources or support intended to facilitate the use 
of telecommunication resources. 
14. 
“Telecommunication resources” means personnel, equipment, mate-
rials, information, training, radio-frequency spectrum, network or trans-
mission capacity or other resources necessary to telecommunications. 
15. 
“Telecommunications” means any transmission, emission, or recep-
tion of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds or intelligence of any nature, by 
wire, radio, optical fibre or other electromagnetic system. 
Article 2 
Coordination 
 
1. 
The United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator shall be the 
operational coordinator for this Convention and shall execute the respon-
sibilities of the operational coordinator identified in Articles 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 
and 9. 
2. 
The operational coordinator shall seek the cooperation of other 
appropriate United Nations agencies, particularly the International Telecom-
munication Union, to assist it in fulfilling the objectives of this Convention, 

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 69 
and, in particular, those responsibilities identified in Articles 8 and 9, and to 
provide necessary technical support, consistent with the purposes of those 
agencies. 
3. 
The responsibilities of the operational coordinator under this 
Convention shall be limited to coordination activities of an international 
nature. 
Article 3 
General Provisions 
 
1. 
The States Parties shall cooperate among themselves and with 
non-State entities and intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Convention, to facilitate the use of telecommunication 
resources for disaster mitigation and relief. 
2. 
Such use may include, but is not limited to: 
a) 
the deployment of terrestrial and satellite telecommunication 
equipment to predict, monitor and provide information concerning 
natural hazards, health hazards and disasters; 
b) 
the sharing of information about natural hazards, health hazards 
and disasters among the States Parties and with other States, 
non-State entities and intergovernmental organizations, and the 
dissemination of such information to the public, particularly to 
at-risk communities; 
c) 
the provision of prompt telecommunication assistance to mitigate 
the impact of a disaster; and 
d) 
the installation and operation of reliable, flexible telecommu-
nication resources to be used by humanitarian relief and assistance 
organizations. 
3. 
To facilitate such use, the States Parties may conclude additional 
multinational or bilateral agreements or arrangements. 
4. 
The States Parties request the operational coordinator, in consultation 
with the International Telecommunication Union, the depositary, and other 
relevant United Nations entities and intergovernmental and non-governmental 
organizations, to use its best efforts, in accordance with the provisions of this 
Convention, to: 
a) 
develop, in consultation with the States Parties, model agreements 
that may be used to provide a foundation for multinational or 
bilateral 
agreements 
facilitating 
the 
provision 
of 
telecommunication resources for disaster mitigation and relief; 
b) 
make available model agreements, best practices and other 
relevant information to States Parties, other States, non-State 

70 ▪ ICT for Peace 
entities and intergovernmental organizations concerning the 
provision of telecommunication resources for disaster mitigation 
and relief, by electronic means and other appropriate mechanisms; 
c) 
develop, operate, and maintain information collection and 
dissemination procedures and systems necessary for the 
implementation of the Convention; and 
d) 
inform States of the terms of this Convention, and to facilitate and 
support the cooperation among States Parties provided for herein. 
5. 
The States Parties shall cooperate among themselves to improve the 
ability of governmental organizations, non-State entities and intergovern-
mental organizations to establish mechanisms for training in the handling and 
operation of equipment, and instruction courses in the development, design 
and construction of emergency telecommunication facilities for disaster 
prevention, monitoring and mitigation. 
Article 4 
Provision of Telecommunication Assistance 
 
1. 
A State Party requiring telecommunication assistance for disaster 
mitigation and relief may request such assistance from any other State Party, 
either directly or through the operational coordinator. If the request is made 
through the operational coordinator, the operational coordinator shall 
immediately disseminate this information to all other appropriate States 
Parties. If the request is made directly to another State Party, the requesting 
State Party shall inform the operational coordinator as soon as possible. 
2. 
A State Party requesting telecommunication assistance shall specify 
the scope and type of assistance required and those measures taken pursuant 
to Articles 5 and 9 of this Convention, and, when practicable, provide the 
State Party to which the request is directed and/or the operational coordinator 
with any other information necessary to determine the extent to which such 
State Party is able to meet the request. 
3. 
Each State Party to which a request for telecommunication assistance 
is directed, either directly or through the operational coordinator, shall 
promptly determine and notify the requesting State Party whether it will 
render the assistance requested, directly or otherwise, and the scope of, and 
terms, conditions, restrictions and cost, if any, applicable to such assistance. 
4. 
Each State Party determining to provide telecommunication assis-
tance shall so inform the operational coordinator as soon as possible. 
5. 
No telecommunication assistance shall be provided pursuant to this 
Convention without the consent of the requesting State Party. The requesting 
State Party shall retain the authority to reject all or part of any telecom-

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 71 
munication assistance offered pursuant to this Convention in accordance with 
the requesting State Party's existing national law and policy. 
6. 
The States Parties recognize the right of requesting States Parties to 
request telecommunication assistance directly from non-State entities and 
intergovernmental organizations, and the right of non-State entities and 
intergovernmental organizations, pursuant to the laws to which they are 
subject, to provide telecommunication assistance to requesting States Parties 
pursuant to this Article. 
7. 
A non-State entity or intergovernmental organization may not be a 
“requesting State Party” and may not request telecommunication assistance 
under this Convention. 
8. 
Nothing in this Convention shall interfere with the right of a State 
Party, under its national law, to direct, control, coordinate and supervise 
telecommunication assistance provided under this Convention within its 
territory. 
Article 5 
Privileges, Immunities, and Facilities 
 
1. 
The requesting State Party shall, to the extent permitted by its 
national law, afford to persons, other than its nationals, and to organizations, 
other than those headquartered or domiciled within its territory, who act 
pursuant to this Convention to provide telecommunication assistance and who 
have been notified to, and accepted by, the requesting State Party, the 
necessary privileges, immunities, and facilities for the performance of their 
proper functions, including, but not limited to: 
a) 
immunity from arrest, detention and legal process, including 
criminal, civil and administrative jurisdiction of the requesting 
State Party, in respect of acts or omissions specifically and 
directly related to the provision of telecommunication assistance; 
b) 
exemption from taxation, duties or other charges, except for those 
which are normally incorporated in the price of goods or services, in 
respect of the performance of their assistance functions or on the 
equipment, materials and other property brought into or purchased 
in the territory of the requesting State Party for the purpose of 
providing telecommunication assistance under this Convention; and 
c) 
immunity from seizure, attachment or requisition of such 
equipment, materials and property. 
2. 
The requesting State Party shall provide, to the extent of its 
capabilities, local facilities and services for the proper and effective adminis-
tration of the telecommunication assistance, including ensuring that telecom-

72 ▪ ICT for Peace 
munication equipment brought into its territory pursuant to this Convention 
shall be expeditiously licensed or shall be exempt from licensing in 
accordance with its domestic laws and regulations. 
3. 
The requesting State Party shall ensure the protection of personnel, 
equipment and materials brought into its territory pursuant to this Convention. 
4. 
Ownership of equipment and materials provided pursuant to this 
Convention shall be unaffected by their use under the terms of this 
Convention. The requesting State Party shall ensure the prompt return of such 
equipment, material and property to the proper assisting State Party. 
5. 
The requesting State Party shall not direct the deployment or use of 
any telecommunication resources provided pursuant to this Convention for 
purposes not directly related to predicting, preparing for, responding to, 
monitoring, mitigating the impact of or providing relief during and following 
disasters. 
6. 
Nothing in this Article shall require any requesting State Party to 
provide its nationals or permanent residents, or organizations headquartered 
or domiciled within its territory, with privileges and immunities. 
7. 
Without prejudice to their privileges and immunities in accordance 
with this Article, all persons entering the territory of a State Party for the 
purpose of providing telecommunication assistance or otherwise facilitating 
the use of telecommunication resources pursuant to this Convention, and all 
organizations 
providing 
telecommunication 
assistance 
or 
otherwise 
facilitating the use of telecommunication resources pursuant to this 
Convention, have a duty to respect the laws and regulations of that State 
Party. Such persons and organizations also shall have a duty not to interfere in 
the domestic affairs of the State Party into whose territory they have entered. 
8. 
Nothing in this Article shall prejudice the rights and obligations with 
respect to privileges and immunities afforded to persons and organizations 
participating directly or indirectly in telecommunication assistance, pursuant 
to other international agreements (including the Convention on the Privileges 
and Immunities of the United Nations, adopted by the General Assembly on 
13 February 1946, and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of 
the Specialized Agencies, adopted by the General Assembly on 
21 November 1947) or international law. 
Article 6 
Termination of Assistance 
 
1. 
The requesting State Party or the assisting State Party may, at any 
time, terminate telecommunication assistance received or provided under 
Article 4 by providing notification in writing. Upon such notification, the 
States Parties involved shall consult with each other to provide for the proper 

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 73 
and expeditious conclusion of the assistance, bearing in mind the impact of 
such termination on the risk to human life and ongoing disaster relief 
operations. 
2. 
States Parties engaged in providing or receiving telecommunication 
assistance pursuant to this Convention shall remain subject to the terms of this 
Convention following the termination of such assistance. 
3. 
Any State Party requesting termination of telecommunication 
assistance shall notify the operational coordinator of such request. The 
operational coordinator shall provide such assistance as is requested and 
necessary to facilitate the conclusion of the telecommunication assistance. 
Article 7 
Payment or Reimbursement of Costs or Fees 
 
1. 
The States Parties may condition the provision of telecommunication 
assistance for disaster mitigation and relief upon agreement to pay or 
reimburse specified costs or fees, always bearing in mind the contents of 
paragraph 8 of this Article. 
2. 
When such condition exists, the States Parties shall set forth in 
writing, prior to the provision of telecommunication assistance: 
a) 
the requirement for payment or reimbursement; 
b) 
the amount of such payment or reimbursement or terms under 
which it shall be calculated; and 
c) 
any other terms, conditions or restrictions applicable to such 
payment or reimbursement, including, but not limited to, the 
currency in which such payment or reimbursement shall be made. 
3. 
The requirements of paragraphs 2 b) and 2 c) of this Article may be 
satisfied by reference to published tariffs, rates or prices. 
4. 
In order that the negotiation of payment and reimbursement 
agreements does not unduly delay the provision of telecommunication as-
sistance, the operational coordinator shall develop, in consultation with the 
States Parties, a model payment and reimbursement agreement that may 
provide a foundation for the negotiation of payment and reimbursement obli-
gations under this Article. 
5. 
No State Party shall be obligated to make payment or reimbursement 
of costs or fees under this Convention without having first expressed its 
consent to the terms provided by an assisting State Party pursuant to 
paragraph 2 of this Article. 
6. 
When the provision of telecommunication assistance is properly 
conditioned upon payment or reimbursement of costs or fees under this 

74 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Article, such payment or reimbursement shall be provided promptly after the 
assisting State Party has presented its request for payment or reimbursement. 
7. 
Funds paid or reimbursed by a requesting State Party in association 
with the provision of telecommunication assistance shall be freely transferable 
out of the jurisdiction of the requesting State Party and shall not be delayed or 
withheld. 
8. 
In determining whether to condition the provision of tele-
communication assistance upon an agreement to pay or reimburse specified 
costs or fees, the amount of such costs or fees, and the terms, conditions and 
restrictions associated with their payment or reimbursement, the States Parties 
shall take into account, among other relevant factors: 
a) 
United Nations principles concerning humanitarian assistance; 
b) 
the nature of the disaster, natural hazard or health hazard; 
c) 
the impact, or potential impact, of the disaster; 
d) 
the place of origin of the disaster; 
e) 
the area affected, or potentially affected, by the disaster; 
f) 
the occurrence of previous disasters and the likelihood of future 
disasters in the affected area; 
g) 
the capacity of each State affected by the disaster, natural hazard 
or health hazard to prepare for, or respond to, such event; and 
h) 
the needs of developing countries. 
9. 
This Article shall also apply to those situations in which telecommuni-
cation assistance is provided by a non-State entity or intergovernmental 
organization, provided that: 
a) 
the requesting State Party has consented to, and has not 
terminated, such provision of telecommunication assistance for 
disaster mitigation and relief; 
b) 
the non-State entity or intergovernmental organization providing 
such telecommunication assistance has notified to the requesting 
State Party its adherence to this Article and Articles 4 and 5; and 
c) 
the application of this Article is not inconsistent with any other 
agreement concerning the relations between the requesting State 
Party and the non-State entity or intergovernmental organization 
providing such telecommunication assistance. 
Article 8 
Telecommunication Assistance Information Inventory 
 
1. 
Each State Party shall notify the operational coordinator of its 
authority(ies): 

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 75 
a) 
responsible for matters arising under the terms of this Convention 
and authorized to request, offer, accept and terminate 
telecommunication assistance; and 
b) 
competent to identify the governmental, intergovernmental and/or 
non-governmental resources which could be made available to 
facilitate the use of telecommunication resources for disaster 
mitigation 
and 
relief, 
including 
the 
provision 
of 
tele-
communication assistance. 
2. 
Each State Party shall endeavour to inform the operational 
coordinator promptly of any changes in the information provided pursuant to 
this Article. 
3. 
The operational coordinator may accept notification from a non-State 
entity or intergovernmental organization of its procedures for authorization to 
offer and terminate telecommunication assistance as provided in this Article. 
4. 
A State Party, non-State entity or intergovernmental organization 
may, at its discretion, include in the material it deposits with the operational 
coordinator information about specific telecommunication resources and 
about plans for the use those resources to respond to a request for telecom-
munication assistance from a requesting State Party. 
5. 
The operational coordinator shall maintain copies of all lists of 
authorities, and shall expeditiously disseminate such material to the States 
Parties, to other States, and to appropriate non-State entities and inter-
governmental organizations, unless a State Party, non-State entity or inter-
governmental organization has previously specified, in writing, that 
distribution of its material be restricted. 
6. 
The operational coordinator shall treat material deposited by 
non-State entities and intergovernmental organizations in a similar manner to 
material deposited by States Parties 
Article 9 
Regulatory Barriers 
 
1. 
The States Parties shall, when possible, and in conformity with their 
national law, reduce or remove regulatory barriers to the use of telecommu-
nication resources for disaster mitigation and relief, including to the provision 
of telecommunication assistance. 
2. 
Regulatory barriers may include, but are not limited to: 
a) 
regulations restricting the import or export of telecommunication 
equipment; 
b) 
regulations restricting the use of telecommunication equipment or 
of radio-frequency spectrum; 

76 ▪ ICT for Peace 
c) 
regulations restricting the movement of personnel who operate 
telecommunication equipment or who are essential to its effective 
use; 
d) 
regulations restricting the transit of telecommunication resources 
into, out of and through the territory of a State Party; and  
e) 
delays in the administration of such regulations. 
3. 
Reduction of regulatory barriers may take the form of, but shall not be 
limited to: 
a) 
revising regulations; 
b) 
exempting specified telecommunication resources from the 
application of those regulations during the use of such resources 
for disaster mitigation and relief; 
c) 
pre-clearance of telecommunication resources for use in disaster 
mitigation and relief, in compliance with those regulations; 
d) 
recognition of foreign type-approval of telecommunication 
equipment and/or operating licenses; 
e) 
expedited review of telecommunication resources for use in 
disaster mitigation and relief, in compliance with those 
regulations; and 
f) 
temporary waiver of those regulations for the use of telecom-
munication resources for disaster mitigation and relief. 
4. 
Each State Party shall, at the request of any other State Party, and to 
the extent permitted by its national law, facilitate the transit into, out of and 
through its territory of personnel, equipment, materials and information 
involved in the use of telecommunication resources for disaster mitigation and 
relief. 
5. 
Each State Party shall notify the operational coordinator and the other 
States Parties, directly or through the operational coordinator, of: 
a) 
measures taken, pursuant to this Convention, for reducing or 
removing such regulatory barriers; 
b) 
procedures available, pursuant to this Convention, to States 
Parties, other States, non-State entities and/or intergovernmental 
organizations for the exemption of specified telecommunication 
resources used for disaster mitigation and relief from the 
application of such regulations, pre-clearance or expedited review 
of such resources in compliance with applicable regulations, 
acceptance of foreign type-approval of such resources, or 
temporary waiver of regulations otherwise applicable to such 
resources; and 
c) 
the terms, conditions and restrictions, if any, associated with the 
use of such procedures. 

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 77 
6. 
The operational coordinator shall regularly and expeditiously make 
available to the States Parties, to other States, to non-State entities and to 
intergovernmental organizations an up-to-date listing of such measures, their 
scope, and the terms, conditions and restrictions, if any, associated with their 
use. 
7 
Nothing in this Article shall permit the violation or abrogation of 
obligations and responsibilities imposed by national law, international law, or 
multilateral or bilateral agreements, including obligations and responsibilities 
concerning customs and export controls. 
Article 10 
Relationship to Other International Agreements 
 
This Convention shall not affect the rights and obligations of States Parties 
deriving from other international agreements or international law. 
Article 11 
Dispute Settlement 
 
1. 
In the event of a dispute between States Parties concerning the 
interpretation or application of this Convention, the States Parties to the 
dispute shall consult each other for the purpose of settling the dispute. Such 
consultation shall begin promptly upon the written declaration, delivered by 
one State Party to another State Party, of the existence of a dispute under this 
Convention. The State Party making such a written declaration of the 
existence of a dispute shall promptly deliver a copy of such declaration to the 
depositary. 
2. 
If a dispute between States Parties cannot be settled within six (6) 
months of the date of delivery of the written declaration to a State Party to the 
dispute, the States Parties to the dispute may request any other State Party, 
State, non-State entity or intergovernmental organization to use its good 
offices to facilitate settlement of the dispute. 
3. 
If neither State Party seeks the good offices of another State Party, 
State, non-State entity or intergovernmental organization, or if the exercise of 
good offices fails to facilitate a settlement of the dispute within six (6) months 
of the request for such good offices being made, then either State Party to the 
dispute may: 
a) 
request that the dispute be submitted to binding arbitration; or 
b) 
submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice for 
decision, provided that both States Parties to the dispute have, at 
the time of signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, or at 

78 ▪ ICT for Peace 
any time thereafter, accepted the jurisdiction of the International 
Court of Justice in respect of such disputes. 
4. 
In the event that the respective States Parties to the dispute request 
that the dispute be submitted to binding arbitration and submit the dispute to 
the International Court of Justice for decision, the submission to the 
International Court of Justice shall have priority. 
5. 
In the case of a dispute between a State Party requesting tele-
communication assistance and a non-State entity or intergovernmental 
organization headquartered or domiciled outside of the territory of that State 
Party concerning the provision of telecommunication assistance under 
Article 4, the claim of the non-State entity or intergovernmental organization 
may be espoused directly by the State Party in which the non-State entity or 
intergovernmental organization is headquartered or domiciled as a 
State-to-State claim under this Article, provided that such espousal is not 
inconsistent with any other agreement between the State Party and the 
non-State entity or intergovernmental organization involved in the dispute. 
6. 
When signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to this 
Convention, a State may declare that it does not consider itself bound by 
either or both of the dispute settlement procedures provided for in paragraph 3 
above. The other States Parties shall not be bound by a dispute settlement 
procedure provided for in paragraph 3 with respect to a State Party for which 
such a declaration is in force. 
Article 12 
Entry into Force 
 
1. 
This Convention shall be open for signature by all States which are 
members of the United Nations or of the International Telecommunication 
Union at the Intergovernmental Conference on Emergency Telecommuni-
cations in Tampere on 18 June 1998, and thereafter at the headquarters of the 
United Nations, New York, from 22 June 1998 to 21 June 2003. 
2. 
A State may express its consent to be bound by this Convention: 
a) 
by signature (definitive signature); 
b) 
by signature subject to ratification, acceptance or approval 
followed by deposit of an instrument of ratification, acceptance or 
approval; or 
c) 
by deposit of an instrument of accession. 
3. 
The Convention shall enter into force thirty (30) days after the deposit 
of instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession or definitive 
signature of thirty (30) States. 

Annex 1: The Tampere Convention ▪ 79 
4. 
For each State which signs definitively or deposits an instrument of 
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, after the requirement set out in 
paragraph 3 of this Article has been fulfilled, this Convention shall enter into 
force thirty (30) days after the date of the definitive signature or consent to be 
bound. 
Article 13 
Amendments 
 
1. 
A State Party may propose amendments to this Convention by sub-
mitting such amendments to the depositary, which shall circulate them to the 
other States Parties for approval. 
2. 
The States Parties shall notify the depositary of their approval or 
disapproval of such proposed amendments within one hundred and eighty 
(180) days of their receipt. 
3. 
Any amendment approved by two-thirds of all States Parties shall be 
laid down in a Protocol which is open for signature at the depositary by all 
States Parties. 
4. 
The Protocol shall enter into force in the same manner as this 
Convention. For each State which signs the Protocol definitively or deposits 
an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, after the 
requirements for the entry into force of the Protocol have been fulfilled, the 
Protocol shall enter into force for such State thirty (30) days after the date of 
the definitive signature or consent to be bound. 
Article 14 
Reservations 
 
1. 
When definitively signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention or 
any amendment hereto, a State Party may make reservations. 
2. 
A State Party may at any time withdraw its prior reservation by 
written notification to the depositary. Such withdrawal of a reservation 
becomes effective immediately upon notification to the depositary. 
Article 15 
Denunciation 
 
1. 
A State Party may denounce this Convention by written notification 
to the depositary. 

80 ▪ ICT for Peace 
2. 
Denunciation shall take effect ninety (90) days following the date of 
deposit of the written notification. 
3. 
At the request of the denouncing State Party, all copies of the lists of 
authorities and of measures adopted and procedures available for reducing 
regulatory measures provided by any State Party denouncing this Convention 
shall be removed from use by the effective date of such denunciation. 
Article 16 
Depositary 
 
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the depositary of this 
Convention. 
Article 17 
Authentic Texts 
 
The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, 
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited 
with the depositary. Only the English, French and Spanish authentic texts will 
be made available for signature at Tampere on 18 June 1998. The depositary 
shall prepare the authentic texts in Arabic, Chinese and Russian as soon as 
possible thereafter. 

Annex 2: OCHA 2002 Symposium Final Statement ▪ 81 
ANNEX 2: OCHA 2002 SYMPOSIUM FINAL STATEMENT 
 
United Nations Office for  
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
 
Symposium on Best Practices in  
Humanitarian Information Exchange 
 
Palais des Nations  
Geneva, Switzerland 
5 – 8 February 2002 
 
Best Practices in Humanitarian Information Management and Exchange 
 
 
Preamble  
 
Interested practitioners in the field of information management, including 
government representatives and institutions, UN agencies, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), academia and the private sector, met to take stock of 
achievements in the humanitarian information management field, to identify 
future challenges and to agree on next steps.  
 
Based on their collective experience, the participants endorsed this statement 
as a vision for the future and a prescription for action.  
 
By endorsing this statement participants agreed to 1) share its contents with 
their respective organizations; 2) raise these issues with international 
institutions and actors for broader discussion and implementation; and 3) 
work with OCHA to follow up on its recommendations.  
 
 
Overview  
 
Timely and accurate information is recognized as integral to humanitarian 
action in both natural disasters and complex emergencies. The international 
humanitarian community's ability to collect, analyze, disseminate and act on 
key information is fundamental to effective response. Better information 
leading to improved response directly benefits affected populations. Over 
time, improved assessment of impacts and responses through better data 
collection and management contributes to a more complete global database on 

82 ▪ ICT for Peace 
disaster impacts, leading to better risk assessment and targeting of prevention 
and preparedness activities.  
 
The Symposium recognized that considerable progress has been made to date 
in developing information systems, tools and Web sites and in establishing 
standards for their use. In particular, participants acknowledged the 
ReliefWeb, Integrated Regional Information Network (IRIN) and the 
Humanitarian Information Center (HIC) models as successful examples of 
international and field-level activities and services that form a solid basis for 
future work. But much remains to be done to build upon these approaches and 
continue to meet the demands of decision-makers and other stakeholders.  
 
 
Principles of Humanitarian Information Management and Exchange  
 
The Symposium affirmed the fundamental principle that the purpose of 
humanitarian assistance is to assist affected and at-risk people. Information 
management and exchange should reflect this humanitarian imperative and 
promote more effective humanitarian action.  
 
Symposium participants also identified the following operational principles to 
guide information management and exchange activities:  
 
Accessibility. Humanitarian information and data should be made accessible 
to all humanitarian actors by applying easy-to-use formats and by translating 
information into common or local languages when necessary. Information and 
data for humanitarian purposes should be made widely available through a 
variety of online and offline distribution channels including the media.  
 
Inclusiveness. Information management and exchange should be based on a 
system of collaboration, partnership and sharing with a high degree of 
participation 
and 
ownership 
by 
multiple 
stakeholders, 
especially 
representatives of the affected population.  
 
Inter-operability. All sharable data and information should be made 
available in formats that can be easily retrieved, shared and used by 
humanitarian organizations.  
 
Accountability. Users must be able to evaluate the reliability and credibility 
of data and information by knowing its source. Information providers should 
be responsible to their partners and stakeholders for the content they publish 
and disseminate.  

Annex 2: OCHA 2002 Symposium Final Statement ▪ 83 
Verifiability. Information should be accurate, consistent and based on sound 
methodologies, validated by external sources, and analyzed within the proper 
contextual framework.  
 
Relevance. Information should be practical, flexible, responsive, and driven 
by operational needs in support of decision-making throughout all phases of a 
crisis.  
 
Objectivity. Information managers should consult a variety of sources when 
collecting and analyzing information so as to provide varied and balanced 
perspectives for addressing problems and recommending solutions.  
 
Humanity. Information should never be used to distort, to mislead or to cause 
harm to affected or at-risk populations and should respect the dignity of 
victims.  
 
Timeliness. Humanitarian information should be collected, analyzed and 
disseminated efficiently, and must be kept current.  
 
Sustainability. Humanitarian information and data should be preserved, 
cataloged and archived, so that it can be retrieved for future use, such as for 
preparedness, analysis, lessons learned and evaluation.  
 
 
Key Issues  
 
In support of these principles, Symposium participants highlighted a number 
of key themes to be considered when developing and implementing 
humanitarian information management and exchange systems.  
1) User Requirements  
The Symposium emphasized that information management systems should 
meet the clearly defined needs of users and decision-makers, and aim to 
reduce the effects of information overload.  
 
2) Quality of Data and Information  
To be useful, data and information must be relevant, accurate and timely. 
Ensuring quality requires the development of, and adherence to, standards for 
information collection, exchange, security, attribution and use. In addition, it 
is vital to maintain a strong sense of professional ethics at every stage of 
information system design and implementation, including such elements as 
independence and impartiality, in pursuit of humanitarian action.  
 

84 ▪ ICT for Peace 
3) Technology  
Technology is a powerful enabler. Technology should not, however, 
undermine, distort or overshadow content. Achieving humanitarian objectives 
by using technology is not primarily a question of hardware and software, but 
rather of cost-effectiveness and appropriateness for achieving desired 
humanitarian outcomes. Information system designers should consider 
explicit and proactive efforts for making systems relevant and easy to use, 
particularly in remote areas. This includes bridging the technological divide 
by building capacity, promoting the exchange of knowledge and skills 
between local and international actors and making information available 
through a variety of means in a variety of formats. Human judgment, rather 
than technology, is the basis for operational decisions.  
 
4) Partnerships  
Successful 
information 
management 
systems 
encourage 
openness, 
inclusiveness and sharing. This strengthens relations, trust and coordination 
among multiple stakeholders. Multiple information systems, including Web 
sites and databases, operating at global, regional and local levels, create the 
potential for an unprecedented degree of cooperation between organizations 
and people at the field level, between the field and headquarters and between 
the international and local communities. Partnering with the media can be an 
effective way of communicating information to the affected population.  
 
5) Preparedness  
One of the most important aspects of humanitarian information management 
and exchange is preparation. Information-related efforts that are incrementally 
resourced and initiated only as emergency situations unfold tend to remain 
behind the curve and reactive. This leads to a failure to provide timely 
information that is accurate and contextual. Preparedness measures such as 
base data preparation for high-risk areas, national-level capacity building and 
the formation of institutional relationships prior to deployment enable 
information management and exchange systems to effectively support 
assistance efforts once an emergency begins. Preparation also includes 
planning for sustainability and/or exit strategies.  
 
 
Best Practices  
 
The following is a set of best practices derived from the principles and themes 
summarized above and identified as integral to the future success of 
humanitarian 
information 
management 
and 
exchange. 
In 
complex 
emergencies and natural disasters, the humanitarian community should:  

Annex 2: OCHA 2002 Symposium Final Statement ▪ 85 
Define user needs and emphasize data sets and formats that directly support 
decision-making at the field level. Identify user groups, conduct user 
requirement analysis, inventory information resources inventory and define 
core information products based on user input. Develop and implement 
information products on operationally relevant themes, such as the location 
and condition of the affected population, “who is doing what, where?” and 
factors affecting access to affected populations. Use templates such as the 
Rapid Village Assessment (RVA) tool to speed data collection. Create maps 
to effectively communicate information to decision-makers.  
 
Collect and analyze base data and information before and throughout an 
emergency. Gather, organize and archive data and information on 
operationally relevant themes for high-risk areas in preparation for 
emergencies. Maintain and enhance data sets during emergency responses. 
Document and archive data so that it is easily accessible for future use.  
 
Maintain and promote data and information standards. Follow generally 
accepted standards for information exchange, such as the Structured 
Humanitarian Assistance Reporting (SHARE) standard to promote data 
sourcing, dating and geo-referencing. The SHARE standard facilitates 
integration of data from multiple sources and enhances verifiability, 
assessment, analysis and accountability. Geo-referencing data during 
collection allows cartographic presentation and geographic information 
system (GIS) analysis. Create metadata catalogs as part of a standard 
documentation process with handover procedures.  
 
Maximize resources by expanding partnerships. Recognize that data and 
information are collected and managed by a variety of actors including 
national governments, UN agencies, NGOs, the private sector and research 
institutions and that the contributions of these providers are crucial. Pre-
establish inter-agency agreements and relationships at the national and local 
levels. Establish an ongoing process of personal interaction to create 
partnerships for information management and exchange. Use distributed 
networks and neutral portal repositories to assist with information sharing and 
promote linkages to avoid duplication of effort.  
 
Engage local and national actors in information projects. Develop networks of 
local communities and national NGOs, civil society groups and the private 
sector and address the issue of local participation as part of overall emergency 
planning, monitoring and evaluation. Build and strengthen the national/local 
capacity in information management and exchange and promote the transfer 
and use of local knowledge.  

86 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Maintain preparedness "toolboxes" for online and offline distribution. These 
toolboxes provide guidelines and reference tools for the rapid-deployment of 
HICs or the establishment of Web sites and databases under a variety of field 
conditions. Toolboxes should include data standards, operating procedures, 
training materials, database templates and manuals.  
 
Define an exit strategy. Develop a clear phase-out strategy, including 
transitioning to development activities and creating archiving systems to 
maintain access by current and future stakeholders after the project is closed.  
 
Preserve institutional operational memory. Define and adhere to sound data 
and information management policies and techniques for handling large 
volumes of information. Document datasets with metadata. Maintain quality 
control and organizational learning to avoid the need to start from scratch 
with each emergency and to maintain quality of information services during 
emergencies.  
 
Establish field-based HICs according to identified operational and decision-
making demand. Design them as open-access physical locations, incorporate 
existing capacities, systems and information management activities. Serve as 
a neutral broker of humanitarian information, providing value-added products 
and beneficial services to the field-based humanitarian community. Encourage 
broad participation from local, national and international actors to facilitate 
and support humanitarian response activities. Form partnerships with 
specialized agencies and sector experts to conduct sectoral surveys and 
analyses.  
 
Use appropriate technology. Ensure that field information systems reach the 
broadest possible audience. Be aware of the limitations of technology (both 
inherent and as related to availability). For example, keep in mind that the 
Internet, while powerful, is not a panacea and can be ineffective as a 
distribution channel to and from remote areas. Consider making data 
products, particularly databases, available via e-mail, CD-ROM and for local 
download. Recognize that local staff’s ability to work with the technology is 
an important determinant of success. Technology should be easy to use and be 
accompanied by training for local staff.  
 
Use open data formats and inter-operable technologies. Use commercial, off-the-
shelf technology and create all information products using open data formats and 
inter-operable technologies.  
 
Promote awareness and training. Conduct technology training sessions for 
non-technical humanitarian staff, particularly national staff. Educate senior 

Annex 2: OCHA 2002 Symposium Final Statement ▪ 87 
decision-makers in humanitarian organizations about the purpose, strengths 
and weaknesses of information management and exchange. Broaden 
participation in information projects among affected and at-risk populations.  
 
Involve the private sector. Consider the efficiencies of contracting 
information management and exchange functions to the private sector, 
especially local private interests, when cost-effective and appropriate. 
Encourage a constructive role for the private sector by incorporating private-
sector expertise into preparedness and planning activities.  
 
Mobilize adequate resources. Include funding for field-level information 
management and exchange systems and projects in the overall resourcing of 
assistance programs.  
 
 
Recommendations and Follow-Up Actions  
 
Participants endorsed the above principles, themes and best practices and 
committed to working on resolving outstanding issues. To this end, 
Symposium participants agreed to work proactively within their respective 
organizations to promote recognition of, and investment in, information 
management practices to improve humanitarian action.  
 
The Symposium participants recognized that necessary resources would need 
to be identified and raised to implement these recommendations and follow-
up actions. Participants also emphasized the importance of mobilizing 
resources to provide adequate funding for information management and 
exchange activities incorporating the results of the recommended actions.  
 
The Symposium acknowledged OCHA’s role as a focal point in the area of 
humanitarian information and recommended that a multi-stakeholder steering 
committee be established by OCHA to:  
 
1) draft specific guidelines for humanitarian information management and 
exchange;  
 
2) catalog best practices through the ongoing development of lessons-learned 
case studies, project evaluations and the identification of appropriate 
technologies;  
 
3) establish working groups as needed, including representatives from 
recipient countries, to implement recommendations;  
 

88 ▪ ICT for Peace 
4) establish and announce an appropriate process for implementing these 
recommendations through consultation with stakeholders.  
 
Specific areas to be addressed through this follow-up process include:  
 
· User requirements. Explore the linkages between data, information and 
decision-making in critical areas, such as assessments, “who is doing 
what, where?” and other operational information, particularly in the 
field. Improve the exchange of data and information collected during 
natural disasters and complex emergencies for operational purposes 
as well as to strengthen the database on global disaster impacts over 
the long-term.  
 
· Quality of Information. Develop and disseminate standards, ethical 
guidelines and codes of conduct to address issues of data quality and 
information integrity.  
 
· Technology. Evaluate and report on successful applications of new and 
existing technologies. Identify technology partners and promote the 
dissemination of appropriate technology practices for varying end 
uses. Discuss the application of these technologies in a future forum.  
 
· Partnerships. Strengthen the linkages among existing information 
systems. Improve relationships between these systems and their 
stakeholders including decision-makers at the field and headquarters 
level, as well as with the affected population. Establish public-private 
partnerships especially in the area of systems and tools development. 
Define the roles of sector specialists and the media.  
 
· Preparedness. Promote the preparation of base data for high-risk areas. 
Calculate and disseminate risk assessments, and build national 
capacity and develop toolboxes for rapid mobilization of HICs. Raise 
donor- and, where appropriate, media-awareness of the importance of 
information preparedness to humanitarian action.  
 
· Field-level coordination. Improve field-level information coordination 
among multiple actors including the UN resident coordinator and UN 
country team, NGOs, academia, the affected population and other 
stakeholders. Facilitate OCHA’s role as an information field focal 
point or partner. Evaluate and implement field-level information 
policies such as access and exit strategies.  
 

Annex 2: OCHA 2002 Symposium Final Statement ▪ 89 
Progress on these recommendations will be posted on ReliefWeb, submitted 
to the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) and will become the subject 
of the next symposium.  

90 ▪ ICT for Peace 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
 
Daniel Stauffacher is currently Ambassador at the State Secretariat for 
Economic Affairs of Switzerland, and, among other duties, advisor to the UN 
and the Tunisian Government for the second phase of the WSIS (November 
2005), Vice-Chairman of the Bureau of the WSIS PrepCom, member of the 
UN ICT Task Force and of the Strategy Group on Information Society of the 
Swiss Government and Chairman of the ICT4Peace process.  Ambassador 
Stauffacher holds a PhD from Zürich University and a MA from Columbia 
University in New York in International Economics.  Mr. Stauffacher worked 
in the past for UNDP in Asia, was Division Chief of the Swiss Federal Office 
for Foreign Economic Affairs, Counsellor of the Swiss Mission for the EU 
and Ambassador and Delegate of the Swiss Federal Council in Geneva for the 
World Summit for Social Development (WSSD)/Special Session of the UN 
General Assembly, Geneva June 2000.  He was the convener of the first 
Global Compact Meeting in Switzerland and Ambassador and Delegate of the 
Swiss Federal Council in Geneva for the WSIS (WSIS I).  He was also a 
member of the UN Task Force on Financial Mechanisms for ICTD.  
 
William J. Drake is the President of Computer Professionals for Social 
Responsibility, a global civil society organization, and an ICT policy 
consultant based in Geneva, Switzerland.  In addition, he is co-editor of the 
MIT Press book series, The Information Revolution and Global Politics. 
Previously, he has been a Visiting Senior Fellow at the Center for 
International Development and Conflict Management, University of 
Maryland, College Park; a Senior Associate and the founding Director of the 
Project on the Information Revolution and World Politics at the Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, Washington DC; the founding Associate 
Director of the Communication, Culture and Technology Program, 
Georgetown University, Washington DC; and an Assistant Professor of 
Communication at the University of California, San Diego. His primary 
research interests are the global governance of information and 
communication technology, and the impact of the information revolution on 
world politics.  Among his publications are: Governing Global Electronic 
Networks: International Perspectives on Policy and Power (co-editor, 
forthcoming); Reforming Internet Governance: Perspective from the UN 
Working Group on Internet Governance (editor); From the Global Digital 
Divide to the Global Digital Opportunity: Proposals Submitted to the G-8 
Kyushu-Okinawa Summit 2000---Report of the World Economic Forum Task 
Force; Toward Sustainable Competition in Global Telecommunications: 
From Principle to Practice; Telecommunications in the Information Age 
(editor); and The New Information Infrastructure: Strategies for US Policy 

About the Authors ▪ 91 
(editor). He received his Ph.D. in Political Science from Columbia University, 
New York City. 
 
Paul Currion runs a consultancy firm specializing in information 
management for humanitarian operations.  He has developed Humanitarian 
Information Centres (HIC) in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Iraq and Liberia for the 
United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs, wrote 
the HIC Handbook, and developed the HIC deployment mechanism and HIC 
training package.  When not working in the field, Paul consults on policy 
issues, systems design and advocacy, all focused on how information 
management and ICT can be used to improve responses to natural disasters 
and complex emergencies.  He draws on a wide range of experience in 
humanitarian relief, human rights, conflict resolution and NGO coordination, 
having worked with the UN, donor governments, NGO co-ordination bodies 
and a range of international NGOs.  He is currently working a range of 
projects, including: open source software development for disaster response 
(with the Sahana Project), creation of a GIS data model for humanitarian work 
(with the George Washington University), and an assessment of ICT use by 
NGOs in emergencies (with the Interagency Working Group). 
 
Julia Steinberger is Project Assistant to Ambassador Stauffacher on the 
ICT4Peace project and other WSIS-related issues.  She received her PhD in 
physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and previously 
worked as a physics researcher in cosmology, x-ray astrophysics, and 
experimental atomic physics.  Her interests are at the interface between 
science, communication, and society.  She has worked as a freelance radio 
journalist for Free Speech Radio News, and is pursuing her communication, 
environmental and governance studies at the Institut Universitaire d’Etudes du 
Développement in Geneva.  

92 ▪ ICT for Peace 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Abiew, Francis Kofi and Tom Keating (2004) Defining a Role for Civil 
Society: Humanitarian NGOs and Peacebuilding Operations (in Tom 
Keating and W. Andy Knight, eds., Building Sustainable Peace 
(Alberta and Tokyo: The University of Alberta Press and the United 
Nations University Press, 2004)) 
Adelman, Howard (1998) Humanitarian and Conflict-Oriented Early 
Warning: A Historical Background Sketch (in K. van Walraven, ed., 
Early Warning and Conflict Prevention: Limitations and Possibilities, 
Netherlands: Kluwever Law International) 
Annan, Kofi (1999) Facing the Humanitarian Challenge. Towards a Culture 
of Prevention, (Introduction to the Secretary-General’s Annual Report 
on the Work of the Organisation) 
Bais, Karolien and Mijnd Huijser (2005) The Profit of Peace: Corporate 
Responsibility in Conflict Regions, (Greenleaf Publishing) 
Barry, Jane and Anna Jefferys (2002) A Bridge Too Far: aid agencies and the 
military in humanitarian response (Humanitarian Practice Network, 
London) http://www.odihpn.org/documents/networkpaper037.pdf 
Brahimi, Lakhdar et. al (2000)  Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace 
Operations, A/55/305-S/2000/809 (New York: United Nations 
General Assembly, August 21, 2000) 
http://www.un.org/documents/ga/docs/55/a55305.pdf 
Carothers, Thomas (1999) Aiding Democracy Abroad: The Learning Curve  
(Washington DC: The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace) 
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, Participatory Design, 
http://www.cpsr.org/issues/pd/ 
Crisis Management Initiative(2004) Security –the Common Denominator for 
Connectivity: Conference on Crisis Management and Information 
Technology, Saint-Paul-de-Vence, 3-6 November 2004 (Helsinki: 
CMI) http://www.itcm.org/pdf/ITCM_conference_report_2004.pdf 
Crocker, Chester A., Fen Osler Hampson, and Pamela Aall (1999) Multiparty 
Mediation and the Conflict Cycle (in Chester A. Crocker, Fen Osler 
Hampson, and Pamela Aall, eds., Herding Cats: Multiparty Mediation 
in a  Complex World  (Washington DC: United States Institute for 
Peace)) 
Currion, Paul (2001) Humanitarian Information Centres: Establishing 
Coherent Approaches to Field-Based Information Management in 
Emergencies (a report commissioned by the Field Information 
Support (FIS) Unit of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs (OCHA))  
http://www.reliefweb.int/symposium/InfoCenters.htm 

Bibliography ▪ 93 
Dartnell, Michael (2003) Information Technology and the Web Activism of the 
Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan (RAWA) – 
Electronic Politics and New Global Conflict, (in, Robert Latham, ed., 
Bombs and Bandwidth, 2003) 
de Zeeuw, Jeroen (2001) Building Peace in War-Torn Societies: From 
Concept to Strategy (Netherlands Institute of International Relations 
‘Clingendael’ Conflict Research Unit) 
Druke, Luise (1989) UNHCR and the Need for “Early Warning” (UNHCR 
Refugee Abstracts, 8, December 1989) 
http://www.luisedruke.com/luise/unhcr_need_early_warning.htm 
Easterly, William (2002) The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists' 
Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics (Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press) 
Eide, Espen Barth,  Anja Therese Kaspersen, Randolph Kent and Karin von 
Hippel (2005) Report on Integrated Missions: Practical Perspectives 
and Recommendations (OCHA) 
Hattotuwa, Sanjana (2004) Untying the Gordian Knot: ICT for Conflict 
Transformation and Peacebuilding http://www.info-
share.org/content/docs/untying_the_gordian_knot.doc 
Hick, Steven, Edward F. Halpin and Eric Hoskins (2000) Human Rights and 
the Internet (New York: St. Martin’s Press) 
Hummelink, Marcel (2002)  Evaluation of IT Humanitarian Platforms and 
Their Possible Utilisation as Coordination Instruments (paper 
presented at the ECHO-Partners Annual Conference, Brussels, 14 & 
15 October 2002) 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/echo/pdf_files/2002_partners/information.p
df 
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (2004) 
Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (2005) 
World Disasters Report2005 – Focus on Information (Eurospan, 
London) http://www.ifrc.org/publicat/wdr2005/ 
International Telecommunication Union, Teledensity Main Telephone Lines 
per 100 Inhabitants http://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-
t/com3/focus/72404_v7.xls 
Joint UNEP/OCHA Environment Unit (2005) Joint UNEP/OCHA 
Environment Unit Overview - Note by the Secretariat (OCHA) 
http://ochaonline.un.org/GetBin.asp?DocID=3365 
Knightley, Philip (2003) The First Casualty: The War Correspondent as 
Hero, Propagandist, and Myth-maker from the Crimea to the Gulf 
War II (Andre Deutsch Ltd) 

94 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Kristof, Nicholas (2005) All Ears for Tom Cruise, All Eyes on Brad Pitt (New 
York Times, July 26 2005) 
Krummenacher, Heinz and Susanne Schmeidl (2001) Practical Challenges in 
Predicting Violent Conflict FAST: An Example of a Comprehensive 
Early-Warning Methodology (SwissPeace)  
http://www.swisspeace.org/publications/wp/working paper34.pdf 
Lederach, John Paul (1997) Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in 
Divided Societies  (Washington DC: United States Institute for Peace) 
Lehmann, Ingrid A. (1999) Peacekeeping and Public Information: Caught in 
the Crossfire  (London: Frank Cass) 
Lund, Michael S. (1996) Preventing Violent Conflicts: A Strategy for 
Preventive Diplomacy  (Washington DC: United States Institute of 
Peace Press) 
Macrae, Joanna and Nicholas Leader (2000) Shifting Sands: the search for 
‘coherence’ between political and humanitarian responses to complex 
emergencies  (Humanitarian Practice Network, London) 
http://www.odi.org.uk/hpg/papers/hpgreport8.pdf 
Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (2003) Contribution of the 
International Organisation of Francophonie to the World Summit on 
the Information Society (Rabat Declaration)  (Agence 
Intergouvernementale de la Francophonie) 
http://smsi.francophonie.org/IMG/pdf/declaration_rabat_ang.pdf 
Price Monroe E. and Mark Thompson, eds. (2002) Forging Peace: 
Intervention, Human Rights and the Management of Media Space 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press) 
Power, Samantha (2003) A Problem from Hell: America and the Age of 
Genocide (New York: Perennial) 
Rotberg, Robert I. (1996) Conclusions: NGOs, Early Warning, Early Action, 
and Preventive Diplomacy, in Rotberg, ed., Vigilance and 
Vengeance: NGOs Preventing Ethnic Conflict in Divided Societies 
(Washington D.C and Cambridge, MA.: The Brookings Institution 
Press and the World Peace Foundation) 
v. d. Schulenburg, Michael (2005) OSCE’s Management Reforms and IRMA 
(2002-2005): Final Report (Vienna: Organisation for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe) 
SIPRI (2004) SIPRI Yearbook 2004: Armaments, Disarmament and 
International Security (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs (2004 Bill to Parliament 
concerning a credit facility for measures relating to conflict 
transformation and the promotion of human rights (2004–2007) 
(Bern, EDA) 
http://www.eda.admin.ch/eda/e/home/foreign/humsec.html 

Bibliography ▪ 95 
Union of International Associations (2005) Yearbook of International 
Organisations: Statistics, Visualizations and Patterns, Volume 5 
(Brussels: UIA)  http://www.uia.org/organizations/home.php 
Vitali, Fabio (2004) Metadata for OCHA (OCHA internal communication) 
Warkentin, Craig (2001) Reshaping World Politics: NGOs, the Internet, and 
Global Civil Society (Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers)  
Wenger, Andreas and Daniel Möckli (2003) Conflict Prevention: The 
Untapped Potential of the Business Sector (Boulder, CO and London: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers) 
World Summit on the Information Society (2003) Declaration of Principles 
and Plan of Action http://www.itu.int/wsis/ 
World Summit on the Information Society - Civil Society Plenary (2003) 
Shaping Information Societies for Human Needs: Civil Society 
Declaration to the World Summit on the Information Society 
http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/geneva/civil-society-declaration.pdf 
 

96 ▪ ICT for Peace 
INDEX OF ORGANISATIONS, DOCUMENTS AND WEBSITES 
 
Active Learning Network for Accountability and Practice (ALNAP) 
[http://www.alnap.org/].....................................................................17 
Aid Workers Network (AWN) [http://www.aidworkers.net/]................17 
AidMatrix [http://www.aidmatrix.org/] ................................................32 
AidWorld [http://www.aidworld.org/] ..................................................40 
Alertnet [http://www.alertnet.org/] .......................................................13 
AllAfrica Global Media [http://allafrica.com/] .....................................45 
Association de Réflexion et d'Information sur le Burundi 
[http://www.arib.info/]......................................................................47 
AzerWeb [http://www.azerweb.com/]...................................................14 
BBC Afghan Education Projects (BBC AEP)        
[http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/trust/projectsindepth/story/2003
/09/030904_aep.shtml]......................................................................45 
BBC World Service Trust.....................................................................45 
Brahimi Report................................................................................49, 58 
Burundi Youth Council [http://www.burundiyouth.com/]....................46 
Center for Media, Education, and Technology 
[http://www.cmetfreetown.org/] .......................................................47 
Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters 
[http://www.cred.be/]........................................................................14 
Center for Security Studies at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
in Zurich [http://www.css.ethz.ch/index_EN] ..................................17 
Center of Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian 
Assistance [http://www.coe-dmha.org/]............................................35 
Conseil pour la Paix dans la Région des Grands Lacs Africains 
(CPRGLA)  [http://www.chez.com/cprgla].......................................47 
Crisis Management Initiative (CMI) [http://www.cmi.fi/] .............35, 39 
Crisis Prevention and Peace Building  
[http://www.undp.org/bcpr/conflict_prevention/index.htm] ............21 
Crisis Response Executive Advisory Committee (CREATE) 
[http://www.itcm.org/approach/create.html] ....................................33 
Data Exchange Platform for the Horn of Africa (DEPHA)..................31 
Defense Advanced Projects Agency (DARPA) [http://www.darpa.mil/]
...........................................................................................................40 
Department of State (DoS) [http://www.state.gov/] .............................31 
Development Gateway [http://home.developmentgateway.org/]..........14 

Index of Organisations, Documents and Websites ▪ 97 
Disaster Management Information System.......................................... 38 
Disaster Relief And Strategic Telecommunications Infrastructure 
Company [http://www.drasticom.net/]............................................. 30 
Disaster Resource Network (DRN) [http://66.223.23.193/index.html] 17 
Disasters  [http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0361-
3666] ................................................................................................ 18 
e-Aceh portal [http://www.e-aceh.org/]................................................ 44 
Early Warning Unit [http://ochaonline.un.org/webpage.asp?Page=966]
.......................................................................................................... 20 
Ericsson Response Program 
[http://www.ericsson.com/about/ericssonresponse/] ....................... 30 
Fast IT & Telecommunications Emergency and Support Team 
(FITTEST) [http://www.hiciraq.org/services/FITTEST/index.asp]. 28 
Field Information Support Unit (FIS) .................................................. 26 
Food and Commodity Tracking System (FACTS) .............................. 39 
Foundation Hirondelle [http://www.hirondelle.org/] .......................... 46 
Fritz Institute [http://www.fritzinstitute.org/]...................................... 37 
Frühanalyse von Spannungen und Tatsachenermittlung (FAST) 
International [http://www.swisspeace.org/fast/].............................. 22 
Geneva Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD)........................ 37 
Geneva Humanitarian Forum 
[http://www.genevahumanitarianforum.org/] .................................. 18 
Geographic Information Support Team (GIST) 
[https://gist.itos.uga.edu/index.asp] ................................................. 31 
Global Disaster Information Network (GDIN) [www.gdin.org] ......... 16 
Global Hand [http://www.globalhand.org/]......................................... 32 
Global Identifier Numbers (GLIDE) [http://www.glidenumber.net/].. 34 
Global Map Aid [http://www.globalmapaid.rdvp.org/]....................... 29 
Government Out of a Box (GooB) initiative 
[http://www.cmi.fi/?content=cpcr_programme] .............................. 43 
Groove [http://www.groove.net/]......................................................... 38 
Gurtong Peace Project [http://www.gurtong.org/].............................. 49 
Humanitarian Early Warning Service (HEWSWeb) 
[http://www.hewsweb.org/home_page/default.asp] ........................ 21 
Humanitarian Information Centers (HICs) 
[http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/]................................................. 26 
Humanitarian Information Unit (HIU) [http://www.state.gov/s/inr/hiu]
.......................................................................................................... 31 
Humanitarian Logistics Software......................................................... 37 

98 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research (HPCR) 
Indonesia portal [http://www.preventconflict.org/portal/main]........15 
International Humanitarian Law Research Initiative (IHLRI) [http 
//www.ihlresearch.org/ihl/]...........................................................15 
Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research (HPCR) at the Harvard 
University School of Public Health [http://www.hpcr.org/].............15 
Humanitarian Practice Network (HPN) [http://www.odihpn.org/]......18 
Humanitarian Review [http://www.humanitarian-review.org/]............18 
ICT4Peace (http://www.ict4peace.org/) .................................................7 
Information Management System for Mine Action (IMSA) 
[http://www.imsma.ethz.ch/] ............................................................37 
Information Technology and Crisis Management Project (ITCM) 
[http://www.itcm.org/]......................................................................35 
InfoShare [http://www.info-share.org/] ................................................51 
Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) [http://www.iwpr.net/]
...........................................................................................................47 
Integrated Regional Information Network (IRIN) 
[http://www.irinnews.org/] ...............................................................13 
Integrated Resource Management System (IRMA)..............................38 
InterAction [http://www.interaction.org/ict/]........................................16 
Intermédia Consultants [http://www.intermedia-consultants.ch/]........46 
International Committee of the Red Cross  [www.icrc.org].................14 
International Council of Voluntary Agencies [http://www.icva.ch/]....16 
International Documentation Network on the Great African Lakes 
Region [http://www.grandslacs.net/] ................................................14 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies’ 
FedNet [https://fednet.ifrc.org].........................................................38 
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA) 
[http://www.idea.int/]........................................................................43 
International Media Support (IMS) [www.i-m-s.dk/] ..........................47 
International Relations and Security Network [http://www.isn.ethz.ch/]
...........................................................................................................17 
International Review of the Red Cross 
[http://www.icrc.org/eng/review] .....................................................18 
International Telecommunication Union [http://www.itu.int/] ............33 
Internet Forum on Crisis Prevention (IFCP) 
[http://ochaonline.un.org/webpage.asp?Page=1327]........................21 
ITCM/SKIES [http://www.itcm.org/approach/tools.html]...................39 
Joint UNEP/OCHA Environment Unit.................................................27 

Index of Organisations, Documents and Websites ▪ 99 
Journal of Humanitarian Assistance [http://www.jha.ac/] .................. 18 
KeyObs................................................................................................. 29 
MapAction [http://www.mapaction.org/]............................................. 29 
MapRelief [http://www.maprelief.org/]............................................... 29 
Martus [http://www.martus.org/]......................................................... 38 
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)......................................................... 29 
Mercy Corps [http://www.mercycorps.org/]........................................ 39 
Microsoft Corporation [http://www.microsoft.com/].......................... 39 
National Democratic Institute for International Affairs (NDI) 
[http://www.ndi.org/] ....................................................................... 43 
NetHope [http://www.nethope.org/]..................................................... 29 
Network University [http://www.euconflict.org/tnu/index2.html]....... 18 
Norwegian Refugee Council’s Global IDP Project 
[www.idpproject.org]....................................................................... 14 
Object Management Group [http://www.omg.org/] ............................ 33 
OCHA Website in the Russian Federation [http://www.ocha.ru]........ 14 
Oracle Corporation [http://www.oracle.com/].................................... 39 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) 
[http://www.osce.org] ...................................................................... 38 
Overseas Development Institute (ODI) [http://www.odi.org.uk/] ....... 17 
Partners in Technology International (PACTEC) 
[http://www.pactec.org/] .................................................................. 30 
ReliefGuide [http://www.reliefguide.com/] ......................................... 32 
ReliefWeb [http://www.reliefweb.int/]................................................. 12 
Réseau de Partenaires des Médias Africains  
[http://www.gret.org/mediapartner/index.htm]................................ 46 
RESPOND [http://www.respond-int.org/index.htm]........................... 29 
Rwanda Project of the Center for International Development and 
Conflict Management, University of Maryland at College Park 
[http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/rwanda/index.htm]............................. 23 
Sahana [http://www.sahana.lk/]........................................................... 40 
Save the Children’s Assistance Georgia 
[http://www.assistancegeorgia.org.ge/]............................................ 14 
Search for Common Ground [http://www.sfcg.org/]........................... 50 
Sierra Leone Information Centre (SLIS).............................................. 31 
SOS-Burundi  [http://www.sos-burundi.org/] ...................................... 46 
Southern Africa Humanitarian Information Service (SAHIMS) ......... 31 

100 ▪ ICT for Peace 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute’s (SIPRI) “Early 
Warning Indicators for Preventive Policy” 
[http://www.sipri.org/contents/it/ewi.html] ......................................22 
Strong Angel II [http://www.strongangel.telascience.org/] ..................40 
Structured Humanitarian Assistance Reporting (SHARE) 
[http://www.proventionconsortium.org/files/share.pdf]...................34 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)...............22, 45 
SwissPeace [http://www.swisspeace.org/]............................................22 
Symposium on Best Practices in Humanitarian Information Exchange 
[http://www.reliefweb.int/symposium/]............................................34 
Tampere Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication 
Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations 
[http://www.reliefweb.int/telecoms/tampere]...................................33 
Tariqa....................................................................................................21 
Télécoms sans Frontières (TSF) [http://www.tsfi.org/]........................28 
UN Joint Logistics Centre [http://www.unjlc.org/] ..............................27 
UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS) ....................................................37 
UN University of Peace Institute for Media, Peace and Security 
[http://www.mediapeace.org/] ..........................................................18 
UN Working Group on Emergency Telecommunications (WGET) 
[http://www.reliefweb.int/telecoms/intro/wget.html].......................33 
UNESCO [http://www.unesco.org].......................................................45 
International Programme for the Development of Communication .45 
Programme for Community Multimedia Centers .............................45 
United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) .....27 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) [http://ochaonline.un.org] ..................................................12 
United States Institute for Peace [http://www.usip.org/]......................35 
Virtual Diplomacy Initiative 
[http://www.usip.org/virtualdiplomacy/index.html].....................35 
UNOSAT [http://www.unosat.org/].......................................................31 
Video Letters [http://www.videoletters.net/].........................................49 
Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation (VVAF).............................29 
Virtual Operations On-Site Coordination Center (Virtual OSOCC)....27 
Voxiva [http://www.voxiva.net/]...........................................................38 
War Torn Societies Project (WSP) [http://www.wsp-international.org/]
...........................................................................................................48 
World Food Program (WFP) [http://www.wfp.org/] ...........................28 

Index of Organisations, Documents and Websites ▪ 101 
Commodity Movement Processing and Analysis System (COMPAS)
...................................................................................................... 28 
Deep Field Mailing System (DFMS)............................................... 28 
ETNet............................................................................................... 28 
Field Communications (FieldComms)............................................. 28 
Young Asia Television (YATV) ‘Beyond the No War Zone’ 
[http://www.yatv.net/nowarzone.php] ............................................. 45 
 

