Infosec Management Fundamentals

Infosec Management
Fundamentals
Henry Dalziel
Contributing editor
Jerod Brennen
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier

Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
Copyright r 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency,
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods or professional practices,
may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information or methods described herein. In using such information or
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for
whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-12-804172-7
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
For Information on all Syngress publications
visit our website at http://store.elsevier.com/

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY
Henry Dalziel is a serial education entrepreneur, founder of Concise Ac Ltd,
online cybersecurity blogger and e-book author. He writes for the
Concise-Courses.com blog and has developed numerous cybersecurity
continuing education courses and books. Concise Ac Ltd develops
and distributes continuing education content [books and courses] for
cybersecurity professionals seeking skill enhancement and career
advancement. The company was recently accepted onto the UK Trade
& Investment's (UKTI) Global Entrepreneur Programme (GEP).

CONTRIBUTING EDITOR BIOGRAPHY
Jerod Brennen (@slandail) by day is an infosec geek. By night, he’s a
husband, father, writer, filmmaker, martial artist, musician, gamer,
and social media junkie. Jerod has earned every gray hair in his beard,
having spent his career fulfilling infosec roles in higher education,
consulting, retail, and public utilities. In that time, Jerod has worked
on
projects
including
security
and
compliance
(GRC)
program
implementations,
penetration
tests,
web
and
mobile
application
security assessments, and security tool deployments. Jerod shares what
he’s learned over the years with local and regional information security
professional organizations, as well as attendees at larger information
security conferences. He also teaches information security courses,
both domestically and internationally. His approach to infosec has two
key tenets: you shouldn’t be afraid to void warranties, and you
shouldn't need to bypass security to get your work done.

CHAPTER 11
Introduction
This book has been developed after gaining years of experience in a
variety of IT and information security positions.
I progressed in my career from a level one (entry level) service
desk employee to the CTO and Principal Security Consultant at a
small information security consulting shop. In that time, in every role
and position that I’ve worked in, the answers to my client’s informa-
tion security questions weren’t instantly solved by the latest and
greatest security tools; even in light of the latest attacks and techni-
ques, everything that we’re seeing in the information security space
can be addressed and managed through some basic fundamental con-
trols that we’ve known about for years. So, it’s just having the knowl-
edge, discipline, and “know how” to identify and implement those
controls.
This book covers that information and will enable you to take that
information back to your own organization and step into a leadership
role.
Agenda
Scenarios
An ISO Approach
Key Strengths and Areas of Ownership
Resources
This book begins with a quick review of several scenarios, then it
goes into a framework-based approach for implementing an informa-
tion security program.
While the framework-based approach that I present builds on
controls outlined in the ISO/IEC 27000 series, an internationally
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00001-5
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

recognized body of standards for building out an information security
management system (ISMS), you’ll find that this same approach can
be applied to any number of available frameworks.
Once we cover these details, we’ll move on to building a security
team by mapping key strengths to areas of ownership. Finally, I’ll
share
resources
that
the
more
motivated
security
professional
will want to investigate in order to further your understanding of the
concepts presented here, and to dig deeper into specific areas of
interest to you.
Where Are You Today?
You’re not working in infosec yet, but you desperately want to move into that field.
You’re a newly minted CISSP with your eyes on a position in infosec management / 
leadership.
You’ve recently accepted an infosec management / leadership position in a company that
doesn’t have an established (formalized) security program.
You’ve been in security management / leadership for years, and you want to take a step back
and look at the entire program to determine whether or not you’re covering all the bases.
You’ve recently made a move into consulting, and you want to ensure that your service
offerings are appropriate for large enterprises and small / medium businesses.
Where are you today in your own information security career?
Perhaps you’re not working in InfoSec yet, but you desperately
want to move into this field. If that’s so, good for you! That was the
case with me a number of years ago. My background is actually in
music education so when I went after my first IT security job, my
resume did not reflect the education and training that someone
would expect, which made it even more difficult me to land that
role. The benefit that security-minded professionals have in today’s
market is that there in an ever-growing demand for information
security professionals, with more open positions globally than job
applicants.
Maybe you’re a newly minted CISSP (Certified Information
Systems Security Professional). Perhaps you’ve gone through the certi-
fication process, but you’re in a more tactical operational role and you
want to move into management. I spent years in that role at a large
enterprise in Columbus, Ohio, developing my skills through hands-on
2
Infosec Management Fundamentals

opportunities to implement and maintain information security control
systems. Don’t underestimate the value of this hands-on experience!
It could be that you’ve accepted an information security management
or leadership position. Now you’ve had this responsibility dropped on
your lap, it’s up to you to figure out what it means for your organi-
zation to be secure. That was my most recent enterprise position. This
is where you learn to manage a security budget and a security team.
This is also where most security professionals develop a much deeper
understanding of the balance between business goals and information
security controls.
It could be that you’ve been in that management or leadership
role for years and you want to reverse your role, to step back as
though you’re looking from the outside and determine whether or not
everything that you’re doing is appropriate. Are you actually securing
everything that needs to be secured? Is your security program complete
and comprehensive? Is the value provided by your security program
in-line with the goals of the business?
Finally, maybe you’ve made a move into information security
consulting. You’ve had enough of the enterprise lifestyle and you want
to take the expertise you picked up over the years and share that with
other organizations so they understand where to start and how to
implement security. Given the number of small and medium businesses
at the root of every nation’s economy, the sharing of your expertise in
this fashion is of incredible significance!
Regardless of where you are today, the information we’re about to
cover is directly applicable to what you’re doing. It’s going to help you
grow in your career. It’s going to help you firm up a security program
that you may be managing. The takeaway that I hope everyone gets
from this material is that the information security field is in desperate
need of motivated, dedicated professionals, individuals who, even if
they don’t yet have the background and experience, understand the
importance and value of information security for businesses of all sizes.
The variety of topics that we’re about to cover—that knowledge is in
high demand, and the information will help you find one of those open
positions. More importantly, as anyone who follows the news knows,
this knowledge is desperately needed.
3
Introduction

Key Points About ISO 27k
International Standard
Actually,16 standards
27000–27008, 27010–27011, 27031, 27033-1, 27044-1, 27035
27799: ISO27k for the healthcare industry
27001: Information technology—Security techniques—Information security
management systems—Requirements
27002: Information technology—Security techniques—Code of practice for
information security management
Fourteen categories of security management
Formal Certification vs. Informal Adoption
Your mileage may vary
I’m going to start with a framework, and while there are a number
of frameworks available, the one that I personally have found the
most success with is the ISO/IEC 27000 series.
You may be aware that ISO/IEC 27000 series is a collection of
standards for implementing an information security management system
(ISMS), but what most people don’t realize is that the ISO/IEC 27000
series is actually 16 individual standards and documents. There’s even a
standard dedicated to implementing an information security manage-
ment system in a healthcare organization (ISO/IEC 27799), where you
are bound by Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) compliance and required to appropriately secure electronically
protected health information (ePHI).
If you are just seeing the ISO/IEC 27000 series for the first time, ISO/
IEC 27001 (Information technology—Security techniques—Information
security management systems—Requirements) contains that core set of
knowledge of information on what a program should look like.
However, I have found the most value in focusing on the controls out-
lined in ISO/IEC 27002 (Information technology—Security techniques—
Code of practice for information security controls).
I mentioned that I’ve worked in multiple enterprise information
security roles. In one of those roles, I was brought into an organization
to help them become Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
(PCI DSS) compliant. I learned very quickly that PCI compliance is a
far cry from a comprehensive information security program, and I would
argue that any of the numerous PCI-compliant organizations who
have been breached recently would stand by me in that statement,
4
Infosec Management Fundamentals

understanding that they had likely gone through other stages of com-
pliance, that they likely conducted penetration tests, but attackers
were still able to find gaps in their security programs and defeat secu-
rity controls, in some cases even eluding detection long enough to do
significant damage. The PCI DSS was developed to address confi-
dentiality first and foremost, in an effort to protect consumer credit
card numbers, but does not pay equal attention to integrity controls,
and it spends even less time addressing availability controls.
The ISO/IEC 27000 series, as opposed to something like PCI, goes
into detail regarding specific controls designed to give you a strong,
comprehensive information security control set. I’ve looked at Control
Objectives for Information Technology (COBIT) from ISACA. While
COBIT is an excellent framework in and of itself, the organization I was
with at the time felt that may have been too formal, too regimented.
I looked at the Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL).
For anyone working in a production control environment with high
standards, the ITIL can help you ensure system uptime that meets cus-
tomer service level agreements (SLAs), but ITIL is very light on informa-
tion security.
The ISO/IEC 27002 control set, however, I found to be ideal. That
said, when I approached my leadership about becoming ISO/IEC
27000 series certified, they disagreed with me and told me directly that
was not the approach we were going to take. In retrospect, I agree
wholeheartedly with that decision. The organization I was with did not
have any financial benefit, any long-term benefit from having that cer-
tification. Simply put, the cost outweighed the benefit. However, an
informal adoption of those controls significantly improved our infor-
mation security program measurably from year to year. To the point
that when I made the move from enterprise to consulting, I was very
confident that individuals relying on the service my employer provided,
and all the goods that we sold, would be delivered securely (both in
person and online transactions).
In your role, that mileage may vary, you may be working for an
organization where formal certification makes sense. However, if formal
certification is not an option, you should still consider informal adoption
as a viable alternative. I’ll share some of why here in just a moment.
5
Introduction

CHAPTER 22
ISO Security Management Categories
In 2013, the ISO/IEC 27000 series was updated to reflect a more
refined control set. There are 14 categories identified in the standard,
all of which fall under the umbrella of risk management.
• Policy Management
• Security Organization Management
• Human Resources Security Management
• Asset Management
• Access Management
• Cryptography
• Physical and Environmental Security Management
• Security Operations Management
• Communications Security Management
• Systems Acquisition, Development, and Maintenance
• Supplier Security Management
• Information Security Incident Management
• Business Continuity Management
• Compliance Management
ISO Security Management 
Categories
Risk Management
Policy Management
Security Operations Management
Security Organization Management
Communications Security Management
Human Resources Security Management
Systems Acquisition, Development, and Maintenance
Asset Management
Supplier Security Management
Access Management
Information Security Incident Management
Cryptography
Business Continuity Management
Physical and Environmental Security Management
Compliance Management
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00002-7
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Security controls are not one size fits all from one organization to
the next. An organization that’s very risk averse is going to be more
locked down. They’re likely going to implement a larger number of
information security controls, and the quality of the controls they
implement is going to be greater. However, they’re also going to invest
more time and resources into both implementing and maintaining
those security controls, time, and resources that many smaller organi-
zations don’t have.
If you’re working within a smaller organization, your leadership may
be more willing to accept certain risks, more willing to take chances for
the sake of competing and building out a customer base. Even smaller
organizations will find value in these controls, but it’s important for you
to approach them with an understanding of the level of quality that is
appropriate for your organization.
I found that a clearly defined approach to risk management, one
where business leaders and security professionals openly discuss the
bad things that could to happen and what steps the organization is
willing to take in order to prepare for and respond when those bad
things happen, is going to impact the control selection that you make
from that ISO/IEC control set.
From Concept to Reality
Ask questions
Identify relevant controls
Build your checklist
Starting point
In the end, it’s about trust and discipline
How do we get from this concept of a document, a published standard
or framework to an actual implemented functional information security
program? In my experience, it can be accomplished via a relatively
simple process.
The first step (and this is very difficult for a number of IT folks, but
we need to do it anyway) is to get out from behind our desks and ask
questions. If you want to be successful in implementing an information
security program you need to speak with people not only in IT, but in
the business all throughout the organization. Throughout this material,
8
Infosec Management Fundamentals

I’m going to give you guidance regarding questions you can ask in
order to identify which controls are appropriate for your organization.
Once you’ve had those discussions, that Q&A session, you’re going to
begin building a project list of controls that you’ve identified to be
appropriate for your organization given your risk appetite. With that
list in hand, you’ll be able to discuss your desired level of quality, as
well as project timelines for implementation activities. How soon do
we need to make these changes? How much are we willing to spend?
How many people do we need to support the changes?
That checklist that results from your discussions will be your starting
point. It’s from that checklist that you’re going to drive all of the changes
that you make. In the end, it’s about the level of trust you’re placing in
your employees, your partners, and your suppliers, as well as the dis-
cipline that you, within your organization, are willing to adhere to in
order to ensure that those controls are implemented and maintained.
Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA)
When implementing an information security controls framework,
the Plan-Do-Check-Act model is incredibly appropriate. It worked
extremely well in the organizations that I was working in.
In the “Plan” phase, you discuss which controls are relevant. You
have the conversations, and you begin identifying changes that you intend
to make in your organization in order to improve your security posture.
The “Do” phase is where those discussions transform into imple-
mentation projects. We develop project plans, we decide on project
budgets, and we allocate resources who will actively spend time on
implementing and maintaining these controls.
9
ISO Security Management Categories

Once those projects are complete, once the controls have been
implemented, you move onto the “Check” phase. This is where you
validate whether or not the controls were implemented correctly. The
IT Audit department plays a key role in this phase, as do external
consultants.
I’ve worked with an organization who felt they had a terrific
patching program in place and that they were doing an excellent job of
identifying and remediating vulnerabilities. During one engagement,
I discovered a critical (exploitable) vulnerability on one of the systems
that stored sensitive information. When I presented this finding to the
organization, they performed their own investigation and determined
that the system fully patched and that my finding was incorrect. We
were using different security tools and processes to evaluate technical
vulnerabilities on the target system, and we disagreed over which find-
ing was correct, and (more importantly) whether or not the vulner-
ability was even present. In the end, they found that there was a gap in
their patch management program. It had deployed the patch to the
target system, but hadn’t appropriately installed the patch. A com-
ponent of their patching solution had failed, and because they weren’t
checking whether or not the patches had been appropriately deployed,
they had an exposure that could have potentially been exploited by an
attacker. The “Check” phase where you revisit the controls after imple-
mentation and determine whether or not the control was appropriately
implemented is incredibly important.
The “Act” phase, that fourth component of this cycle, is where you
propose changes where you identify new controls (or perhaps controls
that you hadn’t yet discussed) and make proposals to implement those
controls, which will take you back to the beginning Plan-Do-Check-
Act model.
Of course, the model here is cyclical. It’s intended to be a continuous
process because information security is not a destination; it’s a journey.
At no point will you achieve at an absolutely secure set of controls,
impervious to every attack. Threats will continue to evolve, as will
attacks. If you follow bug bounty programs and competitions like
Pwn2Own hosted at the CanSecWest security conference, you’re aware
of the economy that has grown around vulnerability discovery and
disclosure. This economy is bringing more security researchers into the
field and encouraging activity from independent researchers, which is
10
Infosec Management Fundamentals

contributing to a more rapid discovery and disclosure rate for technical
vulnerabilities in critical systems. I would argue that may be why we’re
seeing attacks like Heartbleed, Shellshock, POODLE, Sandworm,
VENOM, and so many critical vulnerabilities coming out each year.
Even though our controls may have been initially implemented cor-
rectly and appropriately, the threat landscape has changed, as has the
capability set of the attacker.
It’s important for us to continually visit this Plan-Do-Check-Act
cycle to ensure that the controls we’ve implemented are correct.
11
ISO Security Management Categories

CHAPTER 33
Risk Management
I mentioned that risk management is an umbrella under which all
of these controls are identified and ultimately implemented. The first
questions you should ask, and you can ask this of anyone, nontechnical
or technical, are:
What could go wrong at our organization?
What are the bad things that can happen that we’re worried about?
It’s important that you have an open, honest conversation about
the risks most likely to impact your organization, based on incidents
that have happened within your industry, as well as incidents that may
have happened within your organization in the past.
Once you begin identifying and articulating those concerns and
fears, the next questions you should ask are:
How do our controls stack up?
If that bad thing were to happen, what defenses would we have to
minimize damage?
Risk Management
Questions
What could go wrong?
How do our controls stack up?
Are we spending a dollar to protect a dime?
What’s our risk appetite?
Controls
Perform a risk assessment
Risk = Likelihood × Impact
NIST (800–30)
FAIR (Factor Analysis of Information Risk)
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00003-9
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Information security programs often grow organically, and you’re
likely to find that you already have some controls in place. Knowing
where these controls have already been implemented will help you
appropriately manage your information security budget going forward.
Once you’ve got the defenses and controls identified, the next
logical questions are:
Are we spending too much?
Are we spending a dollar to protect a dime?
I’ve asked (and been asked) these questions many times throughout
my career. Many organizations fall into the trap of making a gut feeling
decision to implement a control, regardless of how much it costs, but if
we approach our controls with a critical eye, we’re likely to find that
we’re spending too much, that the amount of money we’re spending on
one control far outweighs the risk.
Finally, all of these questions are going to drive the final questions:
What’s our risk appetite?
How much risk are we willing to accept?
As I mentioned earlier, security is not a one-size-fits-all solution for
every organization. An organization that protects critical national infra-
structure is likely to have a more conservative, more risk-averse appetite
than an organization that sells t-shirts. Understanding your organiza-
tion’s risk appetite is essential if you want to be an effective information
security manager.
The first control that I recommend every organization implement, a
control that needs to be executed on a recurring basis, is some sort
of risk assessment. If I look at the NIST Special Publication 800-30
revision 1 (Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments), they present a
simple qualitative formula for calculating risk:
Risk 5 Likelihood 3 Impact
Likelihood refers to how often a risk is likely to occur or be realized,
and impact refers to how bad the damage would be if that were to
happen. The NIST document provides additional recommendations on
how to calculate the different scores.
14
Infosec Management Fundamentals

If I wanted to go to the other end of the spectrum and look at a
very quantitative approach to risk management, factor analysis of
information risk (FAIR) gets into a very detailed comparison of the
dollars and cents that an organization should be spending to manage
identified risks. In my experience, performing a FAIR-based risk
assessment requires more planning and training that performing a
NIST-based risk assessment, but properly implemented, the FAIR
methodology can provide very specific budgetary recommendations.
Regardless of whether you perform a qualitative NIST-based risk
assessment, a quantitative FAIR-based risk assessment, or a risk assess-
ment based on some other risk management methodology, that risk
assessment will become the bedrock on which you build your information
security program.
15
Risk Management

CHAPTER 44
Policy Management
Once you perform your risk assessment and you’ve begun the
information
security
and
risk
management
conversation
started,
the next step is to take a look at your information security policy set.
The questions to ask at this stage:
What are the rules that we expect our employees to follow?
If you are going to work at our company, what’s okay and what’s
not okay?
For example, a very common question many companies are asking
today is:
Should employees be allowed to bring their own personal devices
(smartphones, tablets, etc.) and connect them to the internal wire-
less network?
Well, if you don’t have a policy that clearly states what your rules
are, then chances are people are going to do that without first seeking
approval from someone in management. Documenting your expecta-
tions in policy is a crucial first step in mitigating these risks.
Policy Management
Questions
What rules do we expect our employees to follow?
How do we do what we do?
Controls
Policies, Standards, Procedures
Policy = Rules, high level
Standard = Technical requirements, detailed
Procedure = Step-by-step instructions
Starting point = three critical policies
Information Security Policy
Data Classification Policy
Acceptable Use Policy
If you want employees to know what’s expected of them, you have to write it down!
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00004-0
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Once you’ve documented what’s okay and what’s not okay to do,
with respect to your IT resources, you’re going to begin addressing the
next question:
How is it that we do what we do?
This shifts the conversation from high-level policies to more detailed
standards and procedures. Let’s continue with the personal device
discussion. If your organization decides that the risk of allowing employ-
ees to connect personal devices to the company network is less than the
cost of providing company-owned devices to those same employees, the
security-minded manager asks questions about which controls are still
necessary to implement for these users and their devices.
What does a secure iPhone look like?
What does a secure Android tablet look like?
Should we enforce passcodes or passwords?
Should we enable location services to locate lost or stolen devices,
especially if that location tracking might violate employee privacy?
Is it okay to allow users to connect jailbroken iPhones and rooted
Android tablets to our internal wireless network? (Hint: No. No it
is not.)
What other security settings need to be turned on before we allow
that phone to connect to our internal wireless network?
The specific settings that you insist users apply before connecting their
devices to the internal wireless network should be documented in one
or more standards. The process of actually changing those settings,
however, would be a procedure. Procedures cover other scenarios as well.
What do we do (step-by-step) when someone leaves the company?
What changes do we make to their access?
Policies are very high level, they shouldn’t change that often.
Standards should be reflective of the technology, and as such should
change as the technology changes. Continuing with the mobile exam-
ple, every time a new version of iOS or the Android operating system
is released, you should have a new standard regarding what a secure
phone or tablet looks like within your organization. At the very least,
you should publish a guideline with recommended settings that users
should apply until the new standard has been developed, approved,
and published.
18
Infosec Management Fundamentals

Procedures will be used frequently by IT support teams. This is
especially true for help desk and service desk teams, those parts of the
IT organization that tends to function as the entry point for new
employees. You should absolutely have detailed step-by-step instruc-
tions so that these teams can understand how to perform security tasks
from the first day they start working with the company.
While a complete information security policy set can take some time
to document, the three critical policies that I recommend everyone start
with are:
1. Information Security
2. Data Classification
3. Acceptable Use
These three policies are just the tip of the iceberg, but they will help
you quickly home in on how you do information security at you
organization.
The Information Security Policy should identify the security rules
that employees should follow. The Data Classification Policy should
clarify the types of controls required for protecting more sensitive
data, both at rest and in motion. (This policy is particularly important,
as you’ll learn later on, since there are many other policies, standards,
and procedures that rely on that data classification policy.) Then, to
address what actions are employees allowed to take while using com-
pany resources (namely Internet, email, mobile devices, and wireless
networks), you’ll want to document your Acceptable Use Policy.
If you want your employees to know what’s expected of them, you
have to write it down.
Otherwise you’re destined to fail.
19
Policy Management

CHAPTER 55
Security Organization Management
Security Organization
Management
Questions
Who’s going to do all this?
Controls
Executive Sponsorship
Information Security Steering Committee
Information Security Team
Internal vs. External (NDA!)
Matrixed
With these policies in place, the next question you’re going to ask is:
Who is going to do all this anyway?
I’ve heard the term unfunded mandate more than once, and I’ve
been on the receiving end of that term where there was a new direc-
tion, a new rule that we’re expected to comply with, regardless of
whether or not we have the technology or staff to do so. The end result
is often a new system deployed, but no designated admin.
This is where the concept of executive sponsorship, ownership of
security from a C-Level executive, is critical. You need someone who
can make budgetary and staffing decisions to support the policies that
you’ve implemented. With the support of that executive sponsor, you
should form an information security steering committee, a group of
leaders within the organization to talk about how security changes
impact their specific areas, and to help them collectively come to
decisions regarding which controls you’ll implement.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00005-2
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

You’ll also need an information security team, whether it’s formed
from internal staff or by engaging a third party managed security
services provider. Someone will need to patch your systems. Someone
will need to run vulnerability scans, to track your compliance status,
to identify and remove instances of malware.
Make sure if you do have that external team in place, you
document a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). You don’t want your
internal security incidents becoming public knowledge as part of that
relationship.
I have also seen success with matrixed security teams, where organi-
zations have a very small full-time information security resource or
team, but then will engage people throughout IT and throughout the
business to help out with security, even though those individuals are
not full-time security professionals.
These three controls here will help you define and manage how
you’re going to run your security program.
22
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 66
Human Resources Security Management
Human Resources
Security Management
Questions
Do we have job descriptions for the security team?
Do our employees really know what’s expected of them?
Should we be doing background checks or credit checks on any employees?
Controls
Job Descriptions
Manager, Senior Analyst, Analyst
Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA)
Security Awareness Training
Onboarding and Separations Procedures
Human Resources (HR) security management, our next category,
focuses on job descriptions and training. Key questions related to this
category include:
Do you have job descriptions for your security team?
If you were to go hire a new security team member, what title
would you look for? What skills would you request?
Answering these questions is essential if you intend to find the right
people for those roles, whether as internal employees or as third party
managed security services providers.
Another crucial question:
Do your employees really know what is expected of them?
It’s one thing to document this information in policy, but have you
validated whether or not your policies are being adhered to?
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00006-4
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

One additional question that I feel you should ask when discussing
human resources security controls is:
Should we be doing background checks or credit checks on any
employees?
If someone is going to have access to highly sensitive information,
you may want the peace of mind in knowing that they haven’t had any
criminal activity in their background, or that they’re not in a financial
compromised position. Knowing that the three common aspects of a
crime are means, motive, and opportunity, you can reduce the risk of
insider fraud by taking motive off the table.
Among the controls you would implement in this category are three
key job descriptions:
1. An information security manager;
2. A senior security analyst; and
3. A security analyst.
I’ll discuss these three roles in detail later on, but rest assured that
they are critical elements of your information security control set.
As I mentioned earlier, a non-disclosure agreement (NDA), is
another key control. This is often a boilerplate document that you can
share with third parties to ensure that, if you choose to engage them in
a way that requires the exchange of sensitive information, they are not
going to disclose key internal information about your organization to
anyone.
Security awareness training is another essential HR security control,
not only for employees, but also for your IT staff to understand. If you
want your employees to successfully detect and appropriately respond to
social engineering attacks, teach them what an attack looks like and tell
them who to contact when they are targeted. It’s unreasonable to expect
your developers to create secure web and mobile applications if you
haven’t taught them how to write secure code? Likewise, don’t expect
your system administrators to understand how to harden a Windows
server or Linux server unless you’ve trained them.
Reiterating what I mentioned earlier in the policy section, onboarding
and separations procedures are very important.
24
Infosec Management Fundamentals

How do we hire someone and grant them access to internal systems?
How do we end someone’s time with our organization and take that
access away?
These four HR security controls here will help you ensure that your
information security control set is reasonable and appropriate.
25
Human Resources Security Management

CHAPTER 77
Asset Management
Asset Management
Questions
What information assets do we have?
How do systems enter the organization?
What do we do with retired systems?
Controls
Asset Tracking System
Discovery
Inventory
Technology Purchase Request Form
In the asset management category, the key question we ask here is
as follows:
What information assets do we have?
Put another way, do you know what systems are connected to your
internal network? Because if you don’t, it may not be prudent to consider it
your network. Someone may have added a wireless access point or a rogue
system that they are using to monitor employee activity, to access trade
secrets, or to serve up malware to unsuspecting visitors to your website.
The threat of unmanaged devices and applications can come from
within an organization as well. Departments with discretionary
spending authority might purchase and implement a technology solu-
tion without ever engaging (or even notifying) the IT department.
Gartner has coined the term “Shadow IT” to cover this.
What information assets do you have and how do you add systems
to the network?
How do you acquire new technology?
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00007-6
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Understanding how you acquire systems and applications and intro-
duce them to your internal network is essential if you want to mitigate
the risks associated with unmanaged technology.
Another key question:
What do we do with retired systems?
No piece of technology is going to last forever, and eventually you
are going to turn it off. Take old hard drives for example. How
many IT teams remove old hard drives and put them in a locked
closet, a process that they will continue to follow until the closet is
full? Storing old hard drives may be an acceptable solution for
some organizations, depending on their risk appetite, until the
closet is full. What do you do at that point?
Ask these questions, and you’ll identify a need for some sort of
asset tracking system where you can ideally discover all the systems on
your network and then track that inventory as it changes over time.
In order to select the right asset tracking system for your organiza-
tion, you need to know what information you need to collect about
your systems. With mobile devices, a mobile device management
(MDM) or enterprise mobility management (EMM) solution might
contain pre-configured technical policies designed to collect informa-
tion that most organizations have agreed is relevant. With work-
stations, you may already have a technology in place that is pushing
software changes and patches to systems that does that tracking. You
might use the same solution to patch and manage servers, although
some organizations choose to manage their workstation population
and their server population using different solutions.
Finding one centralized asset management system could be tricky
for your organization, especially if you are budget-constrained. At the
very least, a small organization with a spreadsheet that includes the
DNS and IP address of every system on their network is a key control.
Also, in order to combat Shadow IT, a technology purchase request
form can help you respond to departments or units within the organization
who are purchasing systems or applications without checking with IT first.
If you provide them with a way to acquire these solutions in a manner that
keeps IT in the loop, IT might be able to help them better articulate their
requirements and select an even more effective solution, not to mention a
solution that adheres to your internal information security policies.
28
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 88
Access Management
Access Management
Questions
Does everyone have access to what they need in order to do their jobs?
Can unmanaged devices attach to our network?
Controls
Principle of Least Privilege
Centralized User Directory
Access Reviews
Password Management
Lock Screens
Multi-Factor Authentication
Port Security
Access management deals with what resources people can get to,
those resources they need in order to do their jobs. The first question
you should ask is:
Does everyone have the access they need in order to do their jobs?
If someone starts a new job and they need to grant that person
rights in Active Directory, a higher risk approach is to look at the
most senior member of the company and say just copy his/her creden-
tials. I say this is a higher risk, since it comes with a greater likelihood
that you will potentially grant the new hire unnecessary access to
systems that store sensitive data. If you provide people with the
appropriate access they need in order to do their jobs, it’s unlikely they
are going to have a need or desire to circumvent your access controls
(i.e., ask someone to share his/her username and password), but you
first need to understand what those access rights are.
Another question you should ask:
Can unmanaged devices attach to our network?
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00008-8
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Look at access management not from a user perspective, but from a
device perspective. If someone can enter a conference room and plug
an unmanaged laptop into a network jack, you have an exposure. If
someone can connect a non-company wireless device to your wireless
network, whether it is a laptop, a smartphone, or a tablet, they could
potentially do a considerable amount of damage to the internal organi-
zation through that connection.
By asking those questions, you’ll begin to identify the appropriate
access rights for employees and networked devices, which is fundamental
if you are to adhere to the principle of least privilege. Approaching every
firewall rule, every Active Directory group, with the notion that we are
only going to give people and systems just enough access to do what they
need to do, is going to help you prevent both intentional and unin-
tentional security incidents.
Some sort of centralized user directory is considering a leading
practice in this area. Most often we see Active Directory from
Microsoft, but directories such as OpenLDAP or eDirectory can often
accomplish the same goal. Secure organizations need a central user
store that all the systems can reference so that when someone is let go
from an organization, an administrator can update that user’s employ-
ment status in one place, and then the centralized directory can cut
off that user’s access immediately for all connected systems and appli-
cations. This control is especially important if the separation was
unfriendly.
Access reviews are more of a procedure, albeit an important one,
where you assign business managers (not IT managers) the responsibility
of reviewing who has access to their systems and data, and then have
them determine whether or not that access is appropriate. IT is never
going to know with absolute certainty who should have access to what,
but the line of business managers should. Performing these access
reviews will help identify situations where the principle of least privilege
is being violated, including violations that an automated system may
have missed.
As much as I hate passwords as a security control, password
management is still important. Identifying password length, password
rotation requirements, the construction and complexity of passwords,
and centralizing that functionality to ensure that strong passwords are
30
Infosec Management Fundamentals

in place across the entire organization has value. It’s also important to
ensure that password security controls are enforced through lock
screens that time out, not only on workstations and laptops, but also
on smartphones and tablets. Also included in this control set is a lock-
out after a period of inactivity and the requirement for multi-factor
authentication to systems that process and/or store sensitive data.
To clarify, multi-factor traditionally includes a combination of some-
thing you know, something you have, and something you are. Any com-
bination of those two is going to make it much more difficult for an
attacker to bypass a login screen. Mobile devices that have location
services enabled allow for an additional factor of authentication
(namely, somewhere you are).
Finally, access management can include network port security
controls. If you have network jacks in conference rooms that no one’s
using, turn them off. If you have jacks underneath desks that aren’t in
use, turn those off as well. As long as you are only enabling ports
where you have an active system connected, you are reducing the
attack surface where someone could introduce an unmanaged device
to your internal network.
31
Access Management

CHAPTER 99
Cryptography
Cryptography
Questions
Do we encrypt sensitive data at rest?
Do we encrypt sensitive data in motion?
Controls
Documented Encryption Policy
Documented Encryption Key Management Procedures
SSL/TLS Encryption
Hard Drive Encryption
Database Encryption
Cell vs. Row vs. Table
The conversation about cryptography (or encryption) controls begins
by asking two basic questions:
Are we encrypting sensitive data at rest?
Are we encrypting it while it’s in motion?
We’ve seen a shift in the industry, and it’s really picked up steam as
of late, to “encrypt all the things.” If you have something that you
want to protect, putting encryption in place is a great way, arguably,
to do that. I say arguably, because encryption requires disciplined
encryption key management practices. Anyone who has been impacted
by a ransomware such as CryptoLocker or CryptoWall can attest to
the harm caused by an encrypted file system where the decryption key
is unavailable. The controls that you identify as a result of this conver-
sation should be documented in your encryption policy, as well as in
your encryption key management procedures.
Discussions around encrypting network traffic most often steer
toward properly implemented SSL and TLS, although the informed
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00009-X
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

information security manager is aware of critical vulnerabilities in
certain encryption mechanisms (POODLE being the one that comes to
mind right away). It’s not enough to just “encrypt” the data. Encryption
controls must be securely implemented and constantly monitored for
new vulnerabilities.
When it comes to encrypting hard drives, whole disk encryption is
considered a leading practice. Before you can encrypt your hard drives,
however, you need to ask some specific questions.
What technology are you going to use?
How are you going to manage the encryption keys?
Is the encryption mechanism vulnerable to bypass attacks?
Do you need the ability to centrally manage encryption keys?
When considering encryption at the database level, it is especially
important to take performance impacts into account. That said, data-
base encryption of some sort is another recommended control, since
databases tend to be repositories of critical information.
Are we going to encrypt data at the cell level, or are we going to
encrypt at the row level?
Are we going to encrypt entire tables?
Fine tuning that encryption so that you are protecting the sensitive,
most critical data, without disrupting business processes (i.e., doing
more harm than good) is key.
34
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 10
10
Physical and Environmental Security
Management
Physical and Environmental
Security Management
Questions
What’s our perimeter?
Could someone walk into any of our locations and take something that
doesn’t belong to them?
Controls
Locks
Sensitive areas
Badges
Employee, Contractor, or Visitor?
Physical Security Assessment
The area of physical and environmental security management
surprised me the most when I initially implemented my first informa-
tion security program. I must admit, I didn’t fully understand the role
in physical security played by the information security manager.
A few key questions:
What is your physical perimeter?
Can someone walk into your server room and steal the system?
Can someone walk into an office location and take a smartphone, a
tablet?
Can someone get into a network device closet and plug something
into a switch?
What is your perimeter and can someone take away something that
does not belong them?
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00010-6
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

As you can imagine, many of the logical security controls you
choose to implement are at a greater risk of compromise if you lose
physical control of the devices you are trying to protect.
Locks around sensitive areas are an excellent control—locks, I should
clarify, that can’t easily be bypassed with a bump key or a modified
hotel key card. As anyone who has followed Chris Nickerson’s exploits
is aware, a clever attacker can compromise sophisticated systems like
motion detector locks with a Mylar balloon and a warm wash cloth,
tricking the system into thinking it is sensing a living person.
Understanding the attacker will help you understand what locks are
appropriate for your organization. Providing badges, some sort of iden-
tification for employees so you can just distinguish an employee from a
contractor from a temporary visitor, is also important from a security
awareness perspective, especially if you encourage your employees to
challenge (or offer to assist) anyone wandering around a sensitive area
without a visible badge.
Doing some sort of physical security assessment will also help you
better understand your exposures in this area. Dumpster diving can help
you determine whether or not sensitive information is being thrown away
without being shredded. Hiring someone to actually try to break into one
of your offices is another excellent test. This is particularly important for
remote locations, locations far enough from headquarters that security
controls may not be actively enforced.
All of these controls will go a long way to address the associated
physical and environmental risks.
36
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 11
11
Security Operations Management
Security Operations
Management
Questions
Who’s responsible for the day-to-day security stuff?
What exactly is the day-to-day security stuff?
Controls
Security Operations Procedures
Change Control
Antimalware
Encryption
Logging and Monitoring
Enabled, centralized, and detailed
When considering security operations management, your adminis-
tration of the day-to-day security tasks, the following question comes
to mind:
Who is responsible for the day-to-day security stuff?
We talked about security organization management earlier. Now,
we take it a step further, because when we are talking about who’s
responsible for the day to day security, we also have to ask:
What exactly is the day to day security “stuff”?
Log reviews, running vulnerability scans, patching systems, responding
to potential security incidents . .. the day-to-day responsibilities of an
information security team can be considerable. Once you have identified
all of those procedures, you’re going to be able to identify who is (or who
should be) responsible for managing them.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00011-8
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Security operation procedures include repeatable tasks such as
change control. Often times, unauthorized changes can be more dam-
aging to a system then an external attacker, so your change control
procedure is a key control in the security operations management cate-
gory. Management of end point security agents, which might include
antimalware and/or desktop encryption, also fall into this category.
Logging and monitoring is another key control that falls under
security operations management. While it is important that we make
every effort to prevent bad things from happening, it is also important
that we have the ability to detect when they have happened so that we
can respond to them very quickly. You can accomplish this by imple-
menting a centralized logging mechanism that is gathering logs from
all of the systems that you need to watch and capturing enough log
data that you could perform both near real-time alerting of security
incidents as they occur, as well as the more long-term investigation of
security incidents and their root causes, tasks that we often associate
with the field of computer forensics.
38
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 12
12
Communications Security Management
Communications Security
Management
Questions
Have we segmented our networks based on our information classification
policy (i.e., principle of least privilege)?
Have we appropriately secured all data exchanges with third parties?
Controls
Network Segmentation
Firewall Security Audits
System-to-System Encryption
Contracts, Confidentiality Agreements, & NDAs
Communications security management deals primarily with network
security controls.
One key control is network segmentation, so the first question
I would ask is:
Have we segmented our networks based on our information classifi-
cation policy?
You’ll remember previously that I recommend three critical policies,
and that the data classification policy is one of them. You’ll find it very
difficult to restrict access to sensitive data unless you know how your
organization classifies data, where that sensitive data resides, and who
has access to it. Once you’ve done that classification and segmented your
network, it’s going to make it a lot harder for an attacker to get to that
data without legitimate access.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00012-X
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

You should also ask the question:
Have we appropriately secured all data exchanges with third parties?
I guarantee that you are doing business with at least one third party
today, most likely a cloud service provider, and the question you
should ask from the security management perspective is:
How do we take in the appropriate action to lock down that com-
munication to ensure that unauthorized third parties can’t access
the information we’re exchanging with the authorized third party?
When implementing network segmentation, it is important that you
first consider the level of complexity that your network administration
team can reasonably support? I’ve visited organizations where I’ve
logged on to their public (unencrypted) guest wireless network and had
direct network access to patient and billing systems. From a security
perspective, that is a terrible network architecture design, but they
didn’t design the network with security in mind. Their first priority
was simplicity. They hadn’t had the discussion with their security team
around network segmentation and therefore had a huge exposure.
Firewall security audits are another key control. Reviewing the rules
to determine how an outsider, for example, might be able to follow a net-
work path to an internal system or location. Do you have any exposures
or gaps there? If you do, perhaps it’s time to consider system-to-system
encryption where you encrypt data even on the internal network. An
internal (unencrypted) FTP process from one server to another may seem
secure because it’s on the inside, but once an unauthorized party gains
access to the internal network, you now have both credentials and poten-
tially sensitive data exposed in plaintext.
In addition to these technical controls, documentation controls such
as security language in contracts, confidentiality agreements, and NDAs
with your third parties will help ensure that they are following the rules
that you’ve laid out.
40
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 13
13
Systems Acquisition, Development,
and Maintenance
Systems Acquisition, 
Development, and Maintenance
Questions
How do we secure new systems before we add them to our network?
Do we have production data in nonproduction systems?
Controls
System hardening process
Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC)
Change control procedures
Change Approval Board (CAB)
Vulnerability management procedures
Development, QA, Production
Scan EVERYTHING (hosts, databases, apps)
Penetration testing (validate your controls)
Systems acquisition, development, and maintenance—what question
do we ask here?
How do we secure new systems before we add them to our
network?
We’re bringing new systems and new applications online all the
time, but we can’t assume that they’ve all been properly locked down.
Do we have production data in nonproduction systems?
I still see this today, and I understand why. Developers are moving
quickly, constrained by limited budgets and tight project deadlines, and
they need to test their applications with a high degree of accuracy. It’s diffi-
cult to come up with test data that is as accurate of a reflection of produc-
tion as actual production data. That said, I’ve been in organizations doing
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00013-1
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

internal penetration tests where I’ve been able to compromise sensitive pro-
duction data sets by exploiting weaknesses on the nonproduction systems
where that data had been stored during the testing process (and, unfortu-
nately, subsequently forgotten). This was possible because those nonpro-
duction systems didn’t have the same level of security and control as the
production systems, a condition that is true in many organizations.
A handful of controls you can implement to address risks associated
with systems acquisition, development, and maintenance are documen-
ted system hardening procedures, a secure software development life-
cycle, and change control procedures that include an approval board
tasked with reviewing all changes before they’re implemented to ensure
that those changes don’t inadvertently or break anything.
Vulnerability management procedures also fall under this category,
which includes scanning development, test, quality assurance (QA),
and production systems for exploitable technical vulnerabilities. If an
attacker compromises a nonproduction host system, even if that system
is devoid of production data, that attacker can still use that host as a
jump point to get to other host systems. Alternately, the attacker may
use that access to execute a pass-the-hash attack, which could be
particularly devastating if domain admin credentials are stored locally
on that nonproduction system.
Don’t just scan host systems, though. Scan your databases. Scan
your applications. Bear in mind that the tools most commonly used to
detect host-level vulnerabilities are not always the same tools that will
inform you of critical database- or application-level vulnerabilities.
Here’s a good rule of thumb: If an attacker can interact with a
resource, it’s on the security manager to figure out how to identify and
mediate any vulnerabilities that may be present in that resource.
Once you have vulnerability scanning and remediation well in-hand,
penetration testing is the next valid step. Penetration testing is a method
for validating whether or not the controls you’ve implemented are
actually effective in deterring an attacker. A vulnerability scan is going
to tell you that you have critical exposures. A penetration test is going
to help you understand whether or not an attacker might actually be
able to take advantage of that exposure, exploit it, and either access
sensitive data or cause a business disruption.
42
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 14
14
Supplier Security Management
Supplier Security 
Management
Questions
Who are all of our suppliers?
Do they know our security (and compliance) expectations?
Controls
Supplier List (Accounting)
Documented Supplier Information Security Requirements
Contracts, Confidentiality Agreements, & NDA’s
Supporting Procedures
Supplier Information Security Assessment
Supplier Information Security Audit
Supplier security management has become more and more important
as of late, especially when it was revealed that attackers were able to
compromise Target customer data in 2013 by first compromising one of
Target’s suppliers, and then exploiting that supplier’s access to install
malware on internal Target systems.
Ask your organization these questions:
Who are all of our suppliers?
Who are the third parties with whom we exchange information?
What you’ll find when you ask these questions is that that list is going
to continue to grow and grow with every person with whom you speak.
With the advent of cloud computing, we have more and more third parties
who offer critical business services and apps that our internal users increas-
ingly rely on. You’ll find that many business units have already engaged
these third parties without IT’s knowledge, as I mentioned earlier.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00014-3
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Who are these suppliers?
Who are these third parties and do they know our security and com-
pliance expectations?
PCI, the payment card industry, clearly states that if you are sharing
credit card data with any third party, then that third party must also
demonstrate PCI DSS compliance. Do your suppliers know of this
responsibility? Have you told them?
One of the key controls that is going to become apparent after you’ve
asked these questions is a documented list of your suppliers. I’ve found
that the best way to compile this list is to follow the money. Speak with
your accounting department. They should be able to provide you with
the majority of the list, because if you are engaged with a third party for
business, you are either paying them money or they are paying you.
That exchange of money is being tracked somewhere. If you can get
into the system that is tracking that list of exchanges, you’ll have your
list of suppliers.
You should also have a documented supplier information security
requirements checklist of some sort.
What information security expectations do you have of them?
Do they have to adhere to PCI?
Do they have to adhere to HIPAA?
Do they have to adhere to the SANS 20 Critical Security Controls,
or does it make more sense for them to adhere to Common Sense
Security Framework?
Your organization needs to agree on the security controls that suppli-
ers and partners must have in place, and then someone must own the
responsibility of communicating those controls to the necessary parties.
Contracts, confidentiality agreements, and NDA’s come up here
again, in addition to two key supporting procedures: a supplier infor-
mation security assessment and a supplier information security audit.
You need to be able to quickly assess whether or not they have key
controls in place, but in some cases you’ll need to dig deeper and ask
them to provide evidence. That’s where the audit comes into play.
44
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 15
15
Information Security Incident Management
Information Security
Incident Management
Questions
Controls
What could go wrong?
What’s already gone wrong?
What do we do when something goes wrong?
Security Incident Response
One Policy
Many Procedures
Security Information Event Management (SIEM) System
Training
End User Security Awareness
Incident Response
Forensics
Tabletop Exercises
Information security incident management is the next category.
Returning to that risk discussion, the umbrella under which all these
controls are discussed, a pair of more in-depth questions arise:
What are the things that could go wrong?
What are the things that have already gone wrong?
As we have matured in detecting and responding to security
incidents, we now have some data that we can go back to. For exam-
ple, let’s say that your organization has been tracking the number of
lost and stolen laptops and mobile devices reported annually, as well
as the number of service desk calls where a support technician had to
manually remove malware from an end user’s machine. Worst case
scenario, perhaps your organization actually saw a data breach. By
analyzing all of this data, you can improve your security incident
detection and response capabilities.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00015-5
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Another key question:
When something goes wrong what do you do?
If the answer is, “We run around screaming with our hair on fire,”
then your organization definitely has an opportunity to improve this
particular security control set.
If you document one security incident response policy with multiple
supporting procedures, a procedure for each specific type of incident
you plan to address, then you can plan ahead of time how to quickly
contain the damage and prevent the incident from having a greater
impact on your business.
A security information event management (SIEM) system is another
critical control, although somewhat more advanced. Hopefully, you
already have a centralized log management system collecting log data
from network devices, critical host systems, and critical applications.
A fine-tuned SIEM system could normalize and analyze that data,
search for potential attack patterns, and then alert security staff when
those patterns are detected.
Training comes up here again, reinforcing what we covered during the
HR security management section. You should train your end users on
how to detect and respond to security incidents, especially social engineer-
ing attacks. Teach them to never engage a social engineer. Teach them to
always report social engineering to someone in security. The security
team can then communicate to other areas of the business to be on the
lookout for that type of attack. You should also train the incident
response team on how to respond to incidents. Tabletop exercises are an
excellent control that allow responders to simulate a response and detect
potential gaps in their response procedures or in the controls that they
have implemented to support security incident response activities.
Larger organizations may want to consider training staff in proper
computer forensics techniques, especially if that data is ever going to be
used in court. That said, many organizations find it to be much more
cost-effective to maintain a relationship with a certified security provider
who specializes in computer forensics.
46
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 16
16
Business Continuity Management
Business Continuity
Management
Questions
How will we recover from a disaster?
How will we keep the business going during the recovery process?
Controls
Disaster Recovery Plan
Business Continuity Plan
Backups
Tabletop Exercises
Business continuity management controls focus on helping you
prepare for and recover from a disaster, as well as how you continue
to operate during that recovery period.
The first question:
How will we recover from a disaster?
. . . is answered by your disaster recovery plan. This document out-
lines how you will bring your IT systems back online, how you will
restore data, and in what order these events will occur. As you can
imagine, generating and testing your backups on a regular basis is
critical to this plan. You may be backing up data, but if you are not
testing your backups, you may find during a security incident or a
recovery event that your backups are useless or they’ve broken, that
they’ve stopped backing up at some point and no one was monitoring.
This is why tabletop exercises and mock recovery exercises are
necessary.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00016-7
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The second question:
How will we keep the business going during the recovery process?
. . . is answered by your business continuity plan. This document
differs from the disaster recovery plan, in that it focuses on how you
will continue to operate securely while the disaster recovery efforts are
underway.
48
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 17
17
Compliance Management
Compliance Management
Questions
What do I need to comply with?
HIPAA, PCI, NERC/FERC, SOX, COPPA, FERPA, CFPB, etc.
External and Internal
Controls
Documented Compliance Procedures
Who is responsible for what?
When is it due?
Unified Compliance Framework
Audits
External and Internal
Scheduled, nonintrusive, and independent
The last group of security controls I want to cover fall under com-
pliance management.
There are two key questions here:
What do I need to comply with?
What rules and regulations exist that apply to me?
HIPAA, PCI, NERC/FERC, SOX, COPPA, FERPA, CFPB . . . the
list is staggering. There are so many acronyms that identifying what’s
relevant to you can take a lot of time. Organizations such as the Unified
Compliance Framework exist solely to track the hundreds of regulations
that exist around the globe, and to help organizations make sense of the
compliance process.
Keep in mind that you’re looking not only at external compliance
requirements, but also at internal policies that you’ve published. What
do we need to comply with there? Having documented compliance
procedures where you identify who is responsible for demonstrating
compliance and when that evidence is due is important.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00017-9
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

I’ve seen governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) solutions that
track some of this information for you. GRC solutions help you
track not only your organization’s internal and external compliance
obligations, but also the level of compliance that your suppliers
have demonstrated with the information security requirements that
you’ve shared with them.
Validating compliance often occurs during internal and external
audits. Ideally, audits should be conducted in a manner that is both
nonintrusive and independent.
Once you go through the process of asking questions related to the
security controls that you’ve decided to implement, with respect to the
risk appetite expressed by your leadership, you’re now ready to step
back and take a look at your information security program. You’ve
got a picture, a framework, of what your security program should look
like and how well your plan stacks up to the actual control set.
50
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 18
18
Skillset Groupings
Skillset Groupings
Business (People)
Process
Technical (*ology)
Security Organization
Risk
Physical
HR Security
Asset
Business Continuity
Security Operations
Security Incident
Acquisition and Development
Policy
Access
Compliance
Cryptography
Supplier Security
Communications Security
This chart identifies key strengths, which align with areas of ownership.
Now we need to talk about who’s going to do this. How do we put
people in the right role?
What I have found is that if you group these areas of responsibility
in the traditional People/Process/Technology matrix, here’s how it
breaks out.
You should have a business-minded person for security organiza-
tion management. I only assign one area to the business person, but
trust me when I say that having a person solely focused on the
relationship between security and the business is a full-time job.
To the process-minded person, I would assign risk, HR security,
business
continuity,
security
incident,
policy,
compliance,
and
supplier security. While each of these areas have a technical
component, the process of implementing and maintaining these
controls takes precedent.
To the technical person, I would assign physical, asset, security
operations, acquisition and development, access, cryptography, and
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00018-0
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

communications security. This person will have to roll up his/her
sleeves and get into the technical weeds when covering these specific
areas.
This chart takes key strengths, identifying what people are good at,
and then assigning those responsibilities to the right people. If you
strive to always put somebody in a role where they are happy and they
enjoy what they are doing, your information security program will be
even more effective.
Business Skillset
“People person”
Information security governance
Compliance and regulatory knowledge
Understand integration points among business, security, and
compliance
Managing people
(ISC)2 CISSP and/or ISACA CISM
Maybe even SANS Masters Degree in Information Security (MSISM)
For the business skillset, this is your people person. This is someone
who understands information security governance, has compliance and
regulatory knowledge and understands how business, security, and
compliance all work together.
These people work well together with other people. They’re good at
managing teams, both technical and nontechnical.
If you were to use certifications to help you find the right
candidate for this role, I would look for someone with their CISSP
(from ISC2), their CISM (from ISACA), or perhaps even their
MSISM from SANS.
52
Infosec Management Fundamentals

Process Skillset
Accountant
Blend of business and technology
Policies, standards, procedures
Understanding of business process flows
ISACA CISA
The process skillset people
are your accountants. They like
numbers, they like tracking things, and they have a mix of business
and technology skills. They love documentation; processes, procedures,
and standards make their day. They also understand business process
flows, a skillset often found in business analysts.
Here, I’ve found that Certified Information Security Auditors
(CISAs) are a terrific fit for this role.
Technical Skillset
Geek/Nerd
System administration
Active in technical/security user groups
Deep knowledge of specific technologies
(ISC)2 CISSP + Specific tech certs
Your technical skillset will be found in your geeks and nerds, terms
that I use with the utmost affection (being a geek myself). First and
foremost, they have done system administration in the past. They’re
active in technical and security user groups and they have a deep
knowledge of specific technologies.
If you’re looking at resumes, these folks may or may not have their
CISSP, but they are likely to have one or more technical certifications
related to specific technologies.
53
Skillset Groupings

Core Team
Manager
Business-oriented, with understanding of tech and process
The buck stops here
Strategic
Senior
Highly Technical and Process-Oriented, with business knowledge
Primary and Secondary
Strategic + Tactical
Junior
Technical and Process-Oriented
Primary and Secondary
Tactical + Operational
Ideally, your core information security team that has three tiers: a
manager, one or more senior security analysts, and one or more
(junior) security analysts. The size of the team will vary, depending on
the size of your organization and on any relationships you might have
with third party managed security services providers. Regardless, the
overall structure can still apply.
The business-oriented manager is responsible for strategic decisions,
where the senior security analyst has strategic conversations with
the manager and then translates that into tactical information when
working with the junior security analyst.
Effective information security programs are driven by information
security managers who encourages seniors to help the juniors grow
into senior positions. The juniors should be constantly learning from
the seniors, seeking new ways to improve existing processes based on
that
accumulated
knowledge.
This
enables
juniors
to
maintain
operational day-to-day responsibilities until they grow into a senior, at
which time you can hopefully bring new junior security analysts onto
the time.
54
Infosec Management Fundamentals

Sample Org Chart
Manager
-> Security Organization
Technical (Senior)
-> Security Operations
-> Information Security Systems
Technical (Junior)
-> Security Operations
-> Physical
-> Asset
Process (Senior)
-> Policy
-> Risk
-> Business Continuity
-> Security Incident
Process (Junior)
-> Policy
-> HR
-> Compliance
-> Security Incident
On the following slide, I’ve included a sample organization chart to
show you how this all maps together.
The manager is responsible for securing the organization and if you
have a team of four full time security professionals (which I know is a
luxury for many organizations), you ideally would have a technical
senior and a process senior who would have the responsibilities I have
outlined here. Then each senior would have a junior who shares certain
responsibilities. For example, the technical senior shares security
operations with a technical junior, but the junior may be responsible
for physical security and asset security where the technical senior may
be responsible for that system acquisition in maintenance. Likewise,
the process senior shares policy with the junior, but maybe the junior
handles the awareness training for HR while the process senior handles
all of the risk assessment.
Again, this is just a sample. Your organization doesn’t need to
look like this, but understand that if you start with a framework
and identify in that risk-based context all of the controls that are
relevant to your organization, the discussion around security organi-
zation and the operations management, around who is going to
implement and maintain all of these controls, is ultimately going
to lead to an organization chart where you can identify where those
responsibilities lie.
55
Skillset Groupings

When you are in that management role, you will also find that this
is how you drive staffing changes. This is how you communicate to
leadership that, in order to meet the quality or level of security out-
lined in your information security policies, you will likely need to have
people in these roles.
56
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 19
19
Resources
Resources
Wikipedia
hp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_27001
hp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_27002
International Organization for Standardization
ISO/IEC 27001:2013
hp://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=54534
ISO/IEC 27002:2013
hp://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=54533
The ISO 27000 Directory
hp://www.27000.org/iso-27001.htm
ISO 27001 Security <- GREAT starting point 
hp://www.iso27001security.com/
As I mentioned at the beginning of the presentation, I am a strong
advocate for sharing resources.
The first set that I wanted to share was around the ISO/IEC 27000
series. If you want to read up on the ISO 27001 and 27002, start with
Wikipedia. In addition to being a free resource, it’s been my experience
that technical information on Wikipedia is often kept up to date. If
you wanted to dig deeper (and have a budget), you could go out to the
iso.org website and actually purchase the 27001 and 27002 documents.
They are licensed to individual users, so they may seem a bit expensive
(depending on what your budget is), but you won’t find a better source
of information than ISO/IEC. The ISO/IEC 27000 directory though
and iso27001security.com sites are independent websites separate from
the iso.org site that still provides some insight and guidance into how
you might approach an ISO/IEC implementation.
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00019-2
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

More Resources
Other Frameworks
COBIT (IT Governance)
hp://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/COBIT/Pages/Overview.aspx
ITIL (IT Service Management)
hp://www.il-oﬃcialsite.com/
Unified Compliance Framework
hps://www.uniﬁedcompliance.com/
Risk Management
NIST
hp://csrc.nist.gov/publicaons/nistpubs/800-30/sp800-30.pdf
hp://csrc.nist.gov/publicaons/dras/800-30-rev1/SP800-30-Rev1-ipd.pdf
hp://csrc.nist.gov/publicaons/nistpubs/800-37-rev1/sp800-37-rev1-ﬁnal.pdf
hp://csrc.nist.gov/publicaons/nistpubs/800-53-Rev3/sp800-53-rev3-ﬁnal_updated-errata_05-01-2010.pdf
FAIR
hp://www.cxoware.com/
hp://fairwiki.riskmanagemennsight.com/
If ISO/IEC isn’t appropriate for your organization, I recommend
you look at COBIT as an alternative. I also recommend everyone
understand ITIL. Although ITIL is not a security framework but a
service management framework, there are definitely parallels between
the two disciplines.
The Unified Compliance Framework (UCF) is another resource that I
mentioned that maps multiple regulations and standards to one another.
I’ve seen a number of GRC solutions that subscribe to the UCF, enabling
you to more quickly identify and implement controls based on that work
that has already been completed.
I’ve got a few resources here from NIST and FAIR in the risk
management category. Again, keep in mind that NIST is more quali-
tative, while FAIR is more quantitative. Regardless of which risk
management framework you choose, you need a common language
for discussing risk internally. If your organization does not yet have
a common language for that discussion, start here. Take a look at
those two.
58
Infosec Management Fundamentals

Even More Resources
SANS 20 Critical Security Controls
hp://www.sans.org/crical-security-controls/
GIAC Certified ISO-27000 Specialist
hp://www.giac.org/cerﬁcaon/cerﬁed-iso-27000-specialist-g2700
Australian Department of Defence Top 35 Mitigation Strategies
hp://www.dsd.gov.au/infosec/top35migaonstrategies.htm
Common Sense Security Framework
hp://www.commonsenseframework.org/
IT Security Career
hp://www.itsecuritycareer.com/
I mentioned the SANS 20 Critical Security Controls, a slightly
deceptive name since these 20 categories contain closer to 150160
specific control requirements.
If you wanted to become a certified ISO/IEC 27000 specialist SANS,
then I recommend you pursue the corresponding GIAC certification.
If your organization is focused on breach mitigation, the Australian
Department of Defence Top 35 Mitigation Strategies is incredible. It’s
a terrific resource that is not as widely known as it should be.
The last two resources are websites that I maintain to help share
this information. The Common Sense Security Framework (CSSF)
was designed to enable organizations to quickly assess the security of
their third parties, as well as turn that lens inward to examine their
own control set.
The CSSF contains what I consider to be the top three controls in
each of seven key areas. If an organization does not currently maintain
these 21 controls, then asking any additional security questions is a
waste of both your time and theirs.
IT Security Career is designed to help aspiring information security
professionals find open positions in the field because, again, I cannot over-
state the importance of finding and employing qualified professionals.
59
Resources

Professional Organizations
ISSA (Information Systems Security Organization)
hp://www.issa.org/
ISACA (Information Systems Audit and Control Association)
hps://www.isaca.org/
SANS
hp://www.sans.org/
InfraGard
hp://www.infragard.net/
OWASP (Open Web Application Security Project)
hps://www.owasp.org/
If you’ve not had that field experience, there are multiple professional
organizations that you can participate in to begin learning the ropes
and to network with current information security professionals. ISSA,
ISACA, SANS, InfraGard, and OWASP all have local chapters in
multiple cities around the world, and you may find one or more of these
organizations in your own city. ISC^2, which I don’t have on the list
here, is starting chapters throughout the world, so you may have even
one more professional organization to consider.
You may have local organizations as well, organizations that don’t
have a national or international footprint. For example, in Indianapolis,
Indiana, there is an organization known as the Indiana Security and
Privacy Network (INSPN), this gathering of information security and
audit professionals is very well-attended, and the information they share
is very helpful to all those who attend.
60
Infosec Management Fundamentals

CHAPTER 20
20
Conclusion
I hope this book has provided you with the information you need to
improve your information security program, and to take the next step
in your career as an information security professional. I strongly
encourage you to dig into the additional resources, to participate in
local professional organizations, and do what you can to help us con-
tinue to secure organizations around the world.
Thanks much for all you do!
Infosec Management Fundamentals. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804172-7.00020-9
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

