
Real-Time Research on the Web
Tara Calishain
Information  
Trapping 

Information Trapping
Real-Time Research on the Web
Tara Calishain
New Riders
1249 Eighth Street
Berkeley, CA 94710
510/524-2178
800/283-9444
510/524-2221 (fax)
Find us on the Web at: newriders.com
To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com
New Riders is an imprint of Peachpit, a division of Pearson Education
Copyright © 2007 by Tara Calishain
Project Editor: Nancy Davis
Editor: Jill Marts Lodwig
Production Editor: Becky Winter
Proofreader: Ted Waitt
Compositor: Danielle Foster
Indexer: Emily Glossbrenner
Cover Design: Charlene Will
Notice of rights
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form by any means—electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the prior written permission from the publisher.  
For information on obtaining permission for reprints and excerpts, contact permissions@peachpit.com.
Notice of liability
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every precaution has been 
taken in preparation of this book, neither the author nor Peachpit shall have any liability to any person or entity with 
respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the instructions contained in 
this book or by the computer software and hardware products described in it. 
Trademarks
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. 
Where those designations appear in this book, and Peachpit was aware of the trademark claim, the designations 
appear as requested by the owner of the trademark. All other product names and services identified throughout the 
book are used in an editorial fashion only and for the benefit of such companies with no intention of infringement of 
the trademark. No such use, or the use of any trade name, is intended to convey endorsement or other affiliation with 
this book.
ISBN 0-321-49171-8
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed and bound in the United States of America

Dedication
To my husband, Phil, with all my love and affection.  

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Mary Ellen Bates and Kathy Biehl, who took an initial 
look at the manuscript and provided invaluable feedback. Many thanks 
to Nancy Davis and Jill Lodwig for finally pinning down this book and 
getting it on track to paperdom. Thanks also to Becky Winter, for her 
production expertise and for helping me track all those crazy little details, 
and Danielle Foster, for her layout talents. 
A heartfelt thanks goes out to my family and coworkers, who are always 
patient when I’m in the middle of writing a book and my brain is off playing 
with search engines.
And a big thanks to all the readers of ResearchBuzz, who constantly inspire 
me with their questions, ideas, suggestions, and feedback. 

Contents
Chapter 1: What Is Information Trapping?	
1
The Benefits of Information Trapping   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    2
Asking the Right Questions  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   4
Getting Practical  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  6
Chapter 2: RSS Basics	
7
What Is RSS?  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    8
Anatomy of an RSS Feed   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     . 11
The Big “So What?”   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     13
Finding RSS Feeds  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  14
Types of RSS Feeds  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     . 25
RSS Reader Tools  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    28
Chapter 3: Page Monitors	
43
Nuts and Bolts   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  44
Web-Based Page Monitors  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  47
Client-Side Page Monitors  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    56
Chapter 4: E-Mail Alerts	
61
Advantages of E-Mail Alerts   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    62
Finding E-Mail Alert Services  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  63
Useful E-Mail Alert Services  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    64
Not As Cool, But They Work   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    72
Chapter 5: Building Queries	
73
What Do You Want to Monitor?   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  74
Types of Search Engines  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  77
Basic Searching Syntax  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    79
Special Searching Syntax  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     . 80
Using the Advanced Search Form   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    82
Tags and Conversations  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  84
Chapter 6: Who’s Linking to Your Site? 	
87
Advantages of Sleuthing Your Own Site   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    88
Trapping General Site Links  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     88

vi
Contents
Trapping Links in RSS Feeds  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    93
Who’s Reading Your RSS Feeds?  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  98
Moving from Internal to External Information  .    .    .    .    .    .    . 100
Chapter 7: Trapping Topic-Based Information	
101
Monitoring General Search Engines  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    102
Monitoring News Search Engines   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   118
Searching Blogs   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    132
Managing Keyword-Searchable RSS Feeds   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  138
A Few More Sources?   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    141
Trapping Commercial Information   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    142
Trapping Government Information  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 149
Monitoring International Sites  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    156
When You Want What Isn’t There   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  160
Moving Beyond Text-Based Information  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 162
Chapter 8: Multimedia Trapping	
163
Searching Audio   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  164
Monitoring Images   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   175
Monitoring Videos   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   179
The Future Is Now  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 185
Chapter 9: Trapping Tags and Conversations 	
187
The Tao of Tags  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 188
Resources That Use Tags  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    191
The Zen of Conversation Trapping  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     . 200
Chapter 10: Filtering the Inflow	
217
Introducing GMail   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   218
Filtering with GMail   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 222
A GMail Toolbox   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  230
Other E-Mail Options  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    232
Moving On. . .   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  234
Chapter 11: Case Studies 	
235
Fred Learns about Outsourcing to Taiwan   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   236
Ethel Tracks a Blog  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    241
Different Strokes  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  246

Contents
vii
Shutting Off the Flow   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   246
Branching Out from These Basic Patterns   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    247
Chapter 12: Organizing What You Find	
249
A Very Simple, Portable Strategy  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 250
Organizing Information on a Single Machine  .     .     .     .     .     .     .   253
Fleshing Out Client-Side Options  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    261
Web-Based Organizing Options   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 268
Sticking to a Strategy  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 273
Chapter 13: Publishing Your Information 	
275
Publishing a Word, PDF, or Text Document  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 276
Publishing to a Mailing List   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .   278
Hosted Blogging Solutions  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 284
Your Own Blogging Site  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 289
Wiki   .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    296
Making Your Own Site  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  301
RSS Feeds for Content Distribution  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 303
Working Toward Manageability  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    . 309
The following appendices were originally published online as bonus material 
for our readers and are not included in the print version of this title:
Appendix A: Going Mobile 	
A1
Appendix B: Keeping Up  	
B1
Appendix C: Using RSS Tools 	
C1
Index  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  311

This page intentionally left blank 

What Is  
Information 
Trapping?
1

2
chapter 1    What Is Information Trapping?
For a long time—and especially around 1994, when the World Wide Web 
was just getting its jumpstart—the Internet appeared to many as a vast pool 
of information just sitting in cyberspace. People who used the Internet for 
research “cast their nets” by entering queries into a search engine, and then 
pulled in “fish,” in the form of information. Once they had the information 
they needed, they didn’t bother to repeat the search, unless enough time 
lapsed and the information changed. 
Nowadays the Internet is in a constant state of flux. No longer a static reposi-
tory of information, Web content changes minute by minute. From bloggers 
posting their thoughts online and news sources adding timely stories, to 
Flickr users showing off their latest photographs and the explosion of online 
video and podcasts, information is being added at a breathtaking rate. 
This continuous flow of information provides an opportunity to not only 
conduct Web searches of relatively constant information, such as a phone 
number or the capital of Idaho, but to continuously monitor live informa-
tion, such as the expansion of area codes or the population growth of Idaho 
over time, to stay abreast of topics that are of interest. 
This idea of using ongoing information “trapping”—constant information 
gathering that’s as automated as possible—instead of relying only on static, 
single instances of Web searching is what this book is all about. And as 
you’ll discover, many tools are available for trapping information. 
The Benefits of Information Trapping 
Picture this: You get up in the morning and go to your office. You’re in the 
middle of a project on online retail sales. Before information trapping was 
a reality, you would spend some time visiting various specialty magazines 
and conducting online news searches, looking for more retail statistics. With 
information trapping, you initially set up information-gathering traps for 
information and statistics about online retail sales, and then each morning 
you simply open your RSS feed reader and/or e-mail application, sit back, and 
read through the information your traps have found. You can save and orga-
nize whatever data you want. As you move on to the other work you need to 
accomplish, your information traps are busily scanning the Internet to pro-
vide you updated information the next time you do your research. 

3
The primary benefit of information trapping, versus running a static search 
every time you need up-to-date information, is saved time. Once you’ve set 
up the traps, information flows to you and into an infrastructure you have 
organized; you no longer need to go out and seek it. This puts you in a bet-
ter position to gather information and learn about your topic than if you 
simply ran searches on search engines whenever you had the time. 
The usual process for getting information from the Web looks something 
like this: 
	 1.	
Run a search on a search engine. 
	 2.	
Evaluate the results. 
	 3.	
Refine the query. 
	 4.	
Repeat this process until you get the information you need. 
This process works fine when you need basic information, or you’re search-
ing for information that you will need only once. However, when you’re 
trying to get information about something for which you have an ongoing 
interest, performing these steps over and over can get tedious.
Compare this process to the process of information trapping: 
	 1.	
Consider your subject and carefully develop search queries. 
	 2.	
Evaluate possible resources to search. 
	 3.	
Set up your queries. 
	 4.	
Receive and evaluate the results. 
The downside to information trapping is that setting up your traps takes 
more time initially than just running a single query on a search engine. 
The reason? Once you’ve created a search term or set of resources to be 
monitored, you don’t have the ability to refine your queries, so you have 
to do your tweaking in advance. However, once they’re established, infor-
mation traps run just fine on their own, and you don’t have to continu-
ally remember to keep running queries to stay abreast of your topic. You’ll 
receive results for as long as you’re interested in getting them—days, weeks, 
months, or possibly even years. And over time, you can refine your search 
as your interests change or as the topic itself changes.
The Benefits of Information Trapping


chapter 1    What Is Information Trapping?
Asking the Right Questions
I’m going to spend a lot of time in this book talking about techniques, resources, 
sites, and software—the stuff you’ll need to make your information traps a real-
ity. But before I get to that I want you to be aware that one of the most important 
tools for effective information trapping is your own brain. Your brain is what 
guides the process and determines the kind of content you actually want to see. 
It’s essential that you ask the right questions before you begin. 
This section details the questions you should ask yourself each and every 
time you design an information trap. 
Why trap for this particular topic? 
There are literally millions of topics that are suitable candidates for infor-
mation trapping, but you still need to think about why you want to trap a 
particular one. Being able to answer why you want to trap it influences the 
resources you choose and the way you organize your information. Are you 
Setting up information traps is a large investment in time and thought, and you might be 
wondering if it’s worth it for your topic. Consider these scenarios: 
Example #1: You’re a PR professional. You have ten clients whose names you want to monitor in 
the context of their appearances, getting coverage in the media, and so forth. You have ten easy 
candidates for information trapping. 
Example #2: A member of your family has cystic fibrosis. They have very good medical care but 
you want to monitor news, medical, and governmental resources for updates and information 
about advances in the care of people with cystic fibrosis. 
Example #3: You’re an avid collector of old woodworking tools. For your own interest and to 
enhance a hobby site you’ve put together, you want to monitor news, discussion groups, and 
hobby blogs for information about old woodworking tools. 
All these examples are valid, whether they’re related to hobbies, personal interests, or 
professional pursuits. Information trapping doesn’t have to be related to the stock market or a 
professional endeavor to provide useful results.
Information-Trapping Scenarios

5
maintaining a Web site on a subject and you need to monitor the Internet 
for new sites and information that will help you generate content? Are you 
trying to get publicity for something and need to monitor the Web for simi-
lar stories? Are you trying to keep up to date with a certain health condi-
tion? Having a sense of why you want to set up information trapping will 
help you design a better information trap. 
What sources do you want to search? 
A wide variety of sites on the Internet are available for trapping—they vary 
in scope, kind of material, and credibility. What kind of information do 
you want? Do you want to limit yourself to highly credible sources? In that 
case, you’ll probably want to search just government resources and news 
search engines. Don’t mind less credible results? Then you could expand 
your results to search engines in general. Want to hear what people think 
about a topic? Then you could monitor discussion lists or blogs. There are 
many different types of resources available to monitor; choosing the best 
resources for your needs is one of the things I’ll show you in this book. 
Where do you want to search? 
Answering where you want to search overlaps with the previous “what 
sources?” question. If you answered that question sufficiently, you’re well on 
your way to answering the “where” question, which addresses the geographi-
cal factor you need to consider for your research. Many search resources 
these days let you narrow your search results to a particular region, country, 
state, or city. Not all topics require geographic restriction, but sometimes it’s 
useful. Say you want to create an information trap on a sports star. Unfortu-
nately, he has a very common name, but by setting up the trap to include the 
name of his team’s city, and perhaps even his own hometown, the informa-
tion you receive in your traps is more likely to be focused only on him. 
How often do you want to receive results? 
If you’ve created a series of information traps, and you can handle the flow 
(or deluge) of information that comes back to you, you may want to see 
results each day. If you’re in a rush, you may even want the results on an 
hourly basis. On the other hand, you may have only a certain amount of 
time to devote to your research, so you might elect to receive updates only 
once a week. When answering this question, it’s important to consider how 
Asking the Right Questions

6
chapter 1    What Is Information Trapping?
much time you have to devote to your information trap. If you’re uncertain, 
be a little conservative. It’s easier to turn up your frequency than to dig 
yourself out from under a pile of information. 
How do you want to receive your results? 
Not too long ago, if you wanted to monitor information online, you had one 
choice for delivery—good ol’ e-mail. Nowadays, you can still use e-mail, 
but you’ve got other choices, including RSS feeds (which I discuss a lot in 
this book) and SMS (“short message service,” which a growing number of 
mobile phones support). You don’t have to limit yourself to only one delivery 
type. You may decide that you want to get most of your results by e-mail, but 
there’s one important topic—about which you want to be alerted immedi-
ately— where SMS is the better choice. 
You’ve probably heard a lot about RSS, and you might even have heard some 
people say that “e-mail is dead” or something like that. Trust me: E-mail 
is not going anywhere. The important thing is that you choose a delivery 
method that’s comfortable for you. If you’re not comfortable with RSS, use 
e-mail. Or use SMS. If alerts were available by carrier pigeon, I’d tell you to 
use those if that’s what you like best. 
Take a few minutes and muse on the questions above; we’ll explore some of 
the answers you might have—and how to use those answers to implement 
well designed information traps—later in the book. If you already have a 
topic in mind and you have solid answers to the questions above, you’re well 
on your way to setting up your first information trap! 
Getting Practical
This chapter hopefully rewired your brain a little bit so that you now think 
of the Internet as a dynamic pool of data from which you can harness and 
automatically cull certain types of information that interest you on an 
ongoing basis, without having to fetch it yourself.
In addition to learning how to think about the Internet in new ways and 
understanding its potential, you’re also going to need to expand your Inter-
net toolbox. Sure, you’ll be using your familiar Web browser, but you’re also 
going to be learning about and using RSS, page monitors, and e-mail alerts. 
Let’s get started!

2
RSS Basics

8
chapter 2    RSS Basics
To do static, one-time searches on the Web, you use one type of tool—a Web 
browser. (You may not think of your copy of Firefox as a tool, but it is!) To 
do information trapping, you need a whole other set of tools. Your browser 
will still come in handy, but its main function is to help you set your traps. 
You also need to know about a technology called RSS, which stands for 
either Rich Site Summary or RDF Site Summary, depending on who you 
ask. And it helps to know a little bit about page monitors, for those occa-
sions when RSS won’t do. 
This chapter and the next take a close look at what these tools are and how 
they work. Before diving into the creation of information traps, which you’ll 
do in Chapter 5, take some time to explore the resources presented in this 
chapter and Chapter 3, and try some experimenting on your own. When 
you’re finished, you’ll be fully prepared for integrating the tools into a set of 
basic information traps in Chapter 5. 
For now, let’s focus on RSS and what you can do with it—including even 
the weird things! 
What Is RSS?
RSS is a type of XML. That’s the short answer. But unfortunately, the short 
answer is not always the most useful one. The long answer is more helpful—
it’s important to understand a little about XML in order to fully appreciate 
the value of RSS.
XML holds the key
Web pages are often written in HyperText Markup Language, or HTML. The 
“markups” are computer code that looks <like this> and specifies how cer-
tain characters, words, and sections of a page should look. An HTML file is 
simply a text file formatted so that your browser displays it in a certain way. 
HTML is just one way to format a text file. Another method is to use eXtensible 
Markup Language, or XML. Like HTML, an XML file looks like a text file that’s 
formatted a certain way, but it specifies a lot more than plain, old HTML. 
In HTML, the markup tells you what the title of the page is, and there are 
ways to tell what the keywords and description of the page are. And that’s 

9
where it pretty much ends. There is no way to delineate specific information 
within the content of the page. Take, for example, an HTML page of infor-
mation about birds. While someone might easily be able to scan the page for 
information about bird migration, a search engine could not. That’s because 
the page simply is not formatted in a way for search engines to look at it and 
determine what part of the content is migration information. 
You might do a keyword search for words relevant to migration, but the 
search engine finding your results might find the keywords anywhere—in 
the header of a page, in menus, or even in the copyright statement! There’s 
no way that the search can be restricted to the area of the HTML page con-
cerned with migration. HTML pages simply aren’t structured to allow a 
search engine to break down the information they hold. 
XML takes care of this problem by allowing for additional ways to delineate 
the information contained in the pages. With XML, you can have a format-
ting style for a page to display information about birds, so both people and 
search engines can read it. Why is this important? Because a computer can 
read not only this particular page about birds, but also ten million other pages 
about birds formatted in XML. Then from this gathered information, it can 
build a useful, searchable, outlined chunk of information about birds. 
To take this scenario one step further, imagine that a search engine 
indexed 10,000 pages about birds from several different sites that were 
formatted in XML. Because of the XML format, you could search for all 
birds that migrated in November, or all birds that eat seeds. With HTML, 
you’d have to do keyword searches using words like migration November 
cardinal and you’d just have to hope you get useful results.  
RSS feeds: a type of XML
So how does RSS relate to XML?
RSS is a type of text file, a particular type of XML for page and story sum-
maries that is formatted so that the data is delineated very clearly, and bro-
ken down far more than it would be on a regular HTML page. There are 
more extensive types of RSS that carry all kinds of data, including sound 
and video files, but this book focuses on basic RSS text files. (Once you 
begin to trap multimedia, you’ll notice plenty of examples of RSS feeds that 
carry data in addition to text.)
What Is RSS?

10
chapter 2    RSS Basics
You’ve probably heard the term RSS feed bantered about. An RSS file is 
called a feed in the same way that an HTML file is called a Web page. RSS 
feeds carry summary data about the latest articles on or additions to a Web 
site. (So in essence, a nicely structured RSS feed summarizes new content 
that’s often made available in chaotic, unstructured HTML pages.) 
The data in an RSS feed is broken down by title and summary, and contains 
additional information, including when the summary was generated, where 
it came from, who the author is, what language it’s in, and so on. Some RSS 
feeds carry only headlines of new information, while others carry summa-
ries—the title of a new article and maybe the first 20 words of that arti-
cle—while still others are called “full feeds” that contain all the text (and 
sometimes multimedia) available from a Web site. In other words, you can 
read the content of a site without having to visit the site at all (Figure 2.1)!
Figure 2.1
The International 
Herald Tribune offers 
a bevy of feeds that 
provides content 
without your having to 
visit the Web site.
Figure 2.1
The International 
Herald Tribune offers 
a bevy of feeds that 
provides content 
without your having to 
visit the Web site.

11
As you’re looking for RSS feeds, you may read about of a different file format called Atom. Atom 
does the same thing that RSS does, for the most part. There don’t seem to be as many Atom 
feeds as RSS feeds, however. Most feed readers that support RSS also support Atom, so don’t 
worry about the differences between the two formats. 
What about Atom? 
Anatomy of an RSS Feed
I just described to you what a feed looks like, but let’s consider an actual example. 
You’re used to HTML pages, which can look like pretty much anything, limited 
only by the creativity of the designer. But RSS feeds are much more uniform. 
Here’s a part of an RSS feed, a summary of an article that was published 
on the Book Standard (bookstandard.com). I’m showing you the code of it, 
which looks very much like the source of an HTML page:  
<item> 
<title>Piracy Threat on the Horizon?</title> 
<link>http://www.thebookstandard.com/bookstandard/news/publisher/
article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1000963039</link> 
<description>The Book Standard, June 16, 2005. An overview of how 
piracy is impacting American publishers, including this scary 
little stat: “U.S. publishers lost an estimated $571 million to 
the illegal activity in 2004, according to the International 
Intellectual Property Alliance.” The article also raised the 
question of why piracy wasn’t more of an issue at the BEA, and how 
outsourcing may be driving some of the problem. 
</description>
<pubDate>Mon, 20 Jun 2005 22:22:20 GMT</pubDate> 
</item>
How this information is displayed for you depends on your RSS reader. 
Browsers all display RSS feeds a little bit differently, just like they display 
HTML pages a little bit differently (Figures 2.2 and 2.3). 
Anatomy of an RSS Feed

12
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Even without the fancy display, you can see by reading through the example 
feed item that it is quite a capsule of information. It has a title, a link, a 
description, and a publishing date. And this is a very basic item; far more 
information can be added. Having the information broken out like this 
makes it very easy for a search engine to organize content by date or title—a 
nifty capability for information trappers. 
Figure 2.2 
The ResearchBuzz RSS 
feed, which you can 
view in a Web browser.
Figure 2.2 
The ResearchBuzz RSS 
feed, which you can 
view in a Web browser.
Figure 2.3
Other RSS feeds can be 
tough to read in a Web 
browser, and require a 
feed reader.
Figure 2.3
Other RSS feeds can be 
tough to read in a Web 
browser, and require a 
feed reader.

13
The Big “So What?”
If you’ve read Web Search Garage, my book on general Internet searching, 
you know I have a “So What” test: whenever I hear about a new technology 
or trend I say, “So what?” The So What is the payoff, or what it’s going to do 
for me as a searcher. If it’s just nifty technology, that’s fine, but I don’t want 
to spend too much time playing with technologies that aren’t going to make 
my searching, exploring, and teaching easier. There’s just too much new 
technology out there! 
The So What for you, in the case of RSS, is saved time. Instead of visiting 
several Web sites to get their latest articles, you can have an RSS feed reader 
do it for you and provide a summary or list of site updates. Furthermore, 
some RSS feeds give you lists of search engine results based on the queries 
you specify—these are called “keyword-based RSS feeds,” which are very 
important. (You’ll learn more about these later in the chapter.) So instead of 
having to run the same search over and over again (on an hourly, daily, or 
weekly basis), the RSS feed will automatically update itself and provide you 
with updated results and new content. 
Let’s look at a real-life, full-blown RSS feed scenario. I use NewsGator 
Online (newsgator.com) as my RSS feed reader. An RSS feed reader, like 
an HTML Web browser (such as Internet Explorer or Firefox), formats 
RSS feeds so that people, as well as computers, can read them. My RSS feed 
reader has about 100 RSS feeds—summary information about new addi-
tions to content on about 100 Web sites. 
Can you imagine how long it would take me to visit every last one of those 
sites to see what new content it had? With RSS feeds and the online feed 
reader, however, I can skim through these sites in an hour or so. 
RSS can save you lots and lots of time by showing you only new and updated 
content from Web sites.
The Big “So What?”

14
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Tip
Many blogs run on services like Blogger, or use content-management  
software like Movable Type. Many of these software packages and 
services can automatically create RSS feeds for their users. This is 
good for you (the trapper) in that there are lots and lots of feeds 
out there; it’s bad for you because many of the feeds are from 
blogs and, therefore, aren’t primary, credible sources. Don’t fret: 
there are many primary-source RSS feeds available: and many blog 
feeds do link to primary-source content.
Note 
Some RSS feed readers are client-based—that is, they’re installed on 
your computer. Others are Web-based; you access them by visiting 
a Web site. (NewsGator is a Web-based feed reader.) Still others are 
installed as part of your Web browser. Which you use depends on 
your situation; we’ll look at your options later in the chapter.
RSS is the cornerstone of any information-trapping strategy. RSS feeds are 
compact, focus on content, and contain a lot of clearly delineated informa-
tion—the essential parts of the data flow you monitor. There will be times 
when you have to look at the content of entire Web pages and Web sites 
instead of using an RSS feed—sometimes RSS feeds aren’t available for 
the materials in which you’re really interested. But whenever possible, you 
should use RSS feeds. How to find an RSS feed, and what options you have 
to read them, is the subject of the rest of this chapter.  
Finding RSS Feeds
Of course, you can’t use an RSS feed until you find one. Fortunately, you’ve 
got several places to look! There are three major places: on RSS-enabled pages 
themselves, in RSS feed directories (which often allow for extensive search-
ing), and in searchable subject indexes of RSS feeds (which allow for less 
searching but have feed listings broken down into detailed subcategories). 
Keyword-based RSS feeds, which we’ll look at in more detail later in the 
chapter, are usually created as the result of a search; therefore, there’s not 
really a place to find them. Instead, you have to investigate the RSS feed 
sources you come across and see if they have keyword-based RSS feeds 
available, or use a tool that generates keyword-based RSS feeds.

15
On the site itself
Many Web sites advertise the fact that they have RSS feeds. Look for either 
a link that says “RSS feed” or, more commonly, an orange button that says 
XML on it. There is also a small square orange button that’s getting popular 
(Figure 2.4). 
Yahoo’s My Yahoo portal feature offers support for RSS feeds, so you might 
see a My Yahoo button in addition to an RSS Feed button. Many RSS feed 
readers also have their own style of buttons, which makes it easy to add a 
feed to that reader with one click. So you might see a plain XML button, and 
then half-a-dozen of the ones listed for individual feed readers (Figure 2.5). 
People really like promoting their RSS feeds!
If you already have a particular set of resources in mind that you want to 
monitor, then I recommend that you visit those sites first to see if they pro-
vide RSS feeds. If you don’t have any resources in mind yet, start by looking 
in RSS feed directories. 
RSS feed directories 
RSS feed directories are—surprise!—directories of RSS feeds. Despite the 
fact that RSS has been getting a lot of press for some time, the technology 
has been going strong for a lot longer, and there are literally millions of 
feeds out there. You can get RSS feeds from four different sources, begin-
ning with two search engines designed exclusively for RSS feeds.
Feedster 
Feedster (feedster.com) is a search engine that indexes RSS feeds. Therefore, 
any pages you find on Feedster will be connected with an RSS feed. 
If your particular interest is fairly obscure or narrowly focused, try search-
ing Feedster first. In the query box, just enter a few keywords that describe 
your interest. For example, let’s say I’m interested in collecting action fig-
ures. I’d plug “action figures” into Feedster. 
Look at an example of Feedster’s search results (Figure 2.6). Notice it 
includes a title, source, number of words, and when the information was 
actually published. (It can include an exact date of publication because an 
RSS feed notes that information in a format that a search engine can under-
stand. Three more cheers for RSS!) 
Figure 2.4
This orange button is 
becoming a popular way 
to denote RSS feeds.
Figure 2.5
Many RSS feeds give 
you multiple ways to 
subscribe.
Finding RSS Feeds

16
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Notice, too, that the source of the result is shown at the bottom underneath the 
“snippet” of the search result. (The snippet usually contains at least one of the 
keywords for which you were searching.) You might skim the snippet and decide 
you immediately want to subscribe to the RSS feed. In that case, you can click the 
orange button just to the right of the word From at the bottom of the entry. 
There’s your RSS feed. Sometimes you won’t want to subscribe to that feed, 
but you may want to read some of the articles on the feed and see what sites 
the articles refer to. This takes some extra time, but it can pay off by point-
ing you to sources of information you might not find otherwise. 
Figure 2.6
Feedster’s results 
give you just enough 
content to allow a little 
preview of the blog 
itself. 
Figure 2.6
Feedster’s results 
give you just enough 
content to allow a little 
preview of the blog 
itself. 
We’re going through these resources and I’m teaching you how to search for and find things, but I’m 
not teaching you what to do with them…yet. So what should you do with them? Should you make an 
attempt to gather RSS feeds now, or just do example searches now and come back later? 
If you’re starting from square one, you can either try a few example searches now and come back 
and do the real searches a little later on, or start a text file and paste in the URLs of any RSS feeds 
you find interesting that you want to come back to. If you’re a little more advanced and already 
have a favorite feed reader set up, go ahead and add your feeds to it. 
What Should You Do with These Resources? 
Syndic8 
Syndic8 (syndic8.com) is a bit geekier than Feedster, and is designed only for 
finding RSS feeds instead of searching for information from RSS feeds. For 
this reason, Syndic8 provides a lot of information about the feeds it lists. 
Look for the Search for Feed query box on the front page (Figure 2.7). 

17
Here you can do a keyword search just like you could using Feedster’s 
query box. 
Let’s do the same search on Syndic8 that we did with Feedster—for “action 
figures” (Figure 2.8).
I received 17 results, ranging from “toy news” to information on character 
figures. The information includes the language of the feeds (not very use-
ful to get an Italian RSS feed if you don’t speak Italian!). You can also view 
when the feed was created and when it was changed. In general, if a feed is 
fairly old (fairly old in Internet terms is a couple of years) and it’s changed 
in the last few days, you’ve probably found an active feed. 
You can get more information about the feed by clicking on the Feed ID 
number (don’t click on the feed name, which takes you to the feed’s Web 
site). There’s also information about the last time the feed was “polled” 
(checked by Syndic8), its RSS version, its status, whether it contains meta-
data, and so on. A lot of these terms may sound like Greek to you—but rest 
assured, by the time you’re finished reading this book, RSS parlance will 
come naturally to you!
Figure 2.7
Syndic8’s home page.
Figure 2.7
Syndic8’s home page.
Finding RSS Feeds

18
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Pay attention to the dates on the search results page—an older feed that’s 
still active usually contains good data, as I mentioned earlier. Be aware of 
“ghost feeds” that haven’t been updated in years. There are a lot of people 
out there who enthusiastically start a site, offer RSS feeds, and realize a 
few months down the road that regularly updating a site requires time and 
effort. So they give up. You want to be using feeds that are up to date. You 
won’t often encounter ghost feeds when searching in Feedster, since Feed-
ster lists search results by date. (The feeds that have updated more recently 
appear at the top of Feedster’s search results.) With Syndic8, however, you 
want to pay more attention. 
You can also see the last entries in the RSS feed (Figure 2.9). Scroll down to 
the very bottom of the feed information page, and notice there’s a list of the 
most recent entries and enough of the content to get a good sense of what 
the feed is about.
Figure 2.8 Syndic8 highlights the term you’re looking for in your search results. 

19
If you take the time now to vet the feed, making sure it covers your topic of 
interest, you’ll save yourself from having to remove the feed from all your 
traps later. 
NewsIsFree
NewsIsFree (newsisfree.com) could be considered a combination of Syndic8 
and Feedster. You can search sources, like Feedster, but you can also browse 
sources, like Syndic8. The direct URL for browsing sources is newsisfree.
com/sources/bycat. 
Take a close look and notice the channels are broken out by category, from 
Top News to blogs (Figure 2.10). 
Pick a category, and you get a list of RSS feed sources, with the most popular 
ones at the top and the rest listed alphabetically. The category listing gives 
the name of the feed, category, language, and a brief description. Click on 
the name of the feed and you get some additional information. At the top of 
the page, you can see the name of the feed, and there is also an orange XML 
button on the page—that’s right, a link to the RSS feed (Figure 2.11). 
Figure 2.9
Syndic8’s feed 
information pages  
also include a list of 
recent additions to the 
RSS feed.
Figure 2.9
Syndic8’s feed 
information pages  
also include a list of 
recent additions to the 
RSS feed.
Finding RSS Feeds

20
chapter 2    RSS Basics
I’m mentioning this because the rest of the page can be a bit confusing and 
you may think that you have to pay to get a link to the RSS feed (which is 
not the case).
Notice that on the left side of a feed information page there’s a search form 
for searching the sources of the news on the site (instead of searching the 
items within the sources). 
Figure 2.10
NewsIsFree offers RSS 
feed listings in a variety 
of categories.
Figure 2.10
NewsIsFree offers RSS 
feed listings in a variety 
of categories.
Figure 2.11
Finding the RSS feeds 
for items listed in 
NewsIsFree.
Figure 2.11
Finding the RSS feeds 
for items listed in 
NewsIsFree.

21
A search for “action figure” on NewsIsFree brought no results—you might 
find you have to stick with Syndic8 or Feedster for more specific searches. 
That’s because NewsIsFree doesn’t seem to have as many sources as Feedster 
or Syndic8. However, I’ve included it here because it has been around a long 
time, it offers a unique way of looking at what’s available, and it’s an invalu-
able resource for keeping up with newly available feeds, which is a topic we 
return to when we discuss pruning, reevaluating, and adding sources. 
Technorati’s Blogfinder
Technorati has a service called Blogfinder (technorati.com/blogs/), which at 
this writing is still in beta, but you can use it to find RSS feeds as well. (Most 
blog-creation software nowadays automatically generates RSS feeds.) 
Technorati lets you search for blogs using “tags,” which are simply key-
words describing the blog. This type of tag search means you need to use 
more general search words than you might use to search the full content 
of a blog. “Action figures” is general enough, and you’ll probably get some 
results. Figure 2.12 shows what those search results look like.
Figure 2.12
Using Technorati’s 
Blogfinder, you can  
sort your results  
two different ways. 
The Freshness option 
works well if you’re 
looking for frequently 
updated blogs for your 
information traps.
Figure 2.12
Using Technorati’s 
Blogfinder, you can  
sort your results  
two different ways. 
The Freshness option 
works well if you’re 
looking for frequently 
updated blogs for your 
information traps.
Finding RSS Feeds

22
chapter 2    RSS Basics
When I conducted my search, I received eight results, with a name of and 
a link to the blog, a brief description, the tags associated with the blog, and 
a note about when the blog was last updated (remember, you don’t want to 
monitor ghost feeds!). You also get a link that lists who is linking to that 
blog, and sometimes you’ll see a list of tags at the top of the search results 
that are related to the one you searched for (in this case, for example, related 
tags are for Vintage Toys and Star Wars). 
Pulling the RSS feeds from the found blogs involves revisiting the site to 
look for the orange RSS logos or one of the personalized RSS logos from My 
Yahoo or another site. It takes a little extra work; on the other hand, the tag 
system makes searching for blogs/RSS feeds on more general subjects easier 
than using a full-text search engine. 
RSS is popular enough at this point that specialized listings of feeds are becoming available. Here 
are a couple that might help you in your information trapping: 
•	
Corporate feeds. Nooked (http://dir.nooked.com/home.dir) provides corporate RSS feeds 
only. You can search the feeds by keyword or browse for them by category. There’s a brief 
description of each feed, and some entities have multiple feeds available (press releases, 
products, and so forth). This resource isn’t 100 percent comprehensive, but it is considerable. 
•	
Newspaper feeds. The Media Drop (themediadrop.com/archives/003699.php) is a list of U.S. 
newspapers, broken out by state, that have RSS feeds. If you’re interested in non-US newspaper 
content, check out the list of UK papers that have RSS feeds, available at http://dave.org.uk/
newsfeeds/. 
Specialty RSS Feed Directories 
RSS in Searchable Subject Indexes 
There are many searchable subject indexes of RSS feeds. A searchable sub-
ject index is a directory set up into categories (Figure 2.13). 
The categories also have subcategories and sometimes they go into aston-
ishing detail. In addition to being set up into categories, such a directory 
is also searchable by keywords (think Yahoo Directory). There are literally 

23
dozens of searchable subject indexes for RSS feeds—I discuss just a couple 
of them here. 
2RSS
2RSS (2rss.com) goes beyond RSS feeds to offer RSS tools and other RSS-
related information. It begins with the directory of RSS feeds, divided into 
several categories. There are blog and news feeds here, yes, but there are 
also business feeds, regional feeds, and lists for feeds that were recently 
added, as well as feeds that are recommended. If you want to get a sense of 
what RSS feeds look like, try the feed reader (2RSS Reader, at the top of the 
page)—you don’t have to log in to use it; just choose a feed from the pull-
down menu or enter the URL of a feed. 
RSS Network
RSS Network (rss-network.com/) offers a directory of RSS feeds, but divides 
the feeds into several unusual categories, including real estate, shopping, 
classified, and animal. When browsing results, you can view the RSS feed 
as a Web page to get a preview of the content, or go straight to the “raw” RSS 
feed or to the Web site for the feed content. 
For 90 percent of your RSS discovery needs, search engines and feed direc-
tories will do the trick. There are many of them and the biggest ones fre-
quently add new feeds. 
Figure 2.13
2RSS, a searchable 
subject index for  
RSS feeds.
Figure 2.13
2RSS, a searchable 
subject index for  
RSS feeds.
Finding RSS Feeds

24
chapter 2    RSS Basics
So far you may have gotten the impression that RSS feeds are good for nothing but delivering 
news and article updates from Web sites. Not so! RSS feeds are all about delivering information—
many different kinds of information. With that in mind, here are six weird—or at least 
unexpected—things you can do with an RSS feed. 
•	
Track a UPS package (simpletracking.com/). Want to track a FedEx or DHL package but don’t 
want to keep going back to the shipper’s Web site and hitting refresh? Enter a package number 
on this form (it supports USPS numbers too!) and it generates a handy RSS feed for you. 
•	
Search Amazon (oxus.net/amazon). Yes, you can use the tool on this page to keep up with 
your favorite authors or book subjects, but you can also use it to keep up with additions 
to other Amazon stores. Want to look for classical music, new DVDs, or even new games 
on that latest platform? This is the way to do it. There’s another good Amazon RSS feed 
generator at onfocus.com/amafeed/.
•	
Clip Coupons (valpak.com/vpcol/searchRSS.do). Now that snail mail envelope full of 
goodies is available in RSS format. Just enter a zip code or your city and state, and Valpak 
generates RSS feeds for coupons in your area, or coupons based on product category. 
•	
Get Hurricane Information (nhc.noaa.gov/aboutrss.shtml). If you live in the southeastern 
part of the United States, I’m sure you know all about when hurricane season is, especially 
after the last few years. The National Hurricane Center keeps you up to date with three 
different RSS feeds for hurricane activity in different oceans.
•	
Access Library Services (public.iastate.edu/~CYBERSTACKS/RSS.htm). As you might imagine, 
with all the different services they already offer, libraries are getting into RSS big time to 
communicate with their users about what they have to offer. This site lists several libraries and 
the services they offer via RSS, from announcements to databases, to new books, and more. 
•	
Get MTA service advisories (robotpolishers.com/subway). Things like service advisories 
are most useful when reading RSS feeds on the go. I discuss this in more detail later in the 
book. Of course, this particular site is most useful if you’re in New York, because this tool 
(Disorient Express) gives you service advisories for the New York City transit system. 
Six Weird Things You Can Do with RSS Feeds

25
Types of RSS Feeds
So far we’ve been looking at where you can find static RSS feeds—RSS feeds 
that Web sites make available to provide information about their site or 
about certain sections of their site. And these static feeds are very useful. 
But your secret weapon as an information trapper is not the static feed, but 
the keyword-based feed. 
This section is all about the “So what?” I discussed earlier in the chapter. 
Which type of RSS feed you use can save you gobs and gobs of time and 
make you look like an information-gathering wizard!
Static feeds
Static feeds are just what they sound like: feeds a site offers that you can’t 
customize with keywords—what we’ve been talking about up to this point 
in the chapter. A site may have one static feed available, or hundreds. My 
Web site ResearchBuzz (researchbuzz.org/wp) has a couple of main feeds 
with the potential for a feed for each category, which amounts to over 200 
feeds—but they’re all static. Static feeds are not the customizable timesavers 
that keyword-based feeds are, but they’re essential to providing you with 
general overviews of a topic, or for providing you with information when 
your interests are too broad for a keyword search. 
Static feeds are your starting point. You build your monitoring process by 
first setting a few information traps of general interest to make sure you get 
a full sweep of the topic you’re interested in. However, you don’t want to set 
too many! The idea is to create a manageable flow of information, which you 
can filter and redirect in whatever way you need. 
Keyword-based feeds
Keyword-based feeds are feeds that are generated based on a search. This 
search can be done on any resource (most people do them on news search 
engines). The advantage is that you can create your own feeds based on the 
keywords you’re interested in, feeds that are as narrowly focused as you 
like. Although most likely you can find RSS feeds that broadly address the 
topic you’re interested in, a keyword-based RSS feed can help you coax out 
narrowly focused information. The rest of this chapter talks about where to 
find keyword-based feeds and what to do with them once you find them. 
Types of RSS Feeds

26
chapter 2    RSS Basics
I hear you out there saying, “So what?” Okay, let’s look at an example: You’re 
interested in molybdenum mining. You might be able to find RSS feeds 
about mining, minerals, elements, or chemistry, but I’m pretty sure there’s 
no Molybdenum Mining Gazette out there. But you could search Yahoo 
News for molybdenum mining, sort your results by date, and generate a con-
stantly updated RSS feed of molybdenum mining news. 
There might not be much news about such a topic, and that’s the entire 
point. Instead of having to go through more general, very active feeds that 
change several times a month or possibly several times a day, you’d be read-
ing a feed that might change only a couple times a month. That would be 
okay, however, because it would be bringing very specific, very focused 
news to you—the exact news you want.
In later chapters, as we dive further into RSS feeds and where they can be 
found, we’ll get up close and personal with keyword-based RSS feeds. For 
now, let’s return to a resource we discussed earlier in the chapter to get a 
better sense of how this type of feed can help you. 
Remember Feedster? Feedster locates static RSS feeds. But it’s also a source 
of keyword-based RSS feeds. Say you’re a customer-service executive with 
Pizza Hut, and you want to know what people are saying about Pizza Hut 
stores. You visit Feedster, and after some experimentation, you settle on the 
search phrase “pizza hut” “thin crust”. Your search results may look like 
Figure 2.14.
Unless one of the blogs you find is called “My Diary of Going to Pizza Hut 
Every Day,” you’re probably not going to want to monitor each of these 
blogs. Instead, you can get an RSS feed of Feedster’s results: a keyword-
based RSS feed that refreshes every time Feedster finds a new entry in its 
index that matches “pizza hut” “thin crust”. (Look for the “Subscribe to 
this search” link at the top of the results page.) Feedster is monitoring the 
part of the blogging world that goes to Pizza Hut so you don’t have to!  

27
Which feed to use and when
How specific can you get when you’re generating an RSS feed? For example, 
if you’re interested in the New York Giants, there must be a few players or 
staff members that are of particular interest. The names of those people 
would be excellent candidates for keyword-based RSS feeds. 
If you’re interested, say, in search engines, you could probably stick with the 
huge number of static RSS feeds devoted to search engines. But maybe you 
want a keyword-based feed for Teoma, a lesser-known search engine ? 
If you’re interested in digital archives, you might want to start with a couple 
of static feeds from archive mailing lists, and then use keyword-based RSS 
feeds for the rest of your traps, searching Yahoo News for “information 
mining”, for example, or “online archives”.  
Or say you have a very specific interest, like archives about Pablo Picasso. 
In this case, you might want to forego static feeds entirely (though there 
might be one or two about modern art that stir your interest) and use only 
keyword-based feeds.
Figure 2.14
Looking for Pizza Hut 
experiences at Feedster.
Figure 2.14
Looking for Pizza Hut 
experiences at Feedster.
Types of RSS Feeds

28
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Obviously, the fewer traps you have, the easier it is to monitor information 
flow. At the same time, the fewer traps you have, the more difficult it is to 
make sure that most of the results are as relevant as possible to your inter-
ests (I won’t say all of the results should be as relevant as possible because 
all is an impossible, and therefore inappropriate, quest).
I am most comfortable when I see some repeated stories in the traps I’ve 
set—say 5 percent to 10 percent. This rate assures me that I’m covering my 
bases and getting most of what I can possibly get, without having too many 
repeats that make it difficult to monitor and act on the data in my traps. 
So aim for having just enough overlap between your static feeds, keyword-based 
feeds, and monitored pages (more about those in the next chapter). “Compre-
hensive but manageable” is my mantra, as you’ll see in later chapters.
Now that you’ve found all these feeds, you have another problem: read-
ing them. What can you use to actually look at RSS feeds? Well, your Web 
browser probably has the chops to read an individual feed, but you want a 
power tool—something that lets you comfortably review dozens (possibly 
hundreds) of feeds at a time. 
RSS Reader Tools
RSS readers fall into two broad categories: tools that let you merely read a 
single feed (reformatting it so that a person can comfortably read it) and 
tools that let you read and organize several feeds at a time. Your browser 
may have the potential to do the first, and many resources are available for 
doing the second. 
RSS readers for many different platforms are available: palmtops and cell 
phones—and even iPods! You can learn more about options for informa-
tion trapping on the go by seeing the bonus chapter on page A1 but for now 
let’s stick with Windows-based and Mac-based options. 

29
Browser tools: Firefox
Which browser do you use? Depending on which one it is, you may have a 
built-in RSS reader. Eventually all the major browsers will have an easy way 
to read multiple RSS feeds, but at the moment that’s not the case. 
If your browser doesn’t support RSS feeds, let me introduce you to one that 
does: Firefox. 
Firefox, which is available at mozilla.com/firefox/, has many advantages: it’s 
free, it runs on many different operating systems, it has extensive RSS sup-
port, and did I mention it’s free? Firefox also offers many different “exten-
sions,” which allow you to do even more things with RSS, but let’s start with 
the basics. 
Basic RSS on Firefox 
Firefox offers a feature called a Live Bookmark, which actually contains an 
RSS feed that updates periodically. Instead of displaying the entire feed, it 
displays a list of links to stories within the RSS feed. For example, when 
Firefox visits a site that has an RSS feed it recognizes, it gives you a little 
symbol in the address bar, as shown in Figure 2.4.
Click on that link, and you have the option of subscribing to the RSS feed as 
a Live Bookmark. The Live Bookmark has a symbol beside it, and displays 
a list of feed items when you hold your cursor over it. Figure 2.15 shows a 
Live Bookmark for ResearchBuzz. You can click on any of the items to be 
taken to the ResearchBuzz story for that item. 
	
Figure 2.15
A Live Bookmark for 
ResearchBuzz. 
RSS Reader Tools

30
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Sometimes Firefox runs into an RSS feed that it doesn’t recognize as an 
RSS feed, in which case you can manually make a Live Bookmark out of it. 
Here’s how:
	 1.	
Click the Bookmarks item on your browser menu, and then click the 
Manage Bookmarks option. The Bookmarks Manager File menu pro-
vides the option to add a Live Bookmark.
	 2.	
Add any RSS feed you want. 
Firefox extensions 
Firefox supports additions to the Firefox program that give it additional 
functionality. There are places to download these extensions all over the 
Web, but I recommend you get them directly from the Firefox site: https://
addons.mozilla.org. 
Here I discuss just a couple of useful Firefox extensions related to RSS. 
For a full overview of all the cool things you can do with Firefox and its 
extensions, I heartily recommend Firefox and Thunderbird Garage, by John 
Hedtke, Chris Hofmann, and Marcia Knous.  
As of this writing, there are several different RSS extensions on Firefox (prob-
ably even more will have been added by the time this book goes to press): 
Wizz RSS. I like Wizz RSS, which you can check out at https://addons.
mozilla.org/extensions/moreinfo.php?id=424. Once installed (and it’s a 
quick install), Wizz RSS lets you read and manage RSS feeds. You can access 
it from the Tools option on Firefox’s main menu or by pressing Alt + W. It 
looks a little like a page frame (Figure 2.16). I recommend this solution 
when you have a low or moderate number of RSS feeds you want to moni-
tor—perhaps you want to put your most critical feeds here so you always 
have them at hand. 
I don’t want to give you a huge tutorial on Wizz RSS, but let me make a few 
points that may not be obvious. 
There’s a public and private list in the Wizz RSS panel, which you open by 
clicking one of the two icons that look like monitor screens in the Wizz 
toolbar. In order to use the private list, though, you’ll need to have a Wizz 
account, which you can create from the Options Etc menu on the Wizz 
toolbar (Figure 2.17). 

31
	
Figure 2.17
Setting up private lists 
does give you a little 
protection for sensitive 
data, but you’ll have to 
establish a user name 
and password first.
Figure 2.16 Reading RSS with Wizz in Firefox.
RSS Reader Tools

32
chapter 2    RSS Basics
The private list requires you to create an account using only a user name 
and password. This level of security is basic at best, so don’t put anything 
ultra-sensitive in the private list, where you create your categories of RSS 
feeds and then populate them with individual feeds. 
Once you’ve created a list of feeds you want to monitor, you navigate 
through this list on the left. When you see an interesting item, click on it, 
and it appears in the Web page on the right. 
When you right-click on the title of an item, you have the option of sharing 
it via e-mail. To take advantage of this, you need to add your e-mail settings 
to Wizz RSS. You can add those by accessing Account Options. 
Wizz RSS isn’t the most full-featured RSS reader you can use, but it’s simple 
to integrate into Firefox. And if you already use Firefox, it gives you the 
ability to use RSS without having to add another tool to your toolbox. 
Sage. Another RSS reader for Firefox, Sage is even simpler than Wizz RSS. 
You can get more information about it at https://addons.mozilla.org/exten-
sions/moreinfo.php?id=77. 
Once installed, Sage looks a little like Wizz RSS (Figure 2.18). However, it 
doesn’t require an account to add RSS feeds. Adding feeds is as simple as 
right-clicking and choosing New Bookmark—if you’ve used Firefox’s book-
marks at all, it should be very intuitive for you. 
Sage is integrated with online-resource Technorati, so you can see what other 
sites are linking to stories you find interesting. In addition, Sage’s options let 
you toggle a feature to search for feeds (it hooks right into Feedster) and use 
a custom style sheet for rendering if you don’t use the one Sage provides. I 
recommend Sage for lightweight feed-wrangling, especially if you don’t want 
to bother with the account setup requirements for Wizz RSS. 
RSS feed readers that integrate with your browser are good because they 
save you a step. You don’t have to worry about another software package 
to install or another site to keep up with. On the other hand, they’re not as 
robust as standalone RSS readers. I recommend them only if you don’t have 
an extensive number of sites to watch, or if there’s a small, critical num-
ber of feeds you want to keep close watch over. Having them right in your 
browser keeps them close at hand when you need them. 

33
Figure 2.18 Sage lays out an RSS feed, content snippets and all, into easy-to-read boxes. 
RSS Reader Tools
If you’re a Mac user, you might want to check out Safari, Apple’s browser 
for Mac OS X. Safari 2.0 can automatically detect RSS feeds and save them 
as bookmarks, letting you know when they’ve been updated. To learn more 
about Safari’s offerings, check out apple.com/macosx/features/safari/. 
Web-based RSS feed readers
A Web-based RSS feed reader is one that you access via a Web site.
Tip
Yes, they’re called RSS feed readers, but for the most part they 
also handle the “Atom” feed type as well, so don’t worry about 
finding an Atom feed reader.

34
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Bloglines 
Bloglines (bloglines.com) is my favorite Web-based RSS feed reader. But be 
forewarned: it has an overwhelming number of options. You power users 
out there will probably jump up and do a little dance. Non-power users may 
find yourselves just wanting to get on with reading your RSS feeds. 
You have to register to use this site. Once you do, and then respond to the 
confirmation e-mail, it’s time to set up your feeds. Check out My Feeds in the 
upper left part of the page (Figure 2.19) and notice that there’s already one feed 
there—for Bloglines itself. You can click Add to add more feeds to the list. 
You can also browse Bloglines’ directory by clicking the Directory tab on 
the main part of the page. The directory lets you search by keyword and 
view a list of the most popular and newest feeds. There’s also a list of all the 
feeds available in alphabetical order, but because Bloglines has thousands 
and thousands of feeds, this isn’t particularly useful. 
When you do a keyword search, notice you get two kinds of results—RSS 
feeds for blogs themselves, and results for entries within blog feeds. So, for 
example, if you search for Starbucks, you might find that there are only 
a dozen or so blogs with the word Starbucks in their description or title, 
but thousands and thousands of entries which mention going to Starbucks, 
their favorite Starbucks drink, etc. 
Bloglines can handle hundreds and hundreds of RSS feeds for you. Once 
you’ve set up the feeds, notice that it looks like a framed page. Your feed lists 
are on the left. Click on a feed and its content shows up on the right. 
Whether you use a standalone or Web-based RSS feed reader is up to you. If you use the same 
computer all the time—a desktop you have at home or a laptop you carry with you everywhere—
a client-side RSS reader would work fine because you’d always have the computer with the 
software on it. If you don’t use the same computer all the time, and instead shuttle between 
laptop and desktop, or home and office computers, then I recommend a Web-based RSS feed 
reader. With this type of feed reader, as long as you can get on the Web, you can get to your 
collection of RSS feeds. 
Standalone vs. Web-Based RSS Feed Readers?

35
From here the possibilities are almost endless, especially for information 
trappers who are always out to expand their sources. For instance, look at 
each entry and notice they have individual “Email This” and “Clip/Blog 
This” links. The “Email This” link does what you’d expect: it gives you a 
pop-up window where you can fill out an e-mail address to send the entry to 
and write a message about it. The “Clip/Blog This” link it gives you another 
pop-up window with an area in which to “clip” the information from the 
story that you want. After clipping, you can publish it to a “Clip Blog” avail-
able at Bloglines, or you can file it in a Bloglines-based clipping file if you 
want to save it for later. 
All of this discussion barely scratches the surface of Bloglines. It’s a sturdy 
RSS reader—you can cram a lot of feeds into it, it lets you do a lot with those 
feeds, and it also incorporates extensive feed discovery tools in with the 
feed reading. If you have a moderate-to-heavy amount of RSS research you 
want to keep up with, and you use different computers, I can’t recommend 
Bloglines enough. It’s a great feed reader. 
Figure 2.19 Your Bloglines account starts with a feed already in place— 
for Bloglines News.
RSS Reader Tools

36
chapter 2    RSS Basics
Newsburst
Newsburst (newsburst.com), brought to you by CNET, is a little more intru-
sive than Bloglines (that is, it asks you a couple of extra questions when 
you register), but if you can get past that then you’ll probably find that it’s 
another useful feed reader. 
Once you’ve registered, Newsburst presents you with a few feeds apparently 
based on the zip code you provided when registering. The Add Source tab at 
the top of the page gives you a way to manually enter RSS feeds you want to 
read and search for new ones (Figure 2.20). 
Newsburst gives advanced users who have been using another feed reader 
the option of uploading an OPML file. An OPML file is a specifically for-
matted XML file that instead of containing content items from a single RSS 
feed, contains information about several RSS feeds with no content items. 
OPML files allow you to import or export lists of RSS feeds from feed read-
ers very quickly.
The default feed display that appears when you first log in to Newsburst is 
called a “dashboard,” in which all the feed entries are laid out in multiple 
columns. In contrast, Bloglines’ feed display is called a “stream”—all the 
feed entries are laid out in one vertical list. You can opt to have either kind 
of display in Newsburst by clicking Change Preferences on the left side of 
the screen and then indicating your choice. If you have a smaller number 
Figure 2.20
You can either search 
for additional sources 
in Newsburst or add 
your own. 
Figure 2.20
You can either search 
for additional sources 
in Newsburst or add 
your own. 

37
of feeds, you might find that the dashboard display is easier to review and 
absorb quickly. If you have lots of feeds, you might want the simple, one-at-
a-time option of a stream. 
Tip 
You may have realized that the layouts on these RSS feed readers 
are very similar, with feed lists located on the left, and feed entries 
on the right. In the same way that browsers’ look and feel have 
become more similar over time, RSS feed readers, too, have stabi-
lized. Once you’ve played with Bloglines and these other readers 
for a bit, you can easily learn your way around other feed readers. 
My Yahoo
Yahoo has been a major supporter of RSS feeds in the past, so it’s no sur-
prise that the My Yahoo page supports RSS feeds (my.yahoo.com/s/about/rss/
index.html). My Yahoo is a little awkward to use if you want to look at a lot of 
RSS feeds, but if you already use the site anyway and you’re not planning to 
subscribe to more than a dozen RSS feeds, it’s hands-down the best choice. If 
you don’t already use My Yahoo, you can register at my.yahoo.com for free. 
My Yahoo has many more formatting options than the other readers we’ve 
discussed so far. You can set up your personalized page to show your local 
weather forecast. You can display the comic strips you want to read every 
day. You can set the “theme” for your page (but be careful—you want to 
choose the one that makes the text easiest to read). You can play around for 
a while until your page looks the way you want it to—after all, if everything 
goes well you’ll be visiting your page often to check your traps. 
Once you’ve finished setting up your page, you can add some RSS feeds to 
the page by clicking the Add Content tab (Figure 2.21). You can search for 
feeds by keyword, add feeds by URL, or check out the most popular feeds 
and add those. My Yahoo makes this extremely easy—just go to the RSS add 
page, paste in the URL of the RSS feed you want, click the Add button, and 
the feed is added to your page. 
For the most part, My Yahoo uses a stream layout (vertical lists), and as you 
add feeds the representation of the page on your left gets longer and longer. 
After throwing a few dozen feeds at My Yahoo, I was unable to discover a 
limit to the number of feeds it can handle. If you don’t mind a really long 
page (or a long load time), you can stack up lots of RSS feeds here. 
RSS Reader Tools

38
chapter 2    RSS Basics
The advantage of using My Yahoo as an RSS feed reader is that Yahoo has 
gone out of its way to make the feed reader pleasant and easy-to-use. And if 
you’re using the site anyway, it’s easy to seamlessly integrate reading your 
RSS feeds into your usual routine. 
There are some drawbacks, however. Yahoo seems to list only five entries 
from an RSS feed at a time, and lists only the titles, not the descriptions of 
the articles. So while you may see a lot of entries on the My Yahoo page, they 
won’t be as informative as smaller pages, which include entry descriptions 
and more than five feed entry titles at one time. 
Client-side RSS feed readers 
If you work mainly on one computer and you don’t want to trust your feeds 
to a Web-based application, then a standalone, or “client-based” RSS feed 
reader, is the better choice. A standalone RSS feed reader is software that 
doesn’t integrate or extend a program—instead it “stands alone” to deliver 
RSS feed managing and reading.
Figure 2.21
You can browse for, 
search for, or add your 
own RSS feeds to  
My Yahoo.
Figure 2.21
You can browse for, 
search for, or add your 
own RSS feeds to  
My Yahoo.

39
I have two suggestions for a client-based RSS feed reader: one for Windows 
and one for Mac. 
NewzCrawler
NewzCrawler (newzcrawler.com/) is a standalone RSS feed reader. How-
ever, it relies on Internet Explorer for some of its features, so it’s best for 
computers that run on Windows. As you’re installing NewzCrawler, you 
have the option of installing an RSS Autodiscovery Module, which makes it 
easier for you to find feeds. But because most Web sites make it quite obvi-
ous where their feeds are, and you’ve learned several techniques for finding 
RSS feeds in this book, you can skip installing the module if you like. 
After you’ve finished installing NewzCrawler and started running it for 
the first time, notice that it already has several RSS feeds installed in that 
lovely “Feeds located on the left, feed items displayed on the right” structure 
that you’re probably very used to by now (Figure 2.22). Actually it’s a little 
bit different. The panel on the right is divided into two parts. The top part 
shows you a summary of items, while the lower part shows the story from 
the item itself. From the lower part you can also visit the story on the Web. 
Tip
NewzCrawler uses Internet Explorer by default to visit Web sites. 
Because this browser has had more than its share of security 
issues, make sure your copy of Internet Explorer has the latest 
patches and updates and that its security settings are turned all 
the way up. NewzCrawler also gives you the option of viewing 
the links from RSS feeds in the browser of your choice, which you 
might find more secure. 
You may find that you don’t want all of the RSS feeds that NewzCrawler 
automatically adds to your list. If you want to get rid of them, it’s easy. Just 
right-click on the feed you want to delete (you can also click the plus sign 
beside the folders to open the folders and show the feeds) and you’ll be pre-
sented with several options. Delete, of course, gets rid of the feed. Catch 
Up marks all the feed stories that have been read. Many other options are 
available, but I won’t go into detail here. 
To add feeds to NewzCrawler, right-click on any of the items, and at the top 
of the pop-up menu, choose New. You have the option of adding new fold-
ers or new feed items. To update your list, click the green Play button at the 
RSS Reader Tools

40
chapter 2    RSS Basics
top of the page, and all the feeds update. NewzCrawler has a free, two-week 
trial offer. It costs $24.95 after that. 
If you’re not using Windows, you have other options. 
NetNewsWire
NetNewsWire (ranchero.com/netnewswire/) requires Mac OS X 10.2.8 but 
is compatible with Mac OS X 10.4. It has a typical three-panel layout, like 
many of the other feed readers we’ve looked at in this chapter, with feeds on 
the left (it comes preloaded with a bunch of Apple-related feeds), headlines 
on the top right (double-clicking on the headline takes you straight to the 
page with the full story), and content (either full-article or snippet) on the 
bottom right. A “sites drawer” provides a list of RSS feeds to which you may 
subscribe, while another tool lets you post to a Web log (Figure 2.23). 
Figure 2.22 You can read RSS feeds and monitor Web pages from NewzCrawler.

41
In addition to the regular RSS feeds, NetNewsWire also provides a way to 
subscribe to special headlines, which essentially are keyword-based RSS 
feeds that we’ve already discussed. There aren’t many options available for 
keyword-based feeds, but there are a few available for experimentation. 
Another option, a Smart List, lets you group together all the feed entries 
that match certain conditions—all the feeds that contain the word “iPod” 
in the title, for example, or all the feeds that contain the word “medical” in 
the description. In these cases, you’re conducting keyword searches of only 
those RSS feeds that you’ve subscribed to! 
You’ll also find a Dinosaurs option in the Window menu that shows you 
a list of feeds that haven’t been updated in at least 30 days—a handy fea-
ture you may want to use when the number of feeds you’re using is getting 
overwhelming. While you may want to keep those really specific keyword-
based feeds that aren’t supposed to update that often anyway, blog feeds 
that aren’t updated at least once a month can be less than useful. Goodbye, 
empty information traps! 
RSS feeds should be the cornerstone of your information trapping strategy. 
But not all resources you want to monitor have RSS feeds. What do you do 
at that point? You use another tool: a page monitor. Read on!
Figure 2.23
NetNewsWire  
comes with a lot 
of Mac-oriented, 
preinstalled feeds.
Figure 2.23
NetNewsWire  
comes with a lot 
of Mac-oriented, 
preinstalled feeds.
RSS Reader Tools

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Page Monitors

44
chapter 3    Page Monitors
In the last chapter, we looked at RSS feeds, which are easy-to-read and easy-
to-follow sources of site changes and content updates. I wish I could tell you 
that RSS feeds are the only source you’ll ever need to use when setting up 
information traps, but that wouldn’t be true. 
Why not? Because many sites still don’t provide RSS feeds. Although RSS 
has been around for quite some time, it hasn’t gained the prominence you 
might think it would. Some site operators don’t have the time or interest 
to integrate another technology into their site. Others provide alternative 
ways for site visitors to keep up with their site’s content (such as e-mail 
alerts) and don’t feel the need to offer RSS feeds. Still others want you to 
actually visit their site and see their ads, rather than receive content via RSS 
feeds. The list goes on. So in your search for information, you more than 
likely will come across pages you want to continually monitor that don’t 
have RSS feeds. What’s an information trapper to do?
Use a page monitor! This chapter discusses the various kinds of page moni-
tors that are available, walks you through how to set one up, and shows you 
how to limit the number of insignificant page updates you receive. 
Nuts and Bolts 
A page monitor simply watches HTML pages for changes and then reports 
them to you. Generally, the monitoring program grabs the page, then returns 
to the same page later, grabs a new copy of the page, and then compares the 
two. Any new information that’s added to the page is reported to you. 
At first, this sounds great. But unfortunately there’s a downside: too many 
“false positives.” For example, if a page changes its date every day, this date 
change may trigger a false positive to the change monitor, and the change 
monitor may incorrectly alert you to the new content. If a page has a visi-
tor counter that gets updated, those updates could also trigger an alert or 
false positive. Even tiny things that are updated, such as a corrected spelling 
error, can trip the page monitor. Not good! 
However, if you’re careful about the pages you pick and use the page moni-
tors to best advantage, you can minimize the number of times information 
traps trigger without providing any useful information. 

45
Why use a page monitor? 
There are two instances in which you’d want to use a page monitor: 
. 
You need the content, but you can’t get it via RSS. I already touched 
on this in the introduction to this chapter—you may want to keep 
up with a news source or with a page of information content, such as 
press releases, for example, but the information isn’t offered via RSS. 
In this case, you can use a page monitor on the appropriate pages. 
Say you’re monitoring the Events page of your favorite band. You want 
to be updated when and where they’re touring so that you’re sure not 
to miss them when they’re in town. Or maybe you want to monitor 
a page that contains information on a company’s board of directors. 
You want to see when information about that group changes, some-
thing that might be more difficult to do with an RSS feed. 
. 
When you need just a tiny bit of information. There may be some 
data point that you’re interested in that is too small to be the subject 
of an RSS feed. You may want to know when a number changes, for 
example, or when a date changes. In that case, monitoring the page 
for changes makes more sense than trying to set up an RSS feed.  
Just make sure you’re not reinventing the wheel. If you’re looking for 
a common small bit of data, like a stock quote or a temperature, there 
are services that can provide you with that information via e-mail 
alerts. (I cover e-mail alerts in the next chapter.) 
Types of page monitors
There are two kinds of page monitors:
. 
Web-based. Some page monitors are Web services. You go to the site, 
enter the pages you want to monitor, and receive page updates via  
e-mail (Figure 3.1). 
These services can be either free or fee-based. The advantage with 
Web service page monitors is that you can access them anywhere and 
receive the alerts on any device in which you are able to receive an  
e-mail (including cell phone, PDA, and so forth). The downside is that 
they’re often limited in their configurability and sometimes show far 
more false-positive alerts than you would like. They’ll also start cost-
ing you some serious money if you want to monitor more than a few 
dozen pages at a time. 
Nuts and Bolts

46
chapter 3    Page Monitors
. 
Client-side. Client-side page monitoring software is installed on your 
computer and keeps copies of the pages it grabs on your computer for 
comparison purposes. The downside with this type of page monitor 
is that if you’re not at your computer or have alternative access to 
it, you’re not going to be able to access your page changes. Another 
downside is that unless you’re connected to the Internet 24/7 with 
broadband (and you really need a broadband connection if you’re 
going to monitor any number of pages), you might not get around 
to doing regular scanning. On the upside, client-side software lets 
you easily manage large numbers of monitored pages (several thou-
sand in my case), whereas it can be cost-prohibitive to do that with 
an online service. Finally, client-side page monitors are usually much 
more configurable than Web-based ones, and can often avoid false-
positive page change alerts. 
Within these two categories, there are dozens of page monitors available, 
with varying functionality. The rest of this chapter provides an overview of 
some monitors I like and recommend. 
Figure 3.1
Trackle, a Web-based 
monitoring service, 
sends out plain-text 
update notices of the 
pages it monitors. 
Figure 3.1
Trackle, a Web-based 
monitoring service, 
sends out plain-text 
update notices of the 
pages it monitors. 

47
Web-Based Page Monitors
If you’re monitoring a minimal number of pages—less than two dozen—and 
you want to watch the pages you monitor from several different computers, 
the flexibility of a Web-based page monitor will be ideal for you. 
WatchThatPage
WatchThatPage (watchthatpage.com) is a free service that lets you specify a 
list of pages and then monitors them for changes. 
You must register to use WatchThatPage with your name, e-mail address, 
and a password. When you register, you have the option of specifying your 
time zone, how often you want to receive updates, and so on. WatchThatPage 
won’t provide updates more than once a day.
Once you’ve registered, you can add pages and even folders (Figure 3.2). 
If you’re planning to cover several different topics, it makes sense to set up 
folders for each of your interests—and setting them up just after you regis-
ter makes it that much easier to administer the sites later. If you have some 
pages you want to monitor for changes every day, and others you want to 
monitor every week, you can set up different channels. 
Figure 3.2 With WatchThatPage, you can group your pages by folder and select pages as you’re browsing 
using a special bookmark called a bookmarklet.
Web-Based Page Monitors

48
chapter 3    Page Monitors
A bookmarklet is like a bookmark, except it has a little bit of JavaScript in it that enables it to do 
things like query a search engine or connect to resources like WatchThatPage (Figure 3.3). 
Figure 3.3
Bookmarklets can do 
simple things like tell 
you how recently a 
page has been updated.	
Bear in mind that if you have JavaScript turned off in your browser, bookmarklets won’t work. 
For security reasons, make sure you stick to using bookmarklets that are offered by services you’re 
using, such as TrackEngine and WatchThatPage, or by legitimate Web sites, such as bookmarklets.
com, rather than ones that have been e-mailed to you or you’ve accessed in some other way. 
What’s a Bookmarklet? 
WatchThatPage provides page alerts via e-mail. However, you can also view 
recent page changes from the site, which is handy when you accidentally 
delete some updates but still want to see them. 
TrackEngine
Unlike WatchThatPage, TrackEngine (trackengine.com) is a paid service, 
with some free functionality available. Registration with TrackEngine is 
free, and requires a name, company name, email address, user name, pass-
word, country/time zone, and a terms-of-service agreement. You can moni-
tor up to five sources before you need to pay a fee.
TrackEngine offers a nifty bookmarklet button you can add to your browser 
toolbar. When you’re surfing the Internet and you find a page you want to 
monitor, you simply click the bookmarklet button on your toolbar, and that 
page is automatically added to TrackEngine. 

49
When you add a page, you are asked to provide the following: the page’s 
URL, a title for the page (something that’s easy for you to remember), and 
how often you want to track this page, whether it’s daily, every two days, 
every three days, or weekly (Figure 3.4). You also have the option of being 
notified of updates containing only the keywords you specify. 
Figure 3.4 TrackEngine’s bookmarklet pops open a window allowing you to add a page you’re viewing to your 
list of monitored URLs.
Tip
The notification option can save you buckets of time! If there’s an 
easy keyword that encompasses the kind of information you’re 
looking for, such as a company name, person’s name, or technology 
name, by all means use it! It helps eliminate a lot of the false posi-
tives you can get when trivial information on the page changes. 
You can get reports about page updates from the front page once you’re 
logged in. Unfortunately, TrackEngine doesn’t allow you to monitor more 
than five pages at a time, which is not much, unless you have a very small 
monitoring job. If you want to monitor more, you have to upgrade. Moni-
toring 10 bookmarks costs $19.95 a year, or you can pay $4.95 a month to 
monitor up to 50 bookmarks. 
Web-Based Page Monitors

50
chapter 3    Page Monitors
Lots of the resources you’re going to see in this book are either free, with the option to pay for 
additional services (like TrackEngine), or available for a fee only. If you’re doing information 
trapping for a company, you’ll have to see if your company will foot the bill to pay for page-
monitoring or other services. If you’re on your own, you are probably wondering how much 
money you should pay for your traps. 
Almost every resource mentioned in this book has a free trial available or a limited offering. For 
those that provide a free trial, it’s a good idea to give it a go first, and see how you like it. Test, 
test, and test some more. If you have fairly limited needs, you might be able to get by with a 
limited, free offering. Or maybe you’ll use several different free services. The rest of the services 
mentioned in this book are inexpensive enough that you can add at least a few of them to your 
toolbox without spending an excessive amount of money.
The page monitors that you pay for have a couple of big advantages. First of all, they’re usually 
more stable in monitoring the pages you’ve set up, and who wants their information traps to 
vanish? Second, they tend to have better customer support. When you’re paying for something, 
you want to make sure you’re getting your money’s worth, right? You don’t have as much 
leverage when a service you don’t pay for goes plotz. 
That said, I still don’t recommend paying for a Web-based page monitor unless you will be 
monitoring fewer than 100 pages. If you will be monitoring more than that, it makes sense to buy 
a client-side page monitor, because for less than $50 you can get WebSite-Watcher and monitor 
literally thousands of pages, as I have done for years. 
When to Pay? 
InfoMinder
InfoMinder (infominder.com/webminder) combines two types of tools—it 
tracks both pages and RSS feeds. It’s a fee-based service, but a 30-day free 
trial is available. (The trial version is limited to 10 pages/feeds.) 
Once you’ve registered for the trial (and confirmed your registration) you 
get—well, nothing but a blank page! But that’s okay. Look for the Add Page 
option, and then find and use the Advanced Form, because for an informa-
tion trapper, the basic form doesn’t amount to much (Figure 3.5). 

51
The Advanced Form lets you first specify the URL of the page you want 
to track, of course. But it also lets you specify whether you want to track 
insignificant changes (like dates, number changes, etc.), and the threshold 
for sending notices about changes (either after a certain number of changes 
or when certain keywords are detected, if what you’re tracking makes 
the keyword option useful). You can also specify how often notices about 
changes are sent to you (every x number of days). There are also some other 
advanced options at the bottom involving cookies and form posting and 
content posting, but I wouldn’t change those; it’s too easy to mess up your 
notifications if you get a setting wrong. 
At the top of the advanced search page, you’re asked to provide the URL of 
the page you wish to search, a description, and the categories into which the 
page fits. Once you’ve provided those categories, you get a pop-up window 
displaying the available categories (which are very broad) and your catego-
ries (Figure 3.6). You can put your categories into the already-existing cat-
egories and use them later. 
Figure 3.5 The advanced form for adding a URL to track gives you lots of options.
Web-Based Page Monitors

52
chapter 3    Page Monitors
What are good category considerations? If you’re monitoring search engine 
news, you might want to enter “Search Engines”, or if you only want infor-
mation on one search engine, you might want to enter Google, Teoma, Yahoo, 
or whatever. Make sure what you enter is easily recognized, and specific 
enough that you can effectively narrow in a particular topic. 
Once you’ve set up some pages to monitor, your login page displays a list 
of pages that you’re monitoring (Figure 3.7). Click on a page URL and a 
framed version of the page displays with changes highlighted. The date that 
the changes were detected is also displayed. Having a copy of the page with 
the changes highlighted makes it easier to see the changes than when they’re 
mailed to you, but the mailed changes, encapsulated in a single text e-mail, 
are also very useful. I recommend using both modification alert types.
There’s one more thing you have to do to make sure you’re ready to use 
InfoMinder as your page monitor: Use Preferences to choose how you want 
the changed information sent to you (via text or e-mail) and how you want the 
changed information on the pages highlighted. Once you do that, you’re set.
Figure 3.6
InfoMinder’s categories 
are very broad.
Figure 3.6
InfoMinder’s categories 
are very broad.
Figure 3.7 New icons make it easy to see which pages have changed on your InfoMinder control panel. 

53
The 30-day free trial lets you track up to 10 URLs. The paid service varies 
from $9 a year, to track up to 20 URLs, to $179 a year, to track up to 1,000 
URLs. There’s also a Premium edition that monitors your pages for updates 
multiple times a day; it costs anywhere from $299 to $499 a year, depending 
on how many pages you track. Now do you see how after a certain number 
of URLs, using Web-based change detection services gets expensive? 
For large companies or enterprises, there’s also a server edition available; 
you install the software on your own server and get more control over the 
results and the ability to track huge numbers of pages. Contact InfoMinder 
for pricing information. 
ChangeDetect
The free registration that ChangeDetect (changedetect.com) requires as of 
this writing also requires you to provide an address and phone number. If 
that’s not a problem for you, then you’ll probably discover that Change-
Detect offers some very precise features in a presentation that isn’t all that 
different from InfoMinder.
However, the free trial only allows you to monitor five pages. But Change-
Detect includes a nifty option called Bulk Monitors that lets you enter 
several pages to monitor at a time. 
Once you’ve set up pages to be monitored, you’ll see a page that resembles 
InfoMinder’s interface, except that it provides more controls (Figure 3.8). 
In fact, it looks a little cryptic until you get into it further. The options on 
the front page let you go straight to the page being monitored, view the 
monitor, modify the monitor, delete the monitor, test the monitor, and see 
when the pages were last changed. 
The options for modification are extensive and worth a look. You can provide 
thorough descriptions of pages you’re monitoring (useful if you’re sharing 
the monitoring chores), specify how you want change information delivered 
to you (you can get an e-mail alert about the page changing or you can get an 
e-mail with the changes in it), and choose how often you want the page to be 
checked (every 12 hours, every day, every week, or every month). 
Web-Based Page Monitors

54
chapter 3    Page Monitors
If you’re using the fee-based version of the service, you also get the option 
to use a user name and password (for monitored pages that require valida-
tion). And don’t forget to check out the advanced options at the bottom of 
the page. You can set the monitor to trigger when the page changes by a 
certain number of bytes, when a word or phrase does (or doesn’t!) appear, 
or when one of a series of keywords appears. (There’s a regular expression 
content filter, but it’s available only for advanced users.)  
ChangeDetect is available in three flavors: Personal (up to 10 pages moni-
tored, $1.95 a month), Plus (up to 100 pages monitored, $14.95 a month), or 
Professional (up to 500 pages monitored, $39.95 a month). An enterprise 
version is also available. 
Trackle
I use Trackle (trackle.com) and like it a lot for pages that I know will change 
on a regular basis, and for pages for which I don’t need anything but plain 
text updates. 
Trackle offers a free 14-day trial available. Once you sign up (this requires 
only a user name, password, and e-mail address), a one-page form displays 
that allows you to enter a list of URLs (up to 25) and which hours of the day 
you want to monitor them (up to 24, though once or twice is usually enough). 
Then just click the Update/Activate button and you’re set (Figure 3.9). 
Figure 3.8
ChangeDetect’s control 
panel looks a little 
cryptic until you get 
used to it. 
Figure 3.8
ChangeDetect’s control 
panel looks a little 
cryptic until you get 
used to it. 

55
While Trackle has a handy place on its Web site that shows you the results 
of your last set of updates, it’s mostly a mail delivery service. It delivers the 
updates of specified URLs as plain text, but keeps the URLs of an update 
clickable. This works well if you’re trying to monitor something that will 
provide coherent updates—say, a blog that doesn’t have an RSS feed (there 
are still plenty of these around!) or a page of press release notes. On the 
other hand, if you’re trying to monitor something that doesn’t have coher-
ent updates, such as a list of numbers or book names or something that 
won’t make much sense without the context of the rest of the page around 
it, Trackle isn’t a good solution. 
Trackle costs $1.95 a month or $19.95 a year to monitor up to 25 pages. It’s a 
lot cheaper than the other services I’ve mentioned so far in this chapter, but 
on the other hand, it doesn’t offer some of the advanced features of the other 
services, including the ability to look for specific keywords, ignore changes 
below a certain page size, and so on. 
Even though Trackle is the cheapest of the services I’ve covered here, for 
the number of pages it covers, it’s still expensive. If you get to the point 
that you want to cover more than 100 pages or so, you’re into “$75 or 
more” territory. At that point, it’s best to use a client-side monitor to keep 
track of page changes. 
Figure 3.9
Trackle’s simple 
interface lets you 
specify page URLs to 
monitor and when you 
want to monitor them. 
Figure 3.9
Trackle’s simple 
interface lets you 
specify page URLs to 
monitor and when you 
want to monitor them. 
Web-Based Page Monitors

56
chapter 3    Page Monitors
Client-Side Page Monitors
There are a few major disadvantages to using client-side monitors for the Web 
pages you want to track. The first is that a client-side monitor is only available 
from your computer, not from all over the Internet. The second disadvan-
tage is that unless you leave your computer on all the time, you won’t be able 
to automate how often your bookmarks are checked. And if your computer 
crashes or has a problem, you’ll need to make sure you have backups.
But there are advantages too! Because you’re using software on your computer, 
you can have more detailed control over the kinds of monitoring you do. You 
can monitor pages as often as you like, even every 5 minutes if you want to. 
And you can monitor huge numbers of pages—200, 500, even over 1,000. You 
can do that with online services, of course, but at a terrific expense. 
Can’t possibly imagine wanting to monitor that many pages? Believe me, 
once you’ve been doing information trapping for a while, you’ll see how 
much time it can save you, compared to hunting down information manu-
ally all the time. And then you’ll begin to discover how many of your every-
day searching chores can be turned into traps, and gradually you’ll find 
yourself wanting to monitor more and more pages! 
Page monitors for Windows
For Windows page monitoring, there’s one program I adore and can’t recom-
mend enough. I’ve been using it for years and it’s amazing: WebSite-Watcher. 
By all rights, WebSite-Watcher (aignes.com) should have its own book. It’s 
powerful, inexpensive, amazingly feature-rich, and an indispensable tool 
for Windows-based information trappers. There’s no way I can do justice 
to all its features in part of a chapter. So I’m going to hit the highlights and 
encourage you to download it (a free trial is available), play with it, and if 
you like it, add it to your toolbox! 
When you first launch WebSite-Watcher, a screen displays that looks like 
Figure 3.10.
There are two ways you can organize your pages to be monitored. You can 
monitor everything in one big file, or you can set up different files to moni-
tor different topics in which you’re interested. For example, I have a file for 

57
monitoring pages relevant to ResearchBuzz, and I have another file set up to 
monitor pages relevant to some topics in another job I have. Since I want to 
review these two types of information with different frequency, I keep them 
in different files. That way I can open one of them, monitor pages, and save 
the other pages to monitor for later. 
Whether you use one file or multiple files, you’ll need to add pages to be 
monitored. You can do that by clicking Bookmarks/New Bookmarks. A 
multi-tabbed input box with options displays, as shown in Figure 3.11.  
Figure 3.11
Using WebSite-Watcher’s many 
options will help eliminate false-
positive page changes.
Figure 3.11
Using WebSite-Watcher’s many 
options will help eliminate false-
positive page changes.
Figure 3.10 WebSite-Watcher’s basic page.
Client-Side Page Monitors

58
chapter 3    Page Monitors
Don’t worry if all of these options seem overwhelming. The important parts 
are the title and the URL, as well as the content filtering checkboxes at the 
bottom of the screen (leave them on default). If you want to be able to filter 
by the appearance of certain keywords, click the Keywords tab. If you fre-
quently want to check a particular URL, click the AutoWatch tab. Remem-
ber that WebSite-Watcher can only check a URL when your computer is on 
and connected to the Internet. 
These are the basic options. Once you’ve gotten a set of bookmarks, you 
check them by choosing Bookmarks/Check all Bookmarks (or the F9 key). 
WebSite-Watcher scrolls through the bookmarks and checks them all. How 
long this takes depends on the speed of your computer and the speed of 
the Web sites you’re checking. When the pages are all checked, you’ll see a 
framed page that shows the lists of the URLs you’re monitoring and moni-
tored pages, with the changes highlighted as shown in Figure 3.12. 
Figure 3.12 WebSite-Watcher highlights page changes so they pop right out at you. 

59
As you can see, it’s really simple to view the pages that have changed using 
WebSite-Watcher. You can also go to the current version of the page, compare 
the current version with previously changed pages, and use other options to 
make sure you’re getting every nuance of changed information on a page. 
I’ve just skimmed the surface of WebSite-Watcher, but the important things 
you need to know are adding, checking, and viewing URLs. If you want to 
monitor more than 20 or so pages and you use Windows, I strongly recom-
mend WebSite-Watcher. 
Page monitors for Mac 
There aren’t as many page monitors available for the Mac as there are for 
the PC, but you still have at least one good option in Web Watcher. And if 
you want to monitor a minimum number of pages, you can always use a 
Web-based monitoring service. Then it won’t matter what kind of computer 
you’re using! 
Web Watcher (chaoticsoftware.com/ProductPages/WebWatcher.html) is 
a shareware program for Mac that costs $20, with a $200 site license and 
$500 multi-site license available. You may try the software for free for 15 
days, however. 
Web Watcher is very easy to use. When you first start the program, a list 
of Watchpoints displays, which will be an empty list until you populate it. 
To add a Watchpoint, click the Add button at the bottom of the window. A 
screen displays that looks like Figure 3.13.
Fill out the name of the page you want to monitor, as well as the URL, user-
name and password (if it’s required), and specify how often you want to 
check the page (you can check pages as frequently as every x seconds, which 
I don’t recommend, to every x days). You can check for changes to a page’s 
size, date, and whether or not its URL is accessible. 
You also have several different notification options. You can request that Web 
Watcher play a beep, display an alert, show the URL in your Web browser, 
or send a notification by e-mail. You can e-mail up to three addresses and 
have custom text for each alert. You may also specify if you want to copy 
the watched URL or its contents—or both—into the notification e-mail. Be 
sure to add your mail server and a reply-to address using Web Watcher’s 
Preferences window if you want to send e-mail alerts!
Client-Side Page Monitors

60
chapter 3    Page Monitors
If you want to monitor for page changes often (several times a day or even sev-
eral times an hour), I recommend setting them up to display in the browser. 
However, if you want to check pages less frequently—say, once a week—I rec-
ommend having the page changes sent in an e-mail, from which you can visit 
the monitored page itself and see if you find anything intriguing. 
Figure 3.13
Web Watcher’s options 
are not as extensive as 
WebSite-Watcher’s, 
but far easier to 
understand. 
Figure 3.13
Web Watcher’s options 
are not as extensive as 
WebSite-Watcher’s, 
but far easier to 
understand. 

4
E-Mail Alerts

62
chapter 4    E-Mail Alerts
In Chapters 2 and 3, we looked at both new-school ways to monitor for 
information (RSS feeds) and decidedly old-school ways (Web page moni-
tors). Smack in the middle of those two technologies are e-mail alerts. 
An e-mail alert is a service provided by a Web site that sends you an e-mail 
whenever content on the site matches a topic or keyword in which you have 
expressed an interest. For example, the Web site PubMed has a service that 
sends an e-mail whenever new content is published about a particular dis-
ease you may be interested in. 
This chapter discusses the benefits of e-mail alerts and how to find e-mail 
alert offerings that are relevant to your interests, as well as provides an 
overview of some of the more general and popular e-mail alert services. 
Later chapters explain how you can filter your e-mail to best manage these 
incoming alerts. 
Advantages of E-Mail Alerts
Right now you might be thinking, “So what? Why not just use one of the 
more advanced Web page monitors when you want to find out when a 
site matches one of the keywords in which you’re interested?” There are a 
couple reasons. 
First, Web sites offering e-mail alerts don’t update you with false positives. 
In other words, you’re not going to get an alert about new content on a site 
unless new content is really there.
Second, most e-mail alert services monitor entire sites, not just pages. If 
you sign up for an alert from CNN, for instance, you get information about 
content added throughout CNN’s Web site, rather than only from the front 
page. There are some Web sites, however, that provide e-mail alerts only 
when Web content changes, as opposed to when content based on keywords 
changes. I don’t recommend those. If you only want to be informed when 
a page changes, a page monitor is a better solution, being more flexible and 
often more customizable.
OK, so you know when and why you might use e-mail alerts instead of Web 
page monitors, but what about RSS feeds? Why not use an RSS feed instead 
of e-mail alerts?

63
Again, because e-mail alerts don’t update you with false-positive content, 
they sometimes provide more useful content than RSS feeds provide. (See 
Chapter 2 for more information on false positives and RSS feeds.) Another 
reason why e-mail alerts can sometimes be more useful is the technology 
on your end. You may want to get content update alerts sent somewhere 
other than your computer—say, your cell phone. Your cell phone may be 
able to receive e-mail, but it may not be able to handle RSS feeds. In this 
case, an e-mail alert service is a better choice. 
So part of the reason for using e-mail alerts is practical: they’re far less likely 
to give you false positives, sometimes they’re all that’s available, and they 
can cover an entire site rather than just a page. And part of the reason has 
to do with you. Sometimes RSS feeds and monitoring services don’t mesh 
with the tools you’ve already got in your toolbox, like a cell phone that can 
get e-mail but can’t run an RSS feed reader. 
Finding E-Mail Alert Services
E-mail alert services exist for just about everything. I use alert services that 
let me scan for mentions of companies, find out about the latest scientific 
research in autism, and check eBay for different kinds of inventory. Unfor-
tunately, this book doesn’t have room to discuss all of the e-mail alert ser-
vices available, so we’ll start by looking at some search engine strategies 
that are useful for finding them, and then proceed to some of the more 
useful general e-mail alert services.
To find e-mail alert services, you can begin by using Google and entering 
the simple query “e-mail alerts” or “email alerts”. As of this writing, 
Google returned over 117 million results for such a search, so it’s not that 
useful. It’s better to narrow the search by including topics. 
For instance, if you’re interested in science, you could try science (“e-mail 
alerts” OR “email alerts”). This search produced over 32 million results, 
which is still too many. You’ll have to get more specific. 
Maybe you’re interested in autism, like I am. So you could try autism (“e-mail 
alerts” | “email alerts”), which—when I did the search—returned 62 results. 
While that’s an improvement, it’s still a lot of results, so you could try different 
combinations of keywords in an effort to narrow your results further. 
Finding E-Mail Alert Services

64
chapter 4    E-Mail Alerts
As you’ve most likely already guessed, finding e-mail alert services via a 
search engine is challenging. You have to use keywords that are general 
enough to snag what you’re looking for but specific enough that you don’t 
get, say, 28 million results. 
Take the time to experiment. When you go searching like this, you will find 
lots of relevant resources that you probably didn’t even know existed, which 
is good for you and good for your information traps. 
Useful E-Mail Alert Services
There are lots of specific e-mail alert services out there that will help you in 
your quest to monitor the Internet for information, but unfortunately you’ll 
have to do some mining in Google or another full-text search engine to find 
them. (Unfortunately since e-mail alerts tend to be features of a site, but not 
a highlight of the site itself, it’s difficult to find topical e-mail alert services 
in searchable subject indexes like the Yahoo Directory.) If you’re interested 
in more general services, we have enough room in this book to look at half-
a-dozen of them. 
Yahoo Alerts
Yahoo offers many different kinds of alerts, including Amber Alerts for 
missing children, auctions, weather, and stocks. But the ones that likely will 
be of most interest to information trappers are news and the breaking news 
alerts. The other alerts are useful on a day-to-day basis, but unless you’re 
trapping weather topics, they’re more like the “basic bits of data” discussed 
in Chapter 1. The news alerts, on the other hand, offer fresh data that you’d 
want to trap anyway, delivered to you in a timely manner (Figure 4.1). 
To use Yahoo’s alerts (alerts.yahoo.com), you need a Yahoo account (the 
same kind of account you use to get a My Yahoo portal page, or Yahoo’s RSS 
feed reader). If you’ve got that, you’re ready to go. 
Let’s walk through setting up an alert. Choose, say, Breaking News first, and 
then the kind of news you want. The second page gives you options (Figure 
4.2). Do you want breaking news from the Associated Press or Associated 
Press bulletins? (Bulletins provide fewer alerts, since they’re more “break-
ing news” type stories.) 

65
Figure 4.1
Yahoo Alerts is 
constantly adding new 
types of information 
to monitor, but for 
information trapping 
you’ll likely find the most 
useful ones are breaking 
news, news, and possibly 
feeds and blogs.  
Figure 4.1
Yahoo Alerts is 
constantly adding new 
types of information 
to monitor, but for 
information trapping 
you’ll likely find the most 
useful ones are breaking 
news, news, and possibly 
feeds and blogs.  
Figure 4.2
Yahoo Alerts offers 
source and delivery 
options for breaking 
news.
Figure 4.2
Yahoo Alerts offers 
source and delivery 
options for breaking 
news.
Useful E-mail Alert Services

66
chapter 4    E-Mail Alerts
You have the option of having the alerts sent to your e-mail address, to 
Yahoo Messenger, or to a mobile device, such as your cell phone. 
Tip
To have alerts sent to your cell phone, you must register your 
mobile device with Yahoo, which involves specifying the type of 
device it is (cell phone, pager, or something else), the manufac-
turer, the wireless carrier, and the phone number. Yahoo gives you 
the option of specifying the maximum number of alerts you get a 
day, but be forewarned: it’s no fun being an information trapper if 
your wireless service provider charges you a zillion dollars a month 
for all the alerts you’re getting. If your service provider charges 
you per wireless alert, make sure you severely limit the number of 
alerts Yahoo can send you per day. 
If you’re interested in a topic that may precipitate a bulletin, such as pol-
itics, international relations, and so on, you may find the breaking news 
alerts useful. (Be sure to get the bulletins, which will minimize your alerts.) 
However, if you’re more into old woodworking equipment or treatments 
for shingles, breaking news may be of minimal interest to you. In cases like 
these, you’ll want regular news alerts. 
When you choose News from the main alerts menu, you’ll discover that 
you have three types of news alerts available: breaking news (you’ve already 
seen the options for those), keyword news, or a daily news digest. Go for 
the keyword news. Again, e-mail alerts are best when you can filter them by 
keyword. You won’t save much time in your trapping if you’re looking over 
an entire daily digest’s worth of news. 
When choosing keyword-based news alerts, you won’t be able to specify 
where you want the news to come from, but you will be able to specify what 
keywords you want included and excluded from your queries. 
Once you’ve specified the words, you’re set up to receive alerts. You can go back 
and add more alerts or review what you already have set up (Figure 4.3). 
If these alert options aren’t specific enough for you, and you have no objec-
tions to RSS feeds, consider Yahoo News RSS feeds instead. They have many 
more options, including allowing you to search categories of stories and 
specify the language of stories that you’re searching. We’ll look at more 
Yahoo options in later chapters. 

67
Google Alerts
Google Alerts (google.com/alerts) offers several different kinds of moni-
toring—not as many as Yahoo—but it is still a relevant option for many 
information trappers. Unfortunately, it only delivers via e-mail: there is no 
option to send alerts to your mobile phone or via an instant-messaging pro-
gram. Some of the alerts Google Alerts provides include News, Web, News 
& Web combined, and Groups (Figure 4.4). 
Figure 4.3
The My Alerts 
summary tab shows 
what you’re monitoring 
and recent matches.
Figure 4.3
The My Alerts 
summary tab shows 
what you’re monitoring 
and recent matches.
Figure 4.4 Google Alert’s options.  
Useful E-mail Alert Services

68
chapter 4    E-Mail Alerts
The News category monitors the stories made available at Google News 
(news.google.com). As of this writing, Google’s news search has over 4,500 
sources. 
The Web category monitors what you’d expect—Google’s Web index. As of 
this writing, Google’s Web index has over 8 billion pages. (Google doesn’t 
even announce anymore how many pages it has in its index.) So unless 
you’re very careful and very specific, you’re going to get more search results 
here than you know what to do with. 
Because it’s hard to generate a specific query, and because it’s not clear when 
Google indexes (or re-indexes) a page compared to when it’s actually cre-
ated, I don’t do much monitoring of general Web pages for new additions. 
(For this same reason, I wouldn’t use the News & Web alert option either.) 
If you really want to use it, make sure you use really, really specific search 
terms for things that you might not find in news stories, like under-the-
radar online services. (I monitor for “online museum”, for example, which 
tends to find personal and new collections that haven’t come to the atten-
tion of mainstream media.)
The Groups category monitors Google Groups, which is Google’s index 
of mailing lists and discussion groups. If you’re interested in monitoring 
things that might be discussed in groups or lists, such as political situations, 
technology hacks, or software support, this is an important category. Bear 
in mind that discussions are going to be heavy on opinion, and lighter on 
verified facts. Consequently, this is not a reliable source for your medical 
research, though it could be useful if you were looking for anecdotal infor-
mation on medical treatment or “support group” type discussions. 
Google Alerts provides a few options. You can get updates to your alerts 
once a day, as they happen, or once a week. I find the Once a Day option a 
happy medium. If you choose weekly, rather than daily, updates, you some-
times get a lot of information at once—too much to easily process. The As 
It Happens option can drown you in mail, especially if your keyword isn’t 
very specific. 
If you have a Google account, you can sign in to manage your Google alerts, 
which has a couple of advantages. It puts all your alerts in one place, and 
it lets you specify whether you’ll get HTML mails or text mails. If you’re 
checking your e-mail on a cell phone, you’ll probably prefer basic text to 
fancy HTML that your cell phone might not be able to handle. 

69
Yahoo and Google are useful services because they come straight from search 
engines. But there are some third party services that are also quite good. 
Third-party e-mail alert services 
Third-party e-mail alert services can offer greater flexibility and a larger 
range of monitored services than some e-mail alert services affiliated with 
individual Web sites.
Google Alert 
Why, you may wonder, is there a third-party service providing Google 
Alerts when Google does it already? The best explanation is that third-party 
provider Google Alert (googlealert.com) came first! Google’s own service 
came along a bit later. A second reason is that Google Alert offers both 
search options and output options that are a bit different from Google’s. It’s 
well worth a look. 
Google Alert has a paid version available, but the basic, free version is very 
useful. You have to register, of course. Once you’ve registered, a page dis-
plays with a list of query boxes into which you can put searches that you 
want to track in Google’s Web index (Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5
Setting up notifications 
with Google Alert.  
Figure 4.5
Setting up notifications 
with Google Alert.  
Useful E-mail Alert Services

70
chapter 4    E-Mail Alerts
I can hear the cool kids in the back of the room reminding me that earlier 
in this chapter I said that I don’t do much monitoring of general Web pages 
for new additions. I did say that. However, the advanced search options 
make Google Alert worth looking at. Google Alert filters search results and 
checks them in a way that Google doesn’t. 
On the page that lets you create the topics you want to track, you’ll find a 
More Options button at the bottom of the screen. Click it, and an Advanced 
Search form appears beside each query box (Figure 4.6). 
Figure 4.6
Wow, that’s a lot of 
additional options! 
Figure 4.6
Wow, that’s a lot of 
additional options! 

71
There are huge numbers of additional options here. You can specify an exact 
capitalization for Google Alert to search for. (This is handy if, say, you want 
pages about Windows CE so you want to find WinCE instead of the word 
wince). You can filter out similar pages. You can even filter out older results. 
So if you’ve got a search that could use some extra filtering, especially for 
punctuation and capitalization, I urge you to try Google Alert. 
Tip 
How is Google Alert able to offer advanced searching options 
that Google can’t? Google Alert filters the searches after Google 
returns them. So when you use the capitalization and searching 
options, you will get far, far fewer results than you would with the 
regular Google Alert. 
Once you’ve put together your queries, you can specify what results you want 
to check (from the top 10 to the top 200), and how often you want the results 
checked (from as frequently as every day to as rarely as every month). 
There are four levels of paid services available: a personal service for $4.95 
a month, a premium service for $9.95 a month, a professional service for 
$19.95 a month, and a platinum service at $39.95 a month. But you may find 
that the basic free service works just fine for you. 
TracerLock 
TracerLock (tracerlock.com) is a hybrid tool that lets you query search 
engines and news sources and functions as a Web page monitor, too! It’s 
not free, but a 30-day free trial is available, which requires you provide a 
credit card number.
TracerLock is actually several different monitors rolled into one: it moni-
tors news stories, search engines, and Usenet (online discussion groups). 
Once you’re logged in to TracerLock, click the “Click here to edit your search 
terms” link. A form displays where you can list your search terms. On that 
same page, you also have the option of entering your own news sources 
that you want monitored for matches on your keyword (Figure 4.7). If your 
interest is very specialized and most news services are too general for you, 
this is a great option. 
Useful E-mail Alert Services

72
chapter 4    E-Mail Alerts
Notice on the front page that you also have the option of monitoring new 
additions to search engines, as well as Usenet. But you’ll have to enable 
those. You also have the choice of getting updates for your keywords in 
real-time or once a day. 
In addition to monitoring news, search engines, and Usenet, TracerLock 
can also monitor Web page changes. Why didn’t I mention this with the 
other page monitors in the last chapter? Mostly because there’s not much 
to it. You simply enter the URLs and it sends you updates when the page 
updates. (TracerLock cautions you to enter only pages that change occa-
sionally; pages that change often, like CNN.com, will trigger alerts only 
once a day.) It’s okay if you need a backup to the more full-featured moni-
tors covered in the last chapter, but it doesn’t offer enough features (like 
keyword filtering) to make it a good primary tool. 
Pricing varies depending on what you want to monitor. Monitoring a single 
keyword will cost you $48 a year, while monitoring five terms will cost you 
$19.50 a month. Over the years, TracerLock has been displaced by alert ser-
vices provided by the search engines themselves, but I find that it can still 
locate items in corners and odd places that I wouldn’t have expected.
Not As Cool, But They Work
E-mail alerts may not be as glamorous as RSS feeds, or as technically nifty 
as directly monitoring the content of a page. But the ability to monitor what 
kind of data is added to huge indexes like Google’s Web and Yahoo News is 
a tremendous advantage for the information trapper. Take advantage of it!
Figure 4.7
TracerLock lets you 
add custom URLs to 
its regular database 
of monitored news 
sources.
Figure 4.7
TracerLock lets you 
add custom URLs to 
its regular database 
of monitored news 
sources.

5
Building Queries

74
chapter 5    Building Queries
When I first started writing this book, I wanted to immediately jump in 
and tell you all about all the nifty stuff you can do with information trap-
ping. I wanted to get right to the examples. I wanted to do the search engine 
equivalent of a quadruple axel and explain how easy it would be for you to 
do it, too. 
However, it wouldn’t have been particularly useful for me to show you how 
to do the equivalent of a fancy jump if I hadn’t yet shown you how to put 
your skates on. Now that we’ve gone through the basic elements that are 
part of every information trapper’s toolbox, you know how to use your 
browser as an information-trapping tool, how to find and read RSS feeds, 
and how to monitor pages using a page monitor. 
Now it’s time to learn what to trap, where to trap it, and why. This chapter 
presents some of the theory behind, and the practice of, setting up good 
queries. So go get a cool drink, sit down in front of your computer, and 
crack your knuckles—we’re into the fun part! 
In later chapters, we’ll tackle what to do with the information you find, 
how to keep up with your feeds (even when you’re on the go!), and how to 
republish what you gather. 
For now, let’s begin by thinking about the obvious question: what are you 
hunting? 
What Do You Want to Monitor? 
What are you trying to trap in the first place, and how are you going to do it? 
What you’re trying to trap can be boiled down to two types of information: 
internal and external. 
Internal information is information out on the Web that mentions, ref-
erences, or discusses a Web site you are interested in, whether it’s your 
own, your company’s, or someone else’s. Whenever I do presentations 
about search engines and information trapping, I often find that many 
people are wanting to track interest in their own Web sites. Monitoring 
to determine what other Web sites are linking to your own, what they are 
saying, or how many people are reading the RSS feed you’re publishing is 
infinitely valuable. We’ll spend Chapter 6 looking at finding and trapping 
internal information. 

75
External information is everything else. As you might imagine, the concept 
of external information is much larger and much more inclusive than inter-
nal information. The challenge with external information lies in building 
the perfect query to trap information of interest because there are so many 
ways to describe and express a topic, idea, or even a name. For example, 
say you want to monitor the news for mentions of George W. Bush (which 
is way too general a thing to want to monitor, but more about that in a 
moment). Do you monitor for “George Bush”, “George W. Bush”, “George 
Walker Bush”, “GW Bush”, or something else entirely? 
Getting the most out of the search engine
The fact that any topic can be expressed in a huge number of different ways 
(and therefore via a huge number of different queries) means that you’ve 
got to know a little bit about how to get the most out of a search engine. 
Yes, there are a huge number of queries you could use to track your topic. 
But only a few of them will work well. In addition, you’ve got to consider 
the size of the data pools where you’ll be trapping. Google News has over 
4,500 sources. Google Web had over eight billion pages at last count. Both 
Manageable but complete is a great guideline. But at some point you may find yourself getting 
an overwhelming amount of information. You’ve got your queries as narrowly focused as 
possible, but you’re not able to keep up with what you’re getting. Which one should you give 
up—manageable or complete? 
Sacrifice completeness for manageability. Getting complete coverage of your topic won’t mean 
anything if you’re drowning in feeds and alerts and can’t make use of what you already have. (I’m 
not even sure that complete coverage is possible for all but the most obscure topics.) Drop back 
to alerts and notifications from whatever you consider your “core sources,” whether they’re 
news search engines, journals relevant to your topic, an RSS feed search engine like Feedster, or 
something else. From there you can slowly add more sources until the results are as manageable 
and as complete as you can handle. 
Remember: you’re doing this to track a topic and expand your knowledge. You’re not doing 
this to overstress yourself and drown in information. Okay? If you can’t have complete and 
manageable, make sure manageable comes first!
Manageable But What?
What Do You Want to Monitor? 

76
chapter 5    Building Queries
of these data pools are constantly being added to and updated. You want to 
make sure you get a manageable number of results that completely covers 
your topic. That’s the goal. That’s your mantra: manageable but complete, 
manageable but complete.
Practicing the theory of onions
Getting too many results for general searches will always be a problem 
when using search engines with large pools of data (which amounts to 
pretty much any Web search engine, news search engine, and so on).  
When developing queries, I advocate practicing “the theory of onions” to 
narrow a search as much as possible. This involves first developing a query 
for your topic that is as tight and specific as you can—condensed, like the 
middle of an onion. Then you run that search and see what kind of results 
you get. Are they manageable? Probably, if your query was very specific. Are 
they complete? Probably not, if your query was as specific as it should have 
been. Next, make your query a little more general—unwrap it like you’re 
moving out through the layers of an onion. Run the query again. Ask your-
self the same two questions: is it manageable? Is it complete? Repeat this 
process until you’re getting a good number of search results without feeling 
like you’ve been hit by the equivalent of a data firehose. 
Experiment on your own a little using the theory of onions and see what 
happens. Most people are so used to plugging a couple words into a search 
engine and going to town that they don’t really “get” the idea of building as 
specific a query as possible. If you’re having problems understanding how 
to start with a very specific search query, here are some possible solutions 
that might get you unstuck.
. 
Your language isn’t unique enough. Every topic has words of its 
own—its own vocabulary. A great example of this is medical terms. 
If you want to monitor causes of abdominal pain, a search for “stom-
ach ache” will get you one level of results, while searching for “peptic 
ulcer” or “gastrointestinal reflux disease” will get you an entirely 
different, more technical level of results. If you are familiar with it, 
try to include the language of your topic in your search queries. It will 
help you immensely in narrowing down your results. 

77
. 
You’re not using enough words. The way some people put queries 
into search engines, you’d think they were being charged by the let-
ter. Why not use more words? Last time I checked, Google had a 
query limit of 32 words. Use the limit! Throw in all the words about 
your topic that occur to you. 
. 
You’re not narrowing in enough. Get specific! Don’t use tree, use  
dogwood. Don’t use bird, use cardinal. If you have to rework your search 
and get more general, that’s fine. That’s the point. You’re experimenting 
here. Experimenting now will pay off later in saved time. 
Of course, how much you adjust your query—how much more or less spe-
cific you have to get—is going to depend a lot on the kind of resource you’re 
using. Let’s get a bird’s eye view of some of the different types of resources 
you’ll search so that you’ll know what to expect. 
Types of Search Engines
In general, two types of search engines index text-based data (multimedia 
is different; we’ll look at multimedia trapping in Chapter 8). This applies to 
every kind of data that might be searched, from scientific journals to news 
stories to Web search engines. 
The first kind is the full-text search engine. Google is a good example. Full-
text search engines try to index every word on every page that they come 
across. As you might expect, this amounts to a lot of words. 
Unfortunately, this book is not a place that I can cover searching and the many types of query 
building in-depth—there’s not enough room! This book focuses on the resources you use once 
you’ve built the perfect query. If you find you want to get down to the nitty-gritty of building 
solid search queries, check out one of my other books, Web Search Garage (Prentice-Hall). It’s 
a couple hundred pages about how to coax information out of search engines in all kinds of 
different ways. You can get more information and some goodies at websearchgarage.com. 
A More In-Depth Look at Building Queries
Types of Search Engines

78
chapter 5    Building Queries
The second kind is the searchable subject index. Yahoo’s Directory and Open 
Directory Project are good examples. A searchable subject doesn’t index every 
word of every page, or even index every available page on the Web. Instead, 
it tries to list sites. And it doesn’t list all the words of a site, but rather just the 
name of the site, the URL, and some kind of brief description. 
Despite the fact that Yahoo got famous because of its Web site directory (its searchable subject 
index), it has in recent years implemented a full-text search engine. And despite the fact that 
Google has had a full-text search engine since 1998, it also offers a searchable subject index via 
its Google Directory. So both search engines offer full-text and subject index searching. 
I mention this when people ask me “Which is better, full-text searching or searchable subject 
indexes?” My answer: neither is better overall. It depends on what you’re looking for. 
Two Types of Searches in Each Search Engine 
As you might imagine, there’s a big difference between a narrow effective query 
in a full-text search engine, and a narrow effective query in a searchable subject 
index. The difference revolves around the “pool” of data you’re searching. 
Let’s look, for example, at a Web site about trees that has 100 pages with 100 
words on each page. Google will attempt to index that entire site. When 
Google finishes, that site will be represented in Google’s index by 10,000 
words of its content. Compare that to Yahoo’s Directory or the Open Direc-
tory Project, which would index the same site with only the Web site’s title 
and a description. In this case, the Web site about trees would be lucky to 
have 100 words representing its content. 
Because of how much information about a site is indexed in each kind of 
search engine, you have to be careful about what you search for. A search for 
something as specific as “southeastern knotty limbed birch tree” would 
be perfect for Google but almost useless in Yahoo’s Directory. Meanwhile, a 
simple search for “birch trees” could bring you useful results at the Open 
Directory, but a deluge of results at Google. 
For the most part, you’ll deal mostly with full-text search engines, so focus 
on generating a concentrated, narrow query. 

79
Is there more you can do to get focused and specific in your queries besides 
putting in as many words as possible and using topic-specific language? Abso-
lutely. You can take advantage of the different syntaxes the search engines 
offer. You can also omit keywords. We won’t go over all the different syntax 
that search engines offer; instead I’ll give you some common syntax—and 
then show you where to look for the more esoteric, quadruple-axel stuff. 
Basic Searching Syntax
How do you search for things in search engines? You type in words. But 
how do you tell the search engine which words you want to search for, 
which ones you want to avoid, and so on? You use Boolean logic. Boolean 
logic simply tells a search engine that you want to search for something 
and something else, or for something and not something else, or for one of 
several different words, and so on. 
For example, the search query beans –rice tells the search engine, “I want 
to search for beans and not rice,” and that’s Boolean. The minus sign in 
front of rice is a Boolean operator; it’s telling the search engine that you 
want to make sure that word doesn’t appear in any query results. If you’ve 
been using search engines for any length of time you’re familiar with using 
minus signs to exclude words, and plus signs to include them. In fact, you 
may have been using Boolean logic all along and not even have known it! 
The first thing you need to know about a search engine is its Boolean default. 
The Boolean default is the Boolean operator that the search engine will use 
if you enter your query with no Boolean operators (for example: beans rice 
cheese lettuce tomato). Will it search for all the words? If so, then it’s using 
the Boolean “and.” Will it search for any of the words? (That is, will it return 
as a result any Web page that has at least one of your query words in it?) If 
so, it’s using the Boolean “or.” 
If you’re trying to get your results as focused as possible, “and” is far bet-
ter than “or,” for the obvious reason that it will give you fewer and more 
relevant results. Unsurprisingly, most search engines nowadays default to 
the Boolean “and.” 
Experiment a little by doing the following: Begin a query by entering into 
a search engine a bunch of relevant words you think might narrow your 
search results. Don’t forget that since most search engines default to “and,” 
Basic Searching Syntax

80
chapter 5    Building Queries
you don’t need to add anything to the query words to make sure they’re 
included in the query. If you want to make sure they’re not included in the 
query, however, put a minus (-) sign in front of them. And to make sure that 
words appear only as a phrase, group them with quotes. 
Take for example the following query: “cardiac arrest” treatment pre-
vention -”heart attack”. This phrase would return results for “cardiac 
arrest” and include the words treatment and prevention but would exclude 
any pages that also had the phrase “heart attack”. 
Tip
Be sure to use great caution when excluding words! The example 
above was designed to find medical professional-level results—in 
other words, Web pages whose audience of medical professionals 
would refer to “cardiac arrest” instead of a “heart attack.” If you 
run this same search, you’ll find that the results are from sources 
like professional medical journals, the American Heart Associa-
tion, hospitals, and so forth. It’s high-level information—just 
removing one phrase wiped out a whole level of results. Very 
powerful, but also very damaging if you use it inappropriately. 
Special Searching Syntax
When you enter a plain query word in a search box, the search engine looks 
for that word anywhere on a page. It will look in the title of the page or in 
the body of the page. One way to reduce your number of results further is to 
use special syntax that limits where the search engine will look for a word. 
Search engines vary in the kinds of special syntax they offer, but in this sec-
tion you’ll find some almost-universal syntax you can use in your searches. 
In addition, look in the search engine’s Help documents for information on 
the right way to express the syntax.
The title syntax
To use the special title syntax on Google and Yahoo, you enter intitle:key-
word. This syntax restricts your searching to the title of a Web page. It’s use-
ful when you don’t have many words by which to limit your topic. Instead, 
you’re limiting where your word might be found. When your word is found 
in the title of a Web page, the page usually contains a lot of information 
about that keyword. 

81
Be sure to try to get as specific as possible even when you’re searching 
titles—a page that has your very specific query word in the title will prob-
ably get you a jackpot of information. On the other hand, you may find you 
need to get more general before you start getting many results. Don’t use 
too many query words with this syntax. 
The URL syntax
To conduct a special URL syntax search on Yahoo and Google, you must 
enter inurl:keyword. This syntax searches only the URLs of pages for the 
keyword you specify. 
But be careful. We are definitely in quadruple-axel territory here. Since 
there’s no guarantee that people will use a full word in a Web page name, 
it’s tough to use this syntax. I tend to use it mostly when I’m searching blog 
entries because many blogs put the full title of their entry in their URL. 
The site syntax
To conduct a site syntax search on Yahoo and Google, you must enter site: 
in the query box. This syntax restricts your search to either a top-level-
domain (.org, .edu, .com, .uk, etc.) or to a single domain (like CNN.com). 
Why would you want to do this? Many domains tend to have their own 
“flavor” of information (with the exception of the .com domain). 
For example, material on .edu domains, especially if you’re searching for 
scientific/professional information, tends to be more academic (though 
occasionally student pages can also be found there). Information on .org 
domains can slant toward the nonprofit (though this is less true than it used 
to be). If you need to search within a single domain, check and see if that 
domain offers its own search or alert service before you go to the services 
offered by a search engine. Remember, there’s no guarantee that a search 
engine will index every single page on a site. 
Warning
Be aware that any time you exclude the .com domain from a 
search, you’re excluding a lot of pages. Try your search without 
using site syntax and then try it again using site syntax to see what 
information you’d be missing. 
Special Searching Syntax

82
chapter 5    Building Queries
Other useful syntax
Title, URL, and site syntax are common to a lot of search engines, whether 
they’re for news, Web searches, or RSS feeds. That’s because these elements 
are common to all Web pages. But search engines go beyond those syntax to 
offer others that can help your searching. Keep an eye out for the following 
syntax, which you can use to narrow down your searches.
Location
Some search engines, especially news search engines, offer you a way to 
narrow your searches by the location of the source. Google News does this, 
for example. To use the location syntax, enter location: and the two-letter 
postal code of the state you want to search. For example, location:ca will 
find news from sources in California. This syntax also works with the name 
of a country (try location:ireland). General search engines sometimes 
allow you to narrow your search by country or region of the world, but less 
often by state or city.
Page size
Sometimes you can narrow down your search results to how large the page 
is. Using this you can try to skip the pages that contain a minimal amount 
of information, but this may mean you can miss useful pages. 
Using the Advanced Search Form 
Every time you use a search engine, without fail, look for the advanced 
search form. Most search engines have a basic form with a query box and 
maybe a couple of options. Until you visit the advanced search form (there’s 
usually a link next to the simple search) you’ll have little idea of what that 
search engine is capable of. For instance, compare Google’s front page (Fig-
ure 5.1) to its advanced search page (Figure 5.2). The front page has a simple 
query box, while the advanced page has several query boxes for providing 
all kinds of search information, and even a few pull-down menus! 
There are thousands and thousands of search engines and interfaces avail-
able, but they all have some basic guidelines in common. Look at the 
advanced search. Look at the help files. For each syntax you use, ask your-
self: Is this going to narrow my results? Is it going to get manageable results 
while keeping them comprehensive? Experiment with them. 

83
Figure 5.1
Google’s front page is 
very simple. 
Figure 5.1
Google’s front page is 
very simple. 
Figure 5.2 Google’s advanced search page can be a bit overwhelming. See what I mean? 
And my biggest recommendation for using syntax is this: combine syntax 
together when you can. Searching just in a title or just in one set of domains 
is powerful enough, but when you do both of those things together you can 
really zoom in on what you want to find. 
Using the Advanced Search Form

84
chapter 5    Building Queries
The suggestions and the techniques I’ve gone over thus far are very useful 
for all kinds of data collections, be they Web pages, news search engines, 
article collections, sets of RSS feeds, or what have you. However, they are 
not useful for two other kinds of information collections—tags and conver-
sations. For those you’ll need to use a different approach. 
Tags and Conversations
What are tags and conversations? Conversations, of course, are discussions 
that might happen on mailing lists or on public forums. You can find them 
via general search engines, but there are also many specialty search engines 
that index only conversations. 
Tags you might not know about. A tag is a keyword that someone can use 
to describe a resource in a directory. Usually a search engine or directory 
that indexes tags has many people “tagging” resources at the same time. The 
index of words used to describe the contents of a directory built that way is 
called a folksonomy, a taxonomy developed by a group of people. Tags are 
not full descriptions or site titles—usually they’re just a word or two. 
Tip
You can learn a lot more about tagging and folksonomies at 
Wikipedia, including an overview on folksonomy at en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Folksonomy. 
You will need to change your strategy when developing monitors for tags 
and conversations. Why? The big answer is language. 
In the case of tags, you’re not searching for summaries or even fully articu-
lated concepts. Instead you’re searching for a word or two words. In the case 
of conversations, you’re looking for much more informal language, such as 
sentence fragments and scraps of conversations. 
These kinds of data pools are very different from a structured, organized 
Web page. And for that reason you’ll have to use different strategies for 
monitoring them. Later in this book, we look at where you can go to search 
and monitor tags and conversations, but here we’re going to stick with the 
idea of queries and how to create them. 
For now, let’s take a look at searching with tags. 

85
Searching within tags
The theory of onions is extremely important when searching huge data sets. 
Getting very narrow and specific is paramount. With tag searching, you 
have less to search. Tags are usually only a word or two. You don’t have to 
abandon the onion completely, but try starting a little more general than 
you would normally. Say you had four levels for describing a bird: 
	 1.	
Bird
	 2.	
Raptor
	 3.	
Hawk 
	 4.	
Red-shouldered hawk 
Level 1 is going to be too general no matter what you search. Level 4 would 
be great for Web search or a news search, but might be too specific for a tag 
search. When searching tags, try to stay at Level 2 or 3. Try one-word, or at 
most two-word, searches. Don’t get too extensive or complicated. 
Searching within tags can be boiled down to basically two ideas: simpler, 
more general. Giving instruction about searching within conversations is 
a little more complex. 
Whenever I talk about searching conversations versus searching the Web in general, someone 
invariably says, “Well, blogs are informal, aren’t they? And they are kind of like conversations. So 
shouldn’t you use the same kind of strategy as when you search for conversations?”
That’s a good question. On one hand, yes, blog content tends to be less formal than that of 
other sites. On the other hand, the structure of a Web page makes most blogs conform to some 
sort of usual narrative: I did this, I read that, I had the following opinions. There are exceptions, 
such as stream of consciousness and fragmentary blogs, but most of them try to keep to some 
kind of recognized structure. With conversations, there’s no existing Web page layout that must 
be adhered to, so conversations can become fragmented, a lot of “inside jokes” can take over, 
language use can become very informal, etc. 
The “many-to-many” element of online conversations allows for some sloppiness and informality 
that the “one-to-many” characteristic of blogs makes less viable.
What about Blogs? 
Tags and Conversations

86
chapter 5    Building Queries
Searching within conversations
When you think about searching within a conversation, whether it is a 
mailing list or an online form, try to think about how you’d talk about your 
topic. Create queries that reflect how you’d verbally discuss the topics. 
If you’re focusing on conversations that professionals are having, try to use 
their vocabulary. (If you’re monitoring mailing lists of medical profession-
als, try to use medical terminology.) When you’re monitoring for technical 
information, you can get a little geekier and use model numbers or ver-
sion numbers. Read through some of the types of conversations you want 
to track so that you can get a sense of the kind of language that’s being 
used. Remember the example earlier in the chapter where simply searching 
for the phrase “cardiac arrest” and removing the phrase “heart attack” 
changed the results so dramatically?
And take advantage of the advanced search forms. Tag searches don’t have 
a lot of advanced options, but many conversations do. Use the available spe-
cial syntax to narrow your results. 
Note
We’re just scratching the surface of tags and conversations with 
a few words to get you thinking about how to generate queries 
when approaching these resources. We’ll get into some serious 
digging later on. 
The next few chapters examine the “where” of information trapping.

6
Who’s Linking to 
Your Site? 

88
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
It’s a big wide world out there, with literally millions of topics to monitor, 
but we’re going to start close to home—with your own Web site. 
You may remember that in the last chapter I discussed the differences 
between external and internal information. Internal information is infor-
mation out on the Web that mentions, references, or discusses a Web site 
you are interested in tracking. External information is everything else. 
When I do presentations about search engines and information trapping, 
many people ask me how they can track which Web sites are linking to 
theirs and what they’re saying about it. So wanting to trap this type of inter-
nal information seems to be a common theme. If you don’t have a Web site 
for which you want to track interest, you may want to skip this chapter. If 
you do have a Web site, you probably have an audience, and this chapter is 
your opportunity to learn what that audience thinks of your site!
Advantages of Sleuthing Your Own Site
There are several reasons you might want to know who’s linking to your site 
or who’s reading it. 
. 
Plain ol’ human curiosity. You’re putting in a great deal of time and 
effort into making a Web site available. Wouldn’t you wonder just a 
little bit who’s linking to it and what they’re saying about it? 
. 
To help your business. If someone’s linking to you with cheers, you 
want to brag. If they’re linking with jeers, you want to know how you 
can make it right. 
. 
To target your content and services. Perhaps you run a library Web site, 
or an ad-driven content site. Knowing what people are saying about your 
site can help you focus your content for your audience (“I found a great 
article about x but I wish they’d cover y”). And if you know what kinds 
of sites are linking to yours, you can approach more of those types of sites 
and ask whether they’d like to link to you as well. The more incoming 
links, the more people can find you. And that’s good! 
Trapping General Site Links
Let’s start our overview of internal information traps by looking at links to 
sites. To track this, we begin with the usual suspects: Google and Yahoo. 

89
Google 
To track who’s linking to your site in Google, you need to use the link syn-
tax like this: 
link:http://www.cnn.com
Unfortunately, Google’s link syntax does not work with any other keywords 
or any other syntax. So you can’t do a query like this:
link:http://www.cnn.com site:edu 
to find all pages from the .edu domain that link to CNN.com. (You can do 
that with Yahoo, as you’ll see in a minute.) In addition, Google’s link syntax 
checks the exact URL you’re looking for—it doesn’t find all pages within 
that domain that are being linked to. 
Google’s strengths lie in the fact that it updates its index fairly frequently, so 
you can pick up a lot of fresh links from its database. But you’ll have a lot of 
links to pore through and you’ll have to do a lot of the organizing yourself. 
Yahoo 
Because it can use other syntax and keywords in conjunction with the link 
syntax, Yahoo is a great way to track not only how many pages are linking 
In the last chapter I noted that figuring out your search queries for internal information searching 
wasn’t that tough. And it isn’t. But let’s talk about queries for just a moment. The most obvious 
query is your domain name, complete with the www, such as www.example.com. To monitor links 
to all pages on your domain, for the most part you have to monitor links to only one URL—your 
basic domain URL (in this case, www.example.com). That’s because most search engines that find 
links will find any link to a given domain. For example, if I searched Technorati for www.example.
com, I would find links to www.example.com. I would also find links to www.example.com/
archive/oldnews.html, or links to www.example.com/really/old/archives/news.html. 
For RSS feeds it’s equally simple; use the URL for your site’s main RSS feed. If you have more than 
one RSS feed (some sites have hundreds of RSS feeds), it might be amusing to see what kind of 
attention the other ones are getting, but it can rapidly get out of hand. In my experience, the 
main feed, not a category or additional feed, is what most readers turn to. Stick with that one. 
A Quick Query Overview 
Trapping General Site Links

90
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
to your site but also what kinds of pages are linking to your site. Yahoo 
offers two syntax for tracking page links: 
. 
Link syntax. Use the link syntax when you want to find sites that are 
linking to one specific page of yours. You use this syntax just like you 
would with Google: link:http://www.cnn.com. 
. 
Linkdomain. Use linkdomain when you want to find all the pages that 
are pointing to a particular domain, instead of just one page. The syntax 
looks like this: linkdomain:www.cnn.com. Note that you do not use http:// 
with this syntax; if you do it will fail and you won’t get any results.
Yahoo also makes a tool available for getting information about sites that 
are linking to a given URL; it’s called Site Explorer. 
Yahoo’s Site Explorer
Instead of using query words to search, start using Site Explorer (siteex-
plorer.search.yahoo.com/) by typing in a simple URL, such as the URL for 
your Web site. When you do that, Yahoo gives you a results page with a list 
of the pages from that domain which Yahoo has indexed. (That’s good to 
know; the more pages from your domain that Yahoo has indexed, the easier 
it will be for other people to find your site.) The full number of pages will be 
at the top of the results list. Beside that number is the number of pages that 
Yahoo has indexed that link to the URL you specified, with a hyperlink so 
that you can see the list (Figure 6.1). 
Unfortunately, Yahoo only lets you see the first 1,000 results from each list, 
which is frustrating if you have more than a few thousand links to your site 
because you know you’re missing most of them. Yahoo does offer the abil-
ity to export the results into a text file that can be opened in Excel, but you 
get the results fifty at a time (in other words, if you want to export a list of 
a thousand pages that link to your site, you’ll have to export a list of results 
twenty times). 
It doesn’t appear that Yahoo Site Explorer lists its site links in order of date, 
so you can’t easily monitor the results list for new additions. However, you 
can monitor the first results page and watch how the numbers at the top of 
the screen change—that is, you can keep track of the count of pages linking 
to your URL, and the count of pages indexed by Yahoo.com. 

91
Narrowing your search
Yahoo indexes billions of pages, so take the opportunity to narrow down the 
kinds of results you get using Site Explorer. Remember how I told you in the last 
chapter that different kinds of domains (.edu, .com, .org, etc.) sometimes have 
different flavors? You can take advantage of that here. You can set up a search 
for your domain and add site:edu to see what .edu sites are linking to you. Or 
perhaps there’s a particular country whose links you are most interested in; you 
could use that country’s code in conjunction with a link search. 
Tip
Just because a site is created and produced in another country 
does not mean it uses that country’s code. For example, a site may 
be created and maintained in Japan, but its URL may end in .com. 
So when you use a country code to narrow down the results of 
your search, bear in mind you’ll be excluding some sites that end 
in .com, .org, etc. 
And of course you can do plain keyword searches, too. Maybe you’d like 
to find out what sites are linking to you but mentioning a competitor, or 
Figure 6.1 You’ll find a variety of page links to your site using Site Explorer.
Trapping General Site Links

92
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
linking to you and linking to a competitor? (You can do two link searches in 
one query!) Once you begin using other syntax and keywords in conjunction 
with a link or linkdomain search, the possibilities are (almost) endless. 
Say you’re the CEO of Example.com and you want to monitor which sites 
are linking to you and linking to CNN.com. That’s easy—your search would 
look like this:
link:http://www.example.com link:http://www.cnn.com
Or say you’ve got a blog and you want to know how many college Web pages 
are linking to you. In this case, you’d enter:
link:http://www.example.com site:edu
Or what if you want to know who’s linking to you but mentioning the name 
of your competitor? You’d enter this in the query box:
link:http://www.example.com WidgetCo
Remember, you want complete but manageable!
If you can think of keywords that are at all relevant, try to use them; nar-
rowing down your results is important. Excluding your own domain from 
the results helps, such as in the following example: 
linkdomain:www.example.com -site:example.com 
Warning
Keep in mind that the link syntax and the linkdomain syntax will 
not work if you include http:// in front of the URL. 
Using Yahoo’s RSS feeds
Yahoo offers RSS feeds of its search results, but you have to enter the URL 
yourself. So, for example, you’d enter the following URL and then substi-
tute your query for the word keyword at the end:
http://api.search.yahoo.com/WebSearchService/rss/webSearch. 
xml?appid=yahoosearchwebrss&query=keyword.
You’ll find more information about Yahoo Web RSS feeds, and the encod-
ing options for them, in the next chapter. Seeing who’s linking to you across 
the entire Web is useful, but it does have its limitations. You might get the 
same results and find that the same pages are indexed over and over, or you 
might miss some of the more minor links to your pages. 

93
To get a timely sense of who’s linking to your site, you want to check RSS 
feed search engines that can sort their results by date. 
Trapping Links in RSS Feeds
Trapping links from RSS feeds has one massive advantage: the feeds can be 
sorted by date. You know when you get a new hit that it will be fresh; it won’t 
be something that’s been wandering around a search engine index for the 
last few years. And because most RSS feeds are oriented toward blogs, you 
also know your results will be mostly commentary. That’s all good. 
You have two major options when you want to check for links in RSS feeds. 
Both Technorati and IceRocket offer link searches.
Technorati 
In Technorati’s (technorati.com) early days, I spent a lot of time using it to 
check links. Nowadays, Technorati does a decent job of searching for tags 
and keywords. But it’s even better at checking for links to sites, which is 
mostly what I use it for. 
You don’t need to use any syntax to check for links; just enter the URL that 
you want to monitor in the Website URL Search form. You will get a list of 
all pages which link to that domain or URL, with the most recent links at 
the top (Figure 6.2). 
Luckily Technorati doesn’t care if you use http:// with the URL. It displays 
a list of the blogs that link to that URL or a URL in that domain, with the 
most recent ones listed first. 
You also have the option to “claim” your site. Claiming your site means that 
you prove to Technorati that you own your domain (this usually involves 
pasting a little snippet of code on your site). Once you’ve done that, you 
have the option of adding some additional information about your blog to 
Technorati and getting some information on your Technorati account page 
about the popularity and number of links to your site. 
I find that sometimes Technorati delivers a false positive on a site that is on a 
link list, but is not part of an active Weblog discussion. On the other hand, it 
will sometimes find results that I didn’t see on IceRocket. 
Trapping Links in RSS Feeds

94
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
Figure 6.2
Checking for links to 
CNNSI.com. Note that 
Technorati also shows 
when the result was 
found.
Figure 6.2
Checking for links to 
CNNSI.com. Note that 
Technorati also shows 
when the result was 
found.
Many blogs contain lists of links to other blogs; these lists of links are called blogrolls. 
Blogrolls are great discovery tools. They exist because of two primary assumptions: if you’re 
interested enough in someone to read their blog, you might also be interested in what they read, 
and if you like one type of blog, the other ones listed in a blogroll might be similar enough that 
you’ll like them too. 
If you have a blog or a site that is popular with blogs, you might find that your URL ends up on 
blogrolls. To track these, try using Blogrolling (blogrolling.com). Blogrolling lets you set up a 
blogroll and search through blogrolls for the URL of your choice. You’ll be able to see how many 
blogs that use the Blogrolling.com service are linking to you. Run a search for your URL, and then 
put a page monitor on the results. 
Blogrolling’s search doesn’t list every possible blog that links to you, of course, only those that use 
the Blogrolling service. But it’s another interesting data point to add to your information traps. 
Watching Blogrolls for Your URL 
If you don’t have an account with Technorati, the easiest way to monitor its 
search results is with a page monitor. But I really recommend you get an 
account—it’s free and only requires a name and e-mail address. 

95
IceRocket 
IceRocket (icerocket.com) is a relatively new search engine that offers 
searches for a variety of collections, from the expected (news and blogs) to 
the unanticipated (MySpace). IceRocket isn’t as famous as Google or even 
Technorati, but I occasionally find results here that I don’t find anywhere 
else (Figure 6.3). 
When you use IceRocket to sleuth out other links to your site, you don’t need 
to use syntax; you just enter your site’s URL, including http://. IceRocket 
displays a list of results sorted by date. 
The only disadvantage I’ve encountered with this site is that sometimes you 
get multiple copies of the same entry in your list of results. 
IceRocket offers RSS feeds of its search results. Just click the Subscribe but-
ton at the top of the search results page and you’re ready to go. 
Figure 6.3 Searching for links in IceRocket doesn’t require a special syntax, just a URL.
Trapping Links in RSS Feeds

96
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
Some site-based information is easy to define, such as who’s linking to your URL, for example, 
or the number of people who read your RSS feed. More nebulous is the idea of your Web site’s 
content, and who is using it. Because content use is an issue with anyone who has a Web site, I 
cover the topic in this chapter; because it is nebulous it gets its own sidebar. 
Usually the idea of someone using your content is bad: another site is reprinting your materials 
with only an acknowledgement—or worse, no acknowledgement! And that does happen. But 
there is potential good to people using your content, too. Maybe someone is using your RSS 
feed snippets as content on their site (and thus driving people to your site!). Maybe you have 
an article you’re trying to circulate and you want people to pick it up. Maybe you’ve been 
encouraging other sites to link to yours with a short summary of your content, and you want to 
see what sites are actually using the summary. Good and bad, there are many reasons to want to 
know if content related to your site is showing up on the Web.
There are two ways to do this. The first way is probably the way you would expect: run a Web 
search with a 10–15 word snippet of the content you want to monitor—the more unique, the 
better (Figure 6.4). Better yet, run two or three Web searches; Google, Yahoo, and MSN are 
all good choices. 
Figure 6.4 Use a unique sentence from your article, and you get a very concentrated list of results.
Who’s Using Your Words? 

97
Then use the search engine monitors we talk about in the next chapter to keep up with new 
matches on your content. Depending on how often you add content or how many snippets you 
want to monitor, you may have to update these searches often. 
Monitoring for content snippets is fine in many cases, but for articles you might want to monitor 
the content of entire pages. Copyscape (copyscape.com) lets you enter the URL of a page and 
get other Web pages whose content is uncomfortably close to matching it. I find that if I do 
this with the front page of my site, I get a lot of people making use of my RSS feeds. However, 
if you have an article or information that’s supposed to be accessed by subscribers only, you 
might want to monitor in this way to make sure that your content is not being circulated in an 
unauthorized way.
Copyscape provides only a limited number of results with a free account. For more results, 
and to get automatic e-mails when new matches of your content appear, you can sign up for a 
Copysentry account. Copysentry costs $4.95 a month or $19.95 a month, depending on the level 
of service you want. 
It’s too easy to be paranoid about your content on the Internet being stolen. But it’s also easy to 
set up monitors to assure that you become aware of any instances of theft. Preparing yourself 
without dwelling on the possibilities is a good strategy. 
Trapping Links in RSS Feeds

98
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
Who’s Reading Your RSS Feeds?
Tracking who’s linking to you is something you can do to an extent via your 
Web site logs. But sometimes that doesn’t give you the whole picture; some 
people have their referrers turned off in their browser (the browser doesn’t 
tell the server from what URL they came to visit your site), and you’ll com-
pletely miss pages that have links but don’t send you any browsers. Using 
Web logs and external, Web-based resources at the same time can give you 
a fuller picture about what people are saying when they link to your site. 
Getting an idea of how many people are visiting or reading certain parts of 
your site, including RSS feeds, is a different story. Web site logs are going 
to give you most of what you need to know, as far as sheer numbers are 
concerned. But Bloglines can give you counts and a little more information 
about where your information fits in the RSS/blog universe. 
Bloglines (bloglines.com) indexes over 600 million articles (as of this writ-
ing) from millions of blogs and news sources. You can use Bloglines to both 
search for links to your site as well as see how many people are reading your 
RSS feed in Bloglines. 
On the upper right side of the page is a query box, followed by a Search For 
Citations pull-down menu (Figure 6.5). Enter your URL there, and you get 
a list of sites that have linked to yours, sorted by date.
Each result includes the blog name, author name, how recently the post 
was made, and a small snippet. Hold your cursor over the More Info item 
underneath the search result to see the number of subscribers that RSS feed 
has in Bloglines, as well as how many other posts on Bloglines are citing 
that search result. 
Want to know how many subscribers your own blog has in Bloglines? Easy 
as pie. Go back to the search box and use the pull-down menu to select 
Search for Feeds. Enter the name of your blog (you’ll have to do a little 
tweaking if the name isn’t unique) and you get a list of search results that 
include the URL of the feed, title, description, and number of subscribers 
(Figure 6.6).

99
Figure 6.5 Bloglines makes it easy to see who’s citing your site.
Who’s Reading Your RSS Feeds?
Figure 6.6 Bloglines tracks how many people are reading a particular feed using its service.

100
chapter 6    Who’s Linking to Your Site? 
Now, will knowing how many people read your feed using Bloglines tell you 
how many people overall read your feed using every possible RSS reader? No. 
But it can give you a good sense of whether you’re popular (is anyone reading 
your RSS feed?). And it may be that you have more readers than you think. 
Moving from Internal to External Information
Internal information, like URLs, numbers of readers, and content, covers 
a lot of the basic stuff that defines the information you provide online and 
reveals what your readers are like—the kind of community you are generat-
ing. If you own or manage a business, it’s probably obvious to you that you 
need to track this. But even if you’re not a business owner or manager, the 
knowledge of what kind of readership you have on your Web site, what they 
say about it, and how they link to it can be immensely valuable. 
Now let’s move further out from internal information to the sites and topics 
that interest you but don’t necessarily involve you. Let’s move to external 
information and where to find it. 
If you don’t mind spending a little money and you want some real precise numbers about who’s 
reading your RSS feed, sign up for FeedBurner (feedburner.com). It costs $4.99 a month (for up 
to three feeds) and provides a huge amount of statistical information about your feed, including 
how many people are subscribed to it and in what RSS feed readers, which items on your feed 
are getting clicked, and what user-agents and search engine ‘bots are visiting your feed. For the 
Web wrangler who really wants to know what her visitors are looking at, FeedBurner would be 
cheap at twice the price!
FeedBurner

7
Trapping Topic-Based 
Information

102
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
In the last chapter, we looked at trapping internal information—informa-
tion such as who’s linking to your site, or who’s reading your RSS feed. 
While that kind of trapping has its place, especially if you’re trying to 
make a living from your Web site, a broader use for information trapping 
lies in trapping external, topic-based information. You might want to use 
the external information you trap to create content for your site, pursue a 
degree, educate yourself, and so on. The possibilities for the kinds of topic 
searching you can do are almost endless.
Unfortunately, so are the resources on the Internet! So now it’s time to look 
at some large categories of information that you can monitor, from really 
broad, like general search engines, to more narrow, like government sites. 
Along the way, I’ll provide some hints for searching particular kinds of sites 
and some things to keep in mind when you’re building queries. In later 
chapters, we look at other trapping options, including multimedia sources. 
For the most part, your largest data pools will come from general search 
engines, and your smallest pools will derive from very focused sites like city 
and state resources. Because of the different kinds of information offered at 
different types of sites, you have to build your traps a bit differently for each 
resource. But the underlying theory is the same: complete but manageable. 
Monitoring General Search Engines
General search engines, the original foundation for information search on 
the Internet, are starting to show their age. They’re large, unstructured, 
chaotic pools of information that can be really tough to trap. On the other 
hand, they are the original foundation for Internet search and therefore 
people who have no idea what an RSS feed is, or how to get listed in a spe-
cialty search engine, will make really sure that they’re listed in a general 
search engine. And that, in a nutshell, is why you should consider trapping 
in them, even though getting the perfect query together and monitoring 
results can be a bit frustrating. 
Google 
General search engines are by definition going to have very large data pools. 
And Google’s no exception. Google (google.com) has stopped providing a 
page count for its search engine, but the last time it did, Google had over 

103
8 billion documents in its index, and I’m confident that index hasn’t got-
ten any smaller! The advantage to that is that Google indexes astonishing 
amounts of material, from every possible corner of the Web. 
You can monitor general search engines not only for links to your sites, 
as we discussed in the last chapter, but also for long queries focused on 
unusual, narrow topics. When applying the theory of onions to full-text 
search engines, make sure your topics are as narrow as possible. Google’s 
query limit is 32 words—you want to push that limit! 
Building your queries
Start building your Google queries using as many words as possible. 
Remember, you can always remove words later. Use as many of the spe-
cial syntax options as you can think of. The title and site syntax will prob-
ably work best. Avoid inurl—it’s difficult to guess which words might be 
included in the URL of a Web site. 
Hints 
n	
Explore the Advanced Search page to see if it can help you. For 
example, say you’re searching mostly in English and your query 
has a few French words. Limit your search to pages in English 
and see how that changes your results. You might also want to 
limit the country your results are coming from, if applicable, 
though in my experience that limits your results too much. 
n	
If you put a tilde (~) in front of a word for which you’re 
searching, Google will find synonyms for the word in addition 
to the word itself. For example, ~television would find news, 
TV, network, etc. You can tell which words are matching your 
tilded query because they’re bolded in the search result snip-
pets. Try experimenting with that. For much fun, search for a 
word with a tilde and then exclude the word itself, like this: 
~television –television. 
Trapping 
For e-mail alerts of new pages added to Google’s index, use the Google Alerts 
feature (google.com/alerts) we talked about earlier in Chapter 4. If you want 
your results in RSS format, use Google Alert (googlealert.com), which we also 
talked about in Chapter 4. 
Monitoring General Search Engines

104
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Possibilities
. 
Try medical terms using the site:edu syntax. 
. 
Try academic terms with the same syntax. 
. 
Try any topical keyword combined with the intitle syntax. 
. 
Use quotes to group your words into phrases as much as possible. 
. 
Is there any word that will help your search if you make sure that it 
doesn’t appear in your queries? Try that by putting a minus in front 
of the word (-birds). 
You might think that if you set up traps on one search engine you don’t need to bother with 
them on others. “They all index the Internet,” you might say. “Isn’t one just like the other?” 
Definitely not! Only so much overlap exists in the indexes of the various search engines. If you 
only monitor one, you’re definitely going to miss information from the others. This might lead 
you to another question: “If I monitor all the major search engines, I’ll be monitoring all the new 
pages added to the Internet, right?” Afraid not. Though you’ll be covering a lot more of the 
Internet than you would otherwise, all the search engines put together do not index more than 
a part of the Internet’s Web pages. 
Bottom Line: monitor several search engines and you’ll get all you can, but you still won’t be 
getting everything. 
Are All Search Engine Indexes Created Alike? 
Yahoo 
When it comes to search engine wars, the two biggies duking it out are 
Yahoo and Google. Because of that, Yahoo (yahoo.com) is being very proac-
tive in developing new syntax, updating its index of Web sites, and making 
its Web search easier and easier to use. Yahoo started as a search engine 
directory, and while the directory still exists, Yahoo is much more of a full-
text search engine now. 
Building your queries
Like Google, Yahoo has a variety of syntax available and a large query limit. 
Maximize both as much as you can. Yahoo’s also got a couple of interesting 

105
ways to narrow your results, such as searching for results only in Creative 
Commons (a “some rights reserved” alternative to full copyright, “all rights 
reserved” protection) content. There’s another option for searching Yahoo’s 
subscription-based content. You can get to Yahoo’s Advanced Web Search 
page directly at http://search.yahoo.com/search/options.
Hints 
n	
Use quotes for phrases. 
n	
Exclude words from your search results when appropriate. 
n	
Use the special content searches with more general queries to 
narrow your results. 
n	
Note that Yahoo’s results show when a site has an RSS feed. 
This could be a useful RSS feed discovery tool for you. 
Trapping 
Yahoo does not offer alerts for page search results, so set Yahoo’s prefer-
ences to show 100 results per page. Then run your search, and afterward 
monitor that page of results. That monitored page will look for changes in 
only the top 100 results, which is another reason why you need to make sure 
your query is narrow enough. 
Yahoo also offers RSS feeds for search results, though you have to jump 
through a couple of hoops to create them—namely, you need to edit a URL. 
Here’s how:
The base URL for getting an RSS feed of Yahoo’s search results looks like this: 
http://api.search.yahoo.com/WebSearchService/rss/webSearch. 
xml?appid=yahoosearchwebrss&query=keyword
You need to change keyword to the appropriate query word. If you want to 
use quotes or several words, you need to make sure they’re encoded prop-
erly (encoded just means writing characters in a certain way so that the 
browser can read them in the URL). 
For instance, you want to combine words using the plus sign (+). To search 
for “three blind mice,” use three+blind+mice. To remove words, use the 
minus sign (-). To remove “mice” from the equation, for example, use 
three+blind-mice. To establish phrases, use %22 at the beginning and at the 
end of your query. For example, to find the phrase “three blind mice,” use 
%22three+blind+mice%22.
Monitoring General Search Engines

106
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Possibilities 
Try to see what you can pull out of Yahoo’s specialty searches: 
. 
Is there potential for articles related to your topic? 
. 
Should you be searching Creative Commons content to see if 
there’s material you can license and use on your site or quote from 
on your site? 
In addition to the Web site, Yahoo has a directory, which you can also 
monitor. Monitoring directories, as we’ve discussed, is a little different 
than monitoring full-text search engines. Your queries have to be more 
general. In the case of Yahoo, it’s also easier because of some of the RSS 
feed offerings. 
Yahoo Directory 
Yahoo’s Directory (dir.yahoo.com) is just what it sounds like: a search-
able subject index of sites and descriptions. In my experience, it is not as 
dynamic as Yahoo’s search engine, but is still useful to monitor. And Yahoo 
makes it a little easier too, depending on what you’re looking at.
Building your queries 
For searching most directories, I don’t bother to build queries. Instead I 
peruse the directory structure and find the subcategories that most accu-
rately reflect what I’m interested in. 
Say I’m interested in lions. I browse the directory, from Science to Animals 
to Mammals to Lions. The subject “lions” has its own page, but there’s also a 
category for Ligers and Tigons (lion/tiger hybrids). As of this writing, there 
are only five links on this page, so it would be easy to monitor this URL 
using a page monitor. 
In general, the deeper you go into the subcategories, the shorter the list of 
sites for each subcategory will be. But if you must monitor a general category, 
I recommend checking to see whether Yahoo Directory has an RSS feed for 
the latest update. The directory doesn’t have feeds for every category and 
subcategory, but it does have an extensive number of feeds for higher-level 
categories. You can see it at http://dir.yahoo.com/rss/dir/index.php. For the 
most part, these feeds don’t go more than one or two levels deep. 

107
Hints 
n	
If you can’t find, or immediately think of, a category that’s 
relevant to your topic, search for a couple of topic keywords. 
Related directory categories will appear at the top of the 
search results and might give you some hitherto-unconsidered 
ideas of other directory pages to monitor. 
n	
Remember that quotes in phrases work in a directory as well, 
as does the ability to exclude keywords. 
Trapping
If you want to monitor for new sites in one of the more general catego-
ries, check to see if Yahoo has an RSS feed for that category. In the case of 
the sub-sub-subcategories, they usually have a sufficiently small number 
of links in which you can use a page monitor to check them for changes 
(Figure 7.1). 
Figure 7.1 This page is small enough that you can monitor it for changes. 
Monitoring General Search Engines

108
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Possibilities
. 
A directory is your chance to use more general keywords than you 
would with a full-text search engine. So experiment with all those 
two-and-three-word queries that were getting you too many results 
in the Google searches. What directory categories are they matching 
up to? Are they categories that would be worth monitoring? 
. 
What happens when you search for as general a topic as you can? Are 
you coming up with useful directories? Would it be worth it to dig 
down into some subdirectories and see what you find? 
Ask 
Several years ago, Ask Jeeves (the company has retired the butler and changed 
its name to Ask) was the serious also-ran of the search engine world— 
a definite third-tier search engine. Now, more and more, Ask (ask.com) is a 
definite player (Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.2 Ask has a very basic home page. Tools on the right point you to additional search options.
Ask used to be known as a “natural language search engine,” that is, you 
could enter your search as a question and Ask would interpret your search 
and (hopefully) find what you were looking for, either on the Web or in its 
own index of questions. Now it’s more of a full-text engine, having inte-
grated technology from Teoma, a search engine company that Ask pur-
chased a few years ago. 

109
Building your queries 
Ask has a pretty spartan home page. There is an advanced search available 
at ask.com/webadvanced, however. Options on the Advanced page include 
the ability to narrow searches by the last time pages were updated or by 
their geographic location. You can also specify what words must or must 
not appear in a search, as well as words that should appear in a search. The 
“should search” makes your search a little fuzzier—it weighs results which 
have “should words” higher in the results, but doesn’t completely eliminate 
those results which don’t have the “should words.” If you want to use words 
that could really focus your topic but also have the potential to torch rel-
evant results, take advantage of Ask’s “should search.” 
Hints 
n	
Take a look at the options to narrow your search on the right 
side of the results page. They vary a lot in how useful they are. 
Some of them are actually interesting and potentially useful, 
while others are downright ridiculous. Ditto for the related 
names search in the same place. Use these additional results as 
a spur for inspiration, but don’t expect them to be useful all of 
the time. 
n	
Notice that each of Ask’s results has a little pair of binoculars 
next to it. Hold your mouse over that pair of binoculars and 
a little pop-up window displays, showing you what that page 
looks like (Figure 7.3). This can come in handy when you’re try-
ing to get a quick idea of a site but don’t want to visit or check 
for page load. 
	
Figure 7.3
Hold your mouse over 
the binoculars and 
you can quickly get 
an idea of whether a 
page is useful or not. 
Monitoring General Search Engines

110
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Trapping
Ask doesn’t offer RSS feeds or e-mail alerts. As a workaround, visit the Pref-
erences page (ask.com/webprefs) and change your result number to 100. 
Then do the searches you want and save the results in a page monitor. To 
narrow your search further, you can also use the Advanced Search page to 
restrict your results to more recently updated pages. 
I am less excited by Ask’s current status (though it’s good) than by its future 
possibilities. In the past couple of years, the company has made huge strides 
in the online search engine world, mostly by doing things a little bit differ-
ently than the established search engines. Watch Ask for tools that will be 
useful to you, the information trapper.
Possibilities
Take advantage of Ask’s search suggestions and quick preview tools:
. 
Can Ask’s search suggestions help you refine your queries at all? 
. 
Ask’s Preview tool is the place to quickly review large numbers of 
sites, so that you don’t have to visit each one. Take advantage of the 
binoculars feature.
Microsoft Live Search
Yahoo and Google are the major search engines right now. But of course 
things can change very quickly. And when a five-ton gorilla like Micro-
soft enters the scene, you can almost count on things changing. Microsoft 
entered the search engine arena with MSN Search, but it has rebranded its 
site as Microsoft Live Search (live.com/?searchonly=true). This new search 
engine should be on your list of resources to trap, partially because Micro-
soft is working incredibly hard to become a major player, and partially 
because it’s put together a few interesting innovations (Figure 7.4). 

111
Building your queries 
You might think at first glance that Live Search doesn’t have any special 
syntax. Microsoft certainly doesn’t go out of its way to highlight them on 
the front page. There are some available, though. Try the following syntax:
. 
Contains. Looks for pages containing the file types you specify. For 
example, contains:mp3 would find pages that link to MP3 files. This is 
different from Google’s filetype operator, which would find the MP3 
files themselves.
. 
Intitle. Looks for words in the title.
. 
Inbody. Looks only for words in the page body, not in the page title. 
Useful when you’re looking for words common to an HTML infra-
structure, such as “title.” 
. 
Link. Finds pages that link to the specified URL. 
. 
Linkfromdomain. This is an unusual syntax! Linkfromdomain finds 
those links that are coming from a specified domain. Wondering who 
your competitors are linking to? Use this syntax to find out. 
. 
Prefer. Sort of a midway point between “or” and “and.” Add prefer: 
to a query keyword if you would like to have it in your results, but it 
isn’t absolutely necessary. (Got any query words you’re not absolutely 
certain about? This is the syntax for you.) 
Figure 7.4 Microsoft Live Search. 
Monitoring General Search Engines

112
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Hint
Live Search does have that single query box on the front page that 
searches several sets of data, including news and images. But Live 
Search doesn’t have an advanced search page. Instead it offers 
advanced search options on the search result pages. One of the 
options is a set of sliders that lets you change some of your search 
options without having to specify syntax or query words. 
Trapping
Unlike Google and Yahoo, Live Search offers its search engine results in 
RSS format. To get an RSS feed for your search results, just add &format=rss 
to the end of any URL in your Live Search search results, like this: 
http://search.live.com/results.aspx?q=woodworking&format=rss 
Possibilities 
Because Live Search offers RSS feeds, you can monitor a lot of searches 
without worrying about using page monitors or getting false positives. Take 
advantage of this feature and stock up with queries. 
Open Directory Project 
The Open Directory Project (dmoz.org) is one of the reasons my hair is 
rapidly turning gray. It offers so much and yet is so frustrating at the same 
time. On the one hand, Open Directory Project comprises a group of edi-
tors working together to build a searchable subject index, and I agree that 
the world needs more searchable subject indexes. On the other hand, it’s 
sometimes a bear to search, and you never know when the categories are 
going to be updated. Despite the drawbacks, in some ways I feel it’s the best 
directory out there, better even than Yahoo Directory. 
Tip 
Open Directory Project is the directory on which the Google 
Directory is based. But in my experience, the data in the Open 
Directory Project is updated much more often than the data in  
the Google Directory. 
Building your queries 
You can browse the Open Directory Project (ODP) just like you browse 
Yahoo’s Directory. However, it may not be as fruitful. Earlier in the chapter, 
we used an example of browsing for “lions” in Yahoo’s Directory, where 

113
we browsed from Science to Animals to Mammals to Lions. Using Open 
Directory Project, the pathway looks like this: 
Top: Science: Biology: Flora and Fauna: Animalia: Chordata: 
Mammalia: Carnivora: Felidae: Panthera: Lion
I could get as far as Animalia if I were browsing, but after that I’d be lost. 
I thought a “chordata” was something you play on a guitar. I recommend 
browsing through the categories until you’re stumped. Then use the search 
engine at the top of the page to search only within that category. From there 
you’re directed to the right places. Browsing and then searching is worth it: 
as of this writing, the Open Directory Project has more lion pages than the 
Yahoo Directory does. 
Hint 
Let your queries get a little more general, but drill down as much 
as you can into the directory structure before you start using the 
search box. It will save you a lot of time. 
Trapping
The ODP doesn’t offer RSS, nor does it offer e-mail alerts. You have to 
choose the categories you want and then feed them to page monitors. 
Possibilities
The ODP is a little different from the Yahoo Directory. In addition to indexing 
Web sites, it also indexes RSS feeds relevant to a category, as well as articles 
relevant to a category. So when you’re monitoring here, you’ll not only be able 
to keep an eye out for relevant and often very credible content, but you’ll also 
learn about RSS feeds that contain content relevant to the category. For these 
reasons, and because of the fact that I find this directory in some instances 
to be better populated than the Yahoo Directory, I recommend trying a few 
extra categories here. The extra monitoring time will be worth it. 
We’ve covered five different directories and search engines here. But are 
those all the possible ones? Heavens no; there are hundreds out there! To 
cover them all would take up far too much space, but here are a couple more 
that I think you should at least consider when you’re preparing to trap the 
general Web. I don’t go as in-depth with these as I did with the first-tier 
search engines, but there’s enough information here that you should be able 
to do some experimentation on your own.
Monitoring General Search Engines

114
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Perhaps you’re having problems developing the perfect query—the exact words you want are 
eluding you. In these cases, it’s a good idea to veer off the track of regular search engines for a 
moment and try something else: clustering search engines. 
A clustering search engine “clusters” results into groups. The groups are built around a certain topic. 
Say you do a search for chips. A clustering search engine might cluster your result into groups like 
potato chips, poker chips, wood chips, and chocolate chips. Instead of having to review all the search 
results at once, you could then choose a group that was most relevant to your search. 
Clustering search engines can help you figure out query words that are relevant to search. Let’s 
look at the chip example again. If you’re trying to do a query on poker chips, you could peruse 
the cluster that groups results about poker chips and see what words appear over and over again. 
Ask yourself what caused the clustering engine to put all those results together. Perhaps those 
words are ones you could use to refine your query. 
There are many clustering search engines available. Here are a few for you to try: 
•	
Clusty (clusty.com) is a service of Vivisimo, one of the first clustering search engines 
available. Conducting a search for “chips” on Clusty not only produced a variety of clusters, 
including “tortilla” and “health programs” (sometimes the reasons for a cluster aren’t 
immediately obvious!), but it also produced lists of possible matches for chips within search 
results (in this case, from Wikipedia pages). 
•	
Mooter (mooter.com) displays lists of search results using a visual layout of the clusters 
it finds to match your query (Figure 7.5). Once you choose a cluster you want to explore 
further, it then provides a more traditional layout, with clusters on the left and search 
results on the right. 
Try a Cluster for Your Search

115
Figure 7.5 Mooter provides results in a cluster of ideas instead of a list of Web pages.
•	
iBoogie (iboogie.com) clusters several different kinds of Web pages, including news, images, 
and medical information. You can try the clustering on the other searches if you like, but 
I find iBoogie still works best for Web pages. It actually slices clusters pretty thin—for 
example, it makes a distinction between poker chips and casino chips! 
Clustering search engines aren’t the best option for every day search result monitoring. In my 
experience, they have smaller databases than the major search engines. But when you need 
some help generating words for your query or understanding what vocabulary is used around a 
particular topic, they help a lot. 
Monitoring General Search Engines

116
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
A9
Brought to you by Amazon, A9 (a9.com) offers several different types of 
searches, including Web, Images, Reference, Movies, and Books. The Web 
search results are provided by Google, massaged a bit by Amazon and Alexa 
(a service that provides traffic and popularity information about Web sites). 
Check out the book search with narrow queries. You’ll get “inside the book” 
results featuring book passages containing your search query (Figure 7.6). 
Figure 7.6 Using A9 you can do a keyword search and get results from within books. 
No RSS feeds or e-mail alerts, unfortunately, so you have to monitor 
result pages. 
Once thing you’ll notice when you visit A9 is a series of checkboxes that lets 
you apply other resources to the search results—resources like reference, 
news, yellow pages, and more (Figure 7.7). 

117
You can get a giant overview of these extra searchable resources—over 450 
of them—at opensearch.a9.com/searches.jsp. 
There are so many resources here that there’s another search engine avail-
able just to find them. If you’re a registered user of A9, you can add these 
resources to A9 as extra columns on your search. If you’re not an A9 user, 
you can add these sources to your search temporarily. It’s easy to get over-
whelmed here. On the other hand, it’s a simple way to dip your toe in the 
wealth of available specialty search engines.
Gigablast
Gigablast (gigablast.com) is a small company compared to Yahoo or Google, 
and contains a Web index that is a bit smaller as well. I’m including it here 
because there’s constant work going on to update it and add more features.
Figure 7.7 A9 offers the ability to search a huge number of resources. 
Monitoring General Search Engines

118
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Gigablast is a full-text search engine that offers a number of search options, 
including for blogs, travel information, and government information. 
Search results provide related phrases and query words, and sometimes 
even related sites (Figure 7.8). 
Figure 7.8 Gigablast shows related phrases at the top of its search results.
Note that the Advanced Search page has an option to search within a list of 
sites you specify, which is handy if you want to search and monitor the results 
from a group of sites instead of just one. Gigablast includes “Giga Bits” in its 
search results, which may help give a few ideas for additional query words. 
Monitoring News Search Engines
General search engines have the advantage of trying to index large quanti-
ties of the Web. They have the disadvantage of dealing with huge sets of 
information, of dealing with unstructured Web pages, and with indexing 
Web pages that haven’t been updated in months or years. 
News search engines counterbalance these disadvantages. The sets of infor-
mation they index are much smaller, they are pretty much all news, and 
most of the news search engines don’t keep their index for more than 30 
days. If the topic you want to trap is in any way related to current events, 
news search engines are the way to go. Even if they aren’t—you’re into those 
old woodworking tools, for example—it’s worth it to set some traps at news 

119
search engines. You never know when a newspaper’s Lifestyle or Hobby sec-
tion is going to interview some woodworker with the world’s largest old 
tools collection.
As you might imagine, several of the search engines offer their own 
news searches, but there are independent ones as well. We look at both 
in this section. 
Yahoo News 
Yahoo News (news.yahoo.com) looks somewhat overwhelming when you 
first get to the front page. There’s lots of news links, multiple tabs to vari-
ous types of news, and even pointers to several other sites on Yahoo. Don’t 
worry about any of that. What you want to do is search, and searching will 
cut through all this extraneous stuff. The Advanced Search page is located 
at search.news.yahoo.com/usns/ynsearch/categories/advanced/index.html. 
Building your queries
When you’re using the Advanced Search page, set the results to sort by date 
instead of by relevance (Figure 7.9). 
The rest is up to you. Note that Yahoo divides the news into categories, 
which is one way to narrow your searches without having to figure out 
query words, and might be useful to those of you doing tricky searches. Say 
you’re trying to track news about certain pharmaceutical businesses. Using 
Yahoo News’ advanced search, you can search for the word pharmaceutical 
in the business category and get a start on a good query. From there you’d 
probably want to add the names of drugs, companies, and so on that you 
were trying to track. But the business category would ensure that you were 
getting more business-oriented results, and not science or medical results. 
Hints 
n	
Take advantage of the category offerings of Yahoo News.
n	
Use the location syntax. If the topic in which you’re interested 
has a geographical area, the location syntax can be a blessing. 
The Advanced Search page notes that you can search by state 
and by country, but in many cases you can also search by city 
as well. Try entering a search term and enter Austin in the 
location box. Notice that your search results are restricted to 
media in Austin, including television stations and newspapers. 
Nifty, huh? This is great for localized information trapping. 
Monitoring News Search Engines

120
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Trapping 
For some reason news search engines have better trap mechanisms overall 
than Web search engines. Yahoo offers news alerts via the Yahoo Alerts sys-
tem, which we talked about earlier, or via RSS feeds. RSS feeds are available 
on the right side of the front news page. Yahoo News also has topical RSS 
feeds, which you may find useful depending on how general your topic is. 
You can get a full list of those feeds at news.yahoo.com/rss. 
Possibilities
. 
Yahoo News’ search indexes a lot of general news searches but puts 
them into categories. If possible, try developing a query that relies on 
the categories to do the heavy work and lets you search using more 
general keywords. 
Figure 7.9
The Advanced Search 
form has many options. 
Make sure you’re using 
the one to sort by date. 
Figure 7.9
The Advanced Search 
form has many options. 
Make sure you’re using 
the one to sort by date. 

121
. 
Sometimes the location search lets you search for media sources in a 
single city. See if it’s possible to work that into your search. 
. 
Don’t forget to take advantage of Yahoo News’ wonderful RSS feeds.
Google News
For a long time Google News (news.google.com) was my favorite news 
search engine. And while other competitors have entered the scene, it still 
has a lot to offer, with over 4,500 sources and both e-mail alerts and RSS 
feeds available.
Building your queries 
Google News has an excellent advanced search available at news.google.
com/advanced_news_search. Here you can narrow your search by location 
(sources available in a particular country, or state in the United States). You 
also can narrow your query word search to the headline of the story (great 
if you’ve got a keyword that just can’t be narrowed down). 
Hint
Google News, as you’ve seen, has some great options for 
advanced searching. Take advantage of them. The title search is 
immeasurably useful when you’re having trouble narrowing down 
your query. In addition, I find the ability to narrow my search to 
sources in a particular state or country also useful. Later in the 
chapter we’re going to look at monitoring the news and issues of 
a country. Google News’ location syntax (as well as Yahoo News’ 
advanced search) is a big part of that. 
Trapping 
Google News offers e-mail updates via its Google Alerts product, as well 
as RSS and Atom feeds. At the end of every results page, check out the left 
side of the page. There, under the page navigation, are text links to RSS and 
Atom versions of your search. 
Possibilities
Google claims to have 4,500 news sources in its index, and has claimed this 
for years. My guess would be that it uses a lot more. Try some of your more 
obscure queries on the wide range of content indexed here. 
Monitoring News Search Engines

122
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
MSNBC 
Unfortunately, the MSN news search (newsbot.msnbc.msn.com) does not 
offer an advanced search form or even much searching help. However, it 
does offer quick searching, RSS feeds, and a source list at newsbot.msnbc.
msn.com/s/publishers.aspx so that you can determine what you’re actually 
searching through. 
Building your queries 
You’re not going to have a lot of choices with MSNBC and there’s not a lot 
of guidance for special syntax. So just use as many words as you can to nar-
row your query. 
Hint 
It’s challenging to really narrow your query without special syntax, 
but try. Go over the list of sources to make sure this is an engine 
you want to search. 
Trapping 
Despite the fact that the home page for MSN News Search is on MSNBC, 
the results page is on Live Search. As with Live Search, just add &format=rss 
to the end of your search results URL to get an RSS feed. 
Possibilities
News search engines are quickly becoming an expected feature of Web 
search engines, but there are other specific engines too—ones that have 
indexes that go back further than 30 days and ones that index things that 
might be tough to find on the Web. 
FindArticles 
FindArticles (findarticles.com) is affiliated with the LookSmart search 
engine. But as a search engine, LookSmart isn’t all that popular nowa-
days, whereas FindArticles is. It indexes over 10 million articles, many 
of which FindArticles claims can’t be found on the regular Web. Some 
of the articles require payment, but FindArticles also has extensive free 
information as well. 

123
Building your queries 
Use the Advanced Search form. There are a couple of unusual options here. 
The most useful one for you is the ability to browse the publications list and 
select which publications you’re going to search, from 1UP to the St. James 
Encyclopedia of Pop Culture. You can search one periodical at a time or 
many (Figure 7.10). 
Another useful feature is the Show Premium Content option at the bottom 
of the page. Premium content is content that will cost money to look at. I 
usually turn that off, although for academic, legal, and medical searches, 
you might want to consider leaving it on. 
Figure 7.10
This compact Advanced 
Search form lets you 
list a huge number 
of periodicals in your 
search. 
Figure 7.10
This compact Advanced 
Search form lets you 
list a huge number 
of periodicals in your 
search. 
Monitoring News Search Engines

124
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Hints 
n	
It will take some time to scroll through all the available 
publications and pick out which ones you want, but this time 
investment is worth being able to search a very specific set 
of publications. If you don’t have the patience or can’t get 
enough information from the publication names to know 
if they are appropriate for your topic, see if you can use the 
category listings below the publication listing. 
n	
You can restrict your results by how many pages the article 
has. If you’re trapping a topic area that might get you a lot 
of false positives—say, if you’re searching for some aspect of 
business and you keep finding announcements about promo-
tions and business moves and such—you might want to set this 
to get results of over one page. That way you can avoid all the 
roundup articles of Joe Smith moving to this company and 
Jane Doe getting promoted to that CEO job. 
n	
Be sure to set your results so that they sort from newest  
to oldest! 
Trapping
FindArticles offers RSS feeds. At the bottom of the search results is the 
ubiquitous orange button and a link to an RSS feed. 
Possibilities
. 
FindArticles makes it very easy to search at a detailed level by source 
and even by article size. Make the most of these options. Try doing 
general searches among a particular set of sources. 
. 
Occasionally try searching for premium (paid) content and see what 
kind of information you find. 
. 
Try a few very specific searches—FindArticles indexes lots of verti-
cal-market publications. 
HighBeam Library
HighBeam Library (highbeam.com/library/) is a paid service. You can 
search for free—and I recommend you do—so that you get a good sense of 
whether HighBeam is useful to you or not. If you want to access full articles, 
it is going to cost you. But there is enough here, it is inexpensive enough, 
and the trapping options are sufficiently broad that I think it’s worth it. 

125
Building your queries 
Again, go straight to the Advanced Search page. Like FindArticles, you can 
pick publications to search. Unfortunately, you can include or exclude only 
five publications at a time. Note that you can also include or exclude certain 
types of information, such as newspapers, images, books, transcripts, maps, 
and so on, rather than choosing from categories of information, such as 
health, business, sports, and the like (Figure 7.11). 
Figure 7.11 HighBeam lets you search not only by specific articles, but also by publication type.
Unless you’re researching a very unusual topic, you can safely leave out the 
maps. The almanacs and dictionaries are questionable as well. 
Hint
Check out the Web search. HighBeam offers a Research Group op-
tion, which lets you set up a specific set of resources that you want 
to search. At first glance, the available resources don’t look like a lot, 
until you realize that you have the opportunity to choose aggregate 
sources like Google News, and very large sources like PR Newswire. 
Check the sources here and see if they’d be useful to you. 
Monitoring News Search Engines

126
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Trapping 
HighBeam offers several opportunities for trapping searches. You can set 
up an RSS feed based on keyword searching (and actually you can set up 
RSS feeds for publications, which will cover new articles released in the 
publications you specify). You may also set up e-mail alerts based on key-
word searches. And you can save your searches for later use and review 
them if you’ve got something that isn’t quite worth an alert, but you want 
to save it for later. 
All this convenience isn’t free (although a free trial is available). If you wish 
to subscribe to HighBeam, it will cost you $19.95 for a monthly subscription 
or $99.95 a year. 
Possibilities
. 
HighBeam’s advanced search is a wonderful thing. Take advantage, if 
you can, of extremely narrow queries like the author search: is there 
a noted journalist in your field that you could be monitoring?
. 
Restricting your searches by media type; running a more general 
search and restricting the results to, say, just image and transcripts, 
could yield some very interesting results.
Hoovers
Hoovers (hoovers.com) has a well-deserved reputation as a premium ser-
vice that provides business information, but what’s less known is that it has 
both a nice news search engine and a business search engine—and it offers 
e-mail alerts! 
Hoovers is not cheap. Subscriptions start at $599 a year and go up to over 
$10,000 a year (discounts are offered to nonprofits, and periodically special 
offers are available). However, if you’re a business searcher you’ll find a lot 
to love about Hoovers.
Hoovers actually gives you the opportunity to do three types of information 
trapping: Saved Searches, Watch Lists, and e-mail alerts. Let’s take these one 
at a time. This information-trapping tool gives you the opportunity to get 
general news alerts and specific company information at the same time. 

127
Saved Searches
The Saved Search page lets you build several different types of saved searches, 
including company searches, such as companies within a certain radius of a 
certain place with a certain number of employees, and so on (Figure 7.12). 
The nuts and bolts of all the different types of Saved Searches is a little out-
side the scope of this book, so I encourage you to investigate Hoover’s offer-
ings. Meanwhile let’s take a look at the more prosaic trapping features. 
Hoovers’ Saved Searches can build a custom news search that lets you search 
both by keyword and company stock ticker. You won’t have the option to 
choose between publications, but you can choose whether you want to 
search for news stories, press releases, or both. 
You can also search for companies that will or are in the process of filing 
for an IPO. You can search underwriters, location (state or metro area), and 
industry. And the stock screener lets you specify a series of data points about 
publicly traded companies and receive listings of stocks that match those data 
points (again, this is a little outside the scope of this book, but worth investi-
gating because this type of information isn’t easy to find on the Web). 
Figure 7.12
Want to do business 
monitoring within a 
specified area? The 
Saved Search is a  
“must try.” 
Figure 7.12
Want to do business 
monitoring within a 
specified area? The 
Saved Search is a  
“must try.” 
Monitoring News Search Engines

128
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Watch Lists
Hoovers’ Watch List feature is much simpler than Saved Searches. Enter 
a company name or a stock ticker, and you get the option to sign up for 
significant developments (major news concerning the company, provided 
daily), news alerts, and press releases (either delivered daily or as they’re 
available) (Figure 7.13). 
In addition, there’s also the option to add a keyword to the watch list. Be 
sure to take advantage of this if your interest in a company is specific—for 
example, if you want to monitor Coke to see when it starts using Splenda in 
its diet drinks, enter Splenda in the keyword box. 
E-mail alerts
The Watch Lists and Saved Searches have e-mail components, but they’re 
also saved to a My Hoovers page that aggregates all that information. On the 
other hand, e-mail alerts are just what they sound like: major e-mail. The e-
mail alerts screen lets you choose e-mail alerts for stock ticker symbols (or 
Figure 7.13
Hoovers lets you 
combine stock symbols 
with keywords for  
e-mail alerts. 
Figure 7.13
Hoovers lets you 
combine stock symbols 
with keywords for  
e-mail alerts. 

129
even multiple symbols within the same story) or specified keywords. You 
can have news alerts delivered to you as they occur or in a daily digest (you 
specify the hour). As you might expect, the available news search slants 
toward the business and the general, but it’s fairly extensive. 
Warning! 
If you get Hoovers e-mail alerts sent to you “as they occur,” you 
could get a lot of e-mail! 
Building your queries 
Hoovers does not offer much in the line of fancy syntax, so stick with gen-
eral keywords and phrases. 
Hints
n	
Hoovers gives you an opportunity to do monitoring for stock 
tickers combined with keywords. Take advantage of this feature.
n	
If you’re interested in business, try some of Hoovers’ more  
abstract searching using the IPO targeting and company 
builder features. 
Trapping 
Hoovers does offer a lot of e-mail alerts, but some of its searches are relegated 
to the My Hoovers page. I would make as much use of the e-mail alerts as pos-
sible and remind myself to periodically visit the My Hoovers page. 
Possibilities
Hoovers costs a lot of money, so if you don’t take advantage of as many 
features as possible, you’re wasting some serious cash. If you do any kind 
of business monitoring, you’ve got to make the most of this site. How could 
you best monitor using a combination of stock symbols and keywords? Are 
there any ways you could make really unusual searches, such as the ability 
to find a company within a specified radius, applicable to your search?
Northern Light 
Northern Light (nlresearch.com) used to be both a Web search engine and 
a news search engine that offered free news alerts. The site has undergone a 
couple of incarnations since that time and has now become a paid service, 
Monitoring News Search Engines

130
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
but it’s worth the $9.95 a month, especially if you’re looking for news in 
periodicals that cater to a particular industry. There is a 30-day trial period 
available, and searching the available libraries is free. Accessing full-text 
articles will cost you, however.
Building your queries 
Visit Northern Light’s Search Help page at nlresearch.com/help.php. North-
ern Light offers a wide variety of advanced searching, including the ability 
to use stemming in your searches. Stemming involves searching for a string 
of letters with a special character at the end—usually an asterisk. A search 
engine that allows stemming will find all versions of that string of letters. 
For example, searching for moon* would find moon, moons, moonlight, 
moonbeam, and so on. 
Hints
n	
Take advantage of Northern Light’s ability to narrow the 
searches by industry (see the trapping notes that follow). 
n	
If you’re interested in monitoring a particular industry or 
business within an industry but you’re having a hard time 
generating the perfect query, Northern Light’s search alerts 
menu is a blessing. 
Trapping 
Once you’re registered and logged in to Northern Light, you’ll see several 
tabs. Click My Alerts, and a page displays that has a section labeled My 
Search Alerts. From there, you’ll see a Create New Alert button. When you 
click that button, a form displays for creating a narrowly focused alert (Fig-
ure 7.14). 
You can limit your search by business function (sales and marketing, human 
resource management, and so on). You can also limit your search by Web-
sites, News, and News Archives, but I recommend keeping the search focused 
on Publications, which finds everything. Use the Preview Results button to 
check and make sure you’re getting a good number of results—not too many, 
and not zero. (Use the radio button on the query page to ensure that you’re 
getting results sorted by date and not relevance, so you can easily see how 
many results for your search have been generated in the last few months.) 

131
When you’ve adjusted the query and the publications so you’re getting a 
useful number of results, click the Save Alert button. You’ll be kicked back 
to the original Search Alerts page, only this time there is a saved alert avail-
able. You can review any results since you last looked at the alert, as well as 
edit the alert (change the search parameters) or delete it. 
One caveat: when Northern Light sends you e-mail alerts, they give you 
only a link back to the content, not a summary of the content in the articles 
found. Furthermore, the information is sent in an HTML e-mail. If you use 
an e-mail account that is not HTML-capable, then you won’t be able to link 
back to Northern Light’s alerts. 
Possibilities
We’ve looked at search engines that break out searches by publication, and 
another engine that breaks out searches by kind of content. Northern Light 
breaks down its sources by kind of research. See if you can use specific types 
of research when building your research queries. 
News searching is the cornerstone of information trapping. When you’re 
trapping at news search engines, you’re referring to a constantly updat-
ing pool of information that is, on the whole, far more credible than the 
Figure 7.14 A lot to fill out, but you can really narrow your queries. 
Monitoring News Search Engines

132
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
entire Web. But the downside is that you’re missing things like personal 
commentary and information and commentary on topics that have not 
attracted the notice of the media. For these types of searches, you need to 
be monitoring blogs. 
Searching Blogs 
Blogs don’t have the credibility of established media, but as a resource 
for commentary, discussion, unusual perspectives on current events, and 
coverage of topics that might not have hit the radar of the media, they are 
invaluable. True, you will have to turn your—ahem—bullpuckey detector 
way up. On the other hand, you’ll find resources and perspectives that you 
won’t find in major media in a month of Sundays. 
Feedster 
We looked at Feedster (feedster.com) earlier in the book. It’s great for find-
ing RSS feeds, and blog commentary as well! 
Building your queries
Feedster indexes only RSS feeds, which means that its advanced search 
should be hideously complicated and let you do all kinds of strange and 
very detailed searching. But it doesn’t. It’s a very basic keyword search with 
the option to find links, entries from a particular feed, etc. 
That’s not to say that there isn’t a couple of special syntax available. You can 
search for words in a title using a title syntax like this: title:keyword. You 
can search for one word or another using or. Remember that you’re search-
ing blog commentary, so you might want to use more casual language or 
even try introducing a few misspellings into your queries if your search 
would seem to warrant it. For example, if you’re doing searches for layman 
commentary on medical issues, you might use less formal terms. 
Hints 
n	
Don’t be afraid to do a lot of different queries. Searching  
commentary isn’t like searching news stories. 
n	
Try using slang and other informal language when doing  
your search. 

133
Trapping 
Feedster offers two ways to keep up with new search results. The first one is 
via RSS feed, which is the one I use. You’re also supposed to be able to get 
new results via e-mail alerts, but I’ve never had good luck with that. I set up 
the alerts, but I’ve never actually received any e-mails. I recommend stick-
ing to the RSS feeds. 
Possibilities
Unfortunately, Feedster and other search engines tend to get overwhelmed 
with results from splogs, or spam blogs. To avoid this, be sure to make your 
queries as specific as possible. 
IceRocket blogs
IceRocket (icerocket.com) offers a variety of different searches that I encour-
age you to experiment with. However, we’ll focus on blog searching. 
Building your queries 
IceRocket doesn’t offer a bunch of special syntax, so focus on keywords. 
Take a look at the Advanced Search page to see if you can take advantage of 
searching by post title or tag (which I talk about in future chapters).
Hint 
When you’re running some experimental queries, pay attention to 
IceRocket’s Search Results page. It shows you what “tags“ are used 
in the posts that you’re finding, and those tags may in turn help 
you build better and more detailed searches. 
Trapping 
Check out the right side of the page for RSS feeds of your search. 
Possibilities
Alhough IceRocket’s search offerings are rather thin, I like what it offers after 
the search results. Click the Trend It button at the top of the search results to 
see how popular your query term has been in blog posts (Figure 7.15). 
This is a great way to find more popular query words that you can use with your 
topic. You may end up using this more than IceRocket’s blog search itself! 
Searching Blogs 

134
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Figure 7.15 IceRocket lets you view the popularity of your query term. 
Blogdigger 
Blogdigger (blogdigger.com) isn’t the best-known blog search engine in the 
world, but it’s got a solid pool of blogs that it searches and offers a couple of 
interesting features. 
Building your queries 
Like IceRocket, Blogdigger doesn’t offer much in the way of special syntax. 
Focus on keyword searches. 

135
Hints
n	
In addition to a general blog search, Blogdigger offers Blog-
digger Local, which allows you to narrow your search to a 
city and state. I find this works better when you search for a 
brand name or a proper name instead of a general search (if 
searching Colorado, using “Denver Post” works better than 
using “newspaper”). If you’re running a local business, this 
is a terrific way to get blogging feedback on your industry in 
your area. 
n	
Blogdigger also offers Blogdigger Groups, which allows you 
to combine several blogs together (as long as they have RSS 
feeds). This is a handy way to review several blogs at once 
via an RSS feed. My only recommendation is that you make 
sure the blogs are not overly active, or you’ll have a hard time 
keeping up with them. 
Trapping 
Like IceRocket, the RSS feed for keyword searches is on the right side of the 
Search Results page. There’s a link for an Atom feed there, too. 
Possibilities
. 
Blogdigger has low volumes of results, but also very low volumes of 
blog spam. 
. 
Feel free to use more general queries here. 
. 
Is there any way that your searching could take advantage of the 
Blogdigger Local feature?
Google Blog Search
With blogs being so hot, it’s no surprise that Google has picked up on the 
interest and made available its own blog search (google.com/blogsearch). 
And though in some respects it has a ways to go before it catches up with 
established blog search engines like Technorati, it’s still a useful addition to 
your monitoring toolkit. 
Building your queries 
You can build your queries using Google’s advanced blog search at google.
com/blogsearch/advanced_blog_search. If you’re a frequent user of Google, 
Searching Blogs 

136
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
this should look rather familiar; a lot of Google’s Web search technology 
transfers to the blog search. However, this doesn’t mean that you should 
use the blog search the same way you use a Web search. URL searches, for 
example, aren’t going to be very useful. Instead, try narrowing your query 
by limiting words to a blog post’s title, or by the language of the blog. 
Hints
n	
Google’s blog search, for some reason, defaults to providing 
results in order of relevance. Use the link on the right side of 
the page to get the results by date. 
n	
Use the “References” link with each search result to see other 
blog posts that link to the one in the search result. 
Trapping 
Google’s blog search makes trapping easy. At the bottom of each search 
result page are four links. Two are for getting the results as an Atom feed 
(10 or 100 results) and two of them are for getting the results as an RSS feed 
(again, 10 or 100 results). I recommend you stick with the ten results. If 
you’ve generated a search that provides 100 results at a time, your query is 
probably not narrow enough! 
Possibilities
If you’ve used Google for any length of time, the syntax of Google’s blog 
search will be very familiar to you. Take advantage of that and go for build-
ing more complex queries. 
Sphere
Sphere (sphere.com) is a newer blog search that’s got a very nice set of 
search results. 
Building your queries 
At first blush, Sphere doesn’t seem to have much in the line of special syn-
tax, but if you check out the Hint page at sphere.com/tips, you’ll see a vari-
ety of available syntax, including page title, blog names, and domain name 
(Figure 7.16).

137
Hint
If you’re hunting more for blogs than for individual entries, try 
the Featured Blogs offering, which suggests blogs based on your 
keyword search. Sphere also offers blog profiles, which provide 
information about the activity level and content of each blog in 
the search result. 
Trapping
Look for the orange RSS button at the top of the search results page. 
Possibilities
.  
If you’re having a hard time finding blogs that match your topic, use Fea-
tured Blogs in conjunction with a couple of general keyword searches. 
.  
If you are thinking about tracking a single blog and don’t know if it’s 
worthwhile, use the Blog Profiles feature to see how active the blog is 
and how much data you could potentially get from it.
Figure 7.16 Sphere does not offer a lot of special syntax, but has an excellent Tips page. 
Searching Blogs 

138
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Managing Keyword-Searchable RSS Feeds
I spend a lot of time in this book talking about RSS feeds, and hopefully at 
this point you’re as enthusiastic about them as I am. Okay, that may be a 
little too much to ask. But hopefully you find them as interesting as I do. 
RSS feeds are one thing. But the next level beyond that—the next idea—is 
keyword-based feeds. Keyword-based feeds, as you might remember, are 
feeds based on searches on the query words that you specify. So instead of 
very general feeds—all the national news from CNN, for example—you can 
get feeds for just the town or the mayor of the town, or even the mayor’s 
favorite hobby. 
Having RSS feeds that are very specifically focused on just the topics in 
which you’re interested will, as you might imagine, save you a lot of time 
when you’re checking your information traps. On the other hand, when you 
decide that you want to generate and use many keyword-based RSS feeds, 
you run into another problem: how to efficiently generate keyword-based 
RSS feeds. The problem is that you end up having to do so many of them.
Take Google News, for example. You might go to Google News and decide 
that you want to get three of its general RSS feeds: one for technology, one 
for business, and one for science. Compare that to getting keyword-based 
RSS feeds. You might decide that there are fifteen keyword-based RSS feeds 
that would be relevant and useful to your topic. So you’d have to run each 
of those fifteen searches and save them as an RSS feed. Now multiply those 
fifteen searches by every resource that offers keyword-based RSS feeds, and 
you’d spend an astonishing amount of time just setting up the feeds. I have 
attempted to solve that problem with a tool called Kebberfegg. 
Using Kebberfegg
Kebberfegg, which you can find at kebberfegg.com, is a free service that 
attempts to make it very easy to set up keyword-based RSS feeds across 
many resources—over 3 dozen as of this writing (Figure 7.17). You can 
view your generated feeds as a plain HTML list, or you may get them as an 
OPML file that you can import into an RSS feed reader. (Think of an OPML 
file as a bookmark file for RSS feed readers.) 

139
Let’s take a look at how it works. It’s really easy: 
	 1.	
Enter in the query box the words you want to search. Then notice that 
beneath the query box is the category list. 
	 2.	
Generate a keyword feed list for one category, or select multiple cat-
egories by pressing the Ctrl key. (You could also select all categories 
by pressing Ctrl + A, but I don’t recommend it—I’ll tell you why in 
a minute.) 
	 3.	
Notice beneath the category selection the keyword feed sources from 
each category are displayed. You also have the option to receive the 
results in HTML or OPML. Choose HTML for now. 
When the query is finished, you get a result that looks like Figure 7.18. 
	 4.	
For each result, you can add the feed to My Yahoo, forward it to your 
e-mail via RSSFwd, or a couple of other options. You can even just 
look at the plain RSS feed! 
Figure 7.17 Kebberfegg can quickly generate lots and lots of RSS feeds.
Managing Keyword-Searchable RSS Feeds

140
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Using Kebberfegg generates a lot of RSS feeds. You may decide you don’t 
want as many, or you may decide that one RSS feed provides better results 
than the other ones you’ve generated. Because of that I recommend you 
not just dump the feeds into your RSS feed reader and prune them later. 
Instead, use the Add to My Yahoo button on each feed to get a preview of 
what the feed will look like. (You don’t have to have a Yahoo account to do 
this.) This will give you a page with the feeds’ last five headlines. A quick 
glance at those is often enough to let you know whether you want to moni-
tor that feed or not. 
Tip
Sometimes the My Yahoo preview doesn’t work, especially when 
there are no results for your keyword search. In that case, I would set 
the ones aside that look interesting but don’t work in Yahoo, and 
preview them one-by-one in an RSS-capable browser like Firefox. 
Using OPML results
Instead of generating HTML files, advanced users may want to check out the 
OPML results, which generate a set of RSS feeds that you can import into an 
RSS feed reader. Getting your results this way will generate a list that you 
Figure 7.18
Kebberfegg gives you 
a list of keyword-
based feeds in several 
different formats.
Figure 7.18
Kebberfegg gives you 
a list of keyword-
based feeds in several 
different formats.

141
can save to your computer and then import into your feed reader. But the 
same warning applies: import these but look them over quickly before you 
integrate them into your monitoring routine. You’ll save yourself a lot of 
time in the long run by taking a few minutes now. 
Breaking up your searches
Kebberfegg makes it really easy to generate keyword-based feeds: if you 
run three searches generating feeds from all categories, you’ve generated 
100 feeds! Because of the very different sources from which you’re gener-
ating RSS feeds, you may want to break up your searches. For the tag site 
searches, you may want to get more general, since you’re searching only 
keywords. In fact, you may want to generate your keyword-based RSS feeds 
for tag sites separately from the other available keyword-based feeds, since 
you won’t feel the need to compromise between the narrow feeds made for 
news search engines, general search engines, and blog search, and the gen-
eral feeds for tags and other few-keyword searches. 
Kebberfegg can generate a lot of feeds for you, and save you a lot of time, 
but you’ve got to remember the rules: generate queries that are as narrow as 
possible considering what you’re searching, and make sure you review the 
feeds before you dump them all into your feed reader.
A Few More Sources? 
So far we’ve looked at trapping on general search engines, news search 
engines, and blog search engines, and we’ve taken a look at a tool that allows 
you to generate several keyword-based feeds at one time. It’s good to have 
Web search engines in reserve to filter for and find the minutiae on your 
topics of interest. News search engines will keep you updated on recent hap-
penings, and the blog search engines will point you toward commentary 
and that under-the-media-radar material.
Yet you’ve barely scratched the surface. If you use these three types of 
searches as the foundation of your trapping, you’ll be off to a good start. 
But if you use them to the exclusion of anything else, you’ll have a problem. 
There are many more types of search engines that could be monitored, but 
in this chapter we look at two more: commercial and governmental. We 
then look at finding other search engines that match your interests. 
A Few More Sources? 

142
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Tip
Because the rules for searching them are so different, we look at 
two other kinds of trapping—conversations and tags—in Chapter 9. 
In Chapter 8, I discuss the idea of trapping multimedia.
Trapping Commercial Information 
Why would you want to find commercial information? Maybe there’s some-
thing you want to buy. Maybe you want to monitor Amazon for a certain 
book. Maybe you want to see how well your industry’s items sell on eBay. 
Maybe you want to know when prices are going up or down. I know some 
researchers disdain monitoring retail and commercial sites for informa-
tion, saying, “Those sites are only about prices.” But thanks to supply and 
demand and capitalism, prices can give you an idea of how popular some-
thing is (or isn’t), and if demand for things is trending up or down. And 
besides, don’t you really want to know when the next Terry Pratchett book 
is coming out? 
Amazon 
It might seem weird to start with Amazon (amazon.com) since it’s an actual 
store, not a price aggregation or comparison site. But Amazon is huge, it 
sells practically everything, and it’s popular enough that customers can in 
some ways reflect the tastes of the Internet as a whole—at least the Internet 
in that country which Amazon is selling to (Amazon has several versions 
for several different countries). 
Searching Amazon 
Amazon has the usual single query box at the top of its pages, but that isn’t all 
Amazon offers by a long shot. Many of its categories of information have their 
own advanced search engines. Let’s look at books, since that’s what Ama-
zon is known for. Take a look at the Advanced Search page (the direct URL 
is amazon.com/exec/obidos/ats-query-page/) and you can see that you can 
search for a huge variety of features, including ISBN, keyword, format, reader 
age, and so on. Other categories offer feature searches more relevant to their 
formats. The advanced search for DVDs is amazing (Figure 7.19)!

143
You won’t get these kinds of search options when you’re actually building 
your searches, but I recommend you use them when you’re making your 
test queries, if any of them are at all relevant to your search. They’ll bring to 
light books (or DVDs or electronics or CDs or whatever) that you might not 
have thought of, and might help you generate more query words. Asking 
you to use the wonderful advanced search options that Amazon gives and 
then telling you to go back and use the more limited alert services sounds 
counterintuitive, I know. But I want you to at least see what the possibilities 
are for your topic in the category you’re searching before you have to limit 
yourself with the trapping tools. 
Third-party Amazon RSS 
YayWasTaken.com offers a generator for Amazon keyword-based feeds at 
yaywastaken.com/amazon/. Because the feeds are keyword-based, they’re 
more extensive than the ones offered by Amazon. It also offers images, 
descriptions, and more information than Amazon’s feeds. Using the service 
is simple. Start by entering this URL: 
yaywastaken.com/amazon/amazon-rss.asp?keywords=keyword
Figure 7.19 Amazon’s Advanced DVD Search offers a huge number of options.
Trapping Commercial Information

144
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Replace keyword at the end of the URL with whatever keywords you’re inter-
ested in. Aside from that, the usual rules apply: get really specific and run 
some test queries (on Amazon) first. 
If you don’t want to hack URLs but instead want to fill out a form and 
get a feed, try Paul Bausch’s Amazon RSS feed generator at onfocus.com/
amafeed/. Specify the keyword and department in which you’re interested, 
and how you want to sort, and the generator will create a feed for you. You 
can also generate a feed based on Amazon’s power search syntax, if you’re 
familiar with it. 
Page monitoring at Amazon 
Maybe you’re really interested in a keyword-based search, or maybe you’re 
interested in monitoring an entire category. I feel for you! You have one 
more option, though it may not work that well for you. You have to use a 
page monitor. You can also use a page monitor if you don’t want to use RSS 
feeds. It’s just a bit tricky.
Run the keyword search of your choice. Your keyword should, on its list of 
results, generate a list of categories on its left that shows you which catego-
ries have results that match your search. Pick the category of your choice. 
Say, for example, I want to monitor for software related to woodworking. I 
run a keyword search and pick “software.” There are only a few results and 
they all fit on one page, so I can just put this URL into a page monitor and 
I’ll be set (Figure 7.20). 
But say I wanted to monitor Home and Garden, which has well over 100 
results. The first thing I would do is take a quick look-see at the results and 
see if there’s any keyword I can use to remove results en masse. I notice that 
there are several parts available from Woodstock International, and they’re 
really not what I’m looking for. 
I change my search to woodworking -woodstock. That instantly reduces my 
search results to a manageable one page. Beyond that if I chose I could nar-
row my results more by choosing a subcategory (kitchen, home and decor), 
eliminating more query words, etc. 
So use a combination of narrow query words and eliminating brand names 
and words that describe what you don’t want and try to get your results 

145
Figure 7.20 An unusual keyword plus a smaller category equals easier monitoring.
down to one page. Then put that page in a page monitor. It isn’t perfect, but 
it’s a possibility. Use Amazon’s alert offerings whenever you can, or care-
fully put together an RSS feed via a third-party offering.
eBay
I know I said that Amazon offers everything, but it’s nothing like eBay. 
eBay, an online auction site, not only offers many commercially available 
items, but items you may not have been aware were for sale, like advertising 
space on someone’s forehead, ghosts, religious icons found in slices of toast, 
and more. There are several ways to monitor eBay, from services that the 
site itself offers to third-party services. To use the services that eBay offers, 
it’s best that you have an account. 
Searching eBay
Just like Amazon, you start with eBay’s advanced search. There are two 
major differences, however: eBay’s advanced search covers its entire site, 
and you can use the advanced search to build your traps. 
I love eBay’s advanced search. It’s very different from any advanced search 
I’ve ever seen. You have some amazing search options here, including 
searching for items within a certain distance from a specified zip code or 
Trapping Commercial Information

146
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
major city, searching for maximum and minimum prices, and searching for 
items that are listed with specific currencies (Figure 7.21). There are also 
more prosaic ways to search, like by category. 
How you should use this search depends on what your goals are. First go 
through and narrow the search as much as you can. Start with the catego-
ries, then move to where the item is located. If it’s suitable, use the feature 
that lets you narrow your search to a specified radius. It can narrow your 
results tremendously. Run a few test queries and see what kind of results 
you’re getting. 
Then you have a decision to make. Are you monitoring these items with the 
intention of possibly purchasing something in the future? Do you just want 
to get an idea of what’s ending up being listed online? Then you’re all set. 
Figure 7.21
eBay’s advanced search 
even offers the ability 
to search by location. 
Figure 7.21
eBay’s advanced search 
even offers the ability 
to search by location. 

147
Tip
If you’re a retailer looking for wholesale lots on eBay, you may have 
noticed that sometimes the wholesale bidding gets very fast and 
very furious. I find that setting a trap for lots that have a “Buy it 
Now” price can give me a good heads-up on sets of items that can be 
bought immediately instead of having to go through a bidding war. 
Maybe you’re a seller instead. Maybe you’re not interested in when items 
get listed, but instead want to know how much items are being sold for. 
That way you know what to price your items for, or maybe you want to 
get a sense of what a fair bid price would be since you’re planning to buy 
something expensive. 
In that case, go to the top of the Advanced Search form and tick the Com-
pleted Listings Only box, which is right under the query box. You only 
receive an alert when a completed listing for your keywords shows up on 
your search results. Then you know whether an item sold or not, what it sold 
for, how many bids, etc. 
Once you’ve generated a query, review the results. If they look good (useful 
to your topic, not too many of them) choose Add to Favorite Searches at the 
top of the page. You’re asked to name your new search. When you’ve chosen 
all that, you’re set. eBay will e-mail you whenever a new auction (or a com-
pleted auction, depending on your settings) matches your specified queries, 
for as long as you have indicated. 
I love eBay’s ability to turn the advanced search into an e-mail alert. But 
there are other ways to track eBay as well. If you’re interested in RSS feeds, 
you’ll be pleased to know there’s a third-party service that generates eBay 
RSS feeds for you, in addition to eBay’s RSS feed offerings. 
eBay RSS feed offerings
For a while, eBay has offered RSS feeds of general information about its 
site—announcements and so forth. But now it’s offering RSS feeds of its 
search results. Do a query, and then search at the bottom of the page for a 
line that’s marked Tools. You’ll see a little orange RSS feed icon on that line. 
That’s it! You’re all set. 
Trapping Commercial Information

148
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
All work and no play makes Jack a dull trapper. So let me take a few minutes out of the chapters and 
tell you about some personal trapping that can save you some money—coupon and best deal blogs. 
Coupon and best deal blogs are just like what they sound like. They’re blogs that aggregate 
information on specials and pass it on to you as quickly as they can. What’s in it for them? A lot 
of times they use affiliate links, so that when you go to a company’s site from their sites and buy 
something, they get a little cut of the deal. Occasionally the blog is actually a company that sells 
the product itself. 
What’s the catch? The catch is that these are specials, and they expire, so you’ve got to keep on 
top of the sites if you want to find the best deals. Consider it fun practice for trapping. I don’t 
want to get you or your credit card in trouble, but here are a few best deal sites you may want 
to know about: 
•	
Woot (woot.com/Blog/Default.aspx) might be bad for your wallet—you’ve been warned! 
Woot is actually a company that sells things. Every day it offers a super deal on one item. 
The offer lasts until the end of the day or until Woot runs out of the item. That’s it. The 
items tend to be electronics and the write-ups describing them are a blast to read. 
•	
Slickdeals (slickdeals.net) doesn’t go for the extensive descriptions and fun writings. Instead 
it offers single-line descriptions of three or four deals a day from a variety of online stores. 
Expired deals get a little red “expired” tag next to them. RSS feeds are available. 
•	
Dealhack (dealhack.com) strikes a happy medium between Woot and Slickdeals with a 
little bit of commentary and several offers. At this writing, deals on the front page include 
everything from a cookware set and a large LCD TV to a refurbished Roomba and DVD sets. 
Don’t miss the rebate, coupons, and clearance sections either.
Looking at these pages is a little different from visiting regular shopping sites, but give them a try.
Coupons and Best Deals

149
eBay third-party services
RSS Auction, at www.rssauction.com, actually offers two levels of RSS feed 
generation. The first one looks an awful lot like eBay’s advanced search 
page! Fill that one out and specify how long you want the feed to be active 
(from 1 to 12 months) and RSS Auction will generate a feed for you. The sec-
ond one will generate a feed of items being offered by one particular seller. 
With both searches you have the chance to mail the RSS feed to you (though 
I don’t know why you’d do that; eBay’s e-mail alerts are just fine). RSS Auc-
tion also sends out alerts for searches of Buy.com and Half.com. 
Shopping and price researching can be fun, but let’s shift gears. Let’s shift 
gears a lot. Let’s go from things you might want to pay for to things you’ve 
already paid for via your taxes: government services. While government 
sites are not as advanced as some sections of the Internet in offering moni-
toring services and RSS feeds, they’re getting better all the time. 
Trapping Government Information
One thing I like about tracking government information is that it’s so prac-
tical; by setting a few information traps you can become a more informed 
citizen and learn things that help you take advantage of government services 
in your community. Let’s start with the smallest common unit of government 
sites, the city site, and then expand to state sites. We’ll then look at national 
services and do a quick overview of international government sites. 
City sites
Maybe you know the Web site for your city. In case you don’t, let me teach you 
a couple of tricks. Take the name of your city and plug it into a full-text search 
engine as part of the phrase “city of”. Every time I try this trick it pops the 
official city site up to the top of the results. If you’re not sure your results rep-
resent the official site, look for one of three things: a URL ending in .us, a URL 
ending in .gov, or a description along the lines of “official site of the city of.” If 
you’re getting official sites, but not in the state for which you’re searching, add 
the state name as a keyword (“city of Springfield” Missouri).
Trapping Government Information

150
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Tip
Sometimes you’ll be interested in a city that’s fairly small. It may 
be so small it really doesn’t have a Web site, or there’s nothing 
much there. In this case, you may want to visit the state’s Web 
site. Often states have sections that contain information on their 
various municipalities. 
What are you looking for? 
Offerings at various city Web sites vary a lot. Generally the larger the city is, 
the greater the offerings are, but any city site that’s active at all generally has 
something. It’s important to be very specific about what you’re looking for.
Depending on your topic, you might look for events calendars, press releases, 
city council meeting notes, adverse weather announcements, warnings of 
scams and other crimes, or announcements of changes to city services. 
That’s not to say there isn’t much, much more at the average city site, such 
as online services to provide permits and such, searchable databases of city 
codes, budgets, contact lists, and so on. 
Trapping the information
How deeply you want to trap on a city site depends on what you want to use 
it for. Want to be a better-informed, more active citizen? Then look for the 
What’s New page and put a page monitor on it if there’s no option for e-mail 
alerts or RSS feeds. Want to keep close tabs on what the city council is doing 
and the business of the city? Watch the press release pages and monitor the 
page that has the city council meeting notes. 
City sites vary on how many built-in trapping mechanisms they offer. Some-
times they offer a newsletter that covers the entire site. Sometimes they offer 
e-mail alerts of press releases and alert type information (weather issues, etc). 
It’s rarer that RSS feeds are offered, but more and more feeds are being added 
to city sites all the time. For the most part, though, I suspect you’ll have to rely 
on your own page monitors. State Web sites have far more information, and 
from what I can tell are better prepared with alert services. 
State sites
Finding a state Web site is simple. Just enter the URL state.xx.us in your 
browser, in which xx is the postal code of a state (NY, PA, SC, FL, and so on). 
Note that this does not work for DC (the address for the District of Columbia 

151
is www.dc.gov), or Puerto Rico. Sometimes this URL will redirect to a new 
one (if you start at state.hi.us, you’re taken to Hawaii.gov) but this URL will 
point you to the right place. As you would imagine the state sites offer a whole 
lot more in the line of services than city sites. They’ve got lots of services, lots 
of database lookups, and lots of communications from election officials. 
Let’s use as an example the state of Wisconsin. It’s located at wisconsin.gov. 
Tip 
If you’re getting stuck finding state information, try govengine.
com. This site divides out state government data into easy-to-
parse lists of information. There are also some countrywide, but 
state-focused, resources here as well. 
As you might imagine, a state’s Web site can be overwhelming. Not only 
does it have to encompass a state’s government, but also tourism issues, 
business considerations, and non-governmental services and opportunities 
for citizens (like job banks). Because of this, it’s easy to go to a government 
Web site and have your brain lock up! 
Instead, let your eye wander over the front page. Some government sites 
have their information broken out by audience—businesses, visitors, resi-
dents, and so on. Others delineate their site by services. And still others go 
for recent news and pointers to featured offerings. 
In the case of the state of Wisconsin, it’s a mix. The front page has news and 
updates in the middle, services and information divided into several broad 
categories on the left, and quick links to presumably popular products and 
services on the right. For you, the trapper, there are a couple of specific 
things to look for. 
Tip 
Sometimes it’s easier to find these things in a text-only site 
instead of a page that is heavy with graphics. Because of the laws 
regarding access for the disabled, most government sites have 
text-only versions. Look for a prominent “text only” link toward 
the top of the page.
The first thing to look for is some kind of press release page. Many time press 
releases for all state agencies and offerings are jammed together. Generally 
less useful is a What’s New page, which in my experience focuses more on 
the state’s Web site instead of offline services. Sometimes—more and more 
Trapping Government Information

152
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
frequently—state sites will offer RSS feeds for their Web sites (some even 
offer e-mail alerts—try to take advantage of that). 
The second thing to look for is some kind of membership offering. Some 
government Web sites offer free registration so that you can create your 
own My State page, which allows you to specify what you’re interested in 
and get everything on a customized page. Sometimes that’s it—no e-mail 
alerts or RSS feeds—but a customized page is easier to monitor and pro-
vides more information. 
In a few cases, depending on what state you’re looking at and what you’re 
looking for, you may find that nothing really meets your needs for monitor-
ing. In that case, you can either monitor the agency home page that most 
closely matches your interests or you can monitor the home page of the site 
itself. Neither is ideal, but either one is better than not looking at the site at 
all. You can also try searching the state Web site for your query words, and 
monitoring the query results, but search engine quality across state Web 
sites varies a lot. Be careful. 
Federal sites
As you can see, the state Web sites are a leap in complexity compared to the 
city Web sites. So you might imagine that the national sites are another leap 
of complexity. And that is the case, but I think there’s been a longer, more 
consistent effort on the part of the U.S. government to develop its Web pres-
ence than there has been for the states as a whole. 
There are many places from which you can monitor U.S. government infor-
mation, but there’s one place in particular where I like to start looking. 
FirstGov
FirstGov (firstgov.gov/) is an effort by the U.S. government to create a portal 
of easily accessible government information. And it’s done a pretty good 
job! Of course, it’s a tough task. There are tons of government agencies and 
what seems like infinite programs and departments in which you might be 
interested. Don’t despair! Start with the RSS Feed page, move to the A-Z 
Agency List and then try the search engine. Note that the search engine is 
not searching every agency Web page. It’s just searching an overview list of 
the types of agencies available. So keep your queries more general. 

153
The RSS Feed page. Yes, the federal government does offer RSS feeds! And as 
you might expect it offers a lot of RSS feeds! This aggregation feed (firstgov.
gov/Topics/Reference_Shelf/Libraries/Podcast_RSS.shtml) points you to the 
RSS feed pages of various agencies. If you don’t have very detailed, esoteric 
needs, you might be able to stop here, get a couple of government agency 
feeds, and be all set. But if that’s not the case, well, proceed to the agency list. 
The A-Z Agency List (firstgov.gov/Agencies/Federal/All_Agencies/index.
shtml). This page includes a comprehensive list of government agencies, 
from the 9/11 Commission to the Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service, and from the Office of Thrift Supervision to the Wyoming state, 
county, and city Web sites. It does include pointers to state resources, so this 
is another place to look if the state homepage is confusing you. If you know 
the name of the agency, you can go straight to it, but otherwise you can do 
a little browsing. Sometimes there won’t be an agency that covers exactly 
that you’re looking for. In this case, head to the full-text search engine for a 
little general searching. 
FirstGov’s full-text search engine is available from a query box on the 
upper-right part of each page (Figure 7.22). 
Figure 7.22
The A-Z Agency List 
with FirstGov’s ever-
present search box on 
the upper right. 
Figure 7.22
The A-Z Agency List 
with FirstGov’s ever-
present search box on 
the upper right. 
Trapping Government Information

154
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
After spending several chapters encouraging you to get more detailed in 
your searches, I’m going to back up and ask you to get more general.
Describe in a word or two what you want. If you’re looking for census  
data, type census. If you’re looking for information on Alaskans, type 
Alaskans. If you’re looking for information from a particular state, include 
the state name. 
I’ve found that the underlying descriptions of the agencies are adequate, 
so just doing a general search usually locates the information I want. Even 
though FirstGov offers a huge amount of data, it’s still a very small data 
pool compared to the entire Web. You may have to do a little experimenting 
to find what you want, but I don’t think finding the agency or department 
relevant to your interests will take long. 
Trapping department-level information 
As you move between different department homepages, you’ll discover two 
things: the departments do not have a common design and they vary a lot 
in their trap-worthiness. Let’s look at the Department of Agriculture, for 
example (Figure 7.23). 
Figure 7.23
The USDA Web site. 
Notice the news is 
located in the middle of 
the page.
Figure 7.23
The USDA Web site. 
Notice the news is 
located in the middle of 
the page.

155
Trapping Government Information
Credibility is a very real issue when it comes to researching scientific and medical information 
online. These are two areas in which, perhaps more than other topic areas, you don’t want to 
find yourself searching among noncredible or undocumented information. 
For that reason, you really need to know about PubMed and Science.gov, two governmental 
Web sites that provide access to scientific and medical research. These are major, busy, well-
known sites, and as such have spawned several third-party tools that you may find useful. 
•	
Science.gov offers both a searchable subject index of science-related government sites and 
the full-text information of over 45 million Web pages. Be sure to check out its Advanced 
Search page. You can narrow your search both by science topic and by date range. Science.
gov also offers alerts. Once registered (it requires only an e-mail address, user name, and 
password), you can run searches and then save the searches as alerts. Alas, search results 
are only sent out once a week, on Wednesdays. 
•	
PubMed (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi) is a service of the U.S. National Library of 
Medicine and provides access to over 50 million citations for life science journals going 
back to the 1950s. You can do searches from this site, and PubMed does offer the ability 
to save searches, but in my experience PubMed can be pretty overwhelming for someone 
with little medical background. 
•	
When I need to search PubMed, I find ClusterMed, at clustermed.info/, very useful. It takes 
your search results and “clusters” them (remember the sidebar on clustering earlier in the 
chapter?) into topics more easily understood by the non-medical professional. A search 
for “autism,” for example, is clustered into topics including face processing, autism and 
Asperger’s syndrome, and children with autism spectrum disorders. ClusterMed does have 
a subscription component, but you can also use a free version that’s limited to 100 results 
at a time. Make those queries specific! 
•	
If you want to use PubMed for RSS feeds, I encourage you to try Hubmed, at hubmed.org/. 
Hubmed is an alternative (friendlier) interface to PubMed that also lets you easily generate 
RSS feeds. It makes PubMed a lot easier to use, especially if you’re not a medical professional 
who might miss some of PubMed’s power functions. 
Trapping Government-Generated Medical and Scientific Information

156
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Visiting this front page you see no indication of RSS feeds or newsletters 
to which you may subscribe. What fresh information do you see? You see a 
pointer to current food recalls. This is a page you could monitor (or get the 
available alerts by e-mail). Returning to the front page, notice that there’s 
an Announcements and Events box on the front page, which would also 
benefit from a page monitor. Notice too that there’s a Newsroom link that 
provides you with updates on department events—another candidate for a 
page monitor. 
On the other hand, the U.S. Maritime Administration site puts headlines, 
announcements, and program listings all on one page—the front page—
which makes it a very rich source for a page monitor. 
In general, you want to keep an eye out for virtual “press rooms,” events 
announcements, calendars, and anything that begins with the phrase “see 
our latest.” Some places also offer newsletters—those are generally for con-
sumer-level information. If you’re looking for something higher-level or 
more esoteric, you’re going to be doing a lot of page monitoring. You will 
not be able to rely on the newsletters. 
The next level of trapping government information is international sites. 
Most countries have Web sites, but the quality and scope vary even more 
than they do among city, state, and federal sites. 
You have a secret weapon, though. I’ll show you what it is in a minute. 
Monitoring International Sites
Alas, you can’t go to Google and search for “the country of X” and  
get the official country site. Often you get gunk. So you have to rely on a 
third-party site that aggregates official country sites. Try the CIA Factbook,  
at cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/index.html. It provides extensive infor-
mation about each of the countries of the world, including a map, demo-
graphic information, and governmental information (Figure 7.24).
But the important thing it provides is the “official” name of the country, 
which you can then use on a search engine. 

157
For example, the conventional long name for Argentina is Argentine Repub-
lic. If you do a search for Argentina on Google, you will get over 519 million 
results. However, if you do a search for “Argentine Republic”, you will get 
only 305,000, and the first result at this writing is a page about Argentina 
from Embassy.org (a very good resource for US embassy information) that 
points to an official Argentina embassy site, and from there you can con-
tinue to the country. 
Figure 7.24
The CIA Factbook looks 
at Aruba. 
Figure 7.24
The CIA Factbook looks 
at Aruba. 
Monitoring International Sites

158
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
Keep it simple
You might remember earlier in this chapter my observation that city Web 
sites can be fairly complex, state Web sites can be more complex, and U.S. 
government Web sites often are even more complex. So you may be assum-
ing that foreign government sites will be the most confusing of all due to 
your possible nonfamiliarity with that country’s government or language. 
That assumption is partly true and partly false.
Any official government Web site has the potential to be mind-bogglingly 
complex. But because your interests are probably not going to be in minu-
tiae that might be buried on such a site, it may not be that difficult to find 
what you’re looking for. Except in extremely unusual situations, you will 
probably not be interested in the day-to-day issues of a country (and if you 
are, you most likely are familiar with the government or language of your 
country of interest). Your interest more likely will be broader—a country’s 
environmental record (but not how it handles recycling in one province), or 
its industries (but not the activities of one bakery in one town). 
If you do have such focused interest, then I would presume that you’re 
familiar enough with the country to be able to navigate the offerings of 
its Web site without too much difficulty. If you aren’t, then try to get the 
information you need from news search engines. Confine your queries to 
the media of that country, and try to do keyword searches. Sometimes you 
can get information from keyword searches of the news that it’s tough to get 
from a country’s Web site. 
Type of content
What will you find on the average country’s Web site? It varies a lot. For some 
countries, you’ll barely find a Web presence. For other countries, you’ll find 
very complex offerings that span tens of millions of pages of content. 
Let’s take for example the Republic of Iceland, which has a Web site at  
government.is/. Information on the front page includes pointers to various 
ministries, a link page, and even a pointer to Iceland’s constitution. The 
middle of the front page is kind of a What’s New for Iceland (Figure 7.25).

159
This is a well-designed, extensive Web site, especially for a country of less 
than 300,000 people. On the other hand, a country’s site may be not much 
more than a page of information about embassies and general demograph-
ics about the country, with pointers to third-party links. It will vary a lot. 
Where to look and what to monitor 
What you end up monitoring on a country’s Web site depends on what inter-
ests you. Often you can narrow your interest down to a certain ministry or 
easily described topic (agriculture, business, demographics, for instance). If 
that’s the case, try to find the ministry or department in that country’s gov-
ernmental structure that addresses that topic. For example, I’m interested 
in digital information collections provided by countries, so I tend to moni-
tor the pages for a country’s national library. RSS feeds tend to be scarce in 
my experience, so you need to use page monitors. 
Figure 7.25
The Republic of Iceland 
Web site has all the 
news located on the 
center of the front page. 
Figure 7.25
The Republic of Iceland 
Web site has all the 
news located on the 
center of the front page. 
Monitoring International Sites

160
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
If you have more of a general interest in a country, you’re going to have quite 
a task. If the front page has the latest news on the country’s workings, like 
Iceland, monitor that. If it doesn’t, try to find the What’s New page (in my 
experience there’s usually some permutation of a What’s New page). But 
don’t rely just on the country’s site. Find the major media for that country 
and monitor its headlines—the front page of that media’s Web site or RSS 
feeds. You might also want to find that country’s embassy in your country 
and monitor it too, but really, a general interest in a country is a huge thing 
to try to encompass. If there’s any way at all to do it, narrow it down. 
When You Want What Isn’t There
My space is limited in this book—there are only so many trees in the world. 
And you may find that the specific topic for which you want to do informa-
tion trapping is not presented in this chapter. In this case, you can start 
your own hunt for search engines and other large-index resources to moni-
tor. I can suggest two techniques for doing that: the easy, incomplete way, 
or the much more difficult, but more thorough way. 
The easy, incomplete way 
The easy, incomplete way is to visit some general searchable subject indexes 
like Yahoo Directory or Dmoz, and browse through the directory to the 
more general categories for your topic. From there, look for a subtopic 
called Web Directories, or Directories, or Search Engines (Figure 7.26). 
This list of Web directories will introduce you to deep sources of informa-
tion about your topic that will include What’s New pages to monitor, point-
ers to news sources and search engines, and other data-rich places at which 
you can trap information. The one downside is that searchable subject 
indexes usually do not include everything, and you may miss some things. 

161
The more difficult, but thorough way 
With the more difficult way you may find more sites, but it will be, well, 
more difficult. Start with a full-text search engine and run a query about 
your topic, but use modifier keywords to slant your results toward search 
engines and information collections. What kind of modifier keywords? 
Terms like search, or what’s new, or category Advanced Search are good 
query phrases to use when you want results that are geared toward finding 
search engines. 
What you’re trying to add to your topic words are words that would nor-
mally appear on a search engine or directory’s home page, or on a search 
engine or directory’s search page.
When you’re narrowing a query by using a lot of additional words, try to use 
more general words. The combination of tightly focused topic phrases and 
more general additional phrases should yield results that contain directo-
ries of interest, sometimes blogs, sometimes link lists, and sometimes even 
pages from various Yahoo properties. Figure 7.27 shows an example of this 
search run in Google.
When You Want What Isn’t There
Figure 7.26 Getting photography pointers to information collections from the Yahoo Directory.

162
chapter 7    Trapping Topic-Based Information
You will find many resources this way, but at the same time you’ll find a 
lot of gunk not relevant to your search. You may also find that you have to 
rerun the searches again and again to catch various resources. You may end 
up finding much more material than if you searched only in a directory, but 
it will take you more time, and it will be more difficult. 
Moving Beyond Text-Based Information
So far in this chapter we’ve looked at various categories of specific information 
that you might want to monitor, and explored a few ways that you can find even 
more specific search engines than the ones we’ve looked at thus far. 
But up to this point it’s all been text-based. As I’m sure you’ve noticed, 
there’s far more than text posted online nowadays. There are images, audio, 
and even video. Thankfully, even as all these different types of information 
are being added, more search engines and resources are becoming available 
to trap them. In the next chapter we’re going to look at something loud, 
colorful, and fast-moving: multimedia trapping. 
Figure 7.27 The difficult way will find you both good stuff and gunk. 

8
Multimedia  
Trapping

164
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
Despite the huge strides in Internet-based multimedia, it’s easiest for search 
engines to index text-based information, so that’s what’s easiest to find. 
However, several companies have made huge strides in the development 
and deployment of multimedia search engines, especially in the past year.
There are several reasons to want to keep up with the latest cool podcasts or 
the newest audio or the latest video. Many blogs have turned to providing 
an audio or video format (especially corporate and marketing blogs), and 
video online has exploded in the last year. For example, sites like YouTube 
and Yahoo Video have been indexing thousands of hours of content. 
You can track multimedia with traps, but you have to do it in a roundabout 
way, specifically by starting your multimedia search using general, text-
based search engines! After that, you can go for specific multimedia sites in 
a variety of categories, from audio, to photos, to video. 
Searching Audio 
Why would you want to trap audio? The variety of audio content that’s 
indexed and available online is almost as varied as the kind of text content. 
There’s music, of course, but there are also podcasts (like talk shows, with 
a huge variety of topics), instructional audio, conference calls, interviews, 
and more. Even if you’re not sure if your topic would be served by trapping 
for audio, at least try a few queries at the resources we cover here, and see 
what you find. You might change your mind! We’ll start by using Google’s 
regular search engine to find audio, specifically MP3s. 
Using general search engines 
Though it’s unlikely that you’ll find actual ready-to-play multimedia in 
Google’s Web search results (except for one resource which we look at a 
little later in the chapter), you can find pointers to multimedia. It just takes 
a little search tweaking and a special syntax we haven’t looked at yet. 
I’m referring to the filetype syntax. Filetype finds pages that have a specified 
string at the end. Searching for filetype:mp3 yields MP3 files that have been 
indexed by Google. To narrow your results, you must use very broad key-
words (such as reggae, rock, metal, “Dance Dance Revolution”, etc.). Using 

165
this syntax shows you that Google does index those files, but unfortunately 
not their contents. In other words, Google can tell you that there’s an MP3 
file in a certain place, but not what words are in it, how long it is, etc. 
Tip
In talking about music online, we can’t avoid the fact that there 
are legal and non-legal sources of music available. Your searches 
will find you both. When deciding what you’re going to download, 
take the high road and go for the legal music. That way, you won’t 
have to worry about the Recording Industry Association of America 
(RIAA) sending you a subpoena or about downloading something 
you don’t want—like a virus coming from illegal or shady sites. 
The MP3 file search is, depending on what you’re looking for, either useful in 
a very narrow way (it certainly gets you few enough results that you should 
be able to monitor them easily using a Google Alert) or a silly party trick. If 
you’re doing genealogy searches, for instance, a general Google search for 
MP3 files might not be helpful. If in your case this type of search falls into 
the “silly party trick” category, then you can move away from Google and 
try either some other search engines that are audio oriented or some mas-
sive audio archives. In those you might find narratives and interviews with 
people who lived in the area where your family lived a hundred years ago. 
Tip 
Try a news search engine if you’re looking for MP3 music down-
loads. Sometimes you’re able to find pointers to new band sites or 
MP3 aggregation sites. Try a keyword for the kind of music or au-
dio content you like plus the words “mp3 download”. So you could 
search for reggae mp3 download or mashups mp3 download. You 
may not get a lot of results, but you will often bump into things 
you might not have found otherwise. 
Using audio-only search engines 
Audio search engines are all over the map in what they offer and what kind 
of search limitations you can use. One thing most of them have in common 
is that they’re not very easy to trap. With that in mind you really need to 
narrow your searches. Thankfully the first tool we’re looking at, Singing-
fish, makes narrowing searches really easy. 
Searching Audio

166
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
Singingfish 
Note that Singingfish (singingfish.com) searches both audio and video one 
at a time. That’s the first and most important way to narrow your search 
results. There are more options on the left side of the page (Figure 8.1). 
You can narrow your results by format, category, and duration, which is a big 
one if you’re searching for music. That’s because if you limit your results to files 
more than one minute long or (even better) three minutes long, you eliminate 
partial songs and song samples which otherwise will clutter up your results. 
You can only display up to 20 results at a time, and Singingfish does not 
offer RSS feeds or e-mail alerts, so narrow your query and what you’re 
searching as much as you can so that the page monitor can do its job. On 
the positive side, you have many opportunities to limit your results, and I 
find that Singingfish brings in results from all over the Internet. 
Tip
Having trouble narrowing your results? Band and artist names can 
work wonders, but when even that doesn’t work, try adding the 
keywords live, interview, new, mix, or preview. 
Figure 8.1
Singingfish lets you 
narrow without using 
keywords.
Figure 8.1
Singingfish lets you 
narrow without using 
keywords.

167
Ithaki
Ithaki (ithaki.net/multimedia/) is a meta-search engine that offers several 
different types of searches, including MP3 and MIDI files. You don’t get any 
search options for its MP3 search beyond keywords, but I find that Ithaki 
finds a limited and ultimately monitorable set of results. If you want to trap 
for a more general keyword, like a musical genre, start here. Again, you 
have to use a page monitor; no RSS feeds or e-mail alerts are available.
Google’s Song Search 
Remember how I noted earlier in the chapter that there was one way to 
directly search for audio content on Google without noodling around with 
special syntax? This is it—sort of. If your audio interest is in music, you 
might find this search useful. 
There isn’t a direct URL for using this feature. Instead, you start your search 
on Google. Search for a musician name, band name, or song name. If Google 
matches it (and in my experience it sometimes misses; Google doesn’t have 
music results for all musicians), a band name and more information dis-
plays at the top of the page. From there, you can drill down into more music 
results for musicians, album names, and even song names. 
This service is of limited usefulness for an information trapper. If you want 
to monitor a musician for new releases, Amazon’s a much better way to go. 
But if you wanted to do something really offbeat like watch for songs with 
a certain keyword in the title, you could do it using Google’s Song Search 
and a page monitor. 
AltaVista Audio Search 
If you’re an old-school Internet searcher, you might be raising an eye-
brow—who in the world uses AltaVista nowadays? Everybody still uses it for 
Babelfish, and I recommend also using it for the audio search (altavista.com/
audio/default). As you can see from the front page, you can specify several 
different types of audio, from MP3, to Real, to AIFF. You can also filter your 
searches by audio lasting more or less than a minute. I recommend you search 
for more than a minute to avoid song clips. Search results aren’t available in 
RSS feeds, darn it, but at least you can get 50 results to a page and monitor 
that. To get 50 results at a time, visit AltaVista’s Web search at AltaVista.com 
and change the settings to 50 results per page (Figure 8.2). 
Searching Audio

168
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
AltaVista doesn’t say that impacts the audio search, but it does. 
Searching the Internet and even multimedia-specific engines for audio is 
a hit-or-miss proposition. Fortunately you’ve got an option besides search 
engines: several different archives contain music, podcasts, and general 
audio files. 
Let’s start with a real hot topic: podcasts. 
Searching and monitoring podcasts
Podcast, podcast, podcast! Just like RSS a few years ago, podcast is now 
officially the buzziest buzzword to fly around the Internet. Everyone’s get-
ting a podcast. Some people are even getting vidcasts. But what the heck 
is a podcast to start with, and how can it help you with your information 
trapping? Let’s begin with the basics. 
What is a podcast? 
A podcast is an audio file—usually an MP3—that’s distributed automati-
cally to audio-playing devices like iPods, or audio-playing software on a 
computer. It’s distributed via a special kind of RSS file. (Remember what 
Figure 8.2
Tweaking AltaVista’s 
Web search settings 
makes audio search 
easier.
Figure 8.2
Tweaking AltaVista’s 
Web search settings 
makes audio search 
easier.

169
we talked about earlier in this book? RSS is just a kind of XML, and XML is 
just a text file that uses a certain kind of markup language.) You subscribe to 
podcasts in the same way you subscribe to RSS feeds. 
Podcasts are audio files, but you may also start hearing about vidcasts—
which is the same concept only using a video file instead of an audio file. 
Vidcasts are in early development and the concept is very much the same, 
so we’ll stick with audio podcasts for the purpose of this section. 
What do you need to listen to a podcast? 
There are lots of different software packages out there for listening to podcasts. 
A free program that might do the trick for you is iTunes, from Apple. You may 
download iTunes for either Windows or Mac at apple.com/itunes/download/. 
If you have an Apple-brand music player, like an iPod, you can use that to play 
podcasts. If you don’t, you can play podcasts from your computer. 
Why should you listen to a podcast?
Podcasts are like blogs. They’re not quite as numerous (yet) but they’re every 
bit as varied. I suspect that no matter what your interest, you’ll find a pod-
cast that fits. And podcasts are more portable. If you trap an interesting text 
news story, you’ll probably end up reading it at your computer desk. On the 
other hand, if you find a podcast series that’s worth listening to every epi-
sode, you can load it on an iPod or a different music player, and take it with 
you. You can listen to it in your car. You can listen to it while you’re working 
out. You don’t have to sit in front of the computer. 
You may have noticed that there are podcast series and podcast episodes. 
These equate to blogs and blog entries. A single podcast would be a blog 
entry. All of the podcast episodes would be the blog. For the most part, you 
might find podcasts for which all episodes are appropriate to your trapping. 
On the other hand, you might have an interest that’s esoteric enough that 
only individual podcast episodes suit your needs. As you’ll see in the next 
two sections, you have the option to find both podcasts to which you can 
subscribe and keyword-based RSS feeds of interesting podcast episodes. 
Finding podcasts
Let’s start with finding podcasts in general. As you might imagine, find-
ing podcasts is a lot like finding blogs—you can look in search engines 
and directories. 
Searching Audio

170
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
Podspider (podspider.com) offers both a searchable subject index of pod-
casts and the ability to search podcasts by keyword (podcasts in several 
different languages are offered). Podcast listings include descriptions and 
pointers to the last couple of episodes. Beware! Like blogs, podcasts can be 
started and abandoned. What’s the point in subscribing to a podcast when 
the last episode is more than a year old?
Yahoo Podcasts (podcasts.yahoo.com/) lets you search for podcasts or 
browse a searchable subject index. In addition to searching for podcasts, 
you can search just for podcast episodes (Figure 8.3). Unfortunately the 
podcast episodes aren’t listed by date, but you could still try to watch a set 
of search results via a page monitor. Yahoo Podcasts also lists podcasts that 
are popular, as well as podcasts that are highly rated by listeners. 
Figure 8.3 Browse and find both podcasts and podcast episodes.

171
Podcast Directory (podcast.net/) has many different ways you can browse 
available podcasts. You can search them by location. You can browse them 
by tag, or by popularity. You can even browse through a video podcast 
directory. If you have a general interest in podcasts, you might want to sub-
scribe to any of the several RSS feeds that list popular podcasts. And don’t 
miss the sections that provide extensive lists of hardware and software for 
listening to podcasts. 
Get a Podcast (getapodcast.com/) is basically a podcast search engine. The 
front page lists a variety of stats, including the latest searches, new podcasts, 
popular podcasts, and recently viewed podcasts. Podcast listings include a 
list of recent episodes available for that podcast, a description and number of 
page views, and extensive episode descriptions when available (Figure 8.4). 
Figure 8.4
Want easy-to-review 
details about podcasts? 
This is the place to look. 
Figure 8.4
Want easy-to-review 
details about podcasts? 
This is the place to look. 
Searching Audio

172
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
This is a great place to get an overview of what a podcast offers in its episodes. 
The resources we’ve just examined are great for showing you what podcasts 
are available, but you might not want to subscribe to entire podcasts. Instead, 
you might just want to hunt for episodes that are relevant to your topic of 
interest. You can do that with keyword-based RSS feeds for podcasts. There’s 
even one search engine that lets you search the audio of podcasts! 
For the resources that follow, all you have to do is run a keyword search 
and save the RSS feed for that search. You then add the RSS feed to iTunes 
as a podcast. Bingo. As new podcast episodes match your keyword, those 
episodes will be automatically downloaded to iTunes. That’s all there is to it! 
You can catch up with your information trapping by listening to podcasts 
as you work out at the gym. 
Monitoring podcasts by keyword 
del.icio.us may sound familiar to you—wait a minute—isn’t del.icio.us 
a tagging site? Yes! And guess what, you can search for the tag podcast, 
along with any other keyword in which you’re interested (del.icio.us/
tag/podcast). So the URL would work if you’re just looking for podcasts in 
general, or you could add a keyword to it, like this: http://del.icio.us/tag/
podcast+reggae. 
Monitoring Del for tagged podcast episodes doesn’t work quite as well in 
iTunes as the two other resources we look at in this section (there’s no guar-
antee that a Del user is going to link to an actual podcast as opposed to the 
podcast’s Web site). But this trap does turn up some very unique finds. Try 
it for some of the more general keywords that are getting you too many 
results in other search engines. 
Blogdigger Media (blogdigger.com/media/) is a blog search engine, but it 
also offers a lot of unique searches as well, like this media search. It doesn’t 
search just podcasts; it can also search video and images too (make sure 
those options are unchecked if you want to focus only on podcasts). Blog-
digger doesn’t seem to have as large a database as some of the larger search 
engines like Technorati and Feedster, but it offers a number of multimedia 
searching options. 
PodZinger (podzinger.com) is very cool. Up to this point all the search 
engines we’ve looked at let you search for keywords within a description of 

173
a podcast or an episode of a podcast. But PodZinger lets you actually search 
within the transcribed audio of a podcast! How nifty is that? If you’re trying 
to run very specific searches, or you keep coming up with keywords that 
don’t ever seem to make it into episode descriptions, try PodZinger. Bear 
in mind that automatic auto-to-text transcription isn’t always perfect, and 
you may have to do some experimenting to get a query that gets you a useful 
number of results. 
Podcasts only sound like they’re really esoteric. Actually they’re based on 
two longstanding technologies (RSS and MP3) that work very well together. 
Use them as an opportunity to continue your information trapping while 
getting unchained from your desk. 
Tip
There are dozens of paid music services online. If you subscribe 
to any of them (iTunes is probably the best known,) be sure to 
check and see if they offer any kind of new music roundup. iTunes 
(apple.com/itunes), for example, has “New Music Tuesdays” and 
updates on the front page of its service to keep you posted as 
to what music has been added to the site. You can also monitor 
Amazon for new CD content, as we talked about earlier—often 
Amazon has samples of music content available. 
Audio archives
Audio archives are often easier to monitor than search engines. An archive 
is one collection of information, and often resides on one server, so you 
know it’s being completely indexed. There are probably thousands of music 
collections online, so I will hit only the highlights here, which include a 
fantastic old-timer, an unexpected resource, and an amazing archive.
IUMA
IUMA (iuma.com), short for Internet Underground Music Archive, has 
been around since 1993, offering music in a dazzling array of genres from a 
dazzling array of artists. Music is available in Real format and in full MP3 
songs. Do some sample searching here before you decide what you’re look-
ing for—IUMA offers an amazing number of genres. You may not have 
heard of any of the artists here but you will find something that interests 
you, I promise. And bless its little heart, IUMA makes it easy to get updates 
on the latest additions. 
Searching Audio

174
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
On the front page, look for the New Arrivals section. You can browse recent 
listings by genre, state, and how recently new material was added to the 
site (from the last seven to the last 30 days). There are no RSS feeds for this 
page, but it’s a perfect candidate for a page monitor. Just look out for pop-up 
ads—IUMA has a lot of them. 
MP3
MP3 (mp3.com/) started out as a rather small site, then it broke out to be 
one of the darlings of the Internet era, and then it self-imploded like so 
many other companies, and then it died, and then CNET brought it back. 
Like IUMA, MP3.com contains information and songs from thousands of 
artists in dozens of genres. Unlike IUMA, some of these artists are very 
high profile. Videos are available at the site as well. MP3.com does not have 
an easy way to check on new additions like IUMA does, but you can go to 
the Listening Room, which offers new music streams as they’re added to the 
site. MP3.com also offers charts of the most popular music in each genre; 
those are also candidates for page-monitoring software. 
MP3.com has current popular artists as well as other music; IUMA has 
lesser known, but still current artists. But, as you might expect, there are lots 
of other kinds of music out there, like music that is more than a few years 
old. While it’s an utter fallacy that everything that’s ever been recorded is 
already on the Internet (though that would be nice), there really is already 
an astonishing amount of old music digitized. You can find a lot of it at the 
Internet Archive. 
Internet Archive
Audio is only one part of the Internet Archive (archive.org). It also contains 
cached Web pages, video, and text. However, the audio part of the Internet 
Archive is a collection in and of itself. You’ll find recordings of live concerts, 
open sourced recording labels, presidential recordings, and a lot more. And 
wonder of wonders, there are RSS feeds available for the most recent addi-
tions to the archive! 
A lot of what you’ll find at the Internet Archive is esoteric to say the least; 
if you’re interested in only the latest and most popular stuff you don’t want 
to monitor the Internet Archive for new music. But if you are looking for 
new music of a lot of different types, or especially live music archives, 
monitor this site. 

175
Audio blogs 
A lot of us have very emotional connections to music. We have very strong 
ideas about what we like and don’t like and could talk for hours about what 
we want to listen to and what we can’t stand. So knowing that, you wouldn’t 
be surprised to discover that music has its own genre of blog called an MP3 
blog. From here you can get all the new music RSS feeds you can stand, but 
you’ll probably have to do a little digging to find what you like. 
Before you can trap you have to find the MP3 blogs that have the music you 
want. Start by visiting Feedster (feedster.com) or Technorati (technorati.com) 
and do a search for “MP3 Blog”. The number of results you get will be limited 
enough that you can narrow it just a little further by adding a few keywords 
for the kind of music you’re searching for (try searching for genres of music or 
artist names, but don’t get really detailed) and perhaps an artist name or two. 
The results you get will include blogs that just review music, and blogs that 
post music, often with the artists’ permission (it’s a great way to get exposure 
for a lesser-known band). 
I have yet to monitor MP3 blogs in a professional capacity, but I personally 
find them invaluable. I’m interested in all kinds of music, and just by read-
ing the RSS feeds of half-a-dozen MP3 blogs, I learn about music that I can’t 
imagine I’d have heard about otherwise. If you have some time and you’re at 
all interested in music, look around for some MP3 blogs and put their RSS 
feeds in your reader. You’ll get some nice surprises out of it. 
Of course audio is not the only multimedia on the Internet. It wasn’t even 
the first multimedia on the Internet, really. That honor belongs to images. 
And from images the Internet has exploded into more images—mainly pho-
tography—and even recently into video. Keeping up with all these images—
and avoiding the ever-present concern of naughty images—is tricky, but it 
can be done. The next section shows you how. 
Monitoring Images 
When I refer to images, I’m referring to a wide territory—photographs, car-
toons, drawings, maps, illustrations, and so on. Photographs tend to have 
their own search engines, but the other types of images are often lumped 
together in image search engines. If you use the special syntax that the 
Monitoring Images

176
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
image engines offer, you can often remove or avoid certain types of images 
in your results. 
Let’s start with Flickr, since it’s familiar to you from earlier discussions in 
the book and it consists mostly of photographs. 
Flickr
Do you remember Flickr (flickr.com)? It’s an online photo site owned by 
Yahoo. It’s searchable by tag, and search results are provided in an RSS 
feed so that you can monitor new images as they’re uploaded to the site. 
As I mentioned earlier, this is a great place to try out those general search 
terms that would provide impossible numbers of results on a general search 
engine, but might give you surprising results on photograph search engines, 
like screenshots or pictures of events. 
Tip 
Flickr has enjoyed amazing success. Perhaps because of that, there 
are now many photo-sharing services to choose from. To check 
out another photo service that offers RSS feeds of search results, 
try SmugMug (smugmug.com). 
Google Images
Google used to crow about the extent of its image search (images.google.
com), noting how many images it had indexed and so on. It doesn’t do that 
now; instead it just primly notes that it has “the most comprehensive image 
search on the Web.”
I don’t know about that—there’s really no way to compare it to other image 
searches without an index count—but I do know a lot is indexed by Google, 
in a lot of different formats. Google Images does not offer an RSS feed of 
its search results, so you have to narrow your search enough to get it in the 
scope of a single page, and that means taking advantage of Google Images’ 
Advanced Search. 
Google Images Advanced Search 
The Google Images Advanced Search is available at images.google.com/
advanced_image_search. You can limit your search by color (you can 
search for black and white, grayscale, or full color). You can also limit your 
search by filetype—GIF, JPEG, or PNG. Photography is usually saved in 

177
JPEG format. So if you limit your search to only GIF or PNG files, you’ll 
tend to have few photographs in your search results. On the other hand, if 
you limit your search to JPEG format images, then your search results will 
tend toward photography, although not exclusively. 
Google’s Advanced Search also offers the ability to limit your search by 
image size, which I find handy when I’m searching for large photographs or 
trying to limit my search to “bugs,” or icons that people use on Web pages. 
Experiment with the advanced search to narrow your results as much as 
possible, and then watch them using a page monitor. 
Ask Images
Ask is a relative newcomer to image search, but it’s got a lot to offer (ask.
com/?tool=img). Unfortunately, one of the things it doesn’t offer is an 
Advanced Search page. On the other hand, Ask does offer related images 
searches that might help you narrow your searches. Run a search and take a 
look at the results page (Figure 8.5). 
Figure 8.5 Review search results and get suggestions for other searches.
Monitoring Images

178
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
On the right side of the page is a list of suggestions for narrowing your 
search. Try these to see if you can get a manageable list of results. You may 
find that the related searches aren’t particularly useful, and you probably 
don’t want to expand your search, but the suggestions can come in handy. 
No RSS feeds are available, so you need to use a page monitor. 
Yahoo Images 
Yahoo Images (images.search.yahoo.com) also offers an Advanced Search 
page, which you can view at images.search.yahoo.com/search/images/
advanced?ei=UTF-8. Note that you can limit your searches to image size 
and color, but not filetype. In addition, while the color options are more 
limited (black and white, or color), the image size options are more exten-
sive (a wallpaper option has been added). 
Yahoo Images also offers the ability in the advanced search to narrow 
searches by the domain in which the images appear. You can also do this 
in Google Images (just add the site syntax to your search), but unless you’re 
doing a medical search (narrowing your results to .edu) or perhaps an archi-
val search (narrowing your results to .gov or a country code like .uk or .ca), 
I wouldn’t limit my search to a particular domain. Again, no RSS feeds, so 
stick with a page monitor. 
Avoiding the naughty stuff
One thing that always comes up when you’re running multimedia searches 
is the possibility of accidentally running into Naughty Stuff. You know—
pictures and video that have less than nothing to do with your searches. 
If your searches are narrow enough, you should be able to avoid naughty pic-
tures and content. However, don’t count on that. Instead, use the advanced 
searches and set the filter to remove adult content from your search results. 
Filters like this aren’t perfect, but between that and very specific searches 
you should avoid content that you don’t prefer to see. 
But what if the unthinkable happens and you end up getting some stuff 
in your search results that makes you go ick? Report it; look for a link on 
the search results page. Some resources we’re mentioning in this chapter 
(like Flickr) don’t want to have any adult content. And other resources, 
like Google Image Search, will want to know if a filtered search is letting 
through inappropriate materials. 

179
Monitoring Videos 
Videos online have been sputtering along for the last several years, but it 
hasn’t been until more people had broadband Internet access that online 
video content really took off. Nowadays, you can do everything from watch a 
news broadcast to watch kids play the Dance Dance Revolution (DDR) video 
game. It all depends on where you look and what you want to monitor. 
Google Video
Google Video (video.google.com) is a little odd in that it’s a combination 
of a video store and a repository for things people upload, as well as a place 
where institutions partnering with Google can park their videos. Materials 
might range from a lecture on physics to a cat beating up a hammer (no kid-
ding!). Start with general searches and try to use more academic language. 
If you do a search for glaucoma, for example, you get stock footage, news 
stories, interviews, and even advertisements in Russian. While it’s a variety 
of results, at this writing it returned only 29—which you may feel is enough 
to comfortably monitor. 
Try using Google Video’s advanced search options, which include the abil-
ity to find only short, medium, or long videos, and to find only videos that 
are free. Don’t forget to sort your results by date! That option is also avail-
able from the Advanced Video Search page (Figure 8.6).
Figure 8.6
Google Video’s 
Advanced Video Search 
page lets you sort 
results by date. 
Figure 8.6
Google Video’s 
Advanced Video Search 
page lets you sort 
results by date. 
Monitoring Videos

180
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
While Google Video does offer some feeds (including for its most popular 
and for comedy videos), RSS feeds do not appear to be available for search 
results. You need to use a page monitor to trap these. 
Searchforvideo
Searchforvideo’s front page includes a huge index of categories, as well as 
a listing of popular videos and featured publishers (searchforvideo.com/). 
There are also pointers to podcasts that have videos as well. Just glancing 
at the front page leaves the impression that Searchforvideo reflects a more 
“pop culture” attitude than Google Video, and searching for glaucoma 
bears this out: It yields news stories, music videos, and even a few videos 
from MySpace. 
Searchforvideo’s default configuration for its search result is a grid, which 
shows only the source of the video and a thumbnail. Be sure when experi-
menting with queries to use the detail button at the top of the search results 
page so that you get snippets and a little more context about the video (Fig-
ure 8.7). Notice you can also sort your results by date. 
Figure 8.7
Be sure to use the 
detail button to get 
a results page that’s 
much easier to quickly 
review.
Figure 8.7
Be sure to use the 
detail button to get 
a results page that’s 
much easier to quickly 
review.

181
Searchforvideo doesn’t offer advanced search, so you need to rely on key-
words to narrow your search down. On the other hand, you can get RSS 
feeds for your search results, so you won’t have to rely on a page monitor. 
Yahoo Video
Yahoo Video has a monster number of videos indexed, so general searches 
get you in trouble here (video.search.yahoo.com). On the other hand, it’s 
also got a great Advanced Search page, so you have several options besides 
keywords for narrowing your search. On the front page are featured videos, 
with tabs available for Popular Videos, Videos by Category, and Tag. 
A search for glaucoma delivers 299 results as of this writing, which is far more 
than Google Video or Searchforvideo. Fortunately, the Search Results page 
brings you an excellent level of detail, providing information such as the file 
type of the video, length of the video, and source (Figure 8.8). At a glance you 
can tell if a video is ten seconds long (probably not very useful) or an hour (an 
hour long video devoted to your topic could prove very useful). 
Figure 8.8 Yahoo Video will bring you a lot of search results, fortunately via an excellent results page.
Monitoring Videos

182
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
Since you are getting so many results, be sure to take advantage of Yahoo 
Video’s Advanced Search. Here you can narrow your search results by the 
length of the video (try limiting your results to videos that are over a minute 
long), by the size of the video’s play screen, by the file type of the video, and 
by the domain of the video (Figure 8.9). 
I can’t imagine how anyone could use the file type to specifically narrow search 
results (other than just getting fewer of them), but experiment with the domain 
restrictions. Searching in .org domains only, or .edu domains only, tends to 
deliver fewer results, which themselves are more academically slanted. 
Yahoo Video Search does not offer RSS feeds; you have to use a page moni-
tor. You might find with the number of results you get that it’s better to do 
several searches for your keywords—one restricted to each major domain—
and monitor each of the results pages. 
YouTube
I don’t know if YouTube was the first online video site out there, but it’s cer-
tainly the most popular video site and has helped spur the explosion in pop-
ularity of online video sites (youtube.com). YouTube hosts the videos that 
Figure 8.9
Yahoo Video’s 
Advanced Search page. 
Try limiting your video 
searches by domain.
Figure 8.9
Yahoo Video’s 
Advanced Search page. 
Try limiting your video 
searches by domain.

183
you’re searching, so you see immediately that the level of detail in search 
results is very useful, though you might not get as many results as you would 
on other video search engines. 
Let’s go back to the example we’ve been using for this entire section, glau-
coma. If you run a search for glaucoma on YouTube, you get fewer results 
than other engines (15 as of this writing), but you also get information like 
tags, user ratings, duration, and context (Figure 8.10). So there’s more detail 
here than there is even in the Yahoo Video search results. 
Figure 8.10 YouTube has limited results with lots of detail.
When you click on the name of a video you go to that video’s page. Here you 
can see how many times a video’s been viewed, what it’s rating is (YouTube 
users can rate a video up to 5 stars; not all videos are rated) and see com-
ments on the video (Figure 8.11). (Often comments point to other similar 
videos.) Detail pages for videos also have pointers to related videos, which 
might give you ideas for tags or ideas to search. 
Monitoring Videos

184
chapter 8    Multimedia Trapping
You can get RSS feeds from YouTube, but it’s a little awkward. You have to 
edit a URL. YouTube offers RSS feeds for tag searching. The RSS feed for a 
tag search looks like this: 
youtube.com/rss/tag/keyword.rss
Simply replace keyword with the word you want to track. For instance, you’d 
use the following URL if you were doing a search on glaucoma:
youtube.com/rss/tag/glaucoma.rss
If you want to use multiple keywords, you’d simply use a plus sign (+) 
between the keywords: 
youtube.com/rss/tag/glaucoma+surgery.rss
In the cases where you’re finding that tag search is not working, or you want 
to do very extensive, keyword-dense searches, try using a page monitor on 
your search results. 
Figure 8.11
Detail pages point you 
to other videos and 
review current ones.
Figure 8.11
Detail pages point you 
to other videos and 
review current ones.

185
The Future Is Now
If you’re a long-time user of the Internet, you might find it challenging to 
adjust to the idea of trapping multimedia. Hasn’t text always been king? 
However, with broadband becoming the de facto standard for accessing 
the Internet, the constant rise of personal expression online, and even the 
popularity of cameras in cell phones, it’s clear that multimedia isn’t going 
away. In fact, it’s going to get more and more popular. 
You may find you have to do more query experimentation with these 
resources, as well as develop different strategies for reviewing what you 
find. But I think you’ll find that it pays off. Multimedia can provide infor-
mation in a much richer context than regular text. 
The Future Is Now

This page intentionally left blank 

9
Trapping Tags and 
Conversations 

188
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
In the past few chapters, we’ve spent a lot of time looking at various types of 
resources you can trap, such as news, government, multimedia, and more. 
And one thing I’ve repeated constantly is that if you want to generate que-
ries that are as narrow as possible, you must avoid being general; get specific 
by describing the topics you want to track as minutely as possible. 
For one chapter—and only one chapter—I’m going to ask you to put that 
advice aside. 
Why? Because this chapter looks at how to monitor and trap tags and con-
versations. Tags are extremely general, and conversations have their own 
idiom of searching. For each of these two types of searches, you have to take 
a different perspective for your searching. 
But it’s worth it! Conversations are great for finding technical support, 
news, and rumors about your topic of interest, and discussions of fitness of 
one item over another. Like blogs, conversations are also useful for quickly 
finding discussions on current events. Tags are part of group-developed 
“folksonomies” and can be an easy way to find manageable numbers of 
resources about general topics. I do tag searches for things I’d never dare to 
use Google or even Feedster for. 
This chapter looks at where to find tags and conversations, and how to trap 
them. It also provides some query-building advice so that you can get out 
of the “narrow, narrow, narrow, specific, specific, specific” groove for just 
this one chapter. 
The Tao of Tags
Tags are a relatively recent phenomenon on the Web. Of course, describing 
a resource using keywords has been happening almost since Day One. But 
having keywords used by a group of people gathered into a single folkson-
omy and then using that folksonomy as a browsing tool for the entire site is 
relatively new. 
A Folksonowhatnow? 
A folksonomy, as we’ve already discussed, is like a taxonomy, a structure of 
organization imposed upon a collection, whether that collection is books, 

The Tao of Tags
189
animals, minerals, or something else. A taxonomy is generally developed by 
a specific group with an idea in mind of what’s going to be classified. Every-
one who works on organizing the collection works within the taxonomy. For 
example, the way the Library of Congress organizes its collection is a huge 
taxonomy designed to encompass millions of subjects. It’s created and regu-
lated by a specific group. As a result, I can’t approach the Library of Congress 
and tell them I’ve created 500 subject headings about Kool and the Gang that 
I want added to their taxonomy. Well, I could, but it wouldn’t happen. 
However, a folksonomy is much more organic than the efforts of the Library 
of Congress. Like the Library of Congress, it’s developed by a specific group, 
but it’s the group that’s using the collection and usually anybody can join 
that group. Unlike the Library of Congress, it isn’t developed and then 
imposed upon a collection, but grows as more items are added to a col-
lection. Tags can have formal language, informal language, or words that 
aren’t in any dictionary you can find. 
This level of flexibility might drive a reference librarian crazy, but it’s ideal 
for the Internet. After all, the Web is not a library. Pages and data are being 
added constantly, there’s no card catalog that covers all the content, and 
there’s no governing body that approves each page as it’s added to the Inter-
net and makes sure it’s plunked into its proper classification slot. If groups 
of users who add to a collection can be involved in creating some kind of 
structure for it, so much the better for the users and for you, the trapper. 
Tip
What kind of resources are organized with tags? It seems to have 
started with online bookmarks, but now tags can be used to 
search a variety of resources, from photos to blog entries. There’s 
even a meta-search engine for tagged items, as you’ll discover a 
little later on in this chapter. 
The advantages of tags. . .
Tags have several advantages: 
. 
They’re created by people who are contributing to a collection of 
resources. Because of this, they tend to be more relevant. 

190
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
. 
They use mostly general words to describe the contents of the col-
lection. For instance, a page about bookmarks of Google resources 
might be tagged Google Tools Bookmarks. So for once you can use 
general searches to find the topics you’re looking for. If you’re trying 
to monitor a very general topic, like Yahoo or Google, you’ll find sites 
that use tags invaluable. 
. 
Resources using tags generally have visual displays of the tags being 
used and how popular they are, which can help you in deciding which 
words to use for their queries. 
But while these are definite advantages, there are also some disadvantages 
to using tags as well.
. . .and the drawbacks
I suspect when tag sites become really popular, we’ll have to watch out for 
spammers trying to make sure their resources are listed with every con-
ceivable relevant keyword (and maybe even a few not so relevant). Because 
you don’t trap tags by date and multiple people can bookmark the same 
resource, you sometimes see “waves” of a resource—several people book-
marking it over a multiple week period. So it can show up in your traps 
over and over and over again. (Sometimes I use this as a benchmark of how 
popular a resource is.) 
In addition, because tags are geared toward very general searching, the 
mechanisms for searching with them can sometimes seem woefully lim-
ited. For example, you can only search for one tag, and you can’t exclude or 
add tags to your search. So sometimes you’ll find that you’re doing general 
searches whether you want to or not. 
Tip
Not every trapper is going to find tags useful. If you’re a medi-
cal student looking to keep up with professional/academic news 
about a particular disease, photos in Flickr are not going to help 
you much. And if you’re a legal analyst, you might not feel that 
searching blogs with tags is going to offer you a lot. But at least 
take a look at what your topic keywords are finding at these sites. 
At worst, you will have spent a few minutes seeing how other 
people use your preferred vocabulary. At best, you will have found 
a couple new traps and gotten ideas for taking your search in a 
different direction. 

191
Resources That Use Tags
There’s more being tagged than just Web sites—there are photographs, blog 
entries, and even life goals! We discuss these later in the chapter, but for 
right now let’s start with the sites that tag general links. 
Tagging seems to have started with social bookmarking, which involves a 
group of people on the same site tagging their bookmarks and then describ-
ing them with a few words. Users could then explore who was using the same 
tags, which bookmarks in the group were most popular, and so on. Get a 
critical mass of people doing that, and voilà, you have a large set of resources 
and a folksonomy. The grandpa of this kind of site is del.icio.us. 
General tag sites
del.icio.us 
If you’re a longtime search-engine user, del.icio.us (del.icio.us) will drive 
you a little crazy at first, but I promise you’ll get used to it. And it’s worth it. 
Instead of snippets and lots of information about search results, you often 
get just a resource name, relevant tags, and the time and date it was added. 
Sometimes you get an additional line of description. You’ll see what I mean 
when you visit the front page of the site. 
The reason it looks that way is because del.icio.us (which I call Del, for short) 
is basically a huge bookmarks depository. When people add something to 
their Del bookmarks, it’s so they can find it later, and less so they can learn 
about cool new sites. However, I find that the resource titles are generally 
enough to give me an idea of what they’re all about. I also find that I can get 
a heads-up on resources here that I don’t normally find anywhere else. 
On Del’s front page (Figure 9.1), the most recent resources are added. On 
the right side is a list of the most popular tags. 
What you will not see is a search box to find tags. That’s okay. To find items 
tagged with the words you’re interested in, use the following URL and 
replace keyword with the tag you’re interested in:
http://del.icio.us/tag/keyword
You have to get a little creative. First put aside all the really narrow queries 
and do those general searches you’ve been dying to do. For example, tag-
ging services like Del are the only places where I trap for the extremely 
general tags “Google” and “Yahoo”, and they work very well! 
Resources That Use Tags

192
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
If you find that your searches aren’t returning many results, get more cre-
ative. Since tags are often used one at a time, someone might create a tag by 
putting two words together. 
For example, “GoogleAPI” is a legitimate tag in the Del system, as is “weight-
loss”. If what you’d like to search for is usually expressed as a phrase, search 
for it as one tag. And as you can see from the Google example, you can also 
take a common word and experiment to see if it has any derivatives. 
You can also do multiple tag searching as well. Just put both tags in the URL 
separated by a plus sign (+). So entering the following URL locates resources 
that have been tagged with both Yahoo and Google:
http://del.icio.us/tag/yahoo+google
If you’re having trouble deciding what to look for, do a couple of searches 
for tags that generally describe your topic. Notice on the right of the results 
page a list of related tags that may help prod your brain.
Del tag searches are simplicity to trap. Notice at the bottom of each page of 
search results a familiar orange logo. That’s a link to the RSS feed for this 
tag search. There are two things you have to watch out for when trapping 
with del.icio.us. Because Del searches are so easy to monitor, and it’s so easy 
to do the general searches that are difficult to do elsewhere, you might find 
yourself tempted to generate and gather lots and lots of RSS feeds. Before 
Figure 9.1 Popular and recent additions to del.icio.us. 

193
you do that, take a close look at the results pages for your searches. Each 
item includes the date and time it was added, and the results are listed new-
est first, with ten to a page. 
So it’s easy to look at the tenth item of the page and see how active the feed 
is. Was the tenth item added a week ago? Great—this is an active but slow 
feed. Was the tenth item added a year ago? You can still add the RSS feed, 
but you might not see updates very often, which is okay. Was the tenth item 
added half-an-hour ago? Not so good—you can still monitor this search 
term, but you’ll have to keep up with a very busy RSS feed. 
The second thing you have to worry about is resource repeats. When I’m 
monitoring the Google tag, I might see the same resource two or three 
times in a week, especially if it gets mentioned by a popular blog or direc-
tory. I don’t worry about this—the repeats are few enough that they don’t 
hinder the flow of information, and they’re usually described well enough 
that I don’t waste my time visiting a site I’ve already visited. 
With del.icio.us being so popular, it’s easy to realize that there would be lots 
and lots of other similar bookmarking services. One of them, Spurl, has 
taken its bookmark service and turned its data into a search engine called 
Zniff. I like it as a complement to Del.
del.icio.us has become a bookmark tool of choice for several thousand people and has its own 
API. The application programming interface is a way for programmers to use the features and 
data of Del in their own programs, and has spawned a huge number of tools, some of which you 
might find useful. Here are some fun ones: 
•	
Bookmarklets (quickonlinetips.com/archives/2005/02/absolutely-delicious-complete-
tools-collection). Several tools that let you perform specific Del search tasks, such as 
searching by user name instead of keyword tags (if you wanted to find everything I’ve 
bookmarked, for example), searching your own bookmarks, and more.
•	
del.icio.us Filtered (deliciousfiltered.stuhlmueller.info/). Get Del feeds without entries. 
•	
Trendalicious (glozer.net/trendalicious.html). Get a sense of what the popular bookmarks 
are in Del at the moment. 
del.icio.us Tool Fest
Resources That Use Tags

194
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
Zniff
At first glance, Zniff (zniff.com) looks like a regular search engine. But it’s 
indexing the bookmarks generated by people who use Spurl, a bookmark 
service like del.icio.us. Zniff also searches a collection of eight million Web 
pages from Iceland! 
Notice that the dates on the results you get are not recent. I suspect there’s 
some kind of lag between users entering items into Spurl and the items 
making it into Zniff. Because you can’t get a sense of how “busy” a tag is, 
you have to do some experimenting. And hey, while you’re at, it, check out 
Zniff’s help file. Unlike many tag searches, it lets you search for phrases, do 
“or” searches, or even do stemming searches. (A stemming search is when 
you search for part of a word and add a wildcard character to find the rest of 
a word—so searching for moon* would find moonlight, moonlight, moons, 
moonpie, and so on.) While it helps to be as specific as possible in your 
searches, you can take advantage of this advanced syntax to try to coax out 
a little additional information from your traps.
Zniff and Del aren’t the only general tag search resources. Heck, they’re 
hardly even the start. If you want to do some more searching through gen-
eral tag sites, try these sites: 
. 
BlinkList (blinklist.com). A newer resource, BlinkList offers both 
RSS feeds of search results and suggestions of tags you might want 
to search for as you are typing in your searches. There aren’t as many 
results as you’ll find on Del, but it’s newer. 
. 
RawSugar (rawsugar.com). RawSugar is another new tagging resource, 
but it offers suggested links and related links, as well as a list of the 
users which have used the tag for which you’re searching and what 
other tags you’re using. As you might imagine, using RawSugar could 
turn into a huge time sink, but on the other hand, it points you to 
other tags you might never have thought about. 
Access to RawSugar’s Showcase section is free, but to do more search-
ing you have to register. Registration is free. Make sure that you’re 
searching the full directory of sites, instead of just RawSugar’s Web 
2.0 Blogs search. 

195
Tags for specific kinds of searching
The aforementioned tools generate very general sets of data. Of course they 
do, they’re bookmarking tools—by design they’re repositories for general 
information. But tags are used in other settings as well. One of my favorites 
is Flickr, which tags photographs, but there are other ones too. 
Flickr
Before we get into Flickr (flickr.com), I am warning you: keep in mind that 
you’re trying to do research here. Do not get distracted by the pretty pic-
tures. Flickr can turn ten minutes into two hours. If this chapter just kind 
of trails off in the middle, send out a search party. 
I’m sure my intrepid editor won’t let that happen. Flickr is a photo-sharing site 
that also lets users tag their photographs. When searching for photographs, 
it’s my favorite place. It’s updated very frequently, the quality of the materials 
on the site is good overall and non-spammish, and it provides an amazingly 
quick reference to pictures of current events. Name an event, and it seems like 
someone’s there snapping pictures, ready to put them on Flickr. 
The front page of Flickr shows you recent photos and news, but the Tag Search 
page, at flickr.com/photos/tags/ is where you want to be (Figure 9.2). 
Figure 9.2
Popular tags at Flickr. 
Figure 9.2
Popular tags at Flickr. 
Resources That Use Tags

196
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
You can use the Advanced Search page to search for multiple tags, or for 
keywords in the tag and in the picture description. However, most of the 
time I find that searching tags works fine. 
You might think that, as an information trapper, you won’t find anything 
really useful on a photo site like Flickr—you may be thinking it’s only about 
birthday parties, bunnies, flowers, and such. But do some experimenting 
with your searches; I think you’ll be surprised. While most of what’s on 
Flickr is indeed photographs, other graphics are included too. 
For example, if you enter a search for Google, which you might think is a 
weird search for a photo site, look at the kind of results you get (Figure 9.3). 
You get pictures of Googlers and Google-related activities, but you also get 
screenshots of Google resources, explanatory graphics, and even concep-
tions of services being offered by Google. And while many of these might 
be posted on blogs and elsewhere on the Web, they would be extremely dif-
ficult to find—what keywords would you use? Flickr’s a nice shortcut. 
When choosing tags for searching Flickr, again go for common words. As 
you can see, Google and Yahoo work well. Try turning phrases into single 
tags like I suggested doing with Del. Remember the searches we did with 
Del—googleapi and weightloss? Try those here. Notice that weightloss 
works, while API doesn’t. Experiment, experiment, experiment! 
Figure 9.3
Getting Google-tagged 
pictures at Flickr.
Figure 9.3
Getting Google-tagged 
pictures at Flickr.

197
Flickr is terrific for current events, as I’ve said before. Try searching for min-
nesota state fair. As of this writing, I got over 700 results! 
In late August and early September 2005, Hurricane Katrina devastated the 
Gulf Coast. As of this writing, over 19,000 photos are tagged with hurri-
canekatrina, from pictures of candles and prayers, to radar pictures of the 
hurricane itself, to pictures of people living in shelters. 
After chapters and chapters of trying to narrow your search, you may be get-
ting a little frustrated at trying to come up with tags that match your topic. 
If this is the case, try the Explore section of Flickr (flickr.com/explore/). 
Here you can explore photos, but you can also use a Flickr feature called 
clustering, which groups photos and finds other tags relevant to what you’re 
searching for. Start with the URL flickr.com/photos/tags/keyword/clus-
ters/, and replace keyword with the tags you want to search. Try entering 
Google again. You get a page that looks like Figure 9.4. 
Notice that the search results are divided into several different sets of tags, 
some of which you might have anticipated (GMail, Googlemap) and some which 
you probably didn’t (memorymap, geotagged, mountainview). If you’re having a 
difficult time finding tags that focus on what you’re looking for, use the clus-
ter feature for some extra ideas. (In addition, you’ll find a list of related tags at 
the bottom of regular search results, which may help you too.) 
Figure 9.4
Clusters of Flickr tags 
related to Google.
Figure 9.4
Clusters of Flickr tags 
related to Google.
Resources That Use Tags

198
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
Trapping Flickr streams is easy, as RSS feeds are offered for searches. (Look 
for “Feeds for photos tagged with keyword. Available as RSS 2.0 and Atom” 
at the bottom of a page of results.) 
Would you rather get your alerts by e-mail? Notifyr (notifyr.com/) will 
send you an e-mail whenever a Flickr page in which you’re interested is 
updated—this can be any kind of Flickr page—a Flickr user’s page, an indi-
vidual picture’s page (in case you’re watching for new comments), or a page 
of Flickr search results. You don’t need to register to use Notifyr; all you 
need is an e-mail address. 
Have you been seduced by Flickr yet? Spent hours and hours looking at 
sunsets, lightning, and cute kitten pictures? I know. Time to go look at 
something else. Blogs, for example, have such an extensive presence on the 
Internet as a whole that it shouldn’t surprise you that there are tag searches 
for them as well. 
Searching blogs with tags
You’ve already seen that blogs in general have plenty of search engines. But 
in addition to doing regular searches for blogs, you can also do tag searches. 
They’re like the Flickr searches: sometimes blog tag searches give you a 
shortcut to resources you would not have found otherwise. Technorati and 
IceRocket are two major search sources. 
Technorati Tag Search
Technorati’s Tag Search page (technorati.com/tag/) starts with a list of “hot 
tags” and the hundred most popular tags, but if none of those interest you 
there’s a search form. This is the place to try all those blog searches you 
wanted to do in Feedster but which got you too many or too many irrelevant 
results. You’ll see when you get the results back that you’re actually getting 
results from many different sources. 
At the top of the results list are tags related to the one for which you just 
searched. Keep those in mind for later. (Also note at the top of the Search 
Results page that there’s a tab for searching photos!) You can get your trap 
down at the top of the search results where there’s an orange button linking 
to an RSS feed. Play and experiment with general blog searches here, and 
then take your experiments to IceRocket. 

199
IceRocket Tag Search
IceRocket is possibly not as well known as Technorati, but it’s got a good 
blog search (blogs.icerocket.com/tag/). As you can see in Figure 9.5, there’s 
a special syntax that lets you search for tags. 
Figure 9.5 Use the tag syntax or simply pick a tag. 
The results are divided by date, giving you clear information at a glance as 
to how busy a tag is. From the results, you can also exclude individual blogs 
(for example, if there’s one that doesn’t really meet your topic requirements 
but is heavily represented in the results). On the other hand, if you find a 
blog that’s great and you want to see more of it, you can also focus on it 
and see its entries exclusively. On the right are several links for RSS feeds. 
IceRocket doesn’t seem to be indexing quite as much as Technorati, but 
what it does index I think is well worth trapping. 
Are bookmarks, photos, and blog search the only things out there that are 
being tagged? Good heavens no. There is a huge variety of tagged resources 
available with more being added every day. Here’s a taste of a few more.
43 Things 
43 Things (43things.com) is a site that collects life goals for people and where 
they’re located. Users can track their progress with their goals and sup-
port each other. Goals are searchable by tags. Goals include losing weight,  
Resources That Use Tags

200
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
paying taxes, watching less television, reading 100 books in a year, and so 
on. If you’re doing any kind of cultural or current event searching, you 
should have a ball—and set a few traps—rummaging around in this site. 
Connotea
For academics, this site (connotea.org) allows users to tag reference 
resources and papers. While not as active as del.icio.us, the resources added 
here are as a whole from more credible sources and are much more aca-
demically oriented. Medical trappers definitely need to visit here. It does 
require registration. If you find useful resources at Connotea try the similar 
academically slanted service, CiteULike (citeulike.org/). 
Shadows
Shadows (shadows.com) is combination of bookmarking application and 
community. Tagged resources can be sent to groups, and the resources 
there can be commented upon by users. Nice to see tagged resources and 
feedback at the same time! Like Connotea, Shadows requires registration.
The general searches which would be just about guaranteed to drive you crazy 
in searching the general Web and other large data pools are just right when 
searching tag engines. Even if some of these resources don’t, at first glance, 
seem like ones that would be appropriate for your topic, at least take a moment 
or two and try a couple of searches with them. I think you’ll be surprised. 
And I think you’ll be equally surprised about monitoring conversations. 
When I’m trying to keep tabs on certain technical issues for a computer, or 
opinions on current events, or experiences with medical problems, conver-
sations will sometimes point me toward issues that don’t bubble up in news 
search engines until much later. There are some things you have to be cau-
tious about when monitoring conversations, but it can be well worth it. 
The Zen of Conversation Trapping
Before the Web was all that, the Internet was all about e-mail. And despite 
the fact that the Web gets much attention, e-mail is still in some ways the 
killer app of the Internet. Millions of conversations are started, ended, and 
continued every second of the day on public mailing lists. They cover every-
thing from aardvarks to zephyrs. Some of the conversations are desultory 

201
and not particularly useful to you, the trapper, but on the other hand the 
amount of free technical support, spirited discussion, problem solving, and 
other data flow can be very helpful. But as I noted earlier, conversation trap-
ping is not without its problems. 
The bummer of conversation trapping
The first stumbling block of conversation trapping is credibility. When 
you’re searching with news search engines you can start out with a baseline 
of credibility to which you can assign a story. You might, for example, con-
sider the Washington Post a high-credibility source, and give other sources 
varying levels of credibility depending on how well you know them, what 
they’re reporting on, and so on. 
With conversations, that baseline should be zero, since you can’t assign any 
credibility to what you’re reading until it’s corroborated or you have some 
other reason to trust it. That’s not to say a lot of good information can’t 
be found in online conversations. But you don’t know in some cases who’s 
posting, what the agenda is, where they got their information, and so on. 
Another stumbling block is language. I’ve mentioned earlier in this book 
that in conversations people tend to be a little sloppier than when they’re 
writing for a Web page. 
Yet another glitch is the fact that information gets old. It’s usually not much 
of a problem with news stories—when a situation changes, the news story is 
updated to reflect the new information. Sometimes, however, the updating 
doesn’t happen, and the same old, outdated information bounces around 
and around. For an Internet-wide example of this, consider the case of 
Craig Shergold. Craig had cancer and wanted to receive greeting cards—in 
1989. Over ten years later, long after Craig was cancer-free and long after 
he appeared on TV, letting the world know that the cards could stop, this 
appeal for cards was still circulating around the Internet and only now 
seems to be slowed down. 
Keep all this in mind as you trap. You may discover over time that there 
are some mailing lists you trust more than other ones. In reading through 
the resources presented in this section, you’ll learn there are ways you can 
concentrate your trapping on one list if that works best for you. There are 
many places online where you can watch conversations. 
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

202
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
Trapping conversations
Generally speaking there are three types of conversations you can track: 
. 
Usenet. Usenet is a collection of thousands of newsgroups set up in a 
hierarchy that’s been available for over twenty years now. While not 
as popular as it used to be, it still generates a lot of traffic. 
. 
Mailing Lists. Discussion groups that are distributed to their mem-
bers mainly through e-mail. As more closed conversations are less 
subject to the ravages of spamming and trolling, mailing lists have 
become more popular over the last few years. And many of them have 
publicly available archives that you can search without being on the 
list, or without requiring more than a basic free registration.
. 
Discussion Boards. Discussion boards are areas on Web sites that con-
tain discussions, usually on very specific topics or groups of topics. 
When it comes to monitoring Usenet, Google Groups is your best bet. But 
for the other types of conversation trapping you have lots of options. 
Google Groups 
Google Groups (groups.google.com) is actually a combination of a mailing 
list host and a Usenet search service, but the mailing lists have not caught up 
with the still prodigious Usenet traffic! So we concentrate on that option. 
Your first task when preparing to trap Usenet is to figure out where you’re 
going to trap. Most topics you want to monitor will be well served by limit-
ing the search to a newsgroup or a set of newsgroups. 
Usenet’s newsgroups are arranged in a hierarchy—major categories like 
comp (computers), sci (science), rec (recreation), and so on. (There are a 
bunch of little categories as well.) Underneath the major categories there 
are subcategories, sub-subcategories (sometimes even more sub than that), 
and newsgroups. You can search by single newsgroups but I find it’s easier 
to search by category. 
If you don’t find any major category that really covers what you’re looking for, 
then you’ve got a couple of options. You can do a full Usenet search (if your 
search is specific enough this shouldn’t be a big deal) or you can try to find 
individual groups that cover what you’re looking for. Searching for individual 
groups also shows you mailing lists that Google Groups is hosting. 

203
The searchable listing of groups is at groups.google.com/groups/dir. Use 
moderately to fairly general words to do your searching, such as sports, 
baseball, money, woodworking, autism, or medicine. When you get search 
results they look like Figure 9.6. 
Figure 9.6 Group listings from Google Groups.
Groups will be divided up at the top by category, region, language, activity, 
and number of users. Then the list of groups will appear below. Group list-
ings include group name, description, and if the group is one of Google’s 
mailing lists, the number of members. 
But let’s start with the categorical searching. Let’s go back to the antique 
woodworking example. I want to monitor groups for mentions of antique 
woodworking, and after some browsing I’ve decided that the recreation 
hierarchy of newsgroups is my best bet. So I search for: 
“antique woodworking” group:rec*
The group special syntax lets me restrict my searches to a single group or 
a category of groups. The rec* searches every group in the recreation cat-
egory. (You can also search under subcategories—group:rec.sports* will 
search only those groups in the sports subcategory.) 
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

204
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
So what kind of results can you get for this? I got less than 125 results as of 
this writing, but you won’t be able to tell how recent the newest results are 
until you go to the switch on the right and choose to sort by date instead of 
by relevance (Figure 9.7). 
Figure 9.7 One page of search results for this Google Groups query goes back several months.
Once you’ve done that, you can view the date of each posts—each post has a 
date and time—and see how recently the newest post is, and how old the old-
est is. In this case you can see that “antique woodworking” isn’t a particularly 
busy search term and would make a good trap. Down at the very bottom of 
the page is a signup form for e-mailed search alerts for Google Groups. 
In addition to the group syntax, Google Groups offers other special syntax 
that you can use to narrow your search. Being familiar with Google search-
ing, you should be familiar with intitle, which is used to find keywords in 
the title. It works the same in Google Groups. Between that and the group 
syntax, you should be able to narrow your searches quite a lot. 
For most of your trapping needs, monitoring the entire Usenet or groups 
of newsgroups should be sufficient. But there will be times when you find a 
single group that has so much great information in it that you want to read 
it exclusively. In these cases, you need to have a Google Groups account. 

205
So how do you build effective searches for conversations, if just getting as narrow as possible 
won’t do it? 
If you make good use of the intitle syntax, or any other resource syntax that allows you to limit 
your searches to the subject line (which in this case is considered the title) of a post, you can get 
by with general searches. Since titles of Usenet and mailing list posts are generally designed to 
get attention and to continue a conversation, they’re usually good for searching. 
If your searches on titles aren’t getting you anywhere, try slightly more specific searches within 
the body of the list posting or newsgroup posting itself. I find that newsgroup searches work 
very well in technical arenas when you include direct quotes of error messages or specific model 
numbers for technical items. Usually when people are requesting technical help they are as 
specific as possible and provide an extensive level of detail. 
So where you might on a Web search be forced to search for “collapsing drive from WidgetCo”,  
a newsgroup search might allow you really narrow in on “collapsing Widget2400ZBQ  
from WidgetCo”. 
Try using model numbers, complete error messages, drug names, the full names of medical 
conditions, and other precise nouns that people might use in describing a problem and asking for 
help. That’s a lot of what takes place in online conversations. Try searching for the most specific 
query words—the model numbers, medical condition names, error messages—in the title. 
If that fails, think of the topic you want to monitor, and try to articulate it as a question. 
How would you describe it? What would you ask? (“What are the latest treatments for 
muscular dystrophy?” “What’s happening with the Arizona Cardinals?” “What are the 
latest antique woodworking collectibles?”) Take the questions you generate and pull out 
the keywords, then search for them (treatments “muscular dystrophy”, happening Arizona 
Cardinals, antique woodworking collectibles). Leave out the time-related words, such as 
new or latest. The fact that you’re only getting the most recent messages will take care of your 
information timeliness. If those questions don’t find you specific enough information, ask a 
different question, extract the relevant words, and start over. 
What you’re doing when you create your queries this way is thinking about how an information-
rich conversation might start—by creating a question. The theory is that a query based on a 
question that will bring you information-rich answers will hopefully also point you towards good 
query results. 
How Do You Build These Searches? 
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

206
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
You may already have a Google Groups account and not know it! If you’ve 
signed up for GMail then you have a Google Groups account. Just use the 
same user name and password that you’d use to sign on there. If you don’t 
you can register. Registration is free. 
I don’t think you necessarily need a Google Groups account unless you’re 
following individual newsgroups. But it may turn out that you do want to 
follow individual newsgroups—a group may cover your topic perfectly and 
may not be worth filtering by keyword. There may be several groups that fit 
your topics this way. 
When you first log on to Google Groups your page will look like Figure 9.8. 
Figure 9.8 Logging on to the Google Groups account.
There is a Groups Lookup at the bottom of the page where you can search 
for newsgroups and mailing lists of interest. 
So say you find a few newsgroups to which you want to subscribe. When you join 
them you’re given several subscription options as you can see in Figure 9.9. 
I always choose to read the newsgroups to which I subscribe on the Web—
what’s the use of having a Web-based interface if you don’t use it?—but you 
may wish to receive regular e-mail or digests. 
Once you’ve subscribed to a few newsgroups, reading them via your Google 
Groups page will look like Figure 9.10. 

207
From there you can read your messages, “star” topics you find interesting 
(useful when there are long, long discussion threads you want to follow 
because it gathers them all into one place), and read your messages. And 
how do you trap the new messages? But subscribing to them, of course! 
Google News is a mix of Usenet newsgroups and mailing lists—but really 
for the most part it’s newsgroups. Yahoo Groups, on the other hand, is an 
ancient and extremely active set of mailing lists, and a gold mine for infor-
mation trappers. 
Figure 9.9 Signing up for newsgroups.
Figure 9.10 Reading a group in Google Groups.
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

208
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
Yahoo Groups 
You don’t, strictly speaking, need a Yahoo account to read Yahoo Groups 
(groups.yahoo.com), but I recommend it. Many of the groups don’t let you 
read the archives unless you’re a member, and by signing into Yahoo you’ll 
easily be able to sign up for groups. Some groups don’t offer public access 
to their archives at all. You have to be given permission to join the list, after 
which you can read the archives. I find there are few enough of those that 
they don’t hinder my information trapping. 
Yahoo’s mailing lists are set up under a sort of hierarchy. Yahoo has set 
them up into a searchable subject index that’s very Yahooesque. But you 
may find keyword searching to be your best bet.
The rules for keyword searching for mailing lists here should be much 
like what you used with Google Groups: moderate to very general words. 
Because Yahoo Groups offers only mailing lists, it can provide you with a 
little more information in its search results, including extended descrip-
tions, a count of the number of people who are subscribed to a mailing list, 
and whether the mailing list archives are accessible to members or not. 
When you decide to subscribe to a mailing list and click on the name of 
the list from the search results, you get a little more information about the 
group—like how many new members it’s gained and how many links, pho-
tos, and messages it’s added in the past week. Pay attention to this! The 
activity of the list is going to determine your strategy to keep up with it, and 
how much use you might get out of it. A group with hundreds of new mes-
sages a week should be approached with more specific and narrower queries 
than a group with only a few dozen messages a week. 
And that’s how we get to talking about trapping. As you may have already 
guessed, your strategy with Yahoo Groups is going to be different than your 
strategy with Google Groups. For one thing, you can’t search the entire 
body of messages at once—you’re going to have to first identify useful 
groups, then search them individually. How you go about that depends on 
the group itself. 
Public groups—groups which have no restrictions on membership or post-
reading—will offer RSS feeds of the latest posts. The RSS buttons are in the 
same area as the latest posts (Figure 9.11). 

209
These are full feeds of all the posts. I recommend using these feeds in con-
junction with something like FeedDigest or FeedShake to extract just the 
words in which you’re interested. We talked about those tools way back in 
the early chapters. 
When groups are not public and are for members only, then you have to do 
something else. I recommend using a page monitor. It’s not as streamlined 
as using an RSS feed, but you won’t have a lot of options here. You can 
either monitor the front page, which shows you the latest posts (this is okay 
if you’re monitoring a not-particularly-busy group), or you can monitor a 
page of search results for that particular group (necessary if you’re monitor-
ing a very busy group). If you want to monitor a page of the latest posts of 
a group that requires registration before you can read the archives, check 
your page monitor to make sure you can specify a login name and password 
when monitoring that page. Most page monitors offer this option. 
Though your methods of finding and monitoring information on Yahoo 
Groups will be different than what you use with Google Groups, the kinds 
of things you’ll be monitoring should be the same, as we talked about ear-
lier in the chapter. Product names, condition names, model numbers, error 
messages. Continue the tactic of creating questions relating to your topic, 
Figure 9.11 Publicly readable groups have RSS feeds available at Yahoo Groups.
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

210
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
extracting the relevant words, and then plugging them into the search. You 
may find some mailing lists to be so information-rich you want to com-
pletely monitor them instead of just looking at search results. You have 
ways to monitor both. 
Google Groups and Yahoo Groups are without question the largest Usenet 
and mailing list resources out there. But there are other repositories of 
mailing lists as well. And though you may not find that you want to moni-
tor every last one of these, they’re worth looking at. 
Tip
Some of the following resources just show you what mailing lists 
are available. They do not allow you to search archives. You may 
find lists here you want to monitor, but you’ll only be able to 
monitor them by subscribing to them. In the next chapter we look 
at managing information flow via e-mail accounts. 
Topica
There are actually two kinds of searches you can do on Topica (lists.topica.
com): you can search for lists and you can search for messages. 
On the front page is a directory of mailing lists you can browse or a search 
box. That search box will find you mailing lists. However, once you run the 
search you get more options (Figure 9.12). 
Figure 9.12 Once you do an initial search, you can do a second search for groups or messages containing  
your keyword.

211
Yes, you do get a list of relevant groups, but on the right you get another 
search box with the option to search for more lists or—and this is the 
important bit for you—search messages! 
But let’s look at the groups first. The search results for groups don’t give 
you as much information as, say, the search results for Yahoo Groups, 
but if you click on the name of the group in the results you get an addi-
tional information page that includes the number of subscribers and the 
approximate list activity, as well as a link to read the archives if they’re 
readable by anybody. Use this information to determine list activity and 
how you want to monitor it. 
Back to the message results. Your search results will initially list posts in 
order of relevance, I believe. Click the date header to resort them by date, as 
you see in Figure 9.13. 
Figure 9.13 Sorting by date in Topica gives you the oldest results first.
When you normally resort items by date, what do you get? You get a list with 
the newest items first. In this case you get the oldest items first, so what you 
have to do is scroll to the last page of the results and monitor that. Mostly 
what you’re monitoring is changes to that page’s content and the addition 
of another page of search results. It’s awkward, and I only occasionally find 
useful results here, but Topica is still active enough that I would at least look 
at the lists it hosts and consider adding it to my information trapping list. 
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

212
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
TILE.NET Lists
TILE.NET (tile.net/lists) is not a message repository. Instead it’s an online 
listing of newsletters and mailing lists. It’s also one of the oldest online 
resources for this kind of thing, so you know it’s extensive. 
You have the choice of browsing by name, description, and domain, which I 
don’t recommend unless you have lots and lots of free time. A search engine 
also allows you to search between lists and newsgroups. You probably got 
your fill of newsgroup searching at Google Groups, so stick to lists. Make 
your searches single-word—ethics, medicine, woodworking, Google. 
The big drawback to TILE.NET is that a lot of the lists have no descriptive 
information, and you can’t get a sense from the title of some of the lists what 
exactly they are. However, for when you want to make sure you cover every 
available inch, and want to set up traps for every available resource, you 
don’t want to miss TILE. There are too many listings here. 
Tip
There are lists of categorized information as well as general mail-
ing lists. If you’re looking for academic information try JISCmail 
(jiscmail.ac.uk), which contains information on mailing lists for 
academic communities, mostly in the UK. 
L-Soft List Catalog
Sometimes you’ll hear someone refer to a mailing list as a LISTSERV. 
That’s not really a correct usage. LISTSERV is a certain type of mailing list 
software and it’s a trademark. A mailing list may run on LISTSERV, but a 
mailing list is not a LISTSERV. (It’s like saying, “Give me a Kleenex,” when 
you’re using a generic brand of tissue.) 
You might realize however that mailing list software would have to be pretty 
darn popular to become a common usage noun. And you’re right. The L-
Soft List Catalog (lsoft.com/lists/listref.html) contains information on over 
58,000 mailing lists—and those are just the publicly available ones! 
There are some unusual ways to find lists here (Figure 9.14)—you can 
search by country and search by lists that have over 1,000 or over 10,000 
subscribers. You can also do a keyword search for lists. 

213
The list search offers several different options. You can search for keywords 
within the list name or list description (which is what I recommend) or 
within the host name. You can also limit your searches to only those lists 
that have a Web-based archive (useful if you want to review list archives 
before you subscribe). Beware using the Web-based archive search limi-
tation—a search for autism found 12 results, but when the search was 
restricted to only those lists with Web-based archives, the same search 
found only 6 results. 
By now you know: there are hundreds of thousands of mailing lists out 
there. But guess what? That’s not the only way to have a conversation online! 
In fact, there’s another way to have open online discussions and that’s via 
online boards. 
Searching online conversations
There are software programs (and some hosted services) that allow people 
to put up online boards or discussion forums. The advantage of those is that 
they allow conversations to be centered on one site. The disadvantage of 
course is that unless you publicize the heck out of ’em, forums can be hard 
to find and hard to build traffic for. A secondary disadvantage is that some-
times online forums become irresistible target for spammers and trolls 
(people who want to start arguments and fights online). 
Figure 9.14 Several different list search options at L-Soft.
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

214
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
But if you can get past those problems, you’ll find a lot to love in boards. 
Generally they evolve into a community, so if you find a good community 
that acts courteously toward itself and exchanges good information, you 
can anticipate the entire forum to generate good information even as it 
moves forward into new topics. Generally, moderated boards (forums that 
have a manager control the postings) are better than unmoderated boards, 
but in both cases the information quality varies across forums. 
I can recommend two places that will help you both find forums and find 
messages on forums. 
You thought building queries for mailing lists and newsgroups was different? Building queries for 
online forums is even more different. In my experience, forum discussions are fairly disjointed. 
The community I mentioned above also means that the group develops its own vocabulary, 
history, and so on. For best results, I recommend monitoring the front page of a forum site and 
watching for the keywords in which you’re interested. The more general, the better. For some 
less-active forums you might be able to get away with just monitoring the front page and not 
using keywords at all. 
Some of the resources outlined in this chapter allow you to search many boards at a time. In that 
case, again, stick to more general keywords and monitor search results pages. 
Building Queries for Forums
Big-Boards 
Big-Boards (big-boards.com) tracks and provides information on the larg-
est boards and forums on the Internet. And when I say largest I mean hun-
dreds of millions of posts by hundreds of thousands of users. There are over 
1,800 boards listed in this directory. Very information-rich trapping areas, 
as long as you can keep the information flow to a usable level! 
You may browse available forums in a subject index or search by keyword. 
Each forum listing has an information page that provides a description of 
the board, as well as a screenshot and number of monitors. Each listing also 
has a stats page that graphically shows the number of members and the 
number of posts per day, and gives a text listing of the number of users and 
the average number of posts per week. 

215
You will not be able to monitor forums directly from Big-Boards, but it will 
point you to a lot of potential trapping areas. 
Yuku
Yuku (yuku.com) is not a board posting search engine. Instead it finds the 
forums themselves. It’s up to you to go to them and decide what you want to 
monitor, but Yuku does provide a lot of information for you. 
Use general to slightly-less-general search words—think of Yahoo Direc-
tory’s top level categories and then maybe a category or so more specific 
than that. If you get too many results, carefully get more specific. I find it’s 
way too easy to end up with nothing. Your search results are very informa-
tive—you get the name of the forum, description, total visits, total posts, 
average daily visits, and average daily posts. That should give you enough 
information to decide if you want to monitor the forum. 
What you find when you decide to visit a forum will vary a lot. Some forums 
require membership to even view posts. Some forums require membership 
to post, which means you can monitor them without having to have a mem-
bership to the board. The Search Results page for a forum search looks like 
Figure 9.15.
Figure 9.15
38 average daily posts? 
You can handle that. 
167? You may want to 
watch specific board 
sections with a page 
monitor.
Figure 9.15
38 average daily posts? 
You can handle that. 
167? You may want to 
watch specific board 
sections with a page 
monitor.
The Zen of Conversation Trapping

216
chapter 9    Trapping Tags and Conversations 
Pay attention to the average number of daily posts! If traffic in the forum is 
light (less than a few dozen messages a day) you may wish to monitor only 
this front page. If the traffic is heavier, you may wish to pick a section or 
sections in that discussion forum that are most relevant to your interest and 
then monitor those using a page monitor. If you’re very interested in sin-
gular topics, you can choose to be notified of topic updates via e-mail—just 
look for the “Click to receive email notification of replies” link. You don’t 
have to be registered on the board in which you’re interested to get notifica-
tion of updates to topics. (This can lead to a lot of e-mail but we discuss that 
in the next chapter.) 
As you can see, searching tags and online conversations is quite different 
from searching full-text search engines. But if you take the opportunity to 
use these resources for general searching, you’ll add a whole new dimension 
to your information trapping. 

Filtering  
the Inflow
10

218
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
For the last several chapters we’ve looked at how to get information, such 
as alerts, notices, and updates about the topics in which you’re interested, 
flowing toward you. 
It’s a little intimidating, isn’t it? You’ve set all these traps, now what are you 
supposed to do with all this information? 
The RSS feeds can be organized in your RSS feed reader and kept until 
you’re ready to look at them. E-mail, on the other hand, has a distressing 
tendency to pile up and hinder you from getting to the information that you 
really want to deal with. 
This chapter addresses the other side of information trapping—what to do 
when you get start getting the e-mails full of the information you wanted. 
Do you save them, filter them, or forward them onward? Do you hide under 
your desk? You’ve learned to make your queries comprehensive and man-
ageable; now we’ll take the first steps to make the flow manageable as well. 
I have a spectacular disadvantage in writing this chapter. There are billions 
of ways you could have your e-mail set up. You might use Outlook, Thunder-
bird, or Eudora. You might be using a corporate setup. There’s no way I can 
cover every possible e-mail permutation. For this reason, I’m going to intro-
duce you to a free online e-mail service and teach you how to filter using that 
service. Because the service is compatible with POP forwarding, you can use 
it as an initial filter and still get e-mail to your regular mailbox. So you can 
think of this service as your first filter point for information trapping. 
Introducing GMail 
GMail (gmail.com) is a free e-mail service from Google. Now you may be 
wondering, “Why did Google, which is known for search engine technology, 
start offering an e-mail application?” You’ve got me. However, GMail does 
marry useful e-mail reading with excellent searching functions, as you’ll 
discover later in this chapter. It also offers an enormous storage limit—over 
2.5 gigabytes, as of this writing, and increasing all the time. 

219
GMail’s many advantages 
GMail offers a huge number of advantages for information trappers:
. 
A lot of storage space. You won’t have to keep clearing out your old 
traps (unless you’ve set eight or nine thousand!). 
. 
Great filtering capability. Keep the stuff that can wait, forward the 
important stuff to your wireless PDA or mobile phone. (There’s also 
some fun address kludging you can do, which we look at in a minute.) 
. 
Spam-filtering. GMail’s spam and virus filtering is very keen— 
perhaps a little too keen—in that you’ll sometimes find something 
you wanted in the spam trap! 
. 
Great searching ability. GMail offers a huge number of special syn-
tax that lets you zero in on the information you’re seeking. 
Tip 
Keep in mind that you can also apply all the hints and tips I provide 
in this chapter to your own e-mail program, if it offers filtering like 
GMail does. 
Getting a GMail account 
GMail accounts used to be by invitation only. As of this writing, however, 
Google is offering GMail invitations to those who are willing to accept an invi-
tation by text message. So if you’ve got a cell phone that can accept text mes-
sages, you can sign up at google.com/accounts/SmsMailSignup1. 
If you don’t have a mobile phone, check and see if GMail is offering free 
accounts yet. If it isn’t, you can request a GMail invite (that will let you open 
a new account) by sending an e-mail to informationtrapping@gmail.com. 
You can also check out 43things.com/things/view/70590 for a list of other 
folks offering invitations to GMail accounts. 
Once you have an account and you’re signed in, your onscreen mailbox will 
look like Figure 10.1.
You see that the folders are on the left side. Beneath them are some labels—
you’ll use those when you filter (more about that in a minute). At the top of 
the screen is a search box for both the Web and your mail, and, of course, in 
the middle of the page is where actual content appears. 
Introducing GMail

220
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
If you’re used to using offline e-mail readers like Eudora, you might find the 
way GMail organizes messages a little odd at first. Instead of listing individ-
ual messages in a list, it gathers similar messages into a thread, and displays 
them in your inbox as one message. This means that many of your alerts 
and updates will gather into one message thread. There are other ways to 
group messages, as you’ll see a little later in this chapter. 
Tip
One potential use of GMail is as a “jump-off point” for your 
information filtering. You set up all your alerts to go to the GMail 
account, and then you set a series of filters that moves the infor-
mation into the appropriate places, such as to your mail account, 
to a cell phone, or even to the archives to be viewed later. You can 
also use this same idea if you have a group of researchers working 
on the same project. Simply set up your GMail account to accept 
all the information traps, and then filter them so that they forward 
to the appropriate people, after which they’re archived. That 
way everybody gets the appropriate information on what they’re 
working on, but at the same time all the information traps are be-
ing gathered and archived in one place. 
Figure 10.1 A lovely empty mailbox at GMail.

221
Address construction in GMail 
Now let’s talk for a minute about what’s going to go into your mailbox. 
You’ll be receiving alerts, updates, notifications about changed pages, and 
so on. The good thing about these types of e-mails is that they’re computer-
generated. What’s so great about that? They have patterns that you can filter 
on. But before we get to the filtering part, let’s first look at how you can 
control the address where the alerts are delivered. 
What? You have only one address on GMail? No you don’t. Even if you don’t 
have more than one account, you have far more than one address. 
In fact, you have practically an infinite number of addresses, thanks to 
GMail’s plus-addressing and dot-addressing capabilities. For simplicity’s 
sake, stick to one or the other. I recommend the plus-addressing. 
What plus-addressing means is that you can append a text string to your 
e-mail address, and GMail will deliver the e-mail to you. So if your address 
is informationtrapping@gmail.com, you can use a plus sign (+) to put a string 
between informationtrapping and @gmail.com, like this:
informationtrapping+hello@gmail.com 
And you can even use several plus signs in a row, like this:
informationtrapping+I+went+to+Quiznos+for+dinner@gmail.com 
That may be a silly example, but what it shows is that for every service from 
which you get an alert, such as GoogleAlert, Trackle, Watch That Page, and 
so on, you can set a unique address using plus-addressing. Which makes 
filtering very simple: as soon as the filter hits the address, it performs the 
action you specify. (And incidentally, if you start getting spam to one of 
those addresses, you’ll know where it originated and you’ll be able to dump 
those e-mails right into the bit bucket.) 
Tip
For some reason, if you go into your GMail account and try to 
send yourself an e-mail using plus-addressing, it won’t work: the 
e-mail will bounce. So if you want to play with this feature, be sure 
to send yourself an e-mail from outside the GMail system. 
Of course, filtering won’t work every time. Sometimes you’ll be looking for 
keywords. Sometimes you’ll be looking for where an e-mail came from. And 
sometimes alert services (like Google’s e-mail alerts) don’t support e-mail 
Introducing GMail

222
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
addresses with plus signs in them. In these cases, you need to look at more of 
GMail’s filtering options. 
Filtering with GMail
Before you get into the filtering, take a look at the e-mail you want to filter. 
What can you filter on? For example, Google Alerts have “Google Alert” in 
the title and the keywords for which you’re searching. EZBoard notifica-
tions come from EZBoard.com. In those cases, you can filter on the Subject 
and the From lines. And, of course, if you created a unique e-mail address 
with plus-addressing, you can filter on that as well. Keep an eye out for pat-
terns in the header; they’re easy to manage.
To access GMail’s filtering, choose the “Create a filter” link in the fairly tiny 
type at the top of your page. A screen displays that looks like Figure 10.2. 
Figure 10.2 The first step in using GMail to construct filters.
Note that here you’re only specifying what to filter for. What happens when 
the filter is activated is for the next panel. 
If you’re filtering by From or To addresses and don’t want to filter on an 
entire address, search for the strings on either side of the at sign (@). For 
example, if you’re filtering on theexample@example.com, you could filter 
either for theexample, or example.com. 
If you want to filter by subject line, bear in mind that you don’t have to have 
the words in the same order as the subject line. So if you want to filter on 
the subject Google Alert - Monty Python you could filter for Alert Google 
Monty Python and it would match. 

223
You can also filter for the presence or absence of keywords, and whether or not 
the e-mail has attachments. (I have yet to find this feature useful for informa-
tion trapping, but I do find it useful in this age of viruses that come in attach-
ments. If you’re very nervous about receiving attachments, you can have a 
filter that moves any e-mails with attachments straight into the trash.) 
Tip
Speaking of match, notice the Test Search button at the bottom 
of the filter setup screen. If you click this button, it will run your 
search against your current inbox and show you what things 
match your search. I recommend doing this early and often. Test 
your filters as you’re building them, and you won’t get any un-
pleasant surprises later! 
I recommend keeping your filters as simple as possible. If I’m getting a 
Google alert for autism developments, and the Subject header is Google 
Alert - Autism Developments, I might only filter for the words Google Alert 
Autism. If that’s my only Google Alert (extremely unlikely, but possible), I 
would filter only for Google Alert. That’s because the simpler my filter is, 
the less likely it’s going to break because of the title changing, the subject 
getting cut off by the mailer, or some other odd happening. 
If you set up enough e-mail alerts, your filters will break at some point. 
However, if you match the minimum amount of information to make the 
filter work, your filter has less chance of breaking. 
Once you have a filter set up and you’ve tested it, you want to click the Next 
Step button. A page displays showing you the actions that can happen once 
an item hits a filter (Figure 10.3). 
Figure 10.3 You can choose any of the five actions shown here.
Filtering with GMail

224
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
Options include the following:
. 
Skip the Inbox. Drop it directly in your archive, bypassing the Inbox 
and putting the message in the All Mail inbox. Handy when you want 
to keep an eye on a certain subject, but you’re not interested in imme-
diately reviewing every item that comes your way. 
. 
Star It. Put a star on it so that it grabs your attention and also moves 
it to the Starred message list. 
. 
Apply the Label. Labels are for dividing up messages. Think of them 
as message folders, or as tags for your e-mail. From this action list, 
you can also generate new labels. I recommend one label per topic. 
For example, maybe you’re monitoring PubMed and Google News 
for autism. You’re more interested in the scientific research from 
PubMed. So you’d label both of them autism, move one to the archive, 
and star the other one so that it gets your attention. 
Tip
Yes, you can apply multiple actions to one filter. You can’t do two 
things that would cancel each other out, such as move it to the 
archive and then move it to the trash, but you can move it to the 
archive and apply a label, for example, or apply a label and then 
forward the mail to a different e-mail address. 
. 
Forward It. Forward the e-mail to a specified address. Note this is 
not the same as using a POP client to download your GMail—we’ll 
cover that momentarily. 
. 
Delete It. Throw it away! 
With regard to information trapping, filters are probably GMail’s most 
important feature. But there are other settings on GMail you may want to 
tweak, especially if you want to download your e-mail. 
POP downloading and other GMail settings 
To access GMail’s other settings, click the Settings link on the upper-right of 
your mailbox. A page of settings divided into tabs displays (Figure 10.4):
. 
The General tab is mostly cosmetic. How many Conversations do you 
want to see per page, do you want e-mail snippets showing or not, etc. 
. 
The Accounts tab lets you use a different From address on your e-mail  
(you will have to verify that address before you can change it). 

225
. 
The Labels tab lets you generate new labels, rename labels, and 
remove labels.
. 
The Filters tab lets you filter your messages (we’ve looked at that 
already). 
. 
The Forwarding and POP tab lets you either forward all your e-mail 
(and either archive or trash GMail’s copy) or download your e-mail from 
GMail (and either trash or keep GMail’s copy). Note that you have to 
enable POP forwarding before you can use it. It’s disabled by default. 
Should you enable POP or not? If you’d rather keep your e-mail archived on 
your own computer, either for security reasons or because your own e-mail 
program has a more sophisticated filter, you should probably enable POP and 
then delete your messages from GMail. If you instead work from several differ-
ent computers and never know where you’ll be getting your mail next, make 
sure you’re not using POP and are just accessing your mail from the Web.
Figure 10.4 GMail offers several tabs of settings. 
Filtering with GMail

226
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
You know your situation better than I do, so take a few minutes and adjust 
the GMail settings in the way that works best for you. From there we get 
into serious stuff: saving, moving around, and deleting messages. 
Forwarding, archiving, and deleting messages 
How do you know what to forward, what to archive, and what to delete? 
And how do you keep all that stuff you want to save without going crazy? 
Forwarding
Here’s how I handle it: For e-mail that I consider important, I set up filters 
to forward those messages to my cell phone, while keeping them on GMail 
so that I can act on them later. That way, when I’m not in front of a com-
puter, I can keep a heads-up idea in mind of things I should really address 
immediately. I don’t try to answer all my mail from my phone—I use it just 
as an alerting service. Of course, if I’m monitoring something for friends or 
clients, I usually end up forwarding a lot to them, too, although I wouldn’t 
do this via a filter without their permission. 
You should be a lot more conservative about forwarding to other people 
than forwarding to yourself. You know how much information you can 
handle. On the other hand, you don’t want to flood your Mom or best buddy 
or client with a bunch of information they don’t have time to review. 
Archiving
GMail offers you over two gigabytes of storage. There’s no real reason for 
you to throw anything away. That doesn’t give you carte blanche to just 
dump your messages in there every which way. Use the organizing feature 
GMail offers: Labels. 
Labels are located on the left of the main page. You can edit them from there 
or from the Settings page. You can also use filters to automatically apply 
labels to certain e-mails as they’re coming in. 
I strongly urge you to take a little time and think of an organizing theme 
for your labels now. If I were monitoring several topics, I might create a 
label for each topic. If I were just monitoring one topic, I might either put 
everything in one label or break out my labels by the services I was monitor-
ing (Google Alerts, Watch That Page, and so on). It doesn’t matter what you 
choose as long as it makes sense to you and you can apply it consistently as 
you generate filters. 

227
Now, knowing Google, you might suspect that GMail has a very good search 
offering. And it does. Knowing that, you may wonder why it’s important to 
organize your mail. Can’t you just search for what you want after the fact? 
To search for what you want, you have to know what to look for, and some-
times you just can’t remember the right keyword. In this case, you have to 
browse through your e-mail until you find what you need. If you’ve orga-
nized your e-mails as you go, however, this is so much easier. There also will 
be times when you don’t need to search but just need to browse through the 
e-mail to get a sense of what you’ve got. Having the mail organized into 
discernible topics makes it easier. And organizing your e-mail means that 
making sure it stays pruned and limited is less important. 
Deleting
I’m not saying never delete any e-mail. There always will be times when you 
come across a false positive or a bit of junk or something that will otherwise 
have nothing to do with your e-mail. But GMail’s amount of storage means 
that, if sufficiently organized, you can store and easily move through huge 
amounts of information. Two gigabytes’ worth of text is an awful lot of text!
Of course, you won’t always find what you’re looking for by browsing. That’s 
when you’ve got to search. 
Searching 
With GMail, the best way to search is using the Advanced Search form. It 
doesn’t take up a lot of room, it’s easy to understand, and there are a couple 
of features that make it easier to search from the Advanced Search form. 
Look for the “Show search options” link at the top of your mailbox page 
next to the query box.
The Advanced Search form looks like Figure 10.5. 
Figure 10.5 GMail’s advanced search options.
Filtering with GMail

228
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
Yes, e-mail is great for alerts, but you may not have realized that it’s also great for getting RSS feeds!
Many people prefer to keep their RSS feeds separate from their e-mail. They see it as a different 
tool requiring different attention. Other people don’t want to have to learn yet another tool, get 
their information from yet another place, and would rather look at their RSS feeds at the same 
time using the same tools and their e-mail. 
These viewpoints aren’t right or wrong; they’re just viewpoints. You may find that you prefer 
reading your RSS feeds in e-mail. In this case, I have two sets of tools for you to try. One is for 
Outlook, and one is for any kind of e-mail program. 
You may also want to take a look at GMail’s RSS feed offerings. Not all of GMail’s accounts offer 
RSS feed readings, which it calls “Web Clips.” To see if Web Clips are offered by your account, 
click the Settings link and look for a Web Clips tab. Web Clips are shown across the top of the 
inbox, one at a time, and therefore aren’t suitable for heavy-duty information trapping. But if 
you’re looking for a way to casually keep up with one or two feeds, this might be worth a try. 
Reading RSS Feeds in Outlook 
If you use Outlook, you’re in luck. Outlook is by far the most popular e-mail program and 
therefore has a lot of add-ins available. If you want to try reading your RSS feeds in e-mail, take 
a look at the following:
•	
intraVnews (intravnews.com/) version 1.12 (as of this writing) is free for personal use or for 
use within charities and non-profits. 
•	
Attensa (attensa.com) looks to be fairly new, but with lots of developing going on.  
The features for this Outlook-based feed reader include integration with the tagging site 
del.icio.us. 
Going from RSS to E-Mail 

229
Non-Platform-Specific RSS to E-Mail Services
Don’t have Outlook? Want to try reading RSS feeds in GMail? Great! 
•	
RSSFwd (rssfwd.com/), a free service, asks you to provide the feed to which you want 
to subscribe. Then it shows you what the feed will look like, asks you for an e-mail, and 
confirms the e-mail. You’ll get new items as they’re added to the RSS feeds. 
•	
RMail (r-mail.org/) has a slightly different format. You enter an e-mail address and the URL 
to which you want to subscribe, and you’ll be added to the list. You can also see the most 
popular feeds that are already being subscribed to. Also free. 
There’s no law that says you have to receive all your RSS feeds by e-mail. There may be a few 
particularly important ones that you want to receive via e-mail, or even a few really important 
ones that you want to receive via a message on your cell phone. (You can find more information 
about mobile information trapping in the bonus chapter beginning on page A1. If the idea of 
reading RSS feeds via e-mail intrigues you, try viewing a few and see how you like it. You might 
want to switch completely to e-mail! 
 
Filtering with GMail

230
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
As you can see, the form is pretty straightforward. You can search by the To 
and From headers, by subject, and by what words are and aren’t in the mes-
sage. You can also search by date and whether or not the message has attach-
ments. The drop-down menu lets you limit your message to a particular part 
of your e-mail, including labeled e-mail! This is just one more reason to make 
sure to organize your messages; it makes them much easier to search. 
Let’s consider a searching strategy for your messages. Because you’re most 
likely going to be searching titles and snippets that have been e-mailed to 
you from alert services, you want to take a more general approach to the 
search than you would with a full-text search engine. However, you should 
take advantage of the special syntax whenever you can to help narrow your 
search. Are you sure it was a Google alert? Include Google in the subject. Are 
you sure that it had the word “green” in it? Search for the word green. Use 
as many of the small clues as you can remember, and then remove them one 
by one, because your memory may not be exact. 
If you’re used to using client-side e-mail programs such as Eudora or Out-
look, GMail will take a little getting used to at first. But if you move around 
a lot and access your e-mail from several different computers, I think you’ll 
appreciate the ability to access GMail from pretty much everywhere. The 
filters and spam filtering are very useful, too. 
GMail has attracted a lot of interest in the online community, both for its 
affiliation with Google and for its large storage capacities. Many develop-
ers have made their own useful tools and gizmos to use in association with 
GMail. Some of these you might find useful; let’s take a look. 
A GMail Toolbox
Lots of outfits have come up with various GMail tools to help extend or 
change the GMail experience. Some of these tools are offered by Google, 
but most of them are not. The following are just a few of the tools you can 
add to your GMail experience, and a couple of Web sites that will keep you 
up to date on new ones: 
. 
GMail Notifier (toolbar.google.com/gmail-helper/). This tool sits in your 
system tray and pops up a little notifier whenever you get an e-mail. Cre-
ated by Google, GMail Notifier must be downloaded. It requires either 
Windows 2000 or XP or Mac OS X 10.3.8 or later (including Tiger). 

231
. 
GMail Loader (marklyon.org/gmail/). Maybe you like GMail so 
much you want to switch ALL your e-mail to it. And now maybe 
you’re wondering how you’re actually going to do that. You’re in luck. 
The GMail Loader will work with several types of e-mail programs 
and get them into GMail. This is a downloaded product; you have to 
be fairly computer-savvy to work with it. 
. 
GMail Drive (viksoe.dk/code/gmail.htm). What’s the point in hav-
ing over two gigabytes of storage if you can’t use it? GMail Drive lets 
you treat GMail like another drive on your computer. You have to be 
somewhat Windows-savvy to use this add-on. 
. 
GMail Preview Bubbles (persistent.info/archives/2005/08/20/
gmail-preview-bubbles). If you use Firefox and Greasemonkey, this 
is the extension for you. This Greasemonkey extension displays a 
popup “bubble” of message content when you mouse over it. If you 
need to quickly scan through messages, this tool provides a very 
cool way to do it. 
. 
gMailto Bookmarklet (sippey.typepad.com/filtered/2004/06/gmailto_
bookmar.html). Bookmarklets, small bits of JavaScript in bookmark 
form, perform all sorts of handy functions. This one gives you a one-
click way to open an outgoing message in GMail. Surfing around, see 
something interesting, and want to e-mail a friend about it? No prob-
lem! That’s what this bookmarklet is for. 
. 
GMail Tools (gmailtools.com/). GMail Tools is a blog that keeps up 
with the latest tools and tricks—and sometimes available invites—
for GMail. 
. 
GMail Tips (http://gmailtips.com/). Whether you’re new to the world 
of Web-based e-mail or just want to learn how to use GMail as effi-
ciently as possible, you’ll appreciate GMail Tips. It offers over 40 tips 
on how to use all aspects of GMail more effectively. If you want more 
in-depth instructions on how to make the most of GMail, this is the 
place. Wow, a whole chapter on GMail! 
A GMail Toolbox

232
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
Other E-Mail Options
Of course, maybe you’re not interested in using GMail. Maybe you don’t 
think it’s that great. Maybe you’re not interested in Web-based e-mail read-
ers. Maybe you want to try something besides GMail. I don’t want to leave 
you out in the cold, so let me make a few suggestions. 
For the most part, you have two e-mail options—Web-based (everything 
happens on the Web, so it doesn’t matter which computer you’re using or 
what operating system it’s using) and client-based (the e-mail program sits 
on your computer and therefore you have to be at that computer to access 
your e-mail). Sometimes a solution can be both, especially if you use differ-
ent computers between work and home. You can access your mail via the 
Web, and then come home and download it to your computer. 
Web-based e-mail
Gmail isn’t the end of all available Web-based mail services. In fact, it’s 
barely the beginning. Several search engines and many, many independent 
companies offer Web-based e-mail. Take a look at Yahoo’s mail offering, 
and then check with your ISP.
. 
Yahoo Mail (mail.yahoo.com). Yahoo doesn’t offer as much storage 
as GMail does (as of this writing, it has only 1GB of storage) but it 
does offer spam and virus protection, as well as the ability to send 
Yahoo Alerts to your cell phone. And while you can only set up to 15 
filters, you can block up to 500 addresses. 
. 
Your ISP. Check and see if your ISP offers the ability to read mail 
online—most of them do. Your ISP’s home page should let you know 
whether it offers this feature. Often it’s linked from the front page 
(Figure 10.6). 
I find this useful for when I’m away from home and I’ve just got to 
check on something. I go to a secure computer, log in to my e-mail, 
log out, and feel secure in the knowledge that I haven’t deleted my  
e-mail—I’ve just looked at it. The message I looked at will still be 
there when I go to my main computer later and download my mail. 

233
Client-side e-mail
It seems that the most popular client-side e-mail reader is Outlook, based 
on the number of tools that are developed for it. But there are other readers 
available as well: 
. 
Eudora (Eudora.com). One of the granddaddies of e-mail programs, 
I’ve been using it for well over ten years. It has integrated protection 
against spam and phishing, and a fairly powerful set of filtering tools. 
The downside is that it’s less popular than Outlook and has fewer 
people developing for it. 
. 
Thunderbird (mozilla.org/products/thunderbird/). If you’re already 
using Mozilla or Firefox, you may want to take a look at Thunderbird, 
brought to you by Mozilla. It’s a free, open-source program and, like 
Outlook, it has a lot of developers writing for it. You can get an idea 
of what extensions are available for Thunderbird at addons.mozilla.
org/extensions/?application=thunderbird. 
. 
Pegasus (pmail.com/). Though the Pegasus mail program is not as 
well-known as other e-mail programs, it’s still fifteen years old. Pega-
sus is an excellent choice for older computers and operating systems 
that might not be able to handle the latest and greatest e-mail clients. 
It also has an extremely powerful filter system, and it’s free. If you 
want very strong filters or you want an e-mail client that gives you 
more opportunity to look under the hood, Pegasus is for you. 
Figure 10.6
EarthLink lets you 
check e-mail from any 
computer.
Figure 10.6
EarthLink lets you 
check e-mail from any 
computer.
Other E-Mail Options

234
chapter 10    Filtering the Inflow
Moving On. . . 
Obviously, finding and setting up the information streams you need is the 
first part of information trapping. But the second part, which we’ve gotten 
into with this chapter, is management. How do you organize what you find? 
How do you make sure it gets your attention? When do you delete it (or 
should you ever delete it)? 
Your e-mail box will be an important part of managing the information as it 
flows to you. Though Gmail is a free service, it offers a variety of filters, features, 
and add-ons that will help you track, and keep, the information you want. 
But when you use a Web-based or client-based e-mail service, you’re sitting in 
front of a computer. What do you do when you’re on the road, with no laptop, 
no WiFi, nothing but your phone? If you want to learn how you can be an 
information trapper on the go, see the bonus chapter beginning on page A1.

Case Studies 
11

236
chapter 11    Case Studies 
Most of this book so far has been discussion of tools—things that you can 
use to trap information better. 
But you may be at the point where having the tools is all very well, but you 
need a more concrete sense of when and how you might want to use them. 
That’s what this chapter is all about. We look at two hypothetical case stud-
ies: one for finding external information, such as news, reports, discussions, 
and so on, and one for finding internal information, such as links and criti-
cal comments. 
As you might imagine, setting up a thorough set of information traps can 
take a lot of hours and touch on as many as two or three hundred resources. 
In one ongoing research job I do, I monitor over 800 separate pages and 
1,500 different RSS feeds. The case studies in this chapter touch on only the 
highlights, or mention resources that might require a certain amount of 
caution or query revision. If you find your own trap-setting involving far 
more resources than the ones in this chapter, good for you! 
Let’s start with Fred, who needs to learn more about outsourcing to Taiwan. 
Fred Learns about Outsourcing to Taiwan
Fred works in a company that makes computer parts. His boss recently 
asked him to investigate the feasibility of outsourcing some of his compa-
ny’s manufacturing work to Taiwan. Fred realizes that what he knows about 
outsourcing to anywhere could fit in an ant’s lunchbox. So while he’s dis-
cussing with his boss and others in the company what their needs are and 
what they hope to accomplish, he sets up several information traps that will 
keep him up to date and inform him about outsourcing. 
Step 1: Generating useful queries
Fred decides to go to a fresh information source—a news search engine—and 
begin experimenting with query words. He heads over to Google News (news.
google.com) and begins generating queries. He discovers that a simple search 
for outsourcing Taiwan yields about 100 results—very manageable—but the 
first ten were published in the last couple of days, meaning he could expect 
five stories a day from this search alone. Fred thinks that may be a little much, 
and besides, the stories don’t actually fit what he’s looking for. He narrows his 
search a little using outsourcing Taiwan manufacturing. 

237
Bingo! He’s halved his results, the first ten results were generated over a couple 
of weeks, and a cursory glance at the page summaries shows that these stories 
are exactly the sort of thing he’s looking for. So he saves that search. After some 
more experimenting, he also settles on the phrase “outsource to Taiwan”, as 
well as the queries “DRAM production” Taiwan, and DRAM outsourcing. 
Fred has generated two searches that address specifically what his boss has 
asked him about. But beyond that he has also generated a search that will 
give him ongoing information about the whole issue of outsourcing to Tai-
wan in the first place, as well as a couple of searches that remove Taiwan 
from the equation and look at the whole issue of computer manufacturing 
and outsourcing in general. 
By monitoring these information traps, Fred will be able to both directly 
answer his boss’s question and perhaps make a few suggestions of his own! 
(Maybe Fred will discover that Taiwan is not the best place to outsource 
some of its manufacturing—maybe it’s India, China, someplace else, or 
nowhere at all.) 
With these queries, Fred begins building his traps by starting at a news 
search engine. 
Step 2: Using news search engines
Fred ponders how urgent his need is to get this information. He finally 
decides that he will have the Google News updates delivered to his cell 
phone, just to give him constant feedback about Taiwan and outsourcing 
in general. The rest of the searches he’ll set up as RSS feeds and specify a 
certain time every morning to go over what’s been delivered to him. 
He stays at Google News, reruns the searches, and takes advantage of the 
option to send the results to his cell phone’s e-mail address. Then he goes 
to Kebberfegg (researchbuzz.org/tools/kebberfegg.com), chooses the News 
option, and one by one generates OPML files for his queries. He then imports 
these files into his newsreader of choice, which happens to be NewsGator, and 
deletes the Google News feeds since he’s already getting them by e-mail. 
Fred now has the cornerstone of his information trapping—fresh informa-
tion being delivered to him from two or three different angles. He will use the 
information that he gains from these searches to tweak his queries over time. 
Perhaps a new company pops up in Taiwan that does what his company is 
Fred Learns about Outsourcing to Taiwan

238
chapter 11    Case Studies 
interested in—he may want to monitor them. Perhaps a new advocacy group 
arises—he’ll want to monitor its activity and news. Fred knows that he’s off 
to a good start, but he also knows that he may have to change his queries and 
direction over time. 
Fred’s next stop is to see if anybody out there is talking about outsourcing 
in Taiwan besides his company. 
Step 3: Doing group and conversation searches 
Fred begins his search at Yahoo Groups. By doing a general search for out-
sourcing, he discovers 508 groups are available! He narrows the search a 
bit to outsourcing manufacturing. He finds a few interesting groups and 
reviews them. One of the groups looks so relevant to his interests that he 
subscribes so that he can read it in its entirety, noting that it has relatively 
low traffic (only a few posts per day). The other two groups are sometimes 
relevant, but not so much that he wants to read them all; they’re pretty busy. 
For those he runs a few searches based on his original queries, and saves the 
results as RSS feeds when that’s an option, and when it isn’t, he notes the 
URLs so that he can send them to a page monitor. 
In other situations, Fred might have found that the groups in which he’s 
interested were private. In these cases, he would have had to subscribe using 
his Yahoo account. But he was lucky enough to find that all the groups in 
which he was interested were publicly available. 
From there, Fred heads to Google Groups. (As you may remember from the 
earlier chapters, Google Groups is a combination of Usenet, a very large set 
of public discussion lists, and Google’s own discussion groups.) A search of 
Google Groups’ entire index for Taiwan outsourcing brings mixed results. 
On one hand, he’s finding some good results. On the other hand, he’s find-
ing too many of them and too much spam. Fred decides to look for indi-
vidual groups instead. If Fred had found a satisfying and relevant number 
of search results, he could have chosen to have search results for the entire 
index delivered to him as e-mail alerts. 
One step forward. . .
Fred remembers that Google Groups offers far fewer lists than Yahoo 
Groups does, and risks a search on a single word: outsourcing. He finds just 
150 results, and after some investigating picks five that he wants to monitor. 

239
All the groups that he wants to monitor are extremely relevant to his inter-
ests and have a low number of members (fewer than 50 in each group) so he 
picks up the RSS feed for each group and adds it to NewsGator. 
So far Fred has not deviated very much from the original queries that he 
picked up from his news searches. That’s because he has been searching 
mostly for groups, and not for conversations within those groups. Now 
Fred is moving to search online message boards (Web sites that contain 
online discussion forums), and may discover that his searches will have to 
be altered for conversational style. 
Fred goes to Yuku (yuku.com), a search engine for online message boards. He 
cautiously starts his search using the word outsourcing but gets no results. He 
searches for Taiwan, but gets only a few results that don’t seem related to busi-
ness. A search for business brings hundreds of results, all far too general.
Fred ponders. How would he pose the issue that he’s investigating in an online 
bulletin board? After a few moments he comes up with this question: 
How do I begin outsourcing in my computer manufacturing business? 
. . .two steps back?
From that question he developed a new query: “begin outsourcing” and 
tried that. This query, while admirably specific, provided no results. He 
gave up and moved on to a different search. 
Not all resources will provide useful traps to all researchers. Fred tried his 
original queries and then generated some new ones that seemed more appro-
priate to his research. While his results were better—a key indicator that his 
query revision was working—they were still not useful to his search. At this 
point, he could decide to let things lie and move on to the next resource, or 
continue to revise his query. In this case, he decided to move on. 
Fred has a couple of choices. He can either try to search Google or Yahoo for 
more forums, using his query words and words that will be more likely to 
find forums and mailing lists (words like forums, posting, thread, earlier, 
and later). Depending on how much time he has to set up his traps and how 
much time he has committed to reviewing them, he could decide to stick 
with the “big two”—Yahoo Groups and Google Groups—or try to find more 
forums related to his interests. 
Fred Learns about Outsourcing to Taiwan

240
chapter 11    Case Studies 
At this point, Fred has a flow of news stories related to his interest and a 
somewhat more limited flow of discussion groups talking about his inter-
est. His next task is to find Web sites dedicated to the topic in which he’s 
interested and set up page monitors. 
Step 4: Monitoring pages
Fred knows that most of the news sources he’s monitoring are general. His 
next task is to find Web sites that are more oriented toward outsourcing spe-
cifically and see if he can integrate any of them into his information traps. 
He starts with the Yahoo Directory (dir.yahoo.com). Knowing that Yahoo’s 
directory is not a list of sites and is more of a subject index, he starts again 
with a single-word search query—outsourcing. He finds the relevant cat-
egory and looks at the list of available sites. He finds half-a-dozen that seem 
to have potential and spends some time reviewing them. In some cases, he 
decides to monitor the front page. In other cases, he decides to monitor a 
different page on the site. And in one case, he decides to monitor three dif-
ferent pages on one site—the front page, the news release page, and the page 
of a journal relevant to outsourcing that is hosted on the site. 
From there he moves to the Open Directory (dmoz.org) and tries the same 
thing, finding a few more useful pages. He doesn’t feel, however, that he’s 
getting full coverage of the outsourcing industry, especially as it relates to 
Taiwan. So he goes to Google and tries a specific search based on the search 
that failed when searching forums: “begin outsourcing” advice. He gets 
371 results and is able to narrow that down to 10 pages to monitor what he 
did not find through the directory. He’s now more comfortable that he’s 
getting complete coverage. 
Many information trappers might stop here, believing they’re well on their 
way to becoming informed. In Fred’s case, however, there’s one more cat-
egory of resource that he wants to cover. 
Step 5: Monitoring stocks 
In his research into outsourcing, Fred sees some publicly owned companies 
whose names are coming up over and over again. These companies have 
made decisions about outsourcing to Asia—some of them are including it in 
their strategies, some have pledged never to do it, and so on. Because Fred 

241
is interested in outsourcing as a possible direction for his company, he’s 
interested in the fortunes of these companies. 
Fred wants to monitor a specific type of data that’s found on the Internet. In 
this case, it’s stock performance. Perhaps in your case it will be something 
else. Fred probably has done various kinds of stock monitoring before. 
Perhaps his company even subscribes to an information service. If it does 
not, Fred could go to Yahoo Finance, for example (finance.yahoo.com) and 
either set alerts for certain companies or subscribe to their RSS feeds. In 
any case, such a specific type of information doesn’t have to be part of the 
information trapping process, but it’s relevant to Fred and his strategy. 
Fred’s future strategy
At the conclusion of his work, Fred has 75 or so feeds in his reader, several 
e-mail alerts set up, and a hundred or so pages in a page monitor. He has 
made his boss aware of his traps and will be spending an hour or so in the 
morning reviewing them before proceeding with the rest of the day’s work. 
Fred has a base of constantly updating data to sift through as he builds his 
report about outsourcing in Taiwan. How long he uses this information 
depends on when his report is due, whether or not his boss wants him to 
treat his report as an organic, ever-changing document, the directions his 
research takes him, and so on. 
In the case of Fred, most of the information he’s looking for is external—it’s 
not directly related to his company. In Ethel’s case, however, there’s a need 
for tracking more internal information. 
Ethel Tracks a Blog
Ethel has a blog that she wants to use to make herself better known in the com-
munity. She understands that she’ll need to create good content, make sure 
she’s publishing an RSS feed, and submit her site to search engines. Beyond that 
she wants to see who is linking to her site and what is being said about her site. 
Unlike Fred, who is monitoring information for a report that will one day 
end (ostensibly), Ethel is setting up her information traps to be monitored 
on a more-or-less perpetual basis. And unlike Fred, Ethel will be looking 
at resources like blogs, so she will probably have more luck with discussion 
groups, and may not need to monitor news at all. However, like Fred, her 
Ethel Tracks a Blog

242
chapter 11    Case Studies 
first step will be to figure out the backlinks and keywords for which she 
should be monitoring. 
Step 1: Determining backlinks and keywords 
Ethel’s blog is a consumer advocacy site called “ICalledandAsked.com.” That’s 
both the name and URL of the site. The name is unique enough that she’ll be 
able to use it in her trapping. If she had gone with a different name—”I Don’t 
Know”—she might have had to confine herself to monitoring only for her blog’s 
URL. If her name is uncommon enough, she might be able to monitor for that 
as well. “Ethel Mae Potter” is probably unique enough.
Ethel has three main things she can monitor: the name of her site, the URL 
of her site, and her own name. Is there anything else she should add? It 
depends on what’s on her site. If she has a tool that other sites might link 
to—a dictionary, a featured article, a database of information—she could 
track that URL as well. If she doesn’t, it’s probably best to monitor just the 
URL of the home page. 
Now that Ethel knows what she’s looking for, she has to figure out where to 
look for it. 
Step 2: Choosing resources to search
Fred, seeking external information, had a good sense of where that infor-
mation was located. He was looking for credible information, data, and 
experiences. It was easy for him to determine where to look. 
Ethel, on the other hand, is seeking internally focused information—links 
to her blog, mentions of its name, and mentions of her name. Where she 
looks is based on information about herself. Is she famous? Is she contro-
versial? Is she known from some other arena? 
It’s entirely possible that for the purposes of monitoring information, Ethel 
is neutral—neither known nor unknown, controversial or not. That’s the 
case we’re going to look at here. 
Step 3: Monitoring blogs
Because Ethel is not particularly famous or infamous, she decides to start 
her monitoring with blogs. Most blog readers read other blogs, so blog 
search engines are a good place to track mentions. 

243
Ethel starts with Feedster (feedster.com), and begins the process of tracking 
her name, her URL, and her site’s name. She decides to go with all RSS feed 
alerts in her blog searches—she’s not interested in getting any notifications 
via e-mail. After she’s set up these feeds, she wonders if she should be moni-
toring blogs for mention of her site’s theme—consumer advocacy. After all, 
if she finds relevant blogs, she could ask them for links or begin a dialogue 
with them. She does a quick search for “consumer advocacy” and finds a 
small number of results scattered over a couple of weeks. Pleased, she adds 
these to her RSS feeds. 
Continuing her search, Ethel visits some other blog search engines, such 
as Technorati (technorati.com) and Google blogs (blogsearch.google.
com/), and generates several more feeds to add to her feed reader. With 
those added, she’s confident that she’ll be notified quickly whenever some-
one mentions her or links to her blog. She’ll also have several chances to 
build her profile in the community by reading and responding to consumer 
advocacy posts on other blogs. If she goes a step further and registers with 
Technorati, she’ll be able to get even more information about who’s linking 
to her blog.
Of course, blogs are not the only place where people discuss and link to 
things. There’s group discussion, as well. 
Tip
When Fred was setting up information traps, he was able to 
evaluate his queries by the initial number of results he was getting. 
Ethel won’t be able to do that in the searches for her name or her 
blog’s URL. If she’s only started, she might not have anyone link-
ing to her at all! Ethel will have to set up many of her initial traps 
on faith and see what kind of results she gets. If she’s getting too 
many mentions to keep up with, she may have to adjust her traps 
to exclude popular results (like from NewsIsFree, newsisfree.com) 
or try some other adjustment to cut down the flow. 
Step 4: Monitoring group discussions 
Ethel, like Fred, proceeds to Google Groups and Yahoo Groups to set 
some traps. Yahoo Groups is a tough one, because she can’t search the 
entire database at one time, but has to pick groups that she thinks would 
mention her blog or her topic of interest. (Ethel can do a Yahoo Groups 
Ethel Tracks a Blog

244
chapter 11    Case Studies 
search for communities containing topics relevant to her blog, but she 
can’t do searches for messages containing topics relevant to her blog.) 
She finds a couple of active groups for consumer advocacy and decides to 
subscribe to them, both to monitor for mentions of her blog and to find bits 
of news that might make worthy blog items. 
Google Groups is much easier for her. She sets up monitors for her name 
and the name of her blog, but decides against monitoring for the phrase 
“consumer advocacy” after she finds neither groups nor good search results 
that represent conversations in which she wants to get involved. 
Ethel spends some time looking for online forums as well (using the tech-
niques used by Fred earlier in the chapter) and does find some boards that 
catch her interest. Since Ethel is monitoring issues that are more consumer-
level, it makes sense that she might get more use from online discussion 
boards. Her problem is making sure that she doesn’t get overwhelmed with 
the number of results that she gets. 
Step 5: Monitoring search engines
Ethel has to use search engines to set up some traps, but not for searching for 
consumer advocacy. Instead, she’ll need to use the search engines to monitor 
for links to her site. She goes to Yahoo, Google, and MSN and searches for 
links to her site as well as the name of her site. She then sets these searches up 
as RSS feeds when that’s an option, and alerts when it isn’t. 
Consumer advocacy is too broad a topic to include in a search engine. But Ethel 
could monitor for her name, as well as her blog’s name. This may have to be 
adjusted over time if another famous Ethel Mae Potter appears on the scene. 
Ethel could, if she wanted, access Yahoo and the Open Directory and find 
consumer advocacy sites that she could cull for news and posts. However, 
she wants to concentrate on blog content to build that community first, so 
she skips those resources. Her last big decision is whether or not she should 
monitor news search engines. 
Step 6: Deciding whether to monitor news 
In Fred’s case, monitoring news was the cornerstone of his strategy. He 
needed fresh data and statistics about outsourcing. Since Ethel’s research is 
more personal and site-focused, monitoring news is less of an issue for her. 

245
There are three scenarios, however, in which she would want to monitor news:
. 
She is actively courting mentions from the media—by putting out 
press releases, having herself listed in expert directories, and so on. 
In this case, Ethel would want to monitor news search engines for her 
name and the name of her blog. 
. 
She is trying to build journalist awareness in a more low-key way—for 
instance, by monitoring news search engines for her topic of inter-
est and then contacting the journalist with comments, additional 
resources, or pointers to her blog. 
. 
She wants to use the news search engines to find bits of interest for 
her blog. Using news search engines to find stories to add to the blog 
is better than using general search engines—the stories are fresher, 
flow is lower, and generally they’re easier to target. 
Ethel does have plans to start issuing press releases, so she monitors for her 
name and her blog’s name. In this one case, she generates e-mail alerts and 
has them sent to her phone. She wants to be able to react quickly when a 
journalist mentions her in a story or her press release gets republished. All 
her other monitoring is done strictly by RSS feed. 
Ethel faces the future
Ethel’s needs are somewhat more basic than Fred’s, but she will also have to 
be ready to tweak and change her traps in the future. She may become well 
known for her commentary on one particular topic, in which case she’ll 
need to monitor that topic. She may develop a positive (or adversarial) rela-
tionship with a retail company over its consumer-relations policies, and 
decide she wants to monitor its press releases. It’s even possible that a par-
ticular iteration of her name becomes prevalent (Ethel Mae P., for example) 
and she’ll have to adjust her traps to accommodate that. As she realizes her 
goal of increasing her profile in the community and the blogosphere, her 
traps will have to be adjusted to reflect that. 
At the moment, Ethel is committed to review her traps three times a week, 
with ongoing updates to the traps as necessary. Her timeline is open-ended; 
she has no plans to end the monitoring at all.
Ethel Tracks a Blog

246
chapter 11    Case Studies 
Different Strokes
As you can see from these two case studies, different needs are going to use dif-
ferent resources. A resource that’s essential to one trapper may be all but useless 
to another. That’s the first thing to remember. The second thing to remember 
is that your initial set of traps is not static. To keep up with the changes in your 
topic, be it internal or external, you will have to change them over time. 
In a perfect world, you would be able to monitor all traps indefinitely. You 
would never have to back off, or do other things, or drop your topic, or 
anything. In that world you could let everything putter forever. But it isn’t 
a perfect world, so in addition to knowing what to look for and how to look 
for it, you also need to know how to shut things off. 
Shutting Off the Flow 
The project is done. Or another project is coming along and you’re drown-
ing in work. Or some emergency has occurred and you need to stop moni-
toring your traps right now. In the cases where you have to put your trapper 
hat aside for the moment, there are several different ways you can back out 
of information monitoring, depending on what you’re monitoring. 
Shutting down RSS
Shutting down RSS, if you’re using a feed reader, is no big deal. Just stop 
reading the feed. Preparing it so that you have a way back in is a little 
tougher. A lot of news is going to go by while you’re preoccupied. Consider 
using Blogdigger (blogdigger.com) to save old posts from RSS feeds, but 
remember it’s not a panacea—if you leave an RSS feed unread for more than 
30 days or so, you’re going to leave some things unfound and unread no 
matter what happens. 
Shutting down e-mail 
You have two options for shutting down e-mail, and they both involve filters.
The first way is to filter all your mail straight into an archive. That way you’ll 
have it when you need it. However, some old alerts, especially for news 
searches, will get too old to be found in 30 days or so. Most news search 

247
engines don’t keep archives for more than about 30 days, and most online 
news outlets also have a limit to how long they keep their stories online. 
The second way is to filter your alerts straight into the garbage. If you’re sure 
that you won’t be able to read your alerts for a long time, or you’re not quite 
finished with the topic (so you don’t want to unsubscribe from the alerts 
completely), filter into the garbage. 
You might be thinking, “Ah, that’s not much different from just deleting 
them from my inbox!” It is. You’ll find that the unused, unneeded alerts 
will drown out the current work you’re trying to do. Go ahead and take the 
time to remove the alerts from your main e-mail. It will make it a lot easier 
to pay attention to your current tasks. 
Shutting down page monitors
If you are using WebSite-Watcher or another client-side page monitor, shut-
ting down your page monitors is as easy as never activating that software 
again. This simplicity comes with a tremendous disadvantage, however. 
You can’t keep track of page changes as they occur over time. 
With Web-based monitors that send you results by e-mail, it’s different. You 
can filter those just as you filter e-mail. And you can keep track of several 
changes that appear over time. But like regular e-mail alerts, be sure to take 
the time to filter the unneeded alerts where they need to go—either into the 
garbage or into the archives. 
Branching Out from These Basic Patterns
The purpose of this chapter has been to give you a bird’s eye view of how 
people in two different situations might use the tools that we’ve discussed 
so far in this book. While you don’t have to follow these steps exactly (and, 
indeed, lots of references to smaller resources have been left out) this should 
give you a basic pattern on which to base your own trapping strategy. Build 
on it from there. 
Branching Out from These Basic Patterns

This page intentionally left blank 

12
Organizing  
What You Find

250
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
Are you this type? You go to the grocery store. You’re a whiz at doing the 
shopping, finding all the bargains, and reading all the nutritional labels. 
But when you get home, the groceries end up sitting on the counter forever 
because you never quite get around to putting them away. 
This chapter is for you. 
The most intricate set of information traps in the world will not help you if 
you’re not able to put your hands on the information you need, and organize 
the information you find in a compelling way. In this chapter, we’re going to 
look at strategies—lots of different strategies—for putting your information 
together and saving it. And because most of these strategies involve setting 
up client software on a single computer, we’re going to start with a really 
basic, portable strategy. From there, we’ll look at computer-based organiz-
ing solutions as well as Web-based solutions. 
A Very Simple, Portable Strategy
Most of this chapter is going to cover software that you install on a single 
computer. That’ll suit most people but not be particularly useful to those 
folks who have to move around between computers or check information 
traps in several different places. There are Web-based options as well, but 
for reasons of access or security you may not want to use those. The strategy 
I’m going to outline here is really step one—a ground-level option to help 
you get started. Later we’ll get into more involved options.
The beauty of using a text editor
The most basic, extremely simple organizer is just a text editor. Its big pro 
is that plain ASCII text files are compatible with just about everything (and 
they stay compatible—ten years from now you will still be able to find a text 
editor for your ASCII files). Furthermore you can fit a lot of information 
in an ASCII file, and such files are very portable. The big disadvantage is 
that they only store text—they don’t store multimedia, and they don’t store 
fancy formatting (though they will store HTML files; you’ll just see the for-
matting tags instead of the formatting itself). 
Text files are how I do most of my initial information organizing. I use a 
program called UltraEdit; it’s available at ultraedit.com. (In fact, I’m using 

251
it to write this chapter right now!) It allows you to open several different text 
files at a time. What I normally do is create one file for whatever I’m work-
ing on at the moment, leave it open, and toss in information as I find it. That 
way I know that everything I need is in one file at any particular time, and 
from there I can write up a Web page, a report, or an e-mail, and copy-and-
paste it where it needs to go. 
The ability to copy-and-paste my text and not have to worry about format-
ting weirdness is the primary reason I use this method of organizing infor-
mation instead of setting up a Microsoft Word file or some other program 
that uses non-ASCII formatting. 
And text files are usually small because, well, they’re just text. And even 
when you have a big text file they’re usually manageable. I’ve thrown multi-
megabyte files at UltraEdit and they’ve been handled fine. When I need to 
take text files somewhere, I put them on a flash drive (a very small portable 
hard drive; you often see them on keychains or lanyards). I can carry them 
knowing I don’t have to worry about special configuration files or whether 
or not a different computer has a particular program. (If worse comes to 
worst, Firefox will open a text file!) 
UltraEdit isn’t free; it costs $39.95. But if you want to try something a little less 
expensive, there are lots of free text editors available, including EditPad Lite 
(editpadpro.com/editpadlite.html), NoteTab Light (notetab.com/ntl.php), 
Cream (cream.sourceforge.net), and Metapad (liquidninja.com/metapad/). 
Another portable option: wikis
The ability to toss a text file on a flash drive and head out the door makes 
keeping data text-based very useful to me. But there are other portable 
information options as well. There are wikis, which are structures that 
allow groups of people to add content collaboratively. (You can get more 
detail about wikis and their history at en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki.) Can 
you imagine if something like that was portable? TiddlyWiki, also known 
as WikiOnAStick, is available at tiddlywiki.com. It allows you to set up a 
wiki that’s portable on a Flash drive, and which you can open and edit in 
a browser. In fact, the instant you open the TiddlyWiki home page, you’ve 
downloaded the software (Figure 13.1). 
A Very Simple, Portable Strategy

252
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
Maybe you’re not sure about what browsers will be available on a computer 
when you get to where you’re going. In that case you may want to also put 
Portable Firefox (portableapps.com/apps/internet/firefox_portable) on your 
flash drive. Portable Firefox is a version of Firefox designed to be as portable 
as possible. It takes your cookies, bookmarks, and other browser information 
with you as you move around. 
If you don’t want to use client-based software, or at least software that you 
can’t put on a flash drive and carry with you, your organizing options are 
going to be limited to what you can find on the Web, which may carry with 
it security and privacy implications. You won’t have to worry about being 
around your computer all the time, but how you can manipulate your data 
will be limited. 
Let’s look at options beyond simplicity now, starting with more extensive 
client-side software options.
Figure 13.1 TiddlyWiki allows you to create outlines of information and carry them on a flash drive. Acquiring 
it is as simple as visiting the home page.

253
Organizing Information on a Single Machine
If you’re going to be doing all your work on a single machine, the advantage is that 
you’re going to be doing all your work on a single machine. And that means you 
can can “pull back” from the idea of just organizing the information that you’re 
gathering and focus on a bigger idea—indexing the contents of an entire machine! 
From there you can “zoom down” to organizing information on a project level. 
It wasn’t too long ago that trying to search an entire computer was very 
tedious. Windows offers tools that allow you to do it but they’re slow and 
sometimes the search results don’t give you the information you need. 
But now Web-based search engines have begun offering tools that allow you 
to index the contents of your computer (though not all contents—more about 
that shortly). These programs go through your computer rather like a search 
engine “spider” goes through a Web site, and builds up an index of your com-
puter’s contents. They then allow you to search the content by keyword, get-
ting results that sometimes include a preview of the item, when it was created, 
and so on. The search engine technology offered by these indexers allows you 
to do deeper and faster searching on your computer than you can usually 
do with the Windows search utility. We’ll take a look at three of the search 
engine desktop searchers here, from Ask, Google, and Yahoo. 
Unfortunately, these search engines on your desktop can’t index everything. If you’re using 
some super-specialized, very rare software that saves files in its own proprietary format, these 
search engines probably aren’t going to be able to help you. 
What do I mean? All indexing programs can take a survey of what’s on your computer—just a list 
of files—and build an index from that. So if you’re just searching by filename, a desktop indexer 
will probably be able to find the filename no matter what kind of file it is. However, a desktop 
indexer will not be able to go into every kind of file and index every single word. So if you’re 
looking for a phrase within the contents of a file (“Dear Aunt Sally,”) a desktop indexer will be 
able to search only a limited number of the files on your computer to find it. It’s kind of like the 
difference between searching the Yahoo Directory—where you’re searching only file names and 
descriptions—and searching Google, where you’re searching the entire contents of Web pages. 
So which desktop indexers support which files? I’ll note that as we look at each of your options.
What’s Getting Indexed and by Whom? 
Organizing Information on a Single Machine

254
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
Search-engine indexers for your computer
Warning! These indexers are, for the most part, Windows-only. I suspect 
that as the Apple brand has gotten very popular (thanks to the iPod, iTunes, 
and other Applesque innovations), we’ll be seeing a greater effort to support 
those folks who use a Mac. Watch the offerings from the search engines to 
see if they take the lead in offering Mac support for their products. 
Ask Desktop
Ask Desktop (sp.ask.com/docs/desktop/) requires Windows 2000 with 
SP3 or Windows XP on a computer with at least 500MHz and 128 MB 
RAM minimum. 
Once you’ve installed Ask Desktop, as with any other indexer, you’ll have to 
wait for it to finish indexing your computer before you make the most of it. 
When you first install it, Ask will open a browser window and show that it’s 
indexing your computer, along with a notification of the last files indexed 
and how many files total have been indexed. How long the indexing takes 
depends on how large your hard drive is and how good your computer’s 
processor is. My experience is that it usually takes an hour or so. Ask keeps 
refreshing the number of files that you have indexed. 
Once your hard drive is indexed, you can search within your browser, or 
you can open up the client interface. (I prefer the client interface, as it gives 
me access to the preferences for the program, allows me to download the 
latest version, and lets me set the indexing speed for slow or fast.) Searching 
is by simple keyword; you can search the computer, the Web, or your e-mail 
(Outlook or Outlook Express e-mail). When you run a search, your results 
will be divided up into tabs (Figure 13.2). 
Some types of files can be previewed in the right pane. The first tab will 
have all the results, but the other tabs will be divided into folders, pictures, 
applications, and so on. On the left of the screen will be results, while on 
the right is summary information about each file as you click on it. Some 
files, like audio and graphics files, will actually preview in the right side of 
the screen (sounds will play, you’ll get a thumbnail of images, and so on). 
Double-click on the filename to open the file itself. 

255
Ask Desktop supports Microsoft Office versions 2000 and higher (this is 
what Ask claims, but I found that the Desktop Search also indexed files 
made with Office 97), Outlook, Outlook Express, PDF and ZIP files, image 
files (.jpg, .gif, and .png), music files (.mp3, .wma, and .wav), video files 
(.mpg and .wmv), several comment formats, HTML, and TXT files. 
Ask does not offer esoteric file format indexing; it’s actually pretty limited 
in what it does index. On the other hand, Ask has a small file footprint and 
won’t put a strain on a slower computer. If you have an older computer and 
you want to index documents that are mostly from Microsoft applications, 
start here. 
Google Desktop
Google Desktop (desktop.google.com) requires Windows XP or Windows 
2000 SP 3+.
It just happens to have a desktop search engine, and also offers “gadgets” 
for desktop information, as well as the ability to index the contents of your 
Figure 13.2 The Ask Desktop Search breaks up search results across several different categories. 
Organizing Information on a Single Machine

256
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
GMail account. Because of this, you’ll have to supply a little bit of addi-
tional information when you start up the application; you’ll need to specify 
whether you want to index your GMail information (assuming you have 
GMail) as well as whether you want to get Google “Gadget” content (little 
programs that you can set up on your desktop) and whether you want to use 
Google as your default search engine in Internet Explorer. 
You’ll also have to specify whether you want usage information to go to 
Google or not. Google uses the information you send it to personalize the 
kind of information that displays in the sidebar, but if you have privacy 
issues, you can choose not to send information to Google (and thus disable 
some of the advanced features).
Once you have answered these questions, Google starts indexing your hard 
drive (giving you an estimate for how long it will take) and displays your side-
bar, which includes things like photos, news, weather, and a little scratch pad 
where you can save notes. If you want more, there are literally hundreds of 
Google Desktop Gadgets available at desktop.google.com/plugins/. By default, 
Google Desktop will only index items when your computer is idle. You may 
choose to start indexing immediately, but it could slow down your computer. 
Google Desktop’s search search is rock simple because—surprise!—it looks 
just like Google’s regular Web search! Google Desktop’s search runs inside 
your browser (Figure 13.3).
Searching is by keyword, and the search results look as Googly as the search 
page. Search results show the name of the file and its location (and a snippet 
if Google can index that file), as well as when it was indexed and an option to 
Figure 13.3
Google Desktop’s 
search looks just like 
Google’s regular search.
Figure 13.3
Google Desktop’s 
search looks just like 
Google’s regular search.

257
open the folder in which the file resides. You can sort your results by relevance 
or date (since Google’s indexing your desktop, it can determine the file dates 
of items). All items are presented by default in the search results, but you can 
also choose to see only e-mails, files, Web history, chats, or other files.
There may be a little additional information depending on the type of file 
being returned in the results. Image files have thumbnails in the search 
results, while text files have caches. 
You can use Google Desktop as just a simple search, but you do have some other 
options that you can see in the preferences. The Desktop Preferences link is 
next to the query box on the Google Desktop home page (Figure 13.4).
Figure 13.4 Control what’s being indexed via Google Desktop’s preferences.
Preferences are set up in tabs and include specifying which file types you 
want to index and whether you want to add any other filetypes for indexing. 
(Google has a subset of its gadget page at desktop.google.com/plugins/c/index/
all.html?hl=en that will give you access to lots of additional indexing plug-ins, 
from Belkasoft’s ICQ plug-in for GDS Pro to Larry’s Help File indexer.) 
Organizing Information on a Single Machine

258
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
You can also add or remove files and folders from your indexing, as well as 
encrypt your index and data files (though this will impact your computer’s 
performance). Finally you can choose to have your desktop’s indexed files 
available for search across several desktops. Because Google stores your 
files on its servers, you can search your files via your Google account from 
no matter where you are. This has serious privacy and security implications; 
think carefully before you decide to do this.
Google Desktop supports a variety of formats including Microsoft Office, 
MSN and AOL Instant Messenger, Google Talk, PDF, music, images, and 
ZIP files. In addition Google, as previously mentioned, also offers dozens of 
plug-ins for searching more obscure file types.
Google Desktop not only offers lots of plug-ins for extreme flexibility, it 
also offers the ability to index across computers, if you do your trapping 
from more than one place. However, this ability comes with some privacy 
and security risk, as your data files will be stored away from your computer. 
Think carefully about using it.
Yahoo Desktop
Yahoo Desktop (desktop.yahoo.com) requires Windows XP or Windows 
2000 SP 3+.
When you download Yahoo Desktop, you not only get the application, you 
also get the Yahoo Toolbar, which is an installation option when you first 
install the program. When the program has been completely installed, you 
also have the option of logging in with your Yahoo account so that Yahoo can 
index your Yahoo Messenger conversations and Yahoo address book contacts. 
If you don’t have a Yahoo account or don’t want to share that information, just 
click Cancel. When you first launch Yahoo Desktop, you get the should-be-
familiar-by-now search on the left and preview on the right (Figure 13.5).
Unlike the other two desktop indexers, Yahoo Desktop has a client inter-
face and doesn’t work through the browser. Furthermore, Yahoo Desktop 
defaults to showing just results from your e-mail. You’ll have to view the All 
tab, furthest to the right on the results page, to see all your results. Other-
wise, the Yahoo Desktop results page is excellent, showing Microsoft Office 
documents in preview mode and even playing multimedia (Figure 13.6).

259
 
A handy Refine button lets you easily narrow down searches further by 
a variety of factors, including date/time, size, and path. I found both the 
searching and the indexing to be very quick; you can increase the speed 
Figure 13.5
Yahoo uses a client 
application instead of 
a browser and filters to 
search for keywords.
Figure 13.5
Yahoo uses a client 
application instead of 
a browser and filters to 
search for keywords.
Figure 13.6
Yahoo Desktop 
previews a variety of 
documents excellently, 
including HTML.
Figure 13.6
Yahoo Desktop 
previews a variety of 
documents excellently, 
including HTML.
Organizing Information on a Single Machine

260
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
and effectiveness of the indexing by choosing Tools > Options from the 
main menu and then choosing Indexing Priority from the Options screen. 
While you’re here, you can also choose some other options for indexing and 
searching with Yahoo Desktop. 
Yahoo supports several different kinds of files, including Outlook, Outlook 
Express, Thunderbird, Microsoft Office, PDF, and, of course, plain text and 
HTML files.
Yahoo also has a free downloadable expansion pack that allows indexing of 
an additional 300 file types. You can download the pack and get a full list of 
the additional file types at desktop.yahoo.com/filetypes. 
You’ll want to spend some time in the preferences menu that I mentioned 
above. It was here that I had to do a little additional tweaking. For exam-
ple, I had to set as a preference that media files (such as music files) would 
play automatically in the preview pane. Without doing this, I would have 
to launch them manually every time I found a music file. Yahoo Desktop 
Search also has a More Indexing option that shows you exactly how much is 
going to be indexed on each folder of your hard drive (Figure 13.7). 
Yahoo Desktop seems to not index the contents of your Program Files 
directory by default. If you’ve installed programs in that folder, and the 
information generated by the programs is also kept in that directory, you 
Figure 13.7
Be sure to check the 
indexing options to see 
what Yahoo Desktop  
is actually getting in  
its index.
Figure 13.7
Be sure to check the 
indexing options to see 
what Yahoo Desktop  
is actually getting in  
its index.

261
want to make sure that at least specific subfolders within the program folder 
are being indexed. This is doubly important if you have programs there that 
are critical to your information trapping.
Also, be sure to check the default indexing for e-mail clients. It appears 
that Yahoo Desktop does not index e-mail by default. If you’re sharing a 
computer or have security/privacy concerns, this is probably a good thing. 
However, if you have a computer to yourself and you’re doing a lot of collab-
orative searching that’s coordinated by e-mail, you definitely want to make 
sure it’s being indexed! 
Fleshing Out Client-Side Options
Computer-level search engines are a good start when you want to make the 
information on your machine findable. But from there you actually need to 
organize the information relevant to your topic, and computer-level search 
engines are not going to help you stash away the stuff that you find while 
you’re browsing the Web. For that you need an information organizer. I’ve 
got three for you to look at: Net Snippets, Surfulater, and Onfolio. 
What these programs do, for the most part, is work with your browser. As 
you’re browsing you might find a story you find interesting, or some text, or 
a page. These information organizers allow you to take what you come across 
and put it into a format that makes it easy to organize. They range from free 
to over $100, and they all have a bit of a learning curve. If you use Inter-
net Explorer, you’ll have no problem using any of these offerings. If you use 
Firefox, you should be able to use them with no trouble, but you might have 
to install extensions. However, if you use Opera you’re probably out of luck: I 
found that, for the most part, these programs were not Opera-compatible. 
Net Snippets
Net Snippets (netsnippets.com) comes in a free and a couple of paid ver-
sions, and works with Firefox and Internet Explorer. If you want to use Net 
Snippets with Mozilla or Firefox, you’ll have to install a Net Snippets but-
ton, which you can learn more about at netsnippets.com/mozilla/install.
asp. Once you’ve installed Net Snippets (and the button if you’re using 
Firefox), you’ll see a little Net Snippets button on your toolbar. Click it and 
you’ll get a little sidebar next to your browser (Figure 13.8). 
Fleshing Out Client-Side Options

262
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
Here you can create a set of folders to organize your content (which I rec-
ommend if you’re covering several different topics). If you want to add the 
contents of a page you’re viewing, right-click on the page you want and 
choose Add Page to Net Snippets. You’ll get a popup window where you can 
specify the importance of the save, make notes, and modify the page to a 
certain extent by removing formatting, converting to text-only, and so on 
(Figure 13.9). Once you’re finished, you save the page to Net Snippets. 
This is a useful tool, but you do have to use it—if you only save half your 
pages you’re going to end up frustrated. Net Snippets does allow you to do 
keyword searching as well as look at the pages you saved within the last 7 
or 30 days. 
Figure 13.8
Start your information 
gathering with Net 
Snippets’ sidebar.
Figure 13.8
Start your information 
gathering with Net 
Snippets’ sidebar.

263
There is a free version of Net Snippets and two pay versions; standard for 
$79.95 and professional for $129.95. You can get more information about 
the different versions of Net Snippets at netsnippets.com/compare.htm. 
Surfulater
Surfulater (surfulater.com) is also available for Firefox and IE. Once 
you’ve installed it, and installed the extension for Firefox if necessary, 
you’ll see that you get a lot of functionality just from the right-click menu 
while you’re browsing. 
As you’re browsing, you may find some information you want to keep. 
Right-click in the body of the page you want to keep, and you’ll get options 
to save the page, to save the article plus the page, or to just add the article. 
When you’ve done that you’ll get a window that shows you what you’ve 
saved. Note that if you highlight text on the page before you choose an 
article to save, you’ll end up with a lot more information saved in Surfu-
later (Figure 13.10). 
If you look at the left side of the screen you’ll see that Surfulater saves its 
pages in an outline format. You can set up several different folders and orga-
nize the information you want that way. If you’re monitoring and gathering 
a lot of information on several different topics this is pretty much critical; 
while you can search Surfulater by keyword, organizing your materials at 
the onset makes it easy to browse as well. 
Surfulater costs $35 but a free trial version is available. 
Figure 13.9
Once you “snip” an 
item, you can set its 
importance and  
add notes.
Figure 13.9
Once you “snip” an 
item, you can set its 
importance and  
add notes.
Fleshing Out Client-Side Options

264
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
Onfolio
Onfolio (onfolio.com) used to be an independent company, but in 2006 it 
was purchased by Microsoft and is now a free download that’s incorporated 
with the Windows Live Toolbar. 
To use Onfolio, you’ll have to install the Windows Live Toolbar (available 
at toolbar.live.com/) and then install the Onfolio button (which you can get 
at onfolio.com). 
Onfolio is accessible from the browser in two ways. you can right-click 
and get the option to save a page or a site to Onfolio, or you can click on 
the Onfolio button in your Windows Live Toolbar. Onfolio launches as a 
browser sidebar (Figure 13.11).
Again, right-clicking brings you a lot of options in Onfolio; when you 
choose to save pages, you’re given a popup window to enter any notes you 
want to enter, name the page, and save the page as either a link or as an 
actual local copy of the page. I save actual pages whenever possible, realiz-
ing that there’s no telling how quickly a page might vanish off the Internet. 
If you have space limitations, however, you might want to limit yourself to 
saving URLs only (Figure 13.12). 
Figure 13.10
If you highlight text 
before saving an item, 
Surfulater will grab 
more text.
Figure 13.10
If you highlight text 
before saving an item, 
Surfulater will grab 
more text.

265
Figure 13.11 Onfolio is part of the Windows Live Toolbar (above) but launches in a sidebar (left).
Figure 13.12
Onfolio’s options for 
saving a page.
Figure 13.12
Onfolio’s options for 
saving a page.
Fleshing Out Client-Side Options

266
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
In addition to having the option of saving a single page, you also have the 
option of saving an entire Web site. Now as you might imagine, this can 
be a very extensive, not to mention time-consuming, thing to do. My site, 
ResearchBuzz, has thousands of pages. So when you open the save site 
dialog you get a window similar to the save page window, but it asks you 
how many “levels down” you want to save. Be sure to use the “Advanced” 
dialog, which lets you specify what kind of files you want to download 
(just Web pages, or PDF files, .doc files, etc.), the maximum number of 
files you want to download, and how you want Onfolio to respond to 
timeouts (Figure 13.13). 
Like Surfulater, Onfolio offers the ability to organize your saved materials 
into folders, and again they’re keyword-searchable. Right-clicking on an 
item you’ve saved gives you the option to do a variety of things, includ-
ing flagging the item with one of many colors, editing comments, export-
ing the contents, or even “blogging” the item you’ve found (Figure 13.14). 
(You need to configure what blog you use in Onfolio; supported platforms 
include Blogger, LiveJournal, and TypePad.)
I can’t imagine too many scenarios where you’d want to save the entire 
contents of a Web site. Perhaps if you’re doing competitive intelligence and 
want to go through a company’s Web site and see what they have, or if you 
find an online library and find all the contents very relevant and very use-
ful. If you save entire Web sites, be sure to put a maximum page download 
Figure 13.13
Be sure to use the 
advanced options if 
you save an entire site! 
You’ll want to set limits 
on how much you 
download.
Figure 13.13
Be sure to use the 
advanced options if 
you save an entire site! 
You’ll want to set limits 
on how much you 
download.

267
limit, lest you discover that the site you’re targeting has a secret stash of 
press releases and you’re going to be downloading for the next two days. 
Choosing the best program 
Which of these programs do you want to use? If you want something fairly 
simple to use, try Surfulater. If you’re looking for something that has the 
capacity to download large files, look into Onfolio. And if you’re looking for 
something that offers a full package, from getting the information to turn-
ing it into a nice report, try Net Snippets. 
I’ve presented you with some pretty heavy-duty offerings for client-side 
information organizing. Software like Onfolio and Net Snippets can take 
an information-monitoring project all the way from the gathering to the 
publishing stage. And that’s as it should be; all the information is installed 
on your computer, pages can be saved in their entirety, and you’re operating 
from your own “workbench.” 
But you may find that a client-based organizing solution is not for you. You 
want to be able to do your searching across several different computers, 
or create a place of organization that several different people can access. 
Unless you’re all in one room together, that’s hard to do from a single com-
puter! In this case, you might want to use Web-based organizing solutions, 
which I cover next. 
Figure 13.14
Once you’ve saved a 
page, you can edit it, 
flag it, even blog it.
Figure 13.14
Once you’ve saved a 
page, you can edit it, 
flag it, even blog it.
Fleshing Out Client-Side Options

268
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
Web-Based Organizing Options 
The intention of this type of solution is the same as client-based solutions—
to help you organize the information you find. But in execution, Web-based 
solutions are a little different. There may be a limit to how much you can 
have stored on a site. With your speed of access there may be only so much 
you want to access at a time. You may have security or privacy concerns. 
Like going from plain text files to something really extensive like Onfolio, 
you have your choice in Web-based solutions, from the really basic to the 
really extensive. We’ll start with the basic and then get more complex.
When I say simple, I mean simple. I mean what are basically bookmarks 
online. For just saving a list of URLs and sites, I like using tagging sites like 
del.icio.us and RawSugar. 
Tagging sites
We have discussed tagging earlier in the book. Now let’s look at it briefly 
from a user perspective as opposed to a researcher perspective. 
Tagging sites allow you to save pointers to Web sites with both descriptions 
and tags. And as we’ve seen earlier, if enough people participate in a site 
that allows tags, then soon you develop a very large and active collection of 
resources that are searchable by keyword. 
Because it is currently the eminent tagging site and because there are so many 
tools to make using it easier, I’m going to cover del.icio.us here. But I’m going 
to also mention other tagging sites that you may want to check out. 
For all that I love about del.icio.us (del.icio.us/), I can’t stand the name 
(I can’t seem to stop typing it incorrectly), so as you’ve probably already 
noticed, I call it Del instead. To use Del, you’ll need to register, which 
requires a user name, password, and e-mail. Once you’ve confirmed and set 
up your account, you have a couple of options. 
The first option is to take ten minutes or so and try out some keywords, see what 
other Del users have bookmarked for the keywords in which you’re interested. 
This will potentially give you some new resources to put in Del, as well as some 
ideas as to what keywords you should be using to tag your resources. 
The second thing you can do is start surfing and dropping things into del.
icio.us as you find them. There are a lot of tools available to make this easy. 

269
Del itself offers one at del.icio.us/help/buttons; it’s a bookmarklet to both 
see your Del bookmarks and to add bookmarks to your Del site. Quick  
Online Tips has a bunch of alternate bookmarklets that add a little more  
functionality at quickonlinetips.com/archives/2005/02/absolutely-delicious- 
complete-tools-collection/. 
There are Firefox extensions to make posting to del.icio.us easier at  
addons.mozilla.org/extensions/moreinfo.php?application=firefox&id=527 
and polarhome.com:753/~pwlin05/delic123/. And if you get a little crazy 
and post so many things to del.icio.us that you lose track of whether you’ve 
already posted them or not, there’s Familiar Taste, which is a Greasemonkey 
extension that lets you check to see if you’ve already added an item to your 
del.icio.us bookmarks. It’s at blackperl.com/javascript/greasemonkey/ft/. 
If you’re concerned about keeping your research and your URLs private, Del 
may not be for you. It’s really designed as a site that aggregates bookmarks 
and interesting sites. If your overwhelming concern is keeping your book-
marks private, try Boz at sandbox.sourcelabs.com/boz/, which encrypts 
your bookmarks on your browser. 
The following are some other bookmark/tagging sites you might find useful:
. 
MyBookmarks (mybookmarks.com) is free and gives you the option 
to make bookmarks publicly available. 
. 
Furl (furl.net), which is brought to you by LookSmart, lets you not 
only save a link to a page but also a cache of a page. The window for 
adding a link to your archive includes the option to rate the page as 
well as mark it private and to assign to it one of several categories. 
. 
Yahoo’s Bookmarks (bookmarks.yahoo.com/config/set_bookmark) is 
good for people who already have a Yahoo account and don’t want to do 
more than manage and keep a set of bookmarks online. It’s not heavy-
duty, doesn’t offer a lot of tagging and saving features like some of the 
other utilities in this chapter, but it’s a good basic bookmark manager, 
especially if you’re already using Yahoo Directory to start with. 
. 
Simpy (simpy.com) looks similar to del.icio.us, but offers a pull-down 
menu to specify whether an entered bookmark is public or private. 
You also have the option of sending a link to other people at the time 
you’re adding it to your directory of bookmarks. Simpy also allows 
you to sync the bookmarks in its service with del.icio.us. 
Web-Based Organizing Options

270
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
. 
RawSugar (rawsugar.com) is a tagging resource like del.icio.us, but is 
rather newer. In addition to the tagging option, RawSugar users can 
see the latest links added to the site and do regular Web searching via 
Google in addition to the tag searching of RawSugar’s archives. (If 
you search for something that isn’t found at RawSugar, it automati-
cally reruns the search using Google.) 
The sites I just mentioned here are basic bookmark/tagging sites. But we can 
get a little more extensive than that, by looking at Web-based resources that 
are designed to act more like a research partner for you. If you tend to move 
around between several different computers and you don’t have much in the 
line of security concerns, online organizing resources can be very useful as 
they’re accessible all the time and from anywhere. They come in several dif-
ferent flavors, from page keepers to free-form databases to wikis. We’ll look 
at several different examples. 
Extensive Web-based organizing sites
Maybe you want something that’s more extensive than just bookmarks, but 
you want to be able to access it from any computer. In that case you might 
want to consider a Web-based organizing site. These sites offer the ability to 
extensively organize information yet access it from any computer. Most of 
them have a bit of a learning curve, though, so be prepared to invest some 
time in getting used to them. 
eSnips
eSnips (esnips.com) is a service of Net Snippets, which we covered earlier 
in this chapter. The differences are that the service is online, and you get 
1GB of space to hold the snips of information from the Web or from your 
computer that you want to save. 
Registration is free. Once you’ve confirmed your registration, you’re invited 
to download an eSnips toolbar (which works in Internet Explorer, Firefox, 
and Netscape). You can also get an extension for Firefox. The eSnips toolbar 
“floats” on your desktop, giving you a quick way to save snippets you find to 
your online eSnips account. If you want to save lots of “bits” of information 
and are less interested in whole pages and sites, eSnips is quite useful. 

271
OnlineHomeBase
OnlineHomeBase (onlinehomebase.com) is a “free-form” information 
keeper. Instead of having to figure out how you’ll bookmark something, 
or structure it so it fits into an existing infrastructure, you can use Online-
HomeBase to create collections of free-form information, in addition to 
organizing the people who need the information. 
OnlineHomeBase is a subscription service costing $2.95 a month, but a free 
14-day trial is available. Once you’ve registered, you’ll be taken on a quick 
tour. Take the tour; it’s worth it. You’ll then have the option to create your 
new HomeBase; you have several different layout options, including three 
columns with a calendar and even a daily diary which you update by send-
ing e-mail (Figure 13.15).
Figure 13.15 OnlineHomeBase gives you several different layout and formatting options.
The HomeBase consists of two large parts; an online calendar and an online 
notepad. Don’t be put off by the word “notepad”; you can actually upload 
images and links into the notepad. (Note that some of this functionality 
works best with Internet Explorer.) There’s also a calendar where you can 
put events and reminders. If you don’t mind using a little geeky format-
ting (a couple of semicolons) you can actually e-mail yourself reminders 
Web-Based Organizing Options

272
chapter 12    Organizing What You Find
of events. With a little more text formatting you can e-mail other people 
reminders of events, and actually get reminders on your cell phone. 
OnlineHomeBase is not the ideal solution if you’re a) married to Opera or 
another more obscure browser; b) needing a start-to-finish infrastructure 
for keeping your information and developing your reports; or c) concerned 
about having to do a little text-formatting geekery. But if you’re in a small 
group of people and you want a basic tool for collaboration, and a tool 
would come in handy, this is useful. And it’s very inexpensive. Note that the 
service does include only 10MB of online storage, which nowadays is pretty 
paltry. Don’t choose this service if you’re going to upload a lot of graphics 
and files that’ll eat up that space!
TWiki
No no, not the little robot from Buck Rogers. TWiki (twiki.org) is a wiki devel-
oped for sharing information between a group of people across an enterprise. 
As an information-organizing solution, this is probably the largest and 
most complex thing I’m going to mention in this chapter. It’s actually a free, 
open source software solution that’s being used on many corporate sites 
(the Web site lists a variety of clients that use it, including Yahoo, Motorola, 
and Disney. For obvious reasons most of these sites use TWiki behind a 
corporate firewall). Since the whole point of a wiki is that it’s editable by any 
member of a team that’s using it, this is great when you have large groups of 
people working together on an information-gathering project. 
Furthermore, TWiki has been extended by a large set of plug-ins, including a 
calendar and access to databases and RSS feeds. While this software is free, it 
will require a huge investment in time and training to make the most of it for 
a project. If you need an enterprise-size solution for your information gath-
ering or organizing, I urge you to try TWiki. Independent researchers and 
those working in small groups in the same place will likely find it overkill. 
Backflip
Backflip (backflip.com) is another information manager that’s more about 
gathering and managing pages than it is about gathering and managing 
small bits of information. Like many of the other resources mentioned in 
this book, it’s a free service. Unlike some of the other resources mentioned 
in this book, it’s not designed to share bookmarks. Backflip bookmarks are 

273
private by default; this is idea for a solo researcher who doesn’t want to 
share his or her bookmarks even inadvertently. 
When you’ve registered, you’ll have the option of importing your bookmarks 
as well as generating some general-level folders for organizing your book-
marks. For the information trapper who wants to use these tools to organize 
a few different topics, most of these folders probably aren’t necessary. 
There are also other ways to view your pages as well, including looking at 
your most popular pages as well as your most recently added pages. Backflip 
has a bevy of tools that you can add to your browser to make “backflipping” 
pages easily; however, if your browsing isn’t proving very inspirational, you 
can also check out pages that are being backflipped often, as well as the 
contents of publicly available folders (remember, Backflip bookmarks are 
private by default, but there is an option to make them public). 
This chapter has covered just some of the solutions you can use to gather, 
share, and organize your information. There are lots more. To find more 
resources to experiment with, try searching Google or Yahoo for online 
bookmark managers or information organizers. 
Sticking to a Strategy
The most important thing is to have some kind of strategy for how you’re 
going to accumulate your information (and share it if you’re working within 
a group). Maybe you’ll settle on something simple, like the multiple-tab text 
editor that I use. Or maybe you need to work with several different people 
across a huge company, and you need an elaborate solution like TWiki. No 
matter what you finally choose, stick with it for at least a month. It takes 
that amount of time to develop a habit to save the information as you trap 
it. Don’t say to yourself, “I’ll find this later,” or “I’ll remember where this 
is.” I promise you: you won’t. Trap as you go. (For what it’s worth, I have to 
remind myself of this all the time too!) 
Accumulating and organizing the information you find is only the second 
step in your three-part process. The first part is to find and monitor the 
information. The second part is to accumulate and organize it, and the third 
part is to reuse and republish it, which we’ll look at in the next chapter.
Sticking to a Strategy

This page intentionally left blank 

Publishing Your 
Information 
13

276
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
In the last chapter, we looked how to organize the information you gather. 
In this chapter, we look at how you go about publishing it. 
Is there a difference? Definitely. As you might have noticed in the last chapter, a 
lot of the options for organizing and gathering your information are designed 
to be private. While you’re gathering, polishing, or just thinking about how all 
the bits fit together, you may not be ready to make it available to the public. The 
publishing aspect is when you have pulled something together—an article, a 
report, a book—that you’re ready to unleash on the world. 
Of course, some of you might be doing research that’s not designed for 
perusal by the entire world. In this case, there may be a private arena—an 
intranet, perhaps—where the information can be stored. Or maybe the 
information is just for you. I find in this case that making an effort to sum-
marize it—even if it only amounts to writing a rough article or an e-mail to 
myself—helps me understand the information I’ve gathered together and 
maybe even gives me a few more insights. Even if you only want to share 
your information with a small group of people, it’s critical to discover a 
good way to make sure the information gets where it needs to go. 
You might think that when publishing information online you’re pretty much 
limited to one option: create your own Web site and publish your pages there. 
Seven or eight years ago, that might have been the case, but these days you 
have lots and lots of options for getting your information online. 
I’m going to cover just a few broad categories here and not get too much into 
the details. The creation, care, and feeding of a Web site or another online 
publishing solution is way out of the scope of this book. I’ll recommend 
books and other resources as we go along. 
The first option is a possibly unexpected solution—a plain old Word or PDF 
document!
Publishing a Word, PDF, or Text Document
It may seem counterintuitive to focus on “office” documents when we’re dis-
cussing the Web, but you can easily publish the information you’ve gathered 
to generate a report and simply upload it to your corporate or institutional 
Web site. This works equally well for Word documents, PDF documents, or 
TXT documents. More obscure formatting (like WordPerfect or other word 
processors) might be a little harder for people to read. 

277
Pros
. 
If you’re already generating Word or PDF documents for consump-
tion in your office, publishing those file formats directly to a Web site 
saves you from having to generate something else for the Web. 
. 
Because you’re not hampered with design or having to integrate your 
information into an already existing structure, making a Word or 
PDF document can be a lot faster. 
. 
The people who find your document can easily print it out, save it to 
their own hard drives, or move it somewhere else to peruse at their 
leisure (which can sometimes be tough with multi-page Web sites). 
Cons
. 
If you’re not already generating a report for the offline set, this method 
will in fact be an extra step. 
. 
Search engines, while they’re okay at indexing Word, text, and PDF 
documents, are pretty awful at formatting them—your carefully 
crafted report may end up looking at bit spastic through Google’s 
“view as HTML” lens. 
. 
Standalone reports can also be a bear to update, and it’s tough to 
inform users that you’ve got a report that has more information than 
the report they viewed last week (it’s a little easier to see the updates 
on a Web site). As far as I know, you can’t publish an RSS feed from a 
Word document. And in my experience, it’s a little tougher to find a 
standalone document like a PDF file than it is a Web site. 
Essentials 
The essentials for posting these kinds of documents are pretty simple: make a 
document in your favorite (preferably popular) word processor and upload it 
to a Web site! The following tips may help you ensure your document survives 
the translation into HTML by a search engine without getting mangled: 
. 
Use as little formatting as possible.
. 
One column beats two columns. Sometimes if you format your con-
tent in two columns, the search engine has a hard time indexing it 
and presenting it in a readable format. 
. 
Fewer pictures are, in my experience, better than a lot of pictures. Try 
to reserve pictures for when illustration of a point is really necessary.
Publishing a Word, PDF, or Text Document

278
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Now let’s look at a more Internet-oriented solution: using a mailing list to 
broadcast your research.
Publishing to a Mailing List 
If you’re doing research that’s ongoing, or you don’t want to go to the trouble of 
creating and organizing an entire Web site, you may want to consider publish-
ing to a mailing list. It doesn’t need to cost you anything; there are plenty of free 
mailing list services out there to which you can publish your research. 
Pros
. 
Getting your information out there is as easy as writing an e-mail 
message. You don’t have to worry about fancy formatting, or page 
creation, or anything like that. 
. 
People can get updates to your research in e-mail instead of having to 
remember to visit your site (or put a page monitor on it). 
. 
You might find it easier to incorporate sending out a regular e-mail 
into your routine than updating a Web site. 
. 
People who don’t have particularly fast connections can download a 
plain-text e-mail far faster than they can visit a Web site. 
Cons 
. 
If you want to add fancy content to a Web site (like Flash media, 
audio, and polls), you won’t find plain-text e-mails useful. 
. 
It can be difficult to organize information within a mailing list. 
. 
So many people have spam traps nowadays you may find that your 
information is not getting to them or you may be accused of being a 
spammer. It’s amazing how often this can happen—people will forget 
they subscribed to a list, have someone who shares e-mail with them 
subscribe to a list, not want to bother to learn how to unsubscribe so 
they take a shortcut by accusing you of spamming, and so on. 
. 
Having to administer a mailing list can be time consuming and tedious. 
. 
It’s sometimes difficult for someone who wants to learn more about 
your research to visit a mailing list archive in order to get up to speed. 

279
Essentials 
Even if you can’t stand the idea of using a mailing list to publish your infor-
mation, you might want to consider creating a mailing list in conjunction 
with a Web site or wiki. I’ve had a Web site for ResearchBuzz for over eight 
years, but many people would rather get a weekly newsletter with a sum-
mary of what’s on the Web site. Sometimes it’s because they don’t want to 
visit the site regularly; sometimes it’s so they can pass around interesting 
bits via e-mail, and sometimes it’s because they want to print out interesting 
bits and keep them. 
When you have a mailing list, you can have either a discussion group or an 
announcement-only list. Newsletters are announcement-only lists. Discus-
sion groups allow the readers to discuss your research, add opinions of their 
own, and even contribute to what you’ve found. You’ll have to be careful, 
though—leading a bunch of people in a discussion often leads to a lot of 
refereeing and damping down of flame wars. Unless you’re creating a list for 
a small group of people, stick to announcement lists. 
Tip
When you start up a mailing list, it’s very important to set up 
confirmation subscriptions. So whenever people try to subscribe 
to your mailing list, they have to respond to a confirmation e-mail 
that’s sent to your address. It protects them—it means nobody 
can subscribe them to a mailing list without their permission. 
And it protects you—if anybody accuses you of spamming them 
with your newsletter, you can point out that your newsletter is 
a confirmed subscription and that all subscribers had to confirm 
their addresses. 
Free mailing lists
If you’d like to start a mailing list, you have some free options to choose 
from. There are a few pay options as well. One thing I would not suggest, 
unless you’re a big geek with a lot of free time, is setting up your own mail-
ing server. You’ll have to deal with things like people accusing you of spam-
ming, accidentally getting on blacklists, and making sure that your server 
doesn’t get cracked. By using a hosted solution, you let somebody else han-
dle all that hassle, while you can concentrate on publishing your research 
and getting it out there! 
Publishing to a Mailing List

280
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Google Groups
Google Groups (groups.google.com) is a free mailing list service, though 
you must have a Google account to create a mailing list. Once you’re logged 
in and choose to create a group, you’ll be asked to set up a group name and 
e-mail address, as well as a description. (There’s also a switch to tag if the 
group should be considered “adults only.”) 
You have three access options: public (anybody can read and post), 
announcement-only (anybody can read, only the moderator can post—this 
is the setting for newsletters), and restricted (reading and posting are pri-
vate and by invitation only). List archives are not searchable and do not 
show in Google Groups search results (Figure 14.1). 
Figure 14.1
Setting up a Google 
Group is a one-screen 
process.
Figure 14.1
Setting up a Google 
Group is a one-screen 
process.

281
Yahoo Groups
You need to have a Yahoo account to set up a new Yahoo Group (groups.
yahoo.com), and instead of a single-page setup like Google Groups, it uses 
a multi-page, stepped setup. You must specify the category of the group, 
which you can do by either browsing or searching Yahoo Group’s directory 
structure (Figure 14.2). 
After specifying the category, you need to name the group, enter a group e-
mail address, and describe your group. (This page is the one that looks very 
much like the similar Google Groups page.) Then you are asked to specify 
the e-mail address at which you’d like to receive messages from the group 
and the Yahoo Profile that you’d like visitors to the new list to see. Finally, 
you must echo a random string of numbers and letters to prove you’re not a 
robot trying to set up a mailing list. 
Free mailing lists are, well, free, but you do run the risk of having random, 
unrelated advertising shoved in your newsletter. In addition, the support isn’t 
that great. If you’re looking for an advertising-free option that offers fairly 
good support and a little more functionality, your best bet is to go for a paid 
mailing list service. Don’t worry though—they’re not particularly expensive. 
Figure 14.2
Setting up a  
Yahoo Group is a  
multi-step process, but 
it gives you immediate 
control over things like 
categorization.
Figure 14.2
Setting up a  
Yahoo Group is a  
multi-step process, but 
it gives you immediate 
control over things like 
categorization.
Publishing to a Mailing List

282
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Paid mailing lists 
There are lots of paid mailing list services out there. I’m going to cover two 
that I’m fairly familiar with, and then give you a pointer to where you can 
find many, many more. Let’s start with NetAtlantic. 
Net Atlantic
Net Atlantic (netatlantic.com) hosts the ResearchBuzz mailing list. It has 
three levels of service for the announcement lists that you would use to send 
out newsletters—one starting at $15 a month, one starting at $30 a month, 
and one starting at $60 a month.
For the basic cost, you can usually get a certain amount of bandwidth with 
which to send out newsletters. You will be charged for any bandwidth you 
take up over and above that set amount. The higher-priced lists have a few 
more features, including the ability to try to resend messages as well as send 
them a little faster. These features are not absolutely necessary. 
While learning your way around a list interface can be a little intimidating 
at first, it’s not that hard. Note with Net Atlantic, you can set up documents 
that are mailed to users when they subscribe and unsubscribe, get daily (or 
weekly or monthly) subscription reports, and be able to watch the delivery 
progress of your newsletter (there’s always some address that gets hung up 
or otherwise blocked so you can’t deliver to it). I find Net Atlantic’s support 
folks prompt and fairly helpful. 
Sparklist
Sparklist (sparklist.com) is a little more expensive than Net Atlantic. It 
seems to be designed for larger clients. Its packages start at $50 a month for 
a discussion group and $100 for an announcement list. (The big difference? 
Discussion lists have a maximum of 2,000 members.) 
If you’re interested in marketing with your newsletter, Sparklist offers a lot of 
tools for tracking and reporting the activity of your readers. (What they click 
on, when they open it, and so on. Note that these tools only work with HTML 
newsletters.) Like Net Atlantic, you can also get subscribe and unsubscribe 
reports, as well as support from real people. 
Whether you choose one of these services or an entirely different paid ser-
vice, be forewarned that they often make strong recommendations about 

283
how to handle your online newsletter—like making sure it’s a confirmed 
subscription list (they may even require it). They may also strongly suggest 
that you keep an unsubscribe link within the body of your newsletter to 
conform to federal guidelines (or again, they may just require it of you). 
Please be sure to follow all these directives; doing so makes you a better 
Internet citizen and makes it easier to protect yourself if someone claims 
they recieved something from you they didn’t want. 
There are dozens and dozens more mailing list hosts available online. You 
can get a huge list of them at dir.yahoo.com/Business_and_Economy/Busi-
ness_to_Business/Computers/Communications_and_Networking/Soft-
ware/Email/Mailing_Lists/. 
Publishing guidelines for mailing lists
While setting up mailing lists is very simple, sharing the fruits of your 
research consistently over long periods of time is not so simple. When 
you’re considering publishing a newsletter or announcement list for your 
newsletter, keep these guidelines in mind: 
. 
Pick a regular schedule of publishing and stick with it. A daily news-
letter is probably too much (unless they’re very short), while once 
every two months is probably too little. Try for either once a week, 
once every two weeks, or once a month. 
. 
If you stick to text-only newsletters, you might stand a better chance 
of getting your newsletter delivered. Sometimes HTML newsletters 
are blocked because they’re considered to be spam. 
. 
While Google Groups and Yahoo Groups make it fairly easy to find 
the archives of a publicly accessible list, that isn’t always true of paid 
services. If you’re using a paid service to host your newsletter, make 
sure it offers archives of a mailing list (most of them do) and that you 
offer some kind of Web-based pointer to the archive—even if it’s just 
a single-page site you post on your institution’s intranet. 
Other methods that work well for publishing your research are Web-based. 
This is what most people think of when they consider publishing their 
information on the Internet. However, the methods I propose may not have 
been the ones you were thinking of.
Publishing to a Mailing List

284
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Hosted Blogging Solutions
Blogs are mentioned throughout this book. Short for Weblogs, they’re very 
popular ways for everyone from grade school kids to corporations to share 
their opinions, insights, and news. You can set up a blog on your own 
server, or you can get a hosted blogging solution. We’ll look at both of them 
here, starting with hosted blogging solutions. With hosted blogging, the 
blog software is contained and maintained on a third party’s server. You 
can either have the blog itself at your own domain, or you can have the blog 
hosted on the third party’s Web site. 
How is a blog different from a Web site? For the most part, blogs are Web 
sites, but they’re easier to maintain. You don’t have to hand-code most blog 
sites; there are templates available for the standard parts of your site—parts 
like navigation and headers and footers. That leaves you free to concentrate 
on generating content—and free to change your entire site just by changing 
the template. If you’re allergic to HTML or you’re nervous about moving 
around and hand-coding a bunch of files, blogging could be for you (espe-
cially hosted blogging).
How is blogging different from other information structures, such as a wiki, 
that you maintain? A blog is ideal when you want to regularly publish news, 
information, and links, with optional commentary. A wiki is more for a set 
of information structures that you want to fill up. 
For example, you might want to publish information on treatments for breast 
cancer. You could publish a blog that would have running pointers to news 
stories on breast cancer, press releases about new treatments, and commen-
tary on personal experience or research processes. On the other hand, you 
could also publish a wiki, which might have pages for treatment, drugs, clini-
cal trials, and so on. The pages on the wiki would be filled in as the publisher 
found information in various categories. The information wouldn’t be date-
based, and there wouldn’t be much room for commentary. 
Pros
. 
With hosted blogging, you may not have to set up your own site; the 
hosting site usually takes care of that for you. In the same vein, you 
don’t have to worry about server fees. 

285
. 
Posting a blog is very simple; in some cases you can also even post  
via e-mail. 
. 
When your blog is part of a hosted blog site, your site will often be 
automatically indexed by the hosting site’s search engine. 
. 
You don’t have to worry about keeping the blogging software updated 
and maintained.
. 
You don’t have to worry about your software’s installation getting 
messed up by accident. 
Cons
. 
Sometimes visitors will take you a little less seriously if you don’t have 
your own site, so if you do use hosted blogging, consider having the 
blog published on your own site. 
. 
If something happens to the host site, it might happen to your blog, too. 
. 
Customization of your blog will probably be more limited than it 
would be if you had your own site. 
. 
If your site gets overwhelmingly popular and it’s located on the blog 
host’s site, the blog host might want to impose visitation restric-
tions on it. 
Essentials
There are many places where you can post a free blog. Really large sites that 
are not more journal oriented include BlogSpot and TypePad. BlogSpot is 
a service of Blogger, while TypePad is a service of Movable Type. We cover 
those here.
BlogSpot
BlogSpot (blogger.com) is a service of Blogger, which is brought to you by the 
folks at Google. Blogger actually allows you to create blogs for your own site 
or to host them on Blogger’s servers. We’ll look at hosting items on Blogger’s 
servers here, and at hosting them on your own server in the next section.
The first thing you’ll need to do is sign up for a Blogger account, which 
is free. Once the account is set up, you can start making blogs. Yes, mul-
tiple blogs—you can set up more than one. I don’t recommend doing this, 
Hosted Blogging Solutions

286
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
though, unless you’re publishing information on topics which are very dif-
ferent—heart surgery and ratites, for example. It’s easier to keep up with 
posting and maintaining one blog. 
Once you’ve registered and signed in, look for the Create Your Blog link. 
Clicking it produces a multi-step walkthrough that includes naming your 
blog and choosing a template. When you’re finished, you’re taken to the 
composition area where you can write your entries (Figure 14.3). 
Blogger has a lot of little tricks to it; for hints and updates to features, check 
out Blogger Buzz, the official Blogger blog, at buzz.blogger.com/. In the 
meantime, here a few hints you might find useful.
. 
Play with the templates. There are lots of Blogger templates to 
choose from. Experiment until you get the one you want, and the 
one you think your audience will want. Some of the templates are 
very stylish, but maybe you want something easy to read or easy to 
scan for information. 
Figure 14.3
Blogger has a 
composition area that 
lets you preview posts 
and insert HTML.
Figure 14.3
Blogger has a 
composition area that 
lets you preview posts 
and insert HTML.

287
. 
Consider comment moderation. Blogger offers a variety of ways to 
make sure that the comments on your blog do not get overrun with 
comment spam (people or robots coming in and posting fake com-
ments which are actually just attempts to get links back to a Web site). 
Be sure that if you have comments on your blog (although you don’t 
have to provide this option), you turn on comment moderation. 
. 
Post regularly. You don’t have to post every day or every hour like 
some people seem to. But do post regularly; otherwise, folks might for-
get to come visit. (Sure they could use your RSS feed, but not everyone 
wants to do that.) Think of the people who might discover your Web 
site via a search engine, only to find that you haven’t posted in a couple 
of weeks or longer. Do you think they’ll bother to get your RSS feed? 
. 
Publicize your RSS feed. Blogger has Atom feeds available, but 
they work in RSS feed readers. Unfortunately, I haven’t seen any of 
the templates show the feed by default! The feed is always the same 
file name; it’s atom.xml. So if you have a BlogSpot blog at example.
blogspot.com, the URL of your feed would be example.blogspot.com/
atom.xml. Make sure you link to that URL on your site’s home page, 
so that all your readers know where to get your RSS feed. 
BlogSpot is a great place for people who aren’t very Web-oriented and who 
just want to quickly put up a Web site for their research. For people who 
want to get under the hood and do a little tweaking, a TypePad blog might 
be a better choice. 
Tip
BlogSpot and TypePad are for all kinds of blogs, while other sites 
are designed more for diary sites and online journals, which is a 
little outside the research republication we’re talking about here. 
Two examples of that would be LiveJournal (livejournal.com) and 
Xanga (xanga.com). 
TypePad
TypePad (typepad.com) is brought to you by the people who do Movable 
Type. It is a hosted solution. There are three levels of hosting here: $4.95 
a month for Basic, $8.95 a month for Plus (which allows you to have up to 
three blogs and customize your design), and $14.95 a month for Pro, which 
allows you to have multiple authors (for collaborative blogs), as well as full 
Hosted Blogging Solutions

288
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
HTML editing and an unlimited number of blogs. There is also a free 30-
day trial available. 
You have to create an account and provide the name of your blog, as well as the 
preferred URL for the blog (you can have a URL at blogs.com or typepad.com). 
Once you’ve signed up, you’ve got a lot of choices to make! You’ll have to choose 
your blog’s layout, a design style, and most importantly how private your blog 
is. You can make it freely available, freely available but not publicized to the 
general public, or completely private and accessible only through a user name 
and password, If you’re looking for a way to publish a blog for a limited group of 
people, the latter option is a good way to do it. If you do choose this option, you 
must immediately specify a user name and password. 
When you’re finished, a control panel opens, where you make your posts, 
edit the way your blog looks, and make lists (Figure 14.4). Lists? Yes, you 
can specify lists of things like people and music and have them show up in 
your blog. You can also set up photo albums. 
Figure 14.4
TypePad is a little more 
complicated, but also 
more flexible.
Figure 14.4
TypePad is a little more 
complicated, but also 
more flexible.

289
Everything for TypePad is made available through the control panel that 
lets you do a variety of managerial tasks, including banning IPs from mak-
ing comments, seeing how many page views your blog has gotten, and 
uploading files—you have 500 MB of file space for your TypePad account. 
While TypePad is not as simple as Blogger, it offers far more in the way of 
easy tweaking and customization. 
For those of you with limited Web-building experience, hosted blogs are a 
great choice. They don’t require server maintenance or hosting, and they’re 
very easy to interact with. However, those of you who want to try different 
software, or want to do more tweaking than is offered by a hosted service 
might want to host a blog on your own site. 
Your Own Blogging Site
The difference between blogging on a hosted service and blogging on your 
own site is that if you do it on your own site, you host both the software and 
the blog. You may have to get up to your elbows in technical stuff, but it also 
means more freedom. 
Pros
. 
Blogs and sites on their own domains tend to be taken more seriously. 
. 
You may not like your “neighbors” on the free blog sites; on your own 
domain you don’t have to have any. 
. 
You can install all the plug-ins and add-ons that your ISP will permit. 
. 
You will have many more software options than the free and hosted 
services offer. 
Cons
. 
Hosting your blog on your own site is much more technical. 
. 
Sometimes the hosting and the domain name registration costs more 
than a hosted service. 
Your Own Blogging Site

290
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
. 
If you’re not careful, you can get hacked. (Well, you can get hacked 
on a blog hosting service, too, but at least then you have someone to 
yell at.) 
. 
Generating content and maintaining a site can be much more time 
consuming than just generating content on a free hosting service. 
Essentials
There are two ways to have a blog on your own site: you can use a hosted 
service that publishes the blog to your site, or you can install the software 
on the server yourself. 
In a way, the former option is the best of both worlds. The technical work is 
at a minimum, while you still have the freedom of your own domain. We’ll 
look at both options here. 
Tip
While we’ll look at options for blogging software to put on your site, 
we’re not going to look at all the intricacies of finding a Web host, 
registering a domain name, learning to use FTP, and all those little bits 
of knowledge that go into maintaining a Web site. For a good book on 
that, check out Blogging in a Snap, from Sams Publishing.
Using a hosted service to publish your blog  
on your site  
In addition to hosting a blog on its own server, Blogger also allows you 
to publish a blog to your own site. To publish a hosted blog to your own 
site, however, you’ll need to know how to transfer files to your site via FTP 
(File Transfer Protocol). Your Web host’s support section should have more 
information about that. 
To use Blogger to publish a blog to your site, you’ll still need to have an account. 
Actually the setup works very much like hosting a blog with BlogSpot, except 
you’ll need to choose the Publishing tab in Settings (Figure 14.5).
There you’ll need to specify your FTP server, the path where blog files 
should be kept, and your blog’s filename and URL. After that, setting up the 
blog proceeds as it did for blogs hosted on Blogger. 

291
Installing software to host your own blog
In addition to using hosting services, there are several packages that you 
can install on your own servers. Some of these packages are free, while 
some of them cost money. The ones I’m covering here are fairly low-cost. 
There are content management and blogging packages that could run into 
the thousands of dollars, but those’ll be overkill for information trappers 
who are just trying to share their knowledge. Let’s see what’s available on a 
smaller scale. 
This space is still developing, but we’ll look at two popular packages—Mov-
able Type and WordPress—and I’ll give you pointers to some other pack-
ages you can investigate. 
Figure 14.5
If you want to publish 
to your own site in 
Blogger, you’ll have to 
set it up here.
Figure 14.5
If you want to publish 
to your own site in 
Blogger, you’ll have to 
set it up here.
Your Own Blogging Site

292
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Tip
If you’re a librarian or someone who’s working on Web space 
within a company or institution, be sure to clear it with the IT 
people before you start installing software. In your case, the IT 
folks might actually prefer that a software package is installed on 
the site instead of an external FTP connection touching the site. 
Movable Type
Movable Type (sixapart.com/movabletype) is a complex application, and 
sometimes it can be frustrating, but its flexibility is amazing. In addition, 
Movable Type is supported by a large community of people who are con-
stantly developing plug-ins and add-ons for it. 
Pricing. Movable Type has several layers of pricing, ranging from a per-
sonal version with no support for free, all the way up to an enterprise-level 
version that you have to contact Movable Type to get pricing for. There are 
discounts offered for not-for-profit and educational groups. 
Installing. To install Movable Type, you have to go through a several-step 
process that includes downloading a compressed set of files, uncompress-
ing and uploading them to your site, setting file permissions (so that the 
core programs that make up Movable Type will run), and then tweaking 
configuration files so that the program looks for data in all the right places. 
After that, you must log in to Movable Type, set up your first blog, and set 
your preferences. It’s not rocket science, but it is time consuming. 
Movable Type offers a tool you can download and run on your server to 
make sure that your server has all the Perl modules and other bits neces-
sary to run Movable Type. If your Web site passes the test, be sure to follow 
the instructions step by step so that you don’t later trip over some step you 
missed. If you’re nervous about installing the software yourself, Movable 
Type can, for a small fee, install the software for you. 
Features. Movable Type offers a lot of functionality right out of the gate. 
Some of the things you might want to pay attention to are the fact that some 
of the versions of Movable Type allow you to publish unlimited blogs on 
your server (again, only recommended if you’re publishing information on 
very different topics), can accept comments (where people make comments 
directly on your site) and trackbacks (where people link to your page and 

293
where their links are noted on your page). Movable Type also gives you a lot 
of control over the way your templates look, as well as the ability to archive 
your information several different ways—daily, weekly, or monthly, and by 
category. (You can set up your own templates as well.) Posting an entry is 
very much like posting in TypePad (Figure 14.6). 
In addition to its native functionality, Movable Type also offers huge numbers 
of plug-ins that are designed to add extra functionality to the software. Some 
of these are very easy to install, while others are pretty complex. You can get a 
full directory of available plug-ins at sixapart.com/pronet/plugins/. 
Figure 14.6
Movable Type offers 
several levels of detail 
to post entries.
Figure 14.6
Movable Type offers 
several levels of detail 
to post entries.
Your Own Blogging Site

294
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Tip
Remember, not all plug-ins for blog packages are created equal. 
Some plug-ins are created by the company that created the 
software, while others are created by third parties. Be cautious of 
the third-party ones. Try to stick to third-party plug-ins that are 
recommended or at least acknowledged by the creators of the 
blog software for which they are intended.
WordPress
WordPress (wordpress.org) is the blog software on which I currently run 
ResearchBuzz and other sites. I have fallen in love with it over time. Some 
of its features are a little hard to grasp at first, and you’ll probably have 
to do a lot of experimenting before you understand the available Web site 
templates and WordPress’s formatting language. Once you have that all in 
hand, though, you’ll be amazed at what you can do.
Pricing. WordPress is an open source project and it’s free, though it does 
accept donations. 
Installing. Because WordPress is free, it’s free for hosting companies to 
install on their Web sites. For that reason, you may find that your hosting 
service has the option to do a “one-click install” of WordPress. If it does, 
take advantage of it! It’ll save you a whole lot of trouble. If it doesn’t, you can 
download an installation document that’ll take you through several steps. 
One of the steps involves creating a database within which WordPress holds 
its information. It’s not quite a ten-minute install, but it’s pretty quick. 
Features. WordPress offers a “dashboard” of tools across the top of the page. 
Notice that in addition to providing a place to post your blog information 
and create an entry (Figure 14.7), you also have a place to post “pages”—
information relevant to your site but separate from your blog. 
Examples of pages you might put here are information about you/your 
institution/your company, an overview of your project, and feedback forms. 
There’s also a place where you can make link lists (links in several differ-
ent categories), create users, and manage comments. Everything is fairly 
straightforward except the WordPress “Themes”—those templates that 
determine what the pages look like. The default theme isn’t bad and there 
are many WordPress themes to choose from for the completely non-artistic 
among us (that means me!) 

295
And like Movable Type, WordPress also offers plug-ins to extend the capa-
bilities of the software. You can get an overview of the types of plug-ins 
available at wp-plugins.net/, or try the list at wiki.wordpress.org/Plugin. 
Other blog software packages 
While Movable Type and WordPress seem to be the two blogging software 
packages that get a lot of press, there are many others available. Here are 
three more that you might want to look at. 
pMachine
If you want to install your software on a corporate site, you may want to try 
pMachine’s ExpressionEngine (pmachine.com). It’s one of the more expen-
sive packages. A commercial license is $249.95; a non-commercial license is 
$99.95. However, if you’re planning to use ExpressionEngine on a personal 
site, you can download its slightly limited core package for free. It offers a 
variety of features that make it appropriate for a group of people or people 
in a company setting, including a private messaging system and support 
Figure 14.7 Most of WordPress’s post detail is in collapsible boxes to the right of the post area.  
You can take advantage of it—or not.
Your Own Blogging Site

296
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
for a discussion board (sold separately). This is a very extensive and com-
plicated package, but on the other hand, it goes way beyond the basic idea 
of blogging. 
NucleusCMS
Moving from a more expensive package to another free one, we’ve got Nucle-
usCMS (nucleuscms.org). This software is more limited than pMachine’s, 
but offers a variety of blogging features, including some nifty features like 
the ability to save entries as drafts, the ability to write entries and post them 
in the future (handy if you want to take a holiday but you want your blog to 
keep updating), and a variety of available plug-ins. 
Textpattern
Like NucleusCMS, Textpattern (textpattern.com) is free. It offers a markup 
language called Textile that is purported to be easier to use than HTML and 
more reliable than WYSIWIG (What You See is What You Get) sites. Text-
pattern offers the features that you’d expect in blogging software, includ-
ing some unique twists like the ability to password-protect site sections or 
specific pages, the ability to close pages after a specific period of time, and 
more direct editing of CSS files. 
There’s no doubt about it—blogs are really hot right now. And if you’re pub-
lishing information that’s best organized by date, blogs are a good choice. 
But if you’re looking for a way to set up an outline of information that gets 
filled in over time, you might want to try a wiki instead. And though you 
don’t hear nearly as much about them as you do about blogs, there are plenty 
of options out there for wikis as well. For simplicity’s sake, you might want 
to try one of the available hosted wiki options. 
Wiki
As I’ve mentioned earlier in this chapter, wikis are best understood as con-
tainers for information—outlines that you can fill in with information as you 
find it. Blogs, on the other hand, are more vehicles for date-based entries and 
commentary. And while some blogs allow you to break your entries down by 
category, those category/entry listings are not usually that easy to read. 

297
Pros
. 
Easy to expand. 
. 
Handy for large groups who need to put information together. 
. 
Can be set up so that it can be edited by anybody or just by a cer-
tain group. 
. 
People who visit it do not have to go through a bunch of archives to 
zero in on just the information they need. 
. 
It only takes typing a word in a certain way to make a WikiWord, 
giving it its own page in your wiki. 
. 
Information on topics is concentrated on singular pages, which might 
make it easier to be found via search engines. 
Cons
. 
Fairly new; it can take a little getting used to. 
. 
Openness of content editing can be a disaster unless carefully managed. 
. 
Not as easy to incorporate commentary; more for factual data. 
(Because many people edit the same pages, if you incorporate com-
mentary, you might end up with a page full of flame wars.) 
. 
It’s difficult to summarize in a newsletter, compared to summarizing 
something more date-oriented, like a blog. 
Essentials
The best example of what a wiki is all about is probably Wikipedia (en.wiki-
pedia.org/wiki/Main_Page). This wiki is an attempt to build an encyclope-
dia that’s fully open and fully editable. That sounds like a recipe for disaster, 
but somehow it’s not. Let’s look at a typical page (Figure 14.8).
Notice there are tabs across the top of the page that include Edit This Page, 
which anyone can click and then edit the page they’re looking at. There’s 
also a history page that shows the edits that have occurred in the past. Edits 
can be as simple as correcting a spelling error to as complex as fleshing out 
an entire article. 
Does this seem a bit overwhelming to you? A wiki that’s also an encyclope-
dia? Okay, let’s look at some smaller-scale stuff. To get an idea of how other 
groups are using wikis, try the list at usemod.com/cgi-bin/wiki.pl?SiteList or 
WikiIndex (wikiindex.com/Main_Page), an effort to list all available wikis. 
Wiki

298
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Earlier in the book, we looked at a few options that you have for portable 
wikis and giant enterprise wikis. There are wikis that you can install on 
your own server, but they’re somewhat technical. If you’re interested in set-
ting up a wiki on your own server, you can get a list of wiki software pack-
ages at dmoz.org/Computers/Software/Groupware/Wiki/Wiki_Engines/. 
Most of them are free. For the sake of simplicity in this book, we’re going to 
look at hosted wiki services. 
Hosted wiki services
At the moment, there doesn’t appear to be any premiere wiki hosting ser-
vices, so here’s a roundup for you to choose from, all of which have different 
highlights and strengths. Most of these are free; the ones that aren’t have 
only a nominal cost. 
Figure 14.8 A typical Wikipedia page.

299
JotSpot 
JotSpot (jotspot.com) offers a lot of extras. For the most part, it’s a paid 
service, but there’s a free service available, too. Getting started is a simple 
five-part process: enter your e-mail address, your password, and the subdo-
main that you want to appear on the jot.com domain where your wiki will 
be set up (it’ll look like this: example.jot.com). You then need to provide 
your name and enter a word string that shows on the page to prevent robots 
from setting up wikis. Once you’ve done all that, JotSpot will present you 
with your new wiki (Figure 14.9).
Figure 14.9 JotSpot offers a quick wiki setup. 
Wiki

300
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
JotSpot has instructional videos, FAQs, and a knowledge base for learning 
more about how to use the JotSpot service. And this will come in handy; 
JotSpot has a lot of additional functionality, including a variety of applica-
tions you can add to your wiki, like a calendar, RSS feed reader, company 
directory, and blog. 
NOTE
JotSpot used to be a paid service, but Google acquired it in late 
2006. As of this writing, JotSpot has suspended new accounts and 
billing for its services. I suspect that when the transition to Google is 
complete, JotSpot will relaunch as a mostly free service. Stay tuned. 
PBwiki
PBwiki (pbwiki.com) has a simple one-step process for making a wiki. You 
enter the name of your wiki, and provide an e-mail address. Once that’s 
done a URL is e-mailed to you. Click on that URL and boom, you have a 
wiki. You’ll be asked to create a password and specify whether you want 
your wiki to be public or not. 
PBwiki is not as slick and extensive as JotSpot, but it’s not as expensive or 
intimidating either. Once you’ve logged in, you’re shown the front page of 
your site along with some pointers to documentation. The PBwiki folks 
encourage you to play with the features and experiment with some of the 
offerings like RSS feeds and the ability to publish a sidebar on a blog. There’s 
also a very lively forum available. 
PBwiki is free, but a premium version is available for $9.95 a month with 
higher levels of service going up to $34.95 a month for corporate level blogs. 
The additional costs pay for more file space, more available designs, and 
more features.
SeedWiki
Like PBwiki, SeedWiki (seedwiki.com) offers accounts that are primarily 
free, and like PBwiki it’s very easy to sign up. Accounts require a name, e-
mail address, and password. 
Once you’ve registered, you’re given the option to set up a wiki or a blog—
unlike the other services they’re not set up for you. Setting up a new wiki 
means specifying a name for it, a language, a description, and a folder— 
in other words, the subject under which the wiki should be listed. 

301
Once you’ve made your wiki, a vanilla page with a navigation bar on the 
side displays to help you administrate it. I like the way that SeedWiki is 
doing its wiki because it provides a lot of freedom to experiment. You can 
make a wiki, and if you don’t like it or want to mess around, you can just 
delete it and start over—no muss, no fuss. 
Wikispaces
Less standalone than a regular wiki is Wikispaces (wikispaces.com), which 
offers easy integration with blog tools like Blogger. Once you’ve registered 
(registration requires a user name, e-mail address, and password), you have 
the option of creating a “space.” Spaces can be public (anybody can view 
and edit), protected (anybody can view, but only certain people can edit), 
and private (nobody can view or edit). Public and protected options are 
free, but the private option costs $5 a month. 
Once you’ve created your space, you’ll see that it looks a lot like a wiki, only 
the editing options seem a little friendlier than most. For more information 
on integrating Wikispace into your TypePad or Blogger blog, go into the 
options menu and check out the Integrate a Blog option. 
Wikis and blogs are two types of Web sites, and are offered as packaging 
and hosting services. But while they’re two types of Web sites, they aren’t 
the only kinds of Web sites. You can also make your own site. 
Making Your Own Site
When it comes down to it, an HTML page is just a text file that has cer-
tain formatting elements in it. It’s not a programming language. It doesn’t 
require compiling. As long as you have some Web space and a way to upload 
your HTML files, you can create your own Web site to hold your found 
information. 
Pros
. 
You can do absolutely anything you want to with it. 
. 
You can integrate multimedia content. 
. 
You can experiment and try out different ways to encapsulate 
information. 
Making Your Own Site

302
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
Cons
. 
You have to code your own Web pages, which, while not difficult, 
does require a certain amount of technical knowledge. 
. 
You’ll spend a lot of time maintaining the containers for your content 
(the pages) as well as the content itself. 
. 
You may have to hire a designer to make your pages visually interesting. 
. 
You’ll miss out on a lot of plug-ins and other ways that blog software 
and wikis add functionality. 
Essentials
A tutorial on HTML is totally outside the scope of this book, and frankly I 
wouldn’t recommend creating your own site unless you have an informa-
tion structure in mind that just doesn’t work within the confines of a hosted 
blog site or wiki, unless you already have extensive HTML skills and some 
experience as a site builder.  
Basic HTML skills
Basic HTML skills can be acquired through any number of books. But 
there are online tutorials available as well. Check out the HTML Goodies 
page (htmlgoodies.com/primers/html/), which has a seven-part HTML 
primer that’s designed to take one week to complete. HTML Code Tuto-
rial (htmlcodetutorial.com/) has a whole domain dedicated to teaching 
the ins and outs of HTML. And if you want something really exhaustive, 
which when gathered into a PDF document weighs in at over 300 pages, 
check out mcli.dist.maricopa.edu/tut/lessons.html. 
Planning a Web site
If you have an idea for a very small Web site, it might not even occur to you 
that you have to plan out a Web site. But take it from me, even the most 
modestly considered Web sites have a tendency to grow like Topsy. Mak-
ing The Net Work has an overview article that gives several salient points 
about which you should think when planning a Web site: makingthenet-
work.org/toolbox/tools/webguide.htm. An article at Sitepoint breaks down 
what you’ll need to do, step by step, as you plan your Web site: sitepoint.
com/article/site-planner. 

303
Now if you look at these articles, especially if you’re an individual or in a 
small group, you’re going to feel like they’re serious overkill. And they prob-
ably are! But at least glance over them. If you’re building a Web site for an 
institution or a corporation, please look over the site planning articles care-
fully. If you’re building the site yourself, it’ll give you some useful guide-
lines. If you’re not, it’ll help you understand the goals and concerns of the 
people who are building the site. 
In this section, we’ve looked at learning HTML, but of course that’s not the 
only way to run your own Web site. You also have the option of learning a 
software package that’ll help you put a Web site together. For example, you 
could learn Dreamweaver, or Microsoft’s FrontPage. So you can either learn 
HTML or a software package—but the same “cons” of extra coding time, 
maintenance, and lack of universal plug-ins will apply. 
Thus far in the chapter it’s been all about content—how do you make the 
content, where do you keep the content? That’s the place to start. But the 
next step is how do you distribute your content? So let’s spend a little more 
time on RSS feeds. 
RSS Feeds for Content Distribution
RSS feeds, as you learned earlier in this book, are XML documents that 
alert users of changes to Web sites and summaries of new content. They 
can get a lot more complicated than that—they can hold everything from 
graphics to MP3 files—but at the heart of it, RSS feeds are about providing 
information updates. 
Making that kind of information available is critical to you, the informa-
tion publisher; the more ways your Web site can be kept up with, the more 
likely your visitors will make the effort to keep up with it, and the more 
readers you’ll have. So you might have a blog and a newsletter, or a wiki and 
a discussion group, or a quarterly published PDF and a wiki. In addition to 
all that, you should have, whenever it’s available, an RSS feed. 
Built-in solutions
When is it available? For blogs, all the time; all major blog software and ser-
vices automatically create RSS feeds for you. For wikis, some of the time. 
When evaluating a wiki, look for syndication options. And be careful because 
RSS Feeds for Content Distribution

304
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
many RSS feeds for wikis require having the user name and password within 
the RSS feed’s URL; this is not the best idea for security reasons and should 
be used very carefully, and not with an information-sensitive wiki. And for 
mailing lists and providers, it depends on the provider you’re using; Google 
Groups and Yahoo Groups have no problem with providing RSS feeds, while 
it’s less available in the paid services. 
If you’ve got an RSS feed built into the solution you’re using, you’ve got one 
big thing to decide and one big thing to do. If you don’t have an RSS feed, 
I’ll give you a quick tutorial on creating one. 
Choosing between full or abbreviated 
RSS feeds are marked by the “full or abbreviated?” controversy. A “full” 
RSS feed means that it reproduces in its entirety the contents of a Web site. 
A blog, for example, that posted all of its entries in an RSS feed would have 
a full RSS feed. An abbreviated RSS feed is a feed that only contains an over-
view of the changes to the site—story summaries or, more often, the first 20 
(or 30 or 50) words of a story. ResearchBuzz is an example of a site whose 
feed contains only snippets of stories that have been posted to the Web site, 
while Gary Price’s ResourceShelf has a full feed. 
Feelings run high about this. Some people think that full RSS feeds are 
absolutely the way to go and it’s not fair to RSS feed users to use anything 
else. Other people are more concerned about what making full RSS feeds 
available would do to the distribution of their content. As you’ll see in a 
moment, it’s very easy to repurpose the content of an RSS feed and make 
it available on other Web sites. In other words, if you made the content of 
your Web site fully available via your RSS feed, it’s possible (even likely, 
depending on your content) that someone would use your RSS feed to put 
your content on their site! Why? To have fresh content. To generate pages 
on which to put advertising. There are lots of reasons. 
Now maybe your research is nonprofit or just a hobby and you don’t care 
if your content gets repurposed to other sites. Or maybe you’d welcome the 
reuse of it as long as it got the word out there about your research. That’s fine; 
publishing a full-content RSS feed would be the right step for you. (It does 
have its value for your readers, including the ability to keep up with your site 
without visiting it directly and passing on the full content of useful site addi-
tions to friends and interested parties.) However, if you’re concerned about 

305
your content being used on other sites, or you’re trying to make some revenue 
from visitors coming to your site (and therefore need eyeballs looking at your 
site’s advertising), then I recommend using abbreviated RSS feeds. 
Of course, how you have the RSS feed doesn’t matter unless your visitors 
know about it, which brings us to the next step. 
Promoting your RSS feeds 
Make sure that visitors know about your RSS feeds! This is especially impor-
tant for hosted services like Blogger. In my experience, the basic templates 
don’t do a lot to highlight the fact that an RSS feed is available. So make sure 
that the home page has a link to your RSS feed, and make sure as well that 
you submit your RSS feed to at least a couple of RSS feed directories like 
the ones we’ve looked at in the book. Feedster (feedster.com) is an absolute 
must, as is Technorati (technorati.com). 
Most hosted services have RSS feeds built in. Google Groups and Yahoo 
Groups offer RSS feeds. Most blog packages have RSS feeds built in. But 
you may be in a situation where you have to make your own feeds by hand. 
Okay. It’s not fun, but, okay. Here’s a basic lesson on making RSS feeds. 
Creating your own RSS feeds
If you have to make your own RSS feeds, try to limit them to basic text 
information; multimedia RSS feeds can be a bit complicated. Use this three-
step process to make your own RSS feeds. 
Start with a template
Just like HTML files, RSS feed files have headers and footers that never 
change. They help tell the computer that’s reading the file what it is and how 
it should look. You’ll need to change a little bit of information on them but 
not much. Script 14.1 shows a typical header for a basic RSS file. 
As you can see, there are some elements that you need to address: 
. 
Title. The name of your Web site, naturally!
. 
Link. The URL for your Web site. (Note this is the URL for your Web 
site, not your RSS feed.) 
. 
Description. A brief description of your Web site. 
RSS Feeds for Content Distribution

306
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
<?xml version=”1.0” ?> 
<rss version=”2.0” xmlns:dc=”http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/ 
” xmlns:sy=”http://purl.org/rss/1.0/modules/syndication/ 
” xmlns:admin=”http://webns.net/mvcb/” xmlns:rdf= 
”http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#” xmlns:content= 
”http://purl.org/rss/1.0/modules/content/”>
<channel>
  <title>Your Marvelous Web Site</title> 
  <link>http://www.example.com/marvelouswebsite</link> 
  <description>Describe Your Site Here</description> 
  <language>en-us</language> 
  <pubDate>Mon, 04 Dec 2006 22:22:20 GMT</pubDate> 
  <copyright>Copyright 2006 You</copyright> 
  <lastBuildDate>Mon, 04 Dec 2006 22:22:20 GMT</lastBuildDate>
. 
Language. The primary language in which your content is generated. 
The above example shows American English. You can get a list of 
the language codes you can use in your feed at msdn.microsoft.com/
workshop/author/dhtml/reference/language_codes.asp. 
. 
PubDate. The date your feed was published. 
. 
Copyright. Whatever copyright disclaimer you want to make about 
your content. 
. 
LastBuildDate. The date your content was last revised. 
At the end of your RSS feed you’ll need your footer (Script 14.2), which is 
very simple. That you can leave as it is.
</channel>
</rss>
Script 14.1
The header. 
Script 14.1
The header. 
Script 14.2
The footer.
Script 14.2
The footer.

307
Fill in the blanks
The actual content summaries from your Web site are contained in items, 
which look like Script 14.3. 
<item> 
<title>A very interesting report</title> 
<link>http://www.example.com/marvelouswebsite/very_interesting_ 
 report.html</link> 
<description>A description of a very interesting report, or your  
 full content.
</description>
<pubDate>Mon, 04 Dec 2006 22:22:20 GMT</pubDate> 
</item>
You’ll have to customize an item for each of your RSS feeds: 
. 
Title. Title of your item. 
. 
Link. A direct link to the item. This can be a file or an anchor within 
a file. 
. 
Description. This is a little misleading. Yes, this can be a description 
of your item, but it can also be the item itself, spread out over several 
paragraphs. If you want to include all your content in your RSS feed, 
put your unabbreviated content here. 
. 
PubDate. The date the item was published. 
Lather, rinse, repeat
For each bit you want to include off your Web site, you’ll need to generate 
an item. So in a plain text file you’d put the feed’s header, an item for each 
story you’re going to include in the RSS feed, and then the footer. You can 
theoretically include as many items as you like, but I’d limit it to 15 or 20. 
I actually did this once a week (for a couple of years!) for a Web site that 
doesn’t generate an RSS feed. Here’s how I did it: I had an RSS feed template. 
Every week I changed all the dates via my text editor’s search-and-replace 
Script 14.3
The items.
Script 14.3
The items.
RSS Feeds for Content Distribution

308
chapter 13    Publishing Your Information 
function. Then I edited each of the items to reflect new content. Since I 
changed the RSS feed weekly, it was easy to keep up with. 
Once you’ve generated your RSS feed, upload it to your site. And then check 
to make sure that it works. 
Testing your RSS feed
To test your RSS feed, use Feed Validator at feedvalidator.org. Enter the 
URL where you uploaded the feed and Feed Validator will tell you if it’s 
okay or not. If it’s not, Feed Validator will tell you why. I do this every week, 
too; here are some common problems I run into. 
. 
Unencoded characters. Some characters have to be properly encoded 
before you can include them in an RSS feed. The one that trips me up 
is the ampersand (&). The proper way to encode it is by using &amp;. 
(Most of the time I remember to search and replace the ampersand 
with &amp; before uploading my feed.) 
. 
Smart quotes. Sometimes I’ll copy and paste something from a non-
text source (such as a quote). Sometimes those quotes will include 
“smart quotes” instead of the ASCII plain quotes. 
You can get a full list of what Feed Validator flags, as well as pointers to how 
to fix the problems, at feedvalidator.org/docs/. 
Making RSS feeds publishable to Web sites
RSS feeds in and of themselves are just text files. Many of your users will 
want to read them with RSS feed readers, which is okay, but some of your 
readers may want to include your feed on their Web site. Or perhaps you 
have many RSS feeds and you want to include feeds from one site on another 
of your sites. There are several ways to do this, from installing programs on 
your server to simpler solutions. Let’s stick with simpler. FeedDigest can 
take a feed and give you code to put your feed on a Web site. 
FeedDigest 
FeedDigest (feeddigest.com/) allows you to not only make a feed publish-
able but to format it and change its look and content. You start by just speci-
fying the URL for your feed. From there, you’ll be given several options, 

309
including how many items to show and how to sort them. Then you’ll be 
prompted to choose the template for the digest from about ten options.  
Once you’ve generated the feed and registered, you’ll have the option to get 
PHP or JavaScript code to include the digest on your site, or to give to others 
to include the digest on their site. 
FeedDigest will also show you how to edit your site to make your RSS feed 
easier to discover by browsers and robots visiting your site. You’ll also learn 
about “pinging sites”—making sites that index RSS feeds aware of new con-
tent on your RSS feed, so they know when to index it.
Working Toward Manageability
Once you get into the full swing of trapping and publishing information, 
you’ll find that you’re culling a lot of interesting information and you’re 
passing it along in various formats. You may even find that this process of 
finding, organizing, and passing along the information is taking more and 
more of your time! In a bonus chapter, which you can access by register-
ing your copy of this book at peachpit.com/title/0321491718, I offer some 
solutions for making information trapping a routine, rather than a giant 
monster that takes over your life. I also provide tips for how to keep your 
keywords and search sources fresh and current. 
Thanks for reading!
Note
You can access additional chapters on mobile information trapping, 
RSS tools, keeping up with your traps, and more by registering your 
copy of this book at the URL mentioned above.
Working Toward Manageability

This page intentionally left blank 

Appendix A 
Going Mobile
The following pages were originally published online as bonus material for our readers 
and are not included in the print version of this title.

A2
Information Trapping
I don’t know about you, but I’m not in front of the computer all the time. It 
just feels like it. I spend plenty of time on the road, in a car, waiting in drive-
thrus and lines of various sorts, and nowhere near a computer. 
But that doesn’t mean I stop being an information trapper! I may not be able 
to get to a computer and check out all my e-mail or RSS feeds, but I’m still 
interested in what’s going on. I just pare it down a little, setting up my cell 
phone to receive the most important e-mail alerts out of all the traps I’ve 
set. And thanks to my phone, I can also read RSS feeds. 
You may not have the latest and greatest phone, but your phone can probably 
at least receive e-mail. In this chapter we look at information trapping on 
the go, some of the options you have with your phone, some of the options 
you might have with a Palm-powered or Windows-CE-powered device, and 
how to manage flow on the go. If you don’t have a mobile phone or another 
online option while you’re on the go, or you carry a WiFi notebook with you 
everywhere, you may want to skip to the next chapter.
Your Fabulous Phone 
Most phones nowadays have the ability to at least get basic e-mail messages. 
In addition, most phones have the ability to get simple messages sent to 
a phone number, also known as Simple Message Service (SMS). If you’re 
receiving an SMS alert, all you have to know is your phone number. To 
receive a simple e-mail on your phone, it’s a little more complicated. The 
problem is that often you may not know what your cell phone’s e-mail 
address is. So let’s start by finding out the e-mail address for your phone. 
Then we’ll talk about some services that go straight to your phone anyway, 
and some phone alert dos and don’ts. 
Tip
Be sure to check your cell phone plan. Some cell phone plans allow 
for unlimited reception of SMS, while other services charge you 
per message. You don’t want to subscribe to something and then 
get a huge phone bill for your messages at the end of the month! 

Going Mobile
A3
Finding your phone number and phone e-mail address
Sure, you know what your phone number is, but your cell phone service 
may have neglected to give you an address to which your phone can be sent 
mail. The Internet to the rescue! To see the e-mail formats for various cell 
phone companies, visit the following URL:
networking.ringofsaturn.com/Telecommunications/mobile-phone-emails.php 
This site has the proper format for mail addresses for dozens of cell phone 
companies. They’re all built around your phone number. For example, a 
Cingular address looks like this: 
10digitphonenumber@mobile.mycingular.com 
You may have to do a little experimenting with this one to find out which 
address works for you—many carriers have multiple addresses listed. If 
none of them work for you, or your cell phone company is not listed here, 
try Teleflip at teleflip.com. Teleflip lets you send messages using a single 
number format. The first 100 messages per month are free.
Now you have two ways in which you can receive information on your 
phone—by phone alerts and by phone messages. Let’s take a look at the ser-
vices that go to your phone, and then the ways you can make e-mail alerts 
go to your phone. 
Services that go to your phone 
Many sites offer cell phone services that work like this: you send the ser-
vice a brief message, and it sends you a brief snippet of information. Even 
Google has a phone messaging service like this. It can be useful, but not for 
trapping information. 
In the case of information trapping, Yahoo has an excellent service. And 
other sites do as well—it’s just a matter of knowing where to look. 
Yahoo Alerts 
As with practically everything else in the Yahoo Universe, you need a Yahoo 
account to use Yahoo Alerts (alerts.yahoo.com). 
Once you have the account and you’ve logged in, notice that you have a 
huge number of alerts from which to choose. You can get alerts on auctions, 
breaking news, stocks, sports—even missing children. Pick a category and 

A4
Information Trapping
notice that you have three alert options: you can get your alerts by e-mail, 
by Yahoo Messenger (an Instant Messaging service), and by phone. (See the 
“Add a mobile device” link on the Alerts page if you don’t have the option 
to get phone alerts.) 
The nice thing about alerts for your phone is that they’re specially format-
ted for a phone’s small screen and don’t have a lot of active content (movies, 
flashing banner ads, complicated Web page scripts, and so forth) that your 
phone can’t handle. For the most part, you’ll find for the most part that 
these alerts are brief and easy to read. Be sure to check out the alerts for 
news and RSS feeds.
Yahoo Alerts has the largest search engine collection of phone alerts useful 
to information trappers, but as I said already, it’s certainly not the only one 
available. A lot of the mobile alert services out there are for entertainment, 
but some of them can keep you up to date on some interesting information. 
Let’s take a look at two. 
FeedBeep
There are other ways to read RSS feeds on newer phones (and we look at 
them a little later in the chapter), but if you’ve got an old-school, few-fea-
tures phone, you’ll appreciate this service. FeedBeep (feedbeep.com) lets 
you send keyword-filtered RSS feeds to your mobile phone, which is handy 
if you want to keep up with certain kinds of news or other things that are 
delivered by RSS feeds (tags, classified ads, and so on). 
However, Feedbeep is not a free service—it costs either $2.95 or $14.95 a month, 
depending on how many alerts you wish to get. You could use these for your 
important feeds that you can filter a little by keyword. (Otherwise, you might 
find yourself getting a lot of SMS alerts, and spending a lot of money.) 
Weatherbug Mobile
You might not think that weather is worth much of a discussion, but after 
hurricanes, floods, snow, and a variety of other emergency-level meteo-
rology, it’s nice to have the latest forecasts coming straight to your phone. 
Weatherbug (weatherbug.com/mobile/default.asp) is free.
Note that the services I’ve mentioned aren’t nearly all the mobile alert ser-
vices that are out there—so many of them are oriented to a particular site 

Going Mobile
A5
that I could never list them all. To find more of these services, try doing a 
Google search for wireless alert and then type in the keyword in which 
you’re interested. So you might enter wireless alert stocks, or wireless 
alert legal. It takes a little sifting, but there are probably hundreds of sin-
gle-site wireless alert services out there. 
As you’ll see momentarily, your phone is not limited to receiving SMS 
alerts—you can often send e-mail messages to your phone as well. However, 
when there are SMS alert services available for the topic in which you’re 
interested, you should use those instead of sending e-mails to your phone. 
Why? Because alert services are formatted to your phone. They’re short, 
they’re free of HTML and multimedia, and they’re easy to read. Regular 
e-mails, even ones that are fairly short, can be tough to read on mobile 
phones. Even on a phone that’s got an easily readable, large screen, like a 
BlackBerry, a regular e-mail can look like hash. 
But sometimes regular e-mail messages are the only way you can get the 
information you want to monitor, so let’s discuss how to do that. 
Filtering to your phone 
In the last chapter, we looked at GMail and how to filter your e-mail. To get 
information to your phone, there’s just one more step you have to take—set 
up filters to go to your phone’s e-mail address, which you hopefully discov-
ered earlier in this chapter. 
If you have an older phone that only does text messages and doesn’t do 
browsing, make sure that the mail you’re getting to your phone contains 
information that you can use independently of the Web. An alert that con-
tains only a pointer to a Web page, for example, isn’t going to be very use-
ful. A page monitor alert that contains the text of the changed page, on the 
other hand, can be useful, as long as it contains a limited amount of text and 
doesn’t overload your phone. 
I’m sorry I can’t be more specific! There are many phone models out there. 
Basically, the more recent your phone, the more you’ll be able to do. But even 
older phones, with their SMS receiving capabilities, can do some things. 
While mobile phones can’t do everything a desktop or laptop computer can do, 
they sure try! For phones, primarily, there’s e-mail and then there’s browsing. 

A6
Information Trapping
Browsing on your phone 
How can you go browsing on your phone’s tiny little screen? You use the 
WAP protocol. WAP stands for Wireless Application Protocol, and it’s a 
way to build Web sites so that they’re ideally formatted for those tiny little 
screens. I’m telling you about them so that you’ll be aware that there is a 
way to surf the Internet from a phone, and there is a place to go exploring 
for wireless alerts. 
If you want to browse with WAP, start with Google. 
Google WAP 
Google WAP (wap.google.com) is very basic. You’re given a search box and 
the option to either search the Web as a whole or search just what Google 
calls the “Mobile Web”—in other words, WAP-enabled sites. If you want 
to try this site, be sure to access it from your phone—Google can often tell 
what kind of browser you’re using and will format the page appropriately. 
Results only come five at a time and do not include snippets or page infor-
mation, but rather just page links. This is annoying when you’re relying on 
snippets for page information, so if you want to search Google WAP, take 
extra care to make sure your searches are as specific as possible. 
As you might imagine, Google WAP is just the tip of the WAP iceberg. 
Check out the following WAP directories, all of which you can visit from 
your browser, though the formatting might look a little different. 
Tip
Want to visit a WAP site but don’t want to fire up your phone to 
do it? There are several WAP emulators available. I used WinWAP 
for this book. It allows you to visit WAP sites from Windows and 
see what they’d look like on your phone. You can get more infor-
mation on WinWAP at winwap.com. 
WAP Catalog
WAP Catalog (wapcatalog.com) has a searchable subject index of WAP 
sites, though some categories only have one or two listings. This site also 
has basic information on WAP browsing and pointers to more information 
and resources.

Going Mobile
A7
WAPly
WAPly (waply.com) is also a searchable subject index of WAP sites, but it 
also offers a service called My WAPly. My WAPly lets you set up your own 
set of bookmarks that you can access from a WAP-enabled browser. It also 
has a page of several books with information on WAP, and a pointer to 
WAP phones. 
Seek4WAP
Seek4WAP (seek4wap.com) is a search engine with a keyword search for 
WAP sites. Note that you can narrow your search for sites by language—
handy since there are many sites in many different languages. There’s a list 
of the latest links available, and if you don’t like searching, you can also 
browse for WAP links by category. 
So far we’ve looked at things that basically any phone can do, but you guys 
with the advanced phones may be getting a little impatient. Where are the 
RSS feed readers? Where are the real Web browsers? When do you get to 
unleash your mad phone skillz? Patience. You’re next! 
Software for Advanced Phones
You may have a phone that can run Java applications or that has an operat-
ing system that supports programs more sophisticated than browsing and 
getting short e-mails. In that case, you will probably have several different 
choices of programs to run on your computer. 
I recommend that you look for RSS feed readers, browser software (some-
times third-party browsers are better than browsers that come with your 
phone), and client software that deliver alerts. I can’t tell you what soft-
ware might be available for every possible kind of phone—but I can tell you 
where to look. 
First stop: Your service provider 
If you’re looking for software for your phone, check with your service provider 
first. The two big pros of getting phone software from your provider are:
. 
The company won’t want you to download anything to your phone 
that’s not safe, so you know it’s going to screen its software carefully.

A8
Information Trapping
. 
You know that if you download something from your provider it’s 
going to work with your provider. Why would the company make it 
available if it doesn’t work with its system? 
Of course there are drawbacks as well. I don’t know about your cell service 
provider, but mine is not exactly a cup overflowing with free and open-
source software. In addition, the kind of software your service provider 
offers might be rather limited. Sure, you can get an application to get the 
latest sports scores, but you might not find an RSS feed reader. To get the 
more esoteric stuff—the stuff that information trappers might find most 
interesting—you’ll have to go beyond your provider. 
Second stop: Third-party software providers
Finding software for your phone platforms can be a little tricky. It’s not like 
a computer software download site that might say something is compatible 
with Windows XP. Some phone sites mention Java, some mention just a 
phone operating system, and some mention a phone model series. 
Multiple platforms
Let’s start with multiple-platform sites. Then I’ll give you a couple of tricks 
for finding more information specific to your model.
Handango (handango.com) is one of the more popular and well-known 
software sites for phones and PDAs. Its offering is segmented by operat-
ing system: software includes Symbian OS, BlackBerry, and Windows 
Mobile Smartphone. Within each operating system, products are further 
segmented by category, and also into lists of new offerings, updated offer-
ings, and offerings that have been recommended by visitors. Check out the 
productivity, communications, and business and professional categories to 
find some of the more interesting offerings. 
Filao (filaomobile.com) doesn’t offer nearly as much as Handango does, 
but that makes it quick to walk through. Operating systems covered here 
include Palm OS, Pocket PC phone, Symbian, and Smartphone. Look at the 
utilities and the reference software. 
GetJar (getjar.com) features freeware, demo, and shareware software for a 
variety of devices and operating systems. Devices supported here include a 
number of Nokia devices, as well as Motorola, Siemens, and Alcatel phones. 

Going Mobile
A9
You can also browse by operating system and program type. There are Java 
programs as well as programs for the Symbian, PocketPC, and Palm OS 
platforms. I found that the product descriptions on these pages were very 
extensive, and the user comments were, for the most part, good. Most cat-
egories here are worth visiting, but you may want to concentrate on Brows-
ers, EMail, and Productivity. The Other category is interesting as well. 
Simon Judge Freeware (simonjudge.com/freeware.html) is not a company; 
rather it’s one guy who develops mobile software for a variety of platforms 
and makes some of his applications available on his site. Operating systems 
covered here include Symbian and Windows Mobile. Resources here are not 
divided into categories. Take a quick look around. 
These multiple-platform sites can give you a good overview of the kinds of 
things available, but you may be more interested in finding resources more 
specific to your phone. And there are some types of phones that have lots 
and lots of resources online (BlackBerry’s a good example). You can find 
more phone-specific resources, but I recommend using a directory instead 
of a search engine to do it. 
Tricks for finding specific platforms 
To find software sites for a specific platform, start with a searchable subject 
index. I recommend Yahoo Directory (dir.yahoo.com ). Start with a search 
for a model name, such as BlackBerry or Nokia. Yahoo Directory will give 
you a list of categories that match your search. In the event that you actu-
ally get too many results, narrow it by searching for a specific model (for 
example, BlackBerry 7510). Sometimes this gives you more specific results, 
sometimes—as in the case of BlackBerry 7510—it gives you nothing. Be 
sure to search by brand first. 
If you’re not having any luck with a directory, you can—cautiously—try 
using a full-text search engine. The problem is that you’ll find yourself get-
ting a lot of ads, product pages, and so forth. Try searching for a model 
number with words designed to trigger software sites, like download or 
software or free trial.
No matter whether you find software or not, you can still revert to using 
your phone to receive small snippets of text and e-mails to keep up with 
what interests you most. But how do you manage that information while 
you’re away from the computer?

A10
Information Trapping
Managing Information Flow on the Go 
I use a phone that allows me to receive a reasonable level of e-mail messag-
ing and has an RSS feed reader. But I don’t try to use it as my computer away 
from the computer. Instead I use it in a simpler way. 
. 
As a reminder device. I send to my phone alerts and RSS feeds that 
cover the broadest categories of what I’m interested in. Getting these 
notes on my phone and reading them when I have a bit of down-
time gives me a heads-up about changes and updates to my topics of 
interest. I’m not getting specific information on which I need to act 
immediately. It’s more like just getting a sense of what’s going on in 
the world of information I’m trapping. 
. 
When I need to act quickly. I do have a couple of alerts set up for very 
unusual events. If I hear a rumor that SearchEngineCo is going to go 
public, I might set up a news search alert for SearchEngineCo IPO and 
send it to my cell phone. That way, if I get wind of some news about it, 
I can quickly follow up long before I might get back to the computer 
to check my e-mail. 
. 
As a pointer to the computer. The third class of reminders I get are 
routine things that I want to make note of or take care of. I have some 
alerts that go to my phone that I review when I have a free moment, 
and then forward to members of my team or even to myself to review 
later. These are non-urgent items that tend to pile up. I use my phone to 
review them when I’m standing in line, waiting in the car, and so on. 
I hope what you’re getting from this chapter is the idea that a phone should 
not be the place that your information flows to and stops, but rather a place 
through which your information can flow. From your phone, you can pick 
out what you want, forward it, save it, sit on it. Don’t try to make your phone 
a point from which you respond and act (unless it’s a really, really, really 
good phone), but instead a way that you can get small bits of information 
and a heads-up on special occasions. 

Appendix B 
Keeping Up
The following pages were originally published online as bonus material for our readers 
and are not included in the print version of this title.

B2
Information Trapping
What I’ve tried to do with Information Trapping: Real-Time Research on the 
Web is to give you the framework for an inexpensive way to identify and 
track topics in which you’re interested, and put the results in a form that’s 
presentable to others. Following that framework to a “T” is a tall order. You 
may decide you don’t want to set up every possible monitoring permutation 
in this book. That’s fine. It’s better to set up a partial program that you can 
keep up with, rather than a full program that quickly overwhelms you. 
This bonus chapter looks at ways you can hone the practice of consistently 
keeping up with your information traps—how to instill sound monitor-
ing habits, decide when to change the keywords you’re monitoring, keep 
abreast of new sources to monitor, and reevaluate your sources. 
Unfortunately, a lot of this guidance boils down to a “gut feeling.” I can’t tell 
you, “When you’re only getting x alerts a month for this keyword, switch 
to keyword y for additional relevance.” I can point out symptoms of things 
that might be going wrong, reasons you might be feeling uneasy, and little 
clues to which you might want to pay attention. But in the end, you are the 
best judge of whether your traps are working. 
As you get more and more experienced with information trapping, you’ll 
learn you can very much rely on your instincts to determine when you’ve 
got it right. This kind of thinking reminds me of the book Blink, in which 
author Malcolm Gladwell talks about how people can make decisions in 
just a fraction of a second, based on a lot of subconscious cognition that 
they might not be aware of. As you monitor your topic, as you read about 
it, as you write about it, and as you organize information about it, I suspect 
this will happen to you as well. 
But it doesn’t happen magically. First you have to get in the habit of moni-
toring every day.
Brush, Floss, and Trap 
How much time you spend every day monitoring the Internet for informa-
tion really depends on how many topics you’re monitoring and how much 
news they generate. But even if you’re only watching for news on antique 
woodworking tools, it’s best to do it every day, so that you get into a rhythm 
of checking and you get a sense of what’s normal in terms of how much 
information your traps routinely uncover each day.  

Keeping Up
B3
I used to spend mornings checking my traps; now I tend to check them in 
the evening. It seems to work better when I do it all at once instead of over 
the course of a day—it’s easier to catch duplicates, get a sense of trends in 
coverage, and so on. I go through the RSS feeds and monitored pages sepa-
rately and manage the e-mail alerts as I get my e-mail. 
For every item I get, I try to do one of three things: 
. 
Put it in a text file to be acted on. 
. 
Pass it on to someone who will be more interested in it than I am. 
. 
Throw it away or ignore it.
The temptation is always there to save something for later, of course, but I 
try to resist it. Virtual objects have a tendency to pile up and become use-
less because you never have the time to actually read or act on them (at least 
they’re findable via computer indexing programs). If I absolutely must keep 
something, I try to relegate it to a storage text file that I don’t normally use, but 
which I can easily search if I suddenly have a need for some stashed story. 
If you decide to put off dealing with some of your gathered information in 
this way, be sure to save entire articles rather than just pointers to articles. 
Some sites don’t keep their news archives up for more than 30 days or so, 
and you might find yourself looking for a story that was relegated to a pay-
per-view archive months ago. Full-text articles also make searching a little 
easier as well. 
So you want to be monitoring every day, at a regular time that suits your 
schedule. If this isn’t possible, commit to checking your traps at least three 
times a week. By developing a regular habit of checking your traps, you’ll 
get a sense of the cycle of news for your topic. In the case of my trapping 
topics, weekends and holidays are really slow; Monday and Tuesday are 
torrentially busy, and the rest of the days are busy enough. Things may 
be different for you. If you’re tracking a particular sport, for instance, you 
may have very busy weekends and then months when very little is going on 
because of the off-season. 
Knowing the average day-to-day activity of your topics is what allows the 
gut feeling to come into play. For instance, sometimes I’ll notice that a 
weekend has been a little busier than usual—a rumor here, a story there—
and then I start wondering if something’s going to come down early in the 
week. Often I’m right. Other times I’ll notice a certain story repeating over 

B4
Information Trapping
and over and over again, and I’ll wonder if that means the story is suddenly 
going to change in a dramatic way, and often it does. Once you’re used to the 
rhythms of your topic, you’ll have a “Hey, what’s up?” feeling when you’re 
suddenly getting a lot more, or a lot fewer, alerts. 
When you get that instinctive feeling about a topic you’re trapping, you defi-
nitely want to pay attention to it. It’s that feeling that sometimes lets you know 
it’s time to make changes to the keywords you’re monitoring. 
Know When to Hold ‘Em, Know When  
to Fold ‘Em 
Most keywords for which you’re monitoring are going to be nouns. (I can 
think of a few times when you’d use verbs and other parts of speech, but let’s 
stick to nouns.) And a noun, you may remember from your Schoolhouse 
Rock, is a person, place, or thing. How often you will need to change your 
keywords and what to look for really depends on whether you’re monitor-
ing a person, place, or thing. 
Trapping a person
A lot of people monitors are centered on companies—you want to see what 
the CEO is up to, what the CFO said last week, and so on. It’s easy to know 
when to alter these—when a person leaves the company, is moved out of the 
position you wanted to monitor, and so forth. Sometimes I will leave a per-
son monitor in place if the individual left the company in an extraordinary 
way. If he or she was prosecuted for criminal activity and forced to resign 
from a company, I may continue to monitor the name a little longer. I do 
this because that person’s actions most likely will “echo” in the company for 
a while, and will be referred to again and again as the company deals with 
things like investor lawsuits, restructuring, and realigning its business. 
You might also monitor a name in the context of a topic. Take Peter Drucker, 
for example. Because Drucker is a famous name in the world of business, 
you might have added his name to a monitored source about corporations 
to glean quotes from him, references to his books (many of which are con-
sidered classics in management), and so on. 

Keeping Up
B5
After Drucker passed away in late 2005, you would have to reevaluate your 
choices at that point. You might decide to remove his name from your mon-
itoring, because you were looking for quotes by people considered expert in 
the world of management. On the other hand, you might decide you want 
to keep his name in your monitoring, because he’s often referred to and you 
like the quality of the results you get when you include his name. 
You may also occasionally run across a person who’s written a book or has 
otherwise become famous in a field you’re monitoring. In this case, you’ll 
probably see the name in your monitored results for a while, and then at 
some point you will realize that all the best results have this person’s name 
in them. That’s your cue to either revise your results to include this person’s 
name or add a new monitor with just the name and possibly one general 
keyword for the topic. 
In summary, there are a few specific events that might trigger you to remove 
a name from your monitoring (such as a death or removal from a company), 
but adding names to your monitoring will be more a case of increasingly 
finding those people mentioned in your monitored results and then decid-
ing that adding their names to your searches will generate only a positive 
impact on your search results. 
Trapping a place
Places aren’t used very often as keywords. You search within a geographical 
area for keywords, but you generally wouldn’t find yourself searching for 
the name of the geographical area itself. 
In my experience, places become notorious in a good or a bad way, and 
this reflects in monitoring results. Silicon Valley is synonymous with the 
information technology industry, and can be used as a good query phrase 
when you’re trying to monitor IT in California. On the other hand, if you’re 
trying to monitor for information about weather disasters, “New Orleans” is 
going to trigger a huge number of results, commentary, and analysis. 
Positive associations tend to develop slowly, while negative associations can 
appear overnight and will have a huge impact on your monitoring results. And 
you’ll see them—you won’t be able to miss them! You will have to do some 
experimenting with location names in your search results to see how much dif-
ference they make to your monitoring, and whether it’s helpful or not. 

B6
Information Trapping
Trapping a thing
“Things” probably make up the bulk of your monitoring keywords, and 
that’s as it should be. In many cases the “thing” keywords can change often, 
too, depending on whether you’re using proper nouns or not. 
Proper nouns
Proper nouns, as you may remember from English class, are nouns that name a 
specific person, place, or thing (we’re going to focus more on them as things).
There are lots of proper-noun things that act as great query words: brand 
names, company names, specific product model numbers, and so on. If you 
can add a product name or model number to your search, it does a tremen-
dous amount for narrowing your results. The problem is that model names 
and numbers tend to change a lot. You have to be very vigilant about mak-
ing sure you use the latest model names or numbers in your query. 
Take, for example, the iPod Mini. In 2005, it was superseded by the iPod 
Nano. If you were trying to monitor for information on flash-memory-
based music players and didn’t change your query from “iPod Mini” to “iPod 
Nano” you’d be missing out on a lot of potentially good stuff. You always 
have an opportunity to change and update your queries as you trap press 
releases, reviews, and product updates, so you need to stay vigilant about 
these types of changes. 
Brand names and company names don’t change as often. Sometimes they 
do (KFC was once Kentucky Fried Chicken), but when that happens there’s 
a lot of hullabaloo about it and you’ll get plenty of opportunity to change 
your queries. The model names/numbers and brand names are what you 
have to watch for. 
Common nouns
Common nouns are nouns that are not specific, such as tree, cat, bottle. You 
can often use common nouns in conjunction with other parts of speech to cre-
ate narrowly defined query phrases, such as “Antique woodworking tools”. 
In my experience, common nouns do not change a whole lot once you’ve done 
your initial experimentation and decided on your queries. You may change 
how you describe a noun (“East European woodworking tools”), but often you 
won’t need to change the noun itself. The big exception is technology topics. 

Keeping Up
B7
Tech people love to invent words or use words that have other connotations. 
Nobody knew what a podcast was three years ago—now it’s an incredibly 
common word. The word “mashup” was used to mean a combination of 
songs. Now it also means a combination of data from Web sites combined 
into one site or tool. 
A typical cycle for a tech word can start like this: you see it mentioned 
on a few blogs. Then you see it mentioned on a ton of blogs. Then you see 
tech news outlets explaining what it means in their stories. Then they stop 
explaining what it means because everybody knows what it means. Then 
your grandma starts using it all the time. Okay, maybe not that last one. 
If you see a new word that you think would be useful to your query, you 
should aim to add it when it starts appearing regularly in a ton of blogs. 
Start including it too soon in your searches and you’ll narrow your results 
too much and end up missing some good content. 
Note that words can change as well as just pop into existence. For example, 
one of the hot ideas of 2005, tagging, is not that much different from using 
keywords. But people call it “tagging,” and not “adding keywords.” So while 
I might have added “using keywords” to my searches at one point, I most 
certainly would have changed it to “tagging” in 2005.  
Making your changes
I don’t think you should be hyper-vigilant about changing your queries—
checking your keywords every day to make sure you’re on top of things. 
You’ll know when it’s time to remove things—when you notice that some of 
your queries are not getting much in the line of results, or that the results 
are getting worse and worse. Knowing when to add words to a query is 
trickier. I tend to add a word when I notice it’s in all my search results. If I’m 
not sure, I give it its own query and monitor it for a few days, and then inte-
grate it into my other queries if I’m satisfied. I’ve narrowed my monitoring 
queries even further, which is always a good thing, and also updated them 
with new and relevant words. 
You will learn a lot about new words and new things to add just from look-
ing closely at what you’re already capturing. But I also recommend that you 
create a routine for yourself so that you can keep a more general ear to the 
ground and learn about new topics you might otherwise miss. As a special 
bonus, doing this will also clue you in on new sources to monitor. 

B8
Information Trapping
An Ear to the Ground, a Nose to the Wind 
Every time you research all the potential traps for a set of queries, you’ll come 
across blogs, or portals, or information sites, that cover your topic but do not 
get as narrowed or focused as you need them to. I recommend you pick a few 
of the best ones—not all of them, just a few—and read them regularly, either 
via Web page monitor or RSS feed. This does two things for you: it keeps you 
up to date on new information sources and teaches you new concepts. 
The queries and sources you monitor can keep you up to date on new infor-
mation sources that are relevant to your content, but your queries may 
be too focused for that to work well. You may get all kinds of sites about 
antique woodworking, for example, but nothing about general woodwork-
ing directories, which may be useful for you to monitor for antique wood-
working sites. Use your queries to be as specific as possible, and then do a 
little general overview monitoring to hit all the topical stuff that can help 
you add new sources down the road. 
Monitoring topical overview sites and news sources is also useful because 
these types of sites track all the trends for the topic you’re monitoring, and 
because they’re general sources, sometimes they will expose you to and 
teach you about a new concept or idea faster than if you had relied only on 
your queries. Which means that you can start experimenting with those 
concepts in your queries sooner rather than later. 
It’s unlikely that you’ll have a problem finding topical Web sites that match 
your interest as you work on generating your specific monitoring queries. 
If you do, however, try a searchable subject index like Yahoo or the Open 
Directory Project. 
Reevaluating Your Sources and Pruning  
Your Traps
I’m being very glib, aren’t I, recommending that you add queries when you 
might be feeling like you’re quite overloaded as it is? It’s just as important 
to remove queries that are no longer productive, or which aren’t quite what 
you’re looking for, as it is to add new names and concepts as you find them.  
Sometimes you’ll discover that two sources you’re monitoring are overlapping 
more than a reasonable amount (perhaps five to ten percent), so one of them 

Keeping Up
B9
has to go. Or you may find that a source has become so overwhelmed with 
advertising that the difficulty of getting to the news outweighs the quality of 
the news. Time to get rid of it. You may also find that a site is almost never 
updating anymore, or has gone off in a wildly different direction. Get rid of it. 
If it comes back, you’ll hear about it from your general topic sources.
Here are some other signs that you may need to get rid of a source or a query: 
. 
You never actively use the information that your trap finds. (This 
may also be a symptom that you have too many queries and are get-
ting overwhelmed with information. Evaluate your sources.) 
. 
By the time you get a good story from that source or query, you’ve 
already gotten it several times from other sources. 
. 
When you get something from a source or query and you think,  “Oh, 
argh.” Go with your gut instinct and get rid of it.
A Dynamically Changing Activity
If there were only one thing that I could really get across to you about the 
whole idea of information trapping, it would be this: it’s not a static process. 
You will constantly need to evaluate your results—not merely as informa-
tional items, but as elements of your monitoring strategy. 
By shifting your focus from wandering on the Internet to setting traps for 
the information you want, you now can save a lot of time and effort in keep-
ing abreast of the topics that interest you. I grant you, it’s a lot more time 
consuming to set the traps up than it is to just fire up your browser and start 
surfing. But you will more than make that time back in the long run. 

This page intentionally left blank 

Appendix C 
Useful RSS Tools
The following pages were originally published online as bonus material for our readers 
and are not included in the print version of this title.

C2
Information Trapping
Information trapping on a large scale would be very difficult, if not down-
right impossible, if it weren’t for RSS feeds. RSS feeds are a very easy and 
convenient way to monitor information. They make it possible to do date-
based searching and very specific content tracking. 
Even though I devoted an entire chapter to RSS technology in my book, I 
still didn’t have enough space to address the tools that are available to help 
you take advantage of RSS. 
This bonus chapter presents 12 useful RSS tools that run the gamut from 
converting RSS feeds to images to capturing RSS feeds almost indefinitely. 
The tools are organized into four categories: Web site tools, creation tools, 
filtering tools, and miscellaneous tools.
You may not be able to work all of these tools into your information trap-
ping strategy, but just learning about them will hopefully provide a new 
perspective on how you can use RSS. 
Web Site Tools
Do you want to put the contents of an RSS Feed on your Web site, but you 
don’t want to have to learn programming? If this is the case, you have sev-
eral options that are no more complicated than filling out a form and copy-
ing and pasting some code. 

Useful RSS Tools
C3
Grazr 
Grazr (grazr.com) is a free service that lets you create a JavaScript-gener-
ated box to display RSS feeds on your site (Figure 1). Unlike some RSS feed 
generators, you can expand and collapse RSS feeds from within the display. 
You can add not just one feed but entire OPML files, or sets of RSS feeds, at 
one time. And you can set up 20 or 30 feeds to read from one small box. 
Figure 1 
Grazr provides a layout 
tool and several options 
to make it easy to 
create an RSS box. 
Figure 1 
Grazr provides a layout 
tool and several options 
to make it easy to 
create an RSS box. 

C4
Information Trapping
Ticker My Feed
Grazr is a good site, but not the only site that can help you create a box to put 
feed content on your site. The problem is that a lot of people don’t have the 
real estate on their page for a large RSS feed box. If you’re in that situation, 
try Ticker My Feed (tickermyfeed.com). You can use the free service to add 
either a traditional “box feed” or a small horizontal ticker through which 
an RSS feed will scroll. Ticker My Feed gives you a lot of control over the 
look and style of the feed (Figure 2).
Figure 2
Running low on screen 
real estate? Create 
a dynamic but small 
ticker for the RSS feed 
of your choice using 
Ticker My Feed.
Figure 2
Running low on screen 
real estate? Create 
a dynamic but small 
ticker for the RSS feed 
of your choice using 
Ticker My Feed.

Useful RSS Tools
C5
RSS 2 GIF
Perhaps you don’t want to use a service like Grazr or Ticker My Feed 
because you don’t want to have any JavaScript on your site, or your visitors 
have browsers that can’t support JavaScript. If that’s the case, try RSS2GIF 
(rss2gif.com). This free service can turn an RSS feed into a GIF image file 
that you can put on your site. The GIF is clickable, and will take you to the 
RSS feed’s Web site. Best of all, the GIF image file automatically changes as 
the RSS feed updates (Figure 3).
Creation Tools
If you use WordPress, Movable Type, or some other blog publishing system, 
there’s a good chance your site automatically generates RSS feeds. But if you’re 
not using software or a service that automatically creates RSS feeds for you, 
this section addresses some solutions that help you create your own. 
Figure 3
From text to picture, 
RSS2GIF uses an RSS 
feed to create an image 
that changes as the 
feed is updated. 
Figure 3
From text to picture, 
RSS2GIF uses an RSS 
feed to create an image 
that changes as the 
feed is updated. 

C6
Information Trapping
FeedforAll
FeedforAll (feedforall.com) is an application you can download to your 
Windows-based or Mac-based computer and use it to create and update RSS 
feeds. You can also use the service to tweak plain feeds generated by content 
management systems. FeedforAll isn’t free—it’s $39.95 for a downloadable 
version. However, NotePage, Inc. (the company behind FeedforAll) also 
offers several PHP feeds that do various RSS tasks (Figure 4). One of them 
is free; the rest are free with the purchase of FeedforAll. 
Figure 4
In addition to RSS 
software, Notepage 
offers several different 
RSS-related PHP 
scripts. 
Figure 4
In addition to RSS 
software, Notepage 
offers several different 
RSS-related PHP 
scripts. 

Useful RSS Tools
C7
ListGarden
If you’re familiar with RSS and you want to try a free solution, check out 
ListGarden (softwaregarden.com/products/listgarden/index.html). The 
free service does not offer any support or a warranty, although it does have 
decent documentation and offers several tutorials. Like FeedforAll, it is a 
downloadable software application that lets you create and maintain RSS 
feeds. A version for Windows, a Perl version for Mac, and a generic Perl 
version are all available. 
FeedPublish
If you want to maintain an RSS feed from several different computers, try 
FeedPublish (feedpublish.com), a Web-based way to create and maintain 
RSS feeds. This free service walks you through the process of creating and 
maintaining an RSS feed. It also tracks click-throughs on your feed and can 
send you reports via e-mail if you want them. The free feeds contain adver-
tisements; Pro accounts, which cost $4.95 a month, omit the ads.
Filtering Tools
One complaint about RSS feeds is that sometimes they generate a lot of 
duplicates. This is especially true when you’re monitoring several differ-
ent sites for similar keywords. One way to get rid of the duplicates is to put 
many RSS feeds into one large feed and filter out the duplicates. The services 
mentioned in this section help you do that.
FeedJumbler
If you want to put together a lot of different feeds quickly, you might like 
FeedJumbler (feedjumbler.com). This free service doesn’t even require reg-
istration—you simply enter what you want to call your feed and a list of 
feeds you want to include. FeedJumbler creates a feed for you in several dif-
ferent formats, and offers various options to change the look and contents 
of the feed. 

C8
Information Trapping
FeedShake
FeedShake (feedshake.com) is a little more complicated than FeedJumbler 
and does require registration. You enter as many URLs as you want to 
include in a single feed and then log in. A feed page editor lets you specify a 
title for your feeds and use keyword filters to indicate what entries you want 
to add or remove from your RSS feed (Figure 5). The latter feature is useful 
when you want to monitor a site for keywords, but it doesn’t offer keyword-
based RSS feeds. FeedShake is a free service. 
Figure 5 FeedShake lets you combine feeds and filter them by keyword.
Miscellaneous Tools
You can do a lot of different things with RSS feeds. This section presents a 
few interesting, possibly useful, and definitely unclassifiable uses for RSS. 
RSS2PDF 
If you’re looking for a quick way to archive the content of RSS feeds on 
paper, RSS2PDF (rss2pdf.com) is a terrific solution (Figure 6). Simply enter 
the URL of the RSS feed in which you’re interested, and RSS2PDF produces 
a PDF file of that feed’s current content. This free service works best with 
full-content RSS feeds. The site also offers a desktop version of the service 
and RSS2PDF bookmarklets. 

Useful RSS Tools
C9
Feed 43
RSS feeds are terrific at tracking new content on Web sites or search results 
that match keywords. But what do you do when you just want to track a tiny 
bit of information on a Web site, such as a name or number? Feed43 (feed43.
com) uses an easily configurable screen scraper to cull very small parts of 
information from a Web site and turn the information into an RSS feed 
(Figure 7). You can also use Feed43 to track Web sites that don’t have their 
own RSS feeds. Services start at $29 a year.
Figure 6
Want to save that feed 
for posterity? Turn it 
into a PDF!  
Figure 6
Want to save that feed 
for posterity? Turn it 
into a PDF!  

C10
Information Trapping
Feedcatch
RSS feeds aren’t designed to retain every update they publish. If they did, 
they’d be very, very long. Most RSS feeds contain information on only the 
last 10 to 20 items that have changed on a Web site. If you find yourself in a 
situation in which you know you will need the contents of an RSS feed for 
an upcoming project, but you don’t quite need it yet or don’t have the time 
to keep up with it, try Feedcatch (feedcatch.feedshake.com), a free service 
of Feedshake. 
To use Feedshake, you enter the URL of the feed you want to archive, and 
then specify the maximum number of items you want to keep in the RSS 
feed and the number of hours old the contents of the feed can be. If you set 
both of those parameters to 0, Feedcatch will create a feed that stores its 
contents indefinitely. 
Figure 7
Feed43 uses patterned 
screen scraping to 
create RSS feeds 
focused on small bits of 
information. 
Figure 7
Feed43 uses patterned 
screen scraping to 
create RSS feeds 
focused on small bits of 
information. 

Useful RSS Tools
C11
Feed Validator
If you have to create and maintain your feed by hand, it will require a lot of time 
and effort—even if you use software to help you. So you want to make sure RSS 
readers can view the feed you’re putting so much effort into generating. 
Feed Validator (feedvalidator.org) lets you know whether a URL you 
entered is a valid, working feed. The free service includes the text of your 
RSS feed, along with highlights of real and potential problems, with exten-
sive documentation (Figure 8). Feed Validator can be nitpicky—sometimes 
it displays the message “This feed is valid, but may cause problems for some 
users.” But it provides a great way to learn about RSS feed syntax. 
Figure 8 Feed Validator warns you not only about things that will break your feed, but also about things that 
could potentially cause trouble. 

C12
Information Trapping
Pushing the Envelope
RSS feeds, along with e-mail alerts and Web page monitors, make it pos-
sible to capture meaningful information out of the enormous information 
flow that goes through the Internet every day—heck, every second. Using 
the tools in this bonus chapter, you can pursue the possibilities even fur-
ther, from creating a way to funnel information back into the Internet, to 
making sure that the topic you want to monitor gets and stays captured. 
Happy trapping! 

- (minus sign), 79–80, 104, 105
* (asterisk), 130
+ (plus sign), 105, 221
“ (quotes), 80, 105, 107, 308
~ (tilde), 103
2RSS, 23
43 Things, 199–200, 219
A
A-Z Agency list, 153
A9, 116–117
adult content, 178
Advanced Search forms
Amazon, 142–143
eBay, 146
FindArticles, 123
Flickr, 1963
Gigablast, 118
GMail, 227–230
Google, 82–83
Google Images, 176–177
Google Video, 179–180
Yahoo, 105
Yahoo Images, 178
Yahoo News, 119–120
Yahoo Video, 181–182
aignes.com, 56
alert services, 63–72
finding, 63–64
Flickr, 198
Google Alert, 69–71, 103
Google Alerts, 67–69, 103
Hoovers, 128–129
Northern Light, 131
Notifyr, 198
third-party, 69–72
TracerLock, 71–72
Yahoo, 64–67
Alexa, 116
AltaVista Audio Search, 167–168
Amazon, 24, 116, 142–145
Amber Alerts, 64
“and” searches, 79
Apple
iTunes, 169, 173
Safari, 33
Archive, Internet, 174
ASCII text files, 250–251
Ask Desktop, 253–254
Ask Images, 177–178
Ask Jeeves, 108–110
asterisk (*), 130
Atom feeds, 11, 33, 287
Attensa, 228
auction sites, 145, 149
audio, searching for, 164–175
audio archives, 173–174
audio blogs, 175
audio-only search engines, 165–168
Audio Search, AltaVista, 167–168
B
Babelfish, 167
Backflip, 272–273
Bausch, Paul, 144
Belkasoft, 257
best deal blogs, 148
Big-Boards, 214–215
blackperl.com, 269
BlinkList, 194
Blog Search, Google, 135–136, 243
blog software packages, 291–296
blog-tracking case study, 241–245
Blogdigger, 134–135, 246
Blogdigger Media, 172
Blogfinder, 21–22
Blogger, 14, 285–287, 290–291
Blogger Buzz, 286
Blogging in a Snap, 290
blogging sites, 289–296
Bloglines, 34–35, 98–99
blogrolls, 94
blogs, 284–296
audio, 175
vs. conversations, 85
coupon/best deal, 148
determining number of subscribers 
to, 98
hosted, 284–289
hosting your own, 289–296
monitoring, 242–243
Index

312
Index
D
Dealhack, 148
Del. See del.icio.us
del.icio.us, 172, 191–193, 268–269
del.icio.us Filtered, 193
desktop indexers, 253–261
DHL package tracking, 24
digital archives, 27
directories
Google, 112
RSS feed, 15–22
Web, 78, 106–108, 112, 160, 240
Yahoo, 78, 106–108, 160, 240
discussion boards/groups, 202, 213, 279, 
282, 303. See also conversations
Disorient Express, 24
Dmoz, 112, 160, 240
documents, publishing, 276–278
domains
monitoring links to, 89
restricting search to specific, 81, 91
dot-addressing, 221
E
e-mail
archiving, 226–227
client-side, 233, 234
deleting, 227
filtering, 218, 222–224, 246–247
forwarding, 226
free service. See GMail
getting information-trapping 
results via, 6
getting RSS feeds via, 228–229
as Internet killer app, 200
searching, 227–230
shutting down, 246–247
Web-based, 232, 234
e-mail alert services, 63–72
finding, 63–64
Flickr, 198
Google Alert, 69–71, 103
Google Alerts, 67–69, 103
Hoovers, 128–129
Northern Light, 131
Notifyr, 198
third-party, 69–72
TracerLock, 71–72
Yahoo, 64–67
e-mail alerts, 62–72
advantages of, 62–63
blogs (continued)
pros and cons of, 284–285
searching, 85, 132–137, 198–200
vs. Web sites, 284
vs. wikis, 284
BlogSpot, 285–287
book information, 142–143
Book Standard, 11
bookmarklets, 47, 48, 193, 231
bookmarks, 189, 191, 269
Bookmarks, Yahoo’s, 269
Boolean logic, 79
Boz, 269
browsers. See Web browsers
business information, 126
C
cell phones
getting trapping results via, 6, 229
sending e-mail alerts to, 66, 68
ChangeDetect, 53–54
CIA Factbook, 156–157
CiteULike, 200
city sites, 149–150
client-based RSS readers, 14, 34, 38–41
client-side e-mail, 233, 234
client-side page monitors, 46, 56–60
clustering feature, Flickr, 197
clustering search engines, 114–115, 155
ClusterMed, 155
Clusty, 114
CNET, 36, 174
commercial information, trapping, 
142–149
Connotea, 200
content filters, 178
content-management software, 14
conversations
vs. blogs, 85
searching within, 84, 85, 86, 205, 
213–216
trapping, 202–213
types of, 202
Copyscape, 97
Copysentry, 97
core sources, 75
corporate feeds, 22
country codes, 91
coupon blogs, 148
coupons, 24
Cream, 251
Creative Commons, 105

313
Index
as alternative to page monitors, 45, 
62–63
as alternative to RSS feeds, 44, 
62–63
defined, 62
setting up on Yahoo, 64–66
EarthLink, 233
eBay, 145–149
Embassy.org, 157
eSnips, 270
Eudora, 220, 233
ExpressionEngine, 295–296
eXtensible Markup Language, 8  
See also XML
external information
defined, 75
information-trapping case study, 
236–241
F
Familiar Taste, 269
federal sites, 152–156
FedEx package tracking, 24
feed readers
Atom, 11, 33, 287
client-based, 14, 34, 38–41
RSS. See RSS readers
typical layouts for, 37
using Web browsers as, 12, 29–33
Web-based, 14, 33–38
Feed Validator, 308
FeedBurner, 100
FeedDigest, 308–309
Feedster, 15–16, 26–27, 132–133, 243
filetype syntax, 164–165, 176
filtering
e-mail, 220, 222–224, 246–247
images, 178
spam, 219
viruses, 219
FindArticles, 122–124
Firefox, 29–33
benefits of, 29
extensions, 30–33, 231, 269
GMail tools, 231
Live Bookmark feature, 29–30
portable version of, 252
recommended book on, 30
RSS support, 29–30
and Thunderbird, 233
where to get, 29
Firefox and Thunderbird Garage, 30
FirstGov, 152–154
Flickr, 176, 195–198
folksonomies, 84, 188–189
forums, 213–216. See also conversations
free services
eSnips, 270
Gmail, 218
Google Alert, 69
Google Groups, 280
intraVnews, 228
Kebberfegg, 138
mailing lists, 279–281
My Yahoo, 37
RawSugar, 194
RMail, 229
RSSFwd, 229
Technorati, 94
WatchThatPage, 47
Yahoo Groups, 281
free software
Cream, 251
EditPad Lite, 251
Firefox, 29
iTunes, 169
Metapad, 251
Net Snippets, 263
NoteTab Lite, 251
Onfolio, 264
Pegasus, 233
Thunderbird, 233
free trials
ChangeDetect, 53
InfoMinder, 50
NewzCrawler, 40
Northern Light, 130
OnlineHomeBase, 271–272
Surfulater, 263
TracerLock, 71
Trackle, 54
Web Watcher, 59
WebSite-Watcher, 56
full-text search engines, 78, 104, 118
Furl, 269
G
gadgets, 255–256
GDS Pro, 257
generator, RSS feed, 143–144
geographic searches, 5
Get a Podcast, 171–172
GIF files, 176–177
Gigablast, 117–118

314
Index
GMail, 218–234
address construction in, 221–222
alternatives to, 232–233
archiving e-mail in, 226–227
benefits of, 219
deleting e-mail in, 227
filtering with, 220, 222–224
forwarding e-mail in, 226
getting account on, 219–220
getting RSS feeds via, 228
searching e-mail in, 227–230
storage limit, 218, 226
tools, 230–231
tweaking settings for, 224–226
GMail Drive, 231
GMail Loader, 231
GMail Notifier, 230
GMail Preview Bubbles, 231
GMail Tips, 231
GMail Tools, 231
gMailto Bookmarklet, 231
Google
Alerts feature, 67–69, 103
basic vs. advanced search page, 83
blog search engine, 135–136, 243
building queries for, 103
desktop search engine, 255–258
e-mail service. See GMail
finding audio with, 164–165
link syntax, 89
monitoring, 102–104
query limit, 77, 103
site syntax, 81
Song Search, 167
title syntax, 80
trapping site links in, 89
URL syntax, 81, 103
Web index, 68
Google Alert, 69–71, 103
Google Desktop, 255–258
Google Directory, 112
Google Groups, 68, 202–207, 238, 
243–244, 280
Google Images, 176–177
Google News, 82, 121, 138, 207, 236–237
govengine, 151
government information, trapping, 
149–156
Greasemonkey, 231, 269
group syntax, 203
Groups
Google, 68, 202–207, 238, 243–244
Yahoo, 208–210, 238, 243, 281
H
Hedtke, John, 30
HighBeam Library, 124–126
Hofmann, Chris, 30
HomeBase, 271–272
Hoovers, 126–129
hosted blogging, 284–289
hosted wiki services, 298–301
HTML
Code Tutorial, 302
Goodies page, 302
meaning of acronym, 8
monitoring, 44. See also page 
monitors
purpose of, 8
and search engines, 9
vs. XML, 8–9
Hubmed, 155
hurricane information, 24
hyperlinks. See links
HyperText Markup Language, 8.  
See also HTML
I
iBoogie, 115
Iceland site, 158–159
IceRocket, 95, 133–134, 199
ICQ plug-in, 257
images
monitoring, 175–178
searching for, 175–178, 195–198
tagging, 195–198
indexes, search engine, 104, 253
indexing programs, 253
InfoMinder, 50–53
information
organizing, 250–273
publishing, 276–309
trapping. See information trapping
information trapping. See also trapping
applying geographic restrictions 
to, 5
benefits of, 2–3
case studies, 236–245
choosing sources for, 5, 75
defined, 2
delivery methods for, 6
downside to, 3
with e-mail alerts, 62–72. See also 
e-mail alerts
free vs. fee, 50
and GMail filters, 224

315
Index
importance of RSS in, 14, 41
of internal vs. external 
information, 74–75
manageability vs. completeness 
in, 75
with page monitors, 44–60. See also 
page monitors
questions to ask about, 4–6
ways of using, 4
internal information
defined, 74
examples of, 100
information-trapping case study, 
241–245
trapping, 88
International Herald Tribune, 10
international sites, monitoring, 156–160
Internet. See also Web sites
dynamic nature of, 2, 6
killer app, 200
using for research, 2
Internet Archive, 174
Internet Explorer, 39, 256, 261, 270, 271
Internet Underground Music Archive, 
173–174
intitle syntax, 80, 104, 111, 204, 205
intraVnews, 228
iPod, 41, 169, 254
ISPs, 232
Ithaki, 167
iTunes, 169, 173
IUMA, 173–174
J
JavaScript, 31, 48, 309
JotSpot, 299–300
JPEG files, 176–177
K
Kebberfegg, 138–141, 237
keyword-based RSS feeds
benefits of, 25
defined, 13
finding, 14
and Kebberfegg, 138–141
managing, 138–141
for podcasts, 172–173
Knous, Marcia, 30
L
L-Soft List Catalog, 212–213
Larry’s Help File, 257
Library of Congress, 189
library services, 24
link syntax, 89–90
linkdomain syntax, 90, 92
links
trapping, in RSS feeds, 93–95
trapping general site, 88–93
LISTSERVs, 212–213
Live Bookmark feature, Firefox, 29–30
Live Search, Microsoft, 110–112
LiveJournal, 287
location syntax, 82, 119
logs, Web site, 98
LookSmart, 122
M
Mac
page monitors, 59–60
search-engine indexers, 253
Mac OS X
RSS feed reader, 40–41
Web browser, 33
mailing lists, 202–213
free, 279–281
Google, 202–207. See also Google 
Groups
guidelines for, 283
L-Soft List Catalog, 212–213
vs. other types of conversations, 
202
paid, 282–283
publishing to, 278–283
starting, 279
TILE.NET, 212
Topica, 210–211
Yahoo, 208–210. See also Yahoo 
Groups
markups, 8
Media, Blogdigger, 172
Media Drop, The, 22
medical information, 76, 86, 155
Metapad, 251
Microsoft
Internet Explorer, 39, 256, 261, 
270, 271
Live Search, 110–112
Office, 255
Outlook, 228, 233, 255
Outlook Express, 255
MIDI files, 167
minus sign (-), 79–80, 104, 105
mobile phones. See cell phones
mobile trapping, 28, 229, 309

316
Index
monitoring. See also page monitors
Amazon, 144–145
blogs, 132–137, 242–243
for content snippets, 96–97
conversations, 200–216
eBay, 145–147
general search engines, 102–118
group discussions, 243–244
HTML pages, 44
images, 175–178
international sites, 156–160
links to domains, 89
links to URLs, 89
news, 244–245
news about search engines, 52, 72
news search engines, 118–132
podcasts, 172–173
search engines, 244
stocks, 240–241
Usenet, 71–72, 202–207
videos, 179–184
monitors, page. See page monitors
Mooter, 114–115
Movable Type, 14, 287, 292–294
Mozilla, 29, 30, 233
MP3 files, 164–165, 167, 168
MP3.com, 174
MSN news search, 122
MSN Search, 110
MSNBC, 122
MTA service advisories, 24
multimedia trapping, 164–185
audio, 164–175
images, 175–178
videos, 179–184
music, 164–165, 173–174. See also audio
My Bookmarks, 269
My Yahoo, 15, 37–38, 140
N
National Hurricane Center, 24
Net Atlantic, 282
Net Snippets, 261–263, 267, 270
NetNewsWire, 40–41
Netscape, 270
New York City transit system, 24
news alerts, 64, 68
news search engines, 118–132,  
237–238, 245
Newsburst, 36–37
NewsGator, 14, 239
newsgroups, 202–207, 212
NewsIsFree, 19–21, 243
newsletters, 279
newspaper feeds, 22
NewzCrawler, 39–40
nlresearch.com, 129
Nooked, 22
Northern Light, 129–132
NoteTab Lite, 251
Notifyr, 198
NucleusCMS, 296
O
ODP, 112–113
Onfolio, 264–267
onions, theory of, 76–77, 85
online forums, 213–216. See also 
conversations
OnlineHomeBase, 271–272
Open Directory Project, 78, 112–113, 240
Opera, 261, 272
OPML files, 36, 138–141
“or” searches, 79
organizing information, 250–273
client-side options, 261–267
portable strategy for, 250–252
on single machine, 253–261
with text editor, 250–251
Web-based options for, 268–273
with wikis, 251–252
Outlook, 228, 233, 255
Outlook Express, 255
Outsourcing to Taiwan case study, 
236–241
oxus.net, 24
P
package tracking, 24
page monitors, 44–61. See also 
monitoring
as alternative to RSS feeds, 8, 44, 45
on Amazon, 144–145
client-side, 46, 56–60
for finding content snippets, 96–97
free vs. fee, 50
how they work, 44
for Mac, 59–60
shutting down, 247
types of, 45–46
Web-based, 45–46, 47–55, 72
when to use, 45
for Windows, 56–59
page-size syntax, 82
PBwiki, 300
PDF documents, publishing, 276–278

317
Index
Pegasus, 233
photo-sharing services, 176
photographs, 175, 195. See also images
PHP, 309
phrase searches, 80, 86, 104, 105, 107
plus-addressing, 221
plus sign (+), 105, 221
pMachine, 295–296
PNG files, 176–177
Podcast Directory, 171
podcasts, 168–173
benefits of, 169, 173
defined, 168–169
finding, 169–172
listening to, 169
monitoring, 172–173
Podspider, 170
PodZinger, 172–173
POP forwarding, 225
Portable Firefox, 252
primary-source RSS feeds, 14
product coupons, 24
publishing, 276–309
to mailing lists, 278–283
PDF documents, 276–278
text documents, 276–278
via blogs, 284–296
via RSS feeds, 303–309
via wikis, 296–301
Word documents, 276–278
on your own Web site, 301–303
PubMed, 62, 155
Q
queries, 74–86
adding words to, 77
basic syntax for, 79–80
building. See query-building
excluding words in, 80
for internal vs. external 
information, 74–75
narrowing focus of, 77, 78–79
for searching conversations, 85, 
86, 205
for searching within tags, 85
special syntax for, 80–82
and theory of onions, 76–77, 85
using advanced search forms for, 
82–84. See also Advanced 
Search forms
query-building. See also searching
for Ask, 109
for Blogdigger, 134–135
for conversations, 205
for Feedster, 132
for FindArticles, 123–124
for Google, 103, 135–136
for Google News, 121
for HighBeam Library, 125
for Hoovers, 129
for IceRocket, 133
manageability vs. completeness 
in, 75
for Microsoft Live Search, 111–112
for MSNBC, 122
for Northern Light, 130
for online forums, 214
for Open Directory Project, 
112–113
recommended book on, 77
for Sphere, 136–137
for Yahoo, 104–107
for Yahoo Directory, 106–108
for Yahoo News, 119–120
quotes (“), 80, 105, 107, 308
R
ranchero.com, 40
RawSugar, 194, 270
RDF Site Summary, 8. See also RSS
Republic of Iceland site, 158–159
ResearchBuzz, 12, 25, 29
Rich Site Summary, 8. See also RSS
RMail, 229
robotpolishers.com, 24
RSS, 8–41
benefits of, 13–14
as cornerstone of information-
trapping strategy, 14, 41
feed readers. See RSS readers
feeds. See RSS feeds
files, 10. See also RSS feeds
getting information-trapping 
results via, 6
meaning of acronym, 8
tools, 23
as type of XML, 8–10
RSS Auction, 149
RSS Feed button, 15
RSS feed generator, 143–144
RSS feeds, 9–28
anatomy of, 11–12
content distribution via, 303–309
corporate, 22
creating your own, 305–308

318
Index
RSS feeds (continued)
defined, 10
directories of, 15–23
eBay, 147
federal government, 153
finding, 14–23
Firefox support for, 29–30
full vs. abbreviated, 304–305
getting via e-mail, 228–229
how Web sites identify, 15
identifying readers of, 98–100
importing/exporting lists of, 36
keyword-based. See keyword-based 
RSS feeds
making publishable on Web sites, 
308–309
managing, 30, 138–141
My Yahoo support for, 15, 37–38
newspaper, 22
page monitors as alternative to, 8, 
44, 45
primary-source, 14
promoting, 305
reading. See RSS readers
searchable subject indexes of, 
22–23
shutting down, 246
static, 25, 27
testing, 308
trapping links in, 89, 93–95
as type of XML, 9–10
types of, 25–28
ways of using, 24
Yahoo, 92–93
from YouTube, 184
RSS Network, 23
RSS readers, 28–41
categories of, 28
client-based, 14, 34, 38–41
Firefox, 29–30
importing/exporting feeds from, 36
platform options, 28
typical layouts for, 37
Web-based, 14, 33–38
Web browsers’ built-in, 29
RSSFwd, 229
S
Safari, 33
Sage, 32–33
Saved Searches feature, Hoovers’, 127
Science.gov, 155
scientific information, 155
search engine indexes, 104, 253
search engines, 75–86. See also Web 
searches
advanced search forms for, 82–84. 
See also Advanced Search forms
audio-only, 165–168
basic syntax for, 79–80
blog, 135–136, 243
and Boolean logic, 79
business, 126
clustering, 114–115, 155
desktop, 253–261
developing queries for, 76–77
for finding RSS feeds, 15–22
full-text, 78, 104, 118
how to get the most from, 75–76
monitoring general, 102–118, 244
monitoring news, 118–132
monitoring news about, 52, 72
natural language, 108
news, 118–132, 237–238, 245
RSS feeds devoted to, 27
special syntax for, 80–82
types of, 77–79
and XML vs. HTML pages, 9
search queries. See queries
searchable subject indexes. See subject 
indexes
Searchforvideo, 180–181
searching. See also query-building
Amazon, 142–143
audio, 164–175
blogs, 132–137, 198–200, 243
conversations, 84, 85, 86, 205, 
213–216
e-mail, 227–230
eBay, 145–147
for images, 175–178, 195–198
for mailing lists, 208–213
podcasts, 169–172
Usenet, 202–207
for videos, 179–184
SeedWiki, 300–301
service advisories, MTA, 24
Shadows, 200
Shergold, Craig, 201
simpletracking.com, 24
Simpy, 269
Singingfish, 166
site syntax, 81
sixapart.com, 292
Slickdeals, 148
smart quotes, 308
SMS, 6

319
Index
SmugMug, 176
social bookmarking, 191
Song Search, Google, 167
spam blogs, 133
spam filtering, 219
spammers, 213
Sparklist, 282–283
Sphere, 136–137
spiders, 253
splogs, 133
Spurl, 193, 194
standalone feed readers. See client-based 
RSS readers
state sites, 150–152
static feeds, 25, 27
stemming, 130
stocks, monitoring, 240–241
subject indexes
RSS feed, 22–23
Web, 78, 106, 160
Surfulater, 263–264, 267
Syndic8, 16–19
T
Tag Search
IceRocket, 199
Technorati, 198
tag sites, 191–200
BlinkList, 194
del.icio.us, 191–193
RawSugar, 194
Zniff, 194
tagging
images, 195–198
sites, 268–270. See also del.icio.us
tags, 188–200
defined, 84
for photo searches, 195–198
pros and cons of, 189–190
searching blogs with, 198–200
searching within, 85
Taiwan Outsourcing case study, 236–241
technical information, 86
Technorati, 21–22, 93–94, 198, 243
Teoma, 27, 108
text-based data, 77
text documents, publishing, 276–278
text editors, 250
Textile, 296
Textpattern, 296
The Media Drop, 22
theory of onions, 76–77, 85
Thunderbird, 233
TiddlyWiki, 251–252
tilde (~), 103
TILE.NET, 212
title syntax, 80–81, 132
top-level domains, restricting search 
to, 81
Topica, 210–211
TracerLock, 71–72
TrackEngine, 49–50
Trackle, 46, 54–55
trapping
with Ask, 110
with Blogdigger, 135
city information, 150
commercial information, 142–149
conversations, 200–213
external information, 75, 236–241
with Feedster, 133
with FindArticles, 124
general site links, 88–93
with Google, 103–104, 136
with Google Groups, 202–207
with Google News, 121
government information, 149–156
with HighBeam Library, 126
with Hoovers, 129
internal information, 74, 241–245
international sites, 156–160
with L-Soft List Catalog, 212–213
links in RSS feeds, 93–95
with Microsoft Live Search, 112
with MSNBC, 122
multimedia, 164–185
with Northern Light, 130–132
with Open Directory Project, 113
with Sphere, 137
with TILE.NET, 212
with Topica, 210–211
with Yahoo, 105–106, 107–108
with Yahoo Directory, 107–108
with Yahoo Groups, 208–210
with Yahoo News, 120
Trendalicious, 193
trial offers. See free trials
trolls, 213
TWiki, 272
TypePad, 287–289
U
UltraEdit, 250–251
UPS package tracking, 24
URL syntax, 81, 103
URLs, monitoring links to, 89

320
Index
USDA site, 154
Usenet, 71–72, 202–207
USPS package tracking, 24
V
Valpak, 24
videos, 179–184
virus filtering, 219
Vivisimo, 114
W
Watch Lists, Hoovers’, 128
WatchThatPage, 47–48
Web, process for getting information 
from, 3
Web-based e-mail, 232, 234
Web-based organizing options, 268–273
Web-based page monitors, 45–46, 47–55
Web-based RSS readers, 14, 33–38
Web browsers. See also specific browsers
built-in RSS readers, 29
how RSS feeds are displayed on, 
11–12
as information-trapping tool, 8
Web pages
searching titles of, 80–81
searching URLs of, 81
Web search engines. See search engines
Web Search Garage, 77
Web searches. See also search engines
developing queries for. See query-
building
ongoing vs. static, 2, 3
recommended book on, 77
Web site logs, 98
Web sites
vs. blogs, 284
creating your own, 301–303
HTML skills required for, 302
making RSS feeds publishable on, 
308–309
monitoring for content snippets 
on, 96–97
planning, 302–303
tagging, 268–270
trapping links to, 88–93
Web Watcher, 59–60
Weblogs, 284. See also blogs
WebSite-Watcher, 50, 56–59, 247
What’s New pages, 150, 151, 158, 160, 161
wiki services, 298–301
WikiOnAStick, 251
Wikipedia, 84, 297–298
wikis, 251–252, 296–301
Wikispaces, 301
Windows
Live Toolbar, 264
page monitors, 56–59
search-engine indexers, 253–261
Wizz RSS, 30–32
Woot, 148
Word documents, publishing, 276–278
WordPress, 294–295
World Wide Web, 2. See also Web sites
X
Xanga, 287
XML
vs. HTML, 8–9
meaning of acronym, 8
RSS as type of, 8–10
and search engines, 9
XML button, 15
Y
Yahoo
bookmark manager, 269
building queries for, 104–107
desktop search engine, 258–261
e-mail alert service, 64–67
link syntax, 90
narrowing results in, 105
and RSS feeds, 15, 37–38, 66, 92–93
Site Explorer, 90–92
site syntax, 81
title syntax, 80
trapping site links in, 89–90
URL syntax, 81
Web-based e-mail, 232
Web site directory, 78, 106–108, 
160, 240
Yahoo Desktop, 258–261
Yahoo Groups, 208–210, 238, 243, 281
Yahoo Images, 178
Yahoo Mail, 232
Yahoo Messenger, 66
Yahoo News, 26, 27, 66, 119–120
Yahoo Podcasts, 170
Yahoo Video, 164, 181–182
YayWasTaken.com, 143
YouTube, 164, 182–184
Yuku, 215–216, 239
Z
Zniff, 194

