
APPLIED MECHATRONICS  
AND MECHANICS  
System Integration and Design 


APPLIED MECHATRONICS  
AND MECHANICS  
System Integration and Design  
Edited by 
Satya Bir Singh, PhD  
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD  
A. K. Haghi, PhD  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
First edition published 2021 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
4164 Lakeshore Road, Burlington, 
ON, L7L 1A4 Canada 
CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, 
Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 USA 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2021 Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot 
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers 
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders 
if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write 
and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on 
CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Applied mechatronics and mechanics : system integration and design / edited by Satya Bir Singh, PhD, 
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD, A.K. Haghi, PhD. 
Names: Singh, Satya Bir, editor. | Ranjan, Prabhat, (Mechatronics professor), editor. | Haghi, A. K., editor. 
Description: Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20200305255 | Canadiana (ebook) 20200305433 | ISBN 9781771888899 (hardcover) | 
ISBN 9781003019060 (PDF) 
Subjects: LCSH: Mechatronics. | LCSH: Mechanics, Applied. 
Classification: LCC TJ163.12 .A67 2021 | DDC 621—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77188-889-9 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00301-906-0 (ebk) 

About the Editors  
Satya Bir Singh, PhD 
Professor, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University,  
Patiala, India 
Satya Bir Singh, PhD, is a Professor of Mathematics at Punjabi University 
Patiala in India. Prior to this, he worked as an Assistant Professor in Math­
ematics at the Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, 
India. He has published about 125 research papers in journals of national 
and international repute and has given invited talks at various conferences 
and workshops. He has also organized several national and international 
conferences. He has been a coordinator and principal investigator of 
several schemes funded by the Department of Science and Technology, 
Government of India, New Delhi; the University Grants Commission, 
Government of India, New Delhi; and the All India Council for Technical 
Education, Government of India, New Delhi. He has 21 years of teaching 
and research experience. His areas of interest include the mechanics of 
composite materials, optimization techniques, and numerical analysis. He 
is a life member of various learned bodies. 
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD 
Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechatronics Engineering at 
Manipal University Jaipur, India 
Prabhat Ranjan, PhD, is an Assistant Professor in the Department of 
Mechatronics Engineering at Manipal University Jaipur, India. He is the 
author of the book Basic Electronics and editor of the book Computational 
Chemistry Methodology in Structural Biology and Materials Sciences. 
Dr. Ranjan has published more than 10 research papers in peer-reviewed 
journals of high repute and dozens of book chapters in high-end edited 
research books. He has received prestigious the President Award–Manipal 
University Jaipur, India, in 2015 for the development of the university; 
a Material Design Scholarship from Imperial College of London, UK, 

 
vi 
About the Editors 
in 2014; a DAAD Fellowship in 2014; and CFCAM–France Award in 
2015. Dr. Ranjan has received several grants and has also participated in 
national and international conferences and summer schools. He holds a 
Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics and Communication and a Master 
of Technology in Instrumentation Control System Engineering from the 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India; as well as PhD in 
engineering from Manipal University Jaipur, India. 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
Professor Emeritus of Engineering Sciences, Former Editor-in-Chief, 
International Journal of Chemoinformatics and Chemical Engineering 
and Polymers Research Journal; Member, Canadian Research and 
Development Center of Sciences and Culture 
A. K. Haghi, PhD, is the author and editor of 165 books, as well as 
1000 published papers in various journals and conference proceedings. 
Dr. Haghi has received several grants, consulted for a number of major 
corporations, and is a frequent speaker to national and international audi­
ences. Since 1983, he served as professor at several universities. He is 
former Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Chemoinformatics 
and Chemical Engineering and Polymers Research Journal and is on the 
editorial boards of many international journals. He is also a member of 
the Canadian Research and Development Center of Sciences and Cultures 
(CRDCSC), Montreal, Quebec, Canada. He holds a BSc in urban and 
environmental engineering from the University of North Carolina (USA), 
an MSc in mechanical engineering from North Carolina A&T State 
University (USA), a DEA in applied mechanics, acoustics and materials 
from the Université de Technologie de Compiègne (France), and a PhD in 
engineering sciences from Université de Franche-Comté (France). 

.......................................................................... ix  
Abbreviations  ....................................................................................................... xi  
Preface  ...............................................................................................................xiii  
 
1.  Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms Using Nondominated  
 
Sorting Jaya Algorithm .............................................................................. 1 
 
Prem Singh, Ramanpreet Singh, and Himanshu Chaudhary 
 
2.  Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System Using  
 
a Magnetorheological Damper with a Fuzzy‑Logic Controller............ 17 
 
G. Pohit 
 
3.  A Review of the Application of Mechatronics in Manufacturing  
 
Processes .................................................................................................... 41 
 
T. Muthuramalingam 
 
4.  Application of a Nature‑Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source  
 
Localization ............................................................................................... 51 
 
Kumar Gaurav, Ramanpreet Singh, Ajay Kumar, and Ram Dayal 
 
5.  Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems: A Case Study in  
 
Automotive Mechatronics ........................................................................ 67 
 
Narayan Kumar and B. Ravindra 
 
6.  A Retrospective Assessment of Elastic‑Plastic and Creep  
Deformation Behavior in Structural Components Like Discs,  
 
Cylinders, and Shells ................................................................................ 81 
 
Shivdev Shahi, Satya Bir Singh, and A. K. Haghi 
 
7.  Investigation of Elastic‑Plastic Transitional Stresses in  
Zirconia‑Based Ceramic Dental Implants under Uniaxial  
 
Compression .............................................................................................. 97 
 
Shivdev Shahi, Satya Bir Singh, and A. K. Haghi 
Contents  
Contributors ...............................
Contents

 
 
8.  Recent Developments in the Theory of Nonlocality in Elastic  
 
and Thermoelastic Mediums...................................................................111 
 
Sukhveer Singh, Parveen Lata, and Satya Bir Singh 
 
9.  Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite  
 
 
Disc Under Thermal Gradients ............................................................. 123 
 
Vandana Gupta and Satya Bir Singh 
 
10.  Application of a Fractional‑Order PID Controller to an  
 
Underactuated System............................................................................ 137 
 
Tung-Yung Huang and Shih-Ying Hung 
 
11.  Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of  
Pressure on a Lower‑Limb Prosthetic Socket Using a  
 
Fuzzy‑Logic‑Based Model...................................................................... 167 
 
Vimal Kumar Pathak, Chitresh Nayak, and Deepak Rajendra Unune 
 
12.  Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process  
Parameters in Oblique Machining Process for Hard‑to‑Cut  
 
Materials Using Coated Inserts ............................................................. 191 
 
Purnank Bhatt, Mihir Solanki, Anand Joshi, and Vijay Chaudhari 
 
13.  Mechanical Design of a Slider‑Crank Mechanism for a  
 
Knee Orthotic Device Using the Jaya Algorithm................................. 209 
 
Ramanpreet Singh and Vimal Kumar Pathak 
 
Index.................................................................................................................. 223  
viii  
Contents 

 
 
Contributors  
Purnank Bhatt 
Assistant Professor, Mechanical Engineering Department,  
G. H. Patel College of Engineering & Technology, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat, India 
Vijay Chaudhari 
Professor, Mechanical Engineering Department, C. S. Patel Institute of Technology,  
Charusat University, Changa, Gujarat, India 
Himanshu Chaudhary 
Mechanical Engineering Department, Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India 
Ram Dayal 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India 
Kumar Gaurav 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India, E-mails: kumar.gaurav@jaipur.manipal.edu; kumarmuj@gmail.com 
Vandana Gupta 
Department of Mathematics, Dashmesh Khalsa College, Zirakpur, Mohali, Punjab, India, 
E-mail: vaggarwal2584@gmail.com 
A. K. Haghi 
Professor Emeritus, Canadian Research and Development Center of Sciences and Cultures, 
Montreal, Canada 
Tung‑Yung Huang 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Southern Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 
Tainan, Taiwan, E-mail: huangt@stust.edu.tw 
Shih‑Ying Hung 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Southern Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 
Tainan, Taiwan 
Anand Joshi 
Professor, Mechatronics Engineering Department, G. H. Patel College of Engineering & Technology, 
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat, India 
Ajay Kumar 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India 
Narayan Kumar 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Karwar, Jodhpur – 342037, Rajasthan, India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
Contributors 
Parveen Lata 
Associate Professor, Department of Basic and Applied Science, Punjabi University Patiala, 
Punjab, India 
T. Muthuramalingam 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology,  
Kattankulathur – 603203, Tamil Nadu, India, E-mail: muthu1060@gmail.com 
Chitresh Nayak 
Professor, Oriental Institute of Science and Technology, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India 
Vimal Kumar Pathak 
Assistant Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, 
Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur – 303007, Rajasthan, India 
G. Pohit 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata – 700032, West Bengal, India, 
E-mail: gpohit@gmail.com 
Prabhat Ranjan 
Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechatronics Engineering at Manipal University Jaipur, 
India, E-mail: prabhat.ranjan@jaipur.manipal.edu 
B. Ravindra 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Karwar, Jodhpur – 342037, Rajasthan, India, 
E-mail: ravib@iitj.ac.in 
Shivdev Shahi 
Research Scholar, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, India,  
E-mail: shivdevshahi93@gmail.com 
Prem Singh 
Mechanical Engineering Department, Swami Keshvanand Institute of Technology, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India, E-mail: premsingh001@gmail.com 
Ramanpreet Singh 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India, E-mail: ramanpreet.singh@jaipur.manipal.edu 
Satya Bir Singh 
Professor, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India, 
E-mail: sbsingh69@yahoo.com 
Sukhveer Singh 
Assistant Professor, Punjabi University APS Neighborhood Campus, Dehla Seehan, Sangrur,  
Punjab, India, E-mail: Sukhveer_17@pbi.ac.in 
Mihir Solanki 
Assistant Professor, Mechanical Engineering Department, 
G. H. Patel College of Engineering & Technology, VallabhVidyanagar, Gujarat, India 
Deepak Rajendra Unune 
Assistant Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, The LNM Institute of Technology, 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 

Abbreviations  
ADC 
analog to digital converter 
ANOVA  
analysis of variance 
BFO 
bacterial foraging optimization 
BMVSS 
Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti 
BWSAS  
Bouc-Wen-based semi-active suspension system 
COG 
centroid of gravity 
COTS 
commercially off the shelf 
CRONE  
Commande Robuste d’Ordre Non-Entier 
DAQ  
data acquisition 
DF 
degree of freedom 
ECU 
engine control unit 
EDM 
electrical discharge machining 
FFS 
flexible force sensor 
FGMs 
functionally graded materials 
FG-MWCNTs  
functionally graded multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
FSR 
force-sensing resistors 
GA  
genetic algorithm 
H 
high 
HAP  
hydroxyapatite 
HIL  
hardware-in-loop 
HSS 
high-speed steel 
HT  
height 
HTLPSO  
hybrid-teaching learning particle swarm optimization 
KAFO 
knee-ankle-foot orthoses 
L  
low 
LEER 
lower extremity exoskeleton robot 
M 
medium 
MCMC 
Markov chain Monte Carlo 
MGA  
modified genetic algorithm 
MOOP  
multi-objective optimization problem 
M-PSO 
modified particle swarm optimization 
MR 
magnetorheological 
NHTSA  
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xii 
Abbreviations 
NSJAYA 
nondominated sorting Jaya algorithm 
OSL 
odor source localization 
PaS 
passive suspension system 
PGO 
powered gait orthosis 
PID 
proportional-integral-derivative 
PSO 
particle swarm optimization 
PTB 
patella tendon bearing 
RF 
radio frequency 
RMSE 
root mean square error 
SDE 
source declaration error 
SiCp 
silicon carbide particles 
SIL 
software-in-loop 
SL 
stump length 
SUBAR 
Sogang University biomedical assistive robot 
TPMS 
tire pressure maintenance system 
TPMS 
tire pressure monitoring sensor 
VA 
virtual agents 
VH 
very high 
VL 
very low 
WT 
weight 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface  
Mechatronics is a core subject for engineers, combining elements of 
mechanical and electronic engineering into the development of computer-
controlled mechanical devices. A mechatronics system integrates various 
technologies involving sensors, measurement systems, drives, actuation 
systems, microprocessor systems, and software engineering. 
A universally accepted definition of the term “mechatronics” is 
the integration of several disciplines such as mechanics, electronics, 
electrical, computer, control, and software engineering using microelec­
tronics to control mechanical devices. 
Applied mechatronics and mechanics is the integration of mechanical 
engineering, electronic engineering, control, and computer engineering. 
Synergistic collaboration among these fields of science involves a high 
potential for accomplishments and achievements now accessible to a 
wide variety of engineers. 
This research-oriented book presents a clear and comprehensive 
introduction to the area and helps the readers to comprehend and design 
mechatronic systems by providing a frame of understanding to develop a 
truly interdisciplinary and integrated approach to engineering. 
The design of mechatronics products is a challenge for design engi­
neers. Therefore, the mechatronic process is a cross-disciplinary design 
process that can be properly applied if, and only if, the specialists from 
all pertinent disciplines work together from a very early stage in the 
design process. 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics is the most comprehensive 
research-oriented book available for both mechanical and electrical 
engineering students and will enable them to engage fully with all stages 
of mechatronic system design. It offers broader and more integrated 
coverage than other research-oriented books in the field with case studies. 
This volume is a source of the latest research and technical notes 
in mechatronics. This book is useful for students, researchers, and all 
readers interested in this topic. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xiv 
Preface 
This volume focuses on application considerations and relevant 
practical issues that arise in the selection and design of mechatronics 
components and systems as well. 
It provides practicing mechanical/mechatronics engineers and 
designers, researchers, graduate, and postgraduate students with knowl­
edge of mechanics focused directly on advanced applications. 
Chapter 1 presents the balancing procedure of the mechanism using 
a multi-objective Jaya algorithm. The mechanisms can be balanced by 
optimizing the inertial properties of each link. The inertial properties 
of each rigid link are represented by the dynamic equivalent system of 
point masses. Thus, the multi-objective optimization problem (MOOP) 
with the minimization of shaking forces and shaking moments is formu­
lated by considering the point mass parameters as the design variables. 
The formulated optimization problem is solved by a posteriori approach-
based algorithm as a multi-objective Jaya algorithm (MOJAYA) under 
suitable design constraints. This algorithm uses the concepts of crowding 
distance and a nondominated sorting approach to find a Pareto set of 
optimal solutions. The efficiency of the proposed approach is investigated 
through a four-bar planar standard mechanism taken from literature. It 
is established that the multi-objective Jaya algorithm is computationally 
more efficient than NSGA-II. The designer can choose any solution from 
the set and balance any real planar mechanisms. 
In Chapter 2, different types of suspension systems are discussed. The 
advantage of a semi-active suspension system is highlighted. It is shown 
that MR damper is an important part of automotive suspension systems 
and, hence, plays a major role in controlling the dynamic nature of the 
vehicle. The effectiveness of the MR damper was studied. Initially, a 
quarter car model with a passive suspension system (PaS) was designed. 
Another quarter car model was developed with an MR damper as a 
member of the semi-active suspension system. The Bouc-Wen hyster­
esis model predicted the behavior of the MR damper. The final quarter 
car model was developed with an MR damper based on the Bouc-Wen 
model and controlled by a fuzzy-logic controller. These three models 
were analyzed by considering the step road profile. Altering the values 
of the scalar gains to produce better results optimized the fuzzy-logic 
controller. 
In Chapter 3, the importance of enhancing the performances of 
conventional manufacturing processes is being increased. It is possible 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
xv 
only where integrating the mechatronics approaches in manufacturing 
processes. The adaptation of control algorithms and modification of 
existing electronics circuits in the manufacturing processes can consid­
erably enhance the performances of the manufacturing technology. The 
efficiency of the unconventional machining processes can be effectively 
increased by the mechatronics engineering concepts. In the present study, 
an endeavor has been made to analyze the various literature related to the 
adaptation of mechatronics knowledge in manufacturing technology. The 
responses of the processes with and without mechatronics approaches 
have been compared and the merits of those systems over the existing 
systems have been analyzed. The influences of the various control strat­
egies have also been analyzed and compared. It has been observed that 
the still better research works can be made to increase the efficacy the 
manufacturing technology. 
Chapter 4 applies the nature-inspired optimization-based approach 
for odor source localization (OSL) problem in an indoor environment 
with mobile agents. An optimization problem is formulated to identify 
the region of maximum odor concentration. The optimization problem is 
solved using a new hybrid-teaching learning particle swarm optimization 
(HTLPSO) algorithm. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the adopted 
approach, experiments are conducted in a simulated environment gener­
ated through the Gaussian plume model. A various set of mobile agents 
in a range of {3–15} are used to find and detect the source of odor with 
high accuracy and concentration, respectively. Furthermore, it is found 
that less number of mobile agents is required for fast convergence to 
detect the odor source. 
Tire pressure monitoring systems as a case study in automotive 
mechatronics presented in Chapter 5. Chapter 6 is a retrospective assess­
ment of elastic-plastic and creep deformation behavior in structural 
components made of discs, cylinders, and spherical/cylindrical shells. 
Unlike elastic solids in which the state of strain depends only on the final 
state of stress, the deformation that occurs in a plastic solid is determined 
by the complete history of loading. The plasticity problem is, therefore, 
essentially incremental in nature, the final distortion of the solid being 
obtained as the sum total of the incremental distortions following the 
strain path. The deformation character has been considered to be linear 
in classical theory which is not accurate. The non-linear character was 
studied by B. R. Seth considering the transition surface function and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xvi 
Preface 
generalized strain measure to determine elastic-plastic and creep state. 
A number of elastic-plastic and creep problems pertaining to various 
structural components, made of materials exhibiting different kinds of 
isotropy and anisotropy have been solved using this transition theory 
and are reviewed in this chapter. It is sufficient to say that the transition 
functions, which define the non-linearity of elastic-plastic and creep 
transition, are more accurate when compared to the classical theory. 
In Chapter 7, elastic-plastic transition stresses in Zirconia-based 
crowns of ceramic dental implants have been calculated analytically. The 
crown of the implant is modeled in the form of a shell which exhibits 
transversely isotropic macro-structural symmetry. The transition theory 
of B. R. Seth has been used to model the elastic-plastic state of stresses. 
The shell so modeled is subjected to external pressure to analyze the 
state of axial compression. The results for Zirconia-based implants are 
compared with a titanium-based dental implant. The elastic stiffness 
constants for these are taken from the available literatures which have 
been obtained using ultrasonic resonance spectroscopy, a non-destructive 
technique of obtaining the stiffness constants. The radial and circumfer­
ential stresses are obtained for radius ratios, which can handle any type 
of dataset for thicknesses of crowns. 
Recent developments in the theory of nonlocality in elastic and ther­
moelastic mediums; presented in Chapter 8. 
In Chapter 9, a mathematical model is developed to investigate the 
creep response in rotating composite disc with hyperbolic thickness for 
isotropic material. The disc is supposed to be made of the composite 
containing silicon carbide particles (SiCp) embedded in a matrix of pure 
aluminum. The model is used to investigate the effect thermal gradients 
on the stresses and strain rates of the isotropic disc by Sherby’s creep law 
and von Mises criterion of yielding. It is concluded that thermal gradients 
introduce a significant change in the strain rates although its effect on the 
resulting stress distribution is relatively small in a composite rotating 
disc. 
The aim of Chapter 10 is to find an adequate rule of tuning frac­
tional-order PID controllers for dynamic systems. PID controllers of 
integer order have been successfully employed in versatile applications, 
especially with the aid of available mature tuning methods such as the 
Ziegler-Nichols method. In recent years, fractional-order PID controllers 
tuned with the Ziegler-Nichols type method were proposed to deal with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
xvii 
fractional-order systems. It is intriguing for the flexibility of the adop­
tion of fractional order which is free from the limit of integer order. This 
article proposes a Ziegler-Nichols type tuning method for the fractional 
order PID controller applied in an underactuated system, and studies 
the effect of fraction order. The simulation results demonstrate that the 
proposed method works effectively. 
Chapter 11 presents a methodology for evaluating the role of ampu­
tee’s physical parameters viz. height, weight, and stump length (SL) on 
the pressure generated at the prosthetic limb/socket interface using the 
regression technique and fuzzy-logic-based model. Intra-socket pressures 
can cause the tissue trauma or discomfort to amputees wearing the pros­
thetic devices. The intra-socket pressure values at lateral tibia, gastroc­
nemius, patella tendon bearing (PTB), kick point, medial tibia, medial 
gastrocnemius, popliteal depression, and lateral gastrocnemius on the 
transtibial residual limb have been collected for three different conditions 
viz. walking, full load and half load for ten patients. An experimental 
setup is developed for force investigation of the lower-limb socket using 
the Flexi-Force sensor. The experimental trials are performed and further 
experimental data are used to establish the Mamdani fuzzy-logic model 
to predict the effective pressure at considered specific regions as the 
response parameters. Mathematical models for pressure at three loading 
conditions have been developed using regression analysis using which 
the effective pressure at considered specific regions can be correlated 
with physical parameters. The models suggested that the weight and 
followed by stump length of amputees are a strong predictor of pressure 
at the socket. The confirmation experiment results reveal that the fuzzy 
model shows good agreement of 98.53% with the experimentally meas­
ured value that proves that the established fuzzy model consequently 
can be used for predicting the effective pressure at the socket interface 
for different points. The developed methodology will assist the ampu­
tee-specific socket design ensuring comfortable socket fitting. 
Experimental investigation and optimization of process parameters 
in oblique machining process for hard to cut materials coated inserts 
presented in Chapter 12. 
Chapter 13 presents the mechanical design of a slider-crank mecha­
nism for a knee joint orthotic device. The device is portable for stroke 
patients and helps in gait training at home, clinics, and hospitals. The 
knee joint mechanism is optimized by considering gait biomechanics for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xviii 
Preface 
making it potable. An optimization problem is formulated by considering 
the geometrical parameters of slider-crank linkage with an objective to 
reduce the required peak force by an actuator while walking on a leveled 
ground. Based on the optimization problem, constraints are posed to 
ensure the range of motion as in normal human gait. The optimization 
problem is solved using the Jaya algorithm. It is observed that there is a 
significant reduction in the peak force required by the actuator. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1  
Dynamic Balancing of Planar
Mechanisms Using Nondominated 
Sorting Jaya Algorithm 
PREM SINGH,1 RAMANPREET SINGH,2 and HIMANSHU CHAUDHARY3 
1Mechanical Engineering Department, Swami Keshvanand Institute of 
Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India, E-mail: premsingh001@gmail.com 
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India 
3Mechanical Engineering Department, Malaviya National Institute of 
Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
ABSTRACT 
This chapter presents the balancing procedure of the mechanism using a 
nondominated sorting Jaya algorithm (NSJAYA). Planar mechanisms can 
be balanced by optimizing each moving link’s inertial properties. These 
properties are derived by the point-mass system. Thus, the multi-objective 
optimization problem (MOOP) is posed to minimize the unbalance force 
and moment in which the point mass parameters are treated as the design 
variables. The formulated optimization problem is solved by a posteriori 
approach-based algorithm as a NSJAYA under suitable design constraints. 
This algorithm uses the concept of crowding distance and a nondominated 
sorting approach to find a Pareto set of optimal solutions. The proposed 
method is tested through a four-bar planar standard mechanism taken 
from literature. It is established that the NSJAYA is computationally more 
efficient than NSGA-II. The designer can choose any solution from the set 
and balance any real planar mechanisms. 

 
 
 
2 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Typically, the unbalanced mechanism develops the forces and moments on 
the bearings which are also known as shaking forces and moments. They 
increase the vibration, driving torque, fatigues, etc., in the mechanism. 
Inertia, the center of mass, and mass of moving link define the input torque, 
the forces, and moments [1]. Recently, the balancing of these forces and 
moments is a challenging task. Therefore, many techniques have been 
applied to reduce the forces and moments using various principles such 
as counterweights [2] and the redistribution of the masses [3] are used to 
minimize the forces. But, this force balancing procedure generally increases 
moments and input torque of the mechanism [4]. Moreover, disk or inertia 
counterweights [5, 6], moment balancing idler loops [7], and a replicate 
mechanism [8] are used to minimize the moments. These approaches of 
balancing enhance the mass and complicacy of the mechanism [4]. 
In contrast, the optimization procedure has also been used by 
researchers to balance the mechanisms. Typically, two objectives, namely, 
shaking force and shaking moment are chosen. Thus, the optimization 
problem with multi-objectives is posed to minimize these objectives 
[9]. The formulated problem can be solved using two approaches as a 
priori approach and a posteriori approach [10]. The first approach obtains 
a single objective problem from the multi-objective problem using an 
appropriate weight for each objective function. This approach gives a 
unique optimal design in each simulation run. Therefore, multiple optimal 
solutions are obtained with a different combination of weights. Moreover, 
the optimum results obtained by this approach depend upon the weights 
assigned to each objective function. Therefore, the designer must know 
the importance of each objective function while assigning the weights 
to the objective functions that can be difficult for an uncertain scenario. 
In addition, a posteriori approach eliminates the drawbacks of a priori 
approach. In this approach, the weights are not assigned to the objectives 
before the start of the algorithm. It provides Pareto optimal solutions in 
the single run of the algorithm. The user can choose appropriate solutions 
based on the importance of objective functions from the Pareto optimal 
set of solutions [11]. This makes the posteriori approach computationally 
more efficient in comparison to the priori approach. Therefore, it is applied 
for the balancing problems of the planar mechanism. 
The conventional optimization techniques like gradient search methods 
based on a priori approach can be applied to balance the shaking force 

 
 
3 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
and moment [12, 13]. However, they need an initial start point to find the 
optimal solution [14]. Thus, these algorithms give the local solution near 
to start point. Moreover, nature-inspired optimization techniques like the 
genetic algorithm (GA) [15, 16] and particle swarm optimization (PSO) 
[17], and a hybrid of two optimization algorithms [18] can be applied 
to balance the mechanisms. But, these optimization techniques require 
specific parameters for their convergence. 
No relevant research has been published in which a posteriori approach 
based algorithm is applied to balance the mechanisms. In this study, a 
posteriori approach based algorithm as a nondominated sorting Jaya 
algorithm (NSJAYA) is applied to balance the planar mechanism. The 
shaking forces and shaking moments are defined using the concept of the 
dynamically equivalent point mass system [19]. This system represents 
the inertial properties of each moving link. In order to balance the mecha­
nism, the optimization problem with multi objectives as shaking force and 
shaking moment are stated by considering the parameters of point masses 
as the design variables. The efficiency of the proposed method is validated 
through a standard four-bar planar mechanism taken from the literature. 
It is found that the NSJAYA algorithm is more efficient in computation 
than NSGA-II used in this study. The Pareto optimal set for the balancing 
problem is calculated and outlined in this chapter. The designer can 
balance any real planar mechanisms using any solution from the Pareto 
optimal set of solutions. 
This chapter is structured as follows: Section 1.2 describes the dynamic 
analysis of the planar mechanism; Section 1.3 describes the optimization 
problem formulation using the concept of a point mass system; Section 1.4 
presents the optimization algorithm. Results and discussion are outlined in 
Section 1.5; and finally, Section 1.6 outlines the conclusions. 
1.2 DYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF THE PLANAR MECHANISM 
This section presents the determination of the shaking forces and shaking 
moments developed in the four-bar planar mechanisms as shown in Figure 
1.1. {o1 xy} and {oi 
} are the global and local coordinate systems, 
xi yi
respectively. The reaction forces at joints are determined using Newton-
Euler equations [20]. Then, these forces determine the shaking force and 
shaking moment. The shaking force is the summation of transmitted forces 
to fixed link in vector form [21] while the vector sum of driving torques 

 
 
4 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
and moments of the reaction forces about the fixed points is known as 
shaking moment [22]. 
FIGURE 1.1 Representation of reaction forces and moments. 
Thus, shaking forces and shaking moments are transferred to 
 
the fixed 
link ‘#0,’ given as: 
f 
F 
F
 
sh    
01  
(1.1) 
03  
M 
 
sh   T01   
 
r
F
0
0 3 
(1.2) 
 
where F01 and F03 are 2-vector reaction forces of link #1 and link #3 at link 
#0, respectively, while T01 is driving torque about joint o1. r4 is the vector 
from o1 to o4. 
1.3 OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM FORMULATION 
This section formulates the optimization problem with multi objectives 
as the shaking force and shaking moment using a point-mass system 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
approach. The mechanism shown in Figure 1.1 has three moving links. 
Each moving link defined as in Figure 1.2(a) is systematically converted 
into the system of three-point masses as shown in Figure 1.2(b). The 
point-mass parameters are treated as the design variables. These param­
eters describe the shaking force and moment which are reported in Eqs. 
(1.1)–(1.2). Generally, three parameters need to specify each point mass 
while each link needs nine parameters to represent it. The vector form of 
i-th link’s design variables is represented as: 
x  m  a m  a m  a 
T
i 
i
i
i 
i
i
i 
i
i
i
1
1
1 
2
2
2 
3
3
3
(1.3) 
where mij is the j-th point mass for the i-th link, aij and θij are the corre­
sponding length and angular position of mij. 
Thus, a total of 27 point mass parameters defines the mechanism, given 
as: 
T
T
T
T
x = [x x x ]
1 
2
3 
(1.4) 
The multi-objective optimization problem (MOOP) is finally stated 
under the appropriate constraints by taking the R.M.S values of shaking 
force, F
 and the shaking moment, M
 as:
sh,rms
sh,rms
(1.5)
Minimize 
f
x
  Fsh rms
1  
, 
(1.6)
Minimize 
f
x
  M sh rms
2   
, 
Subjected to: 
g
x
1i( ) =   mi, min -" 
 
j mij<0 
  
g
x
2i( )="
  jmij - mi ,max < 0  
  
g
x
3i ( ) =   d
r
i - i  < 0 
 fori,  j = 1,...,3 
  
g4i( )
x =  m
2 
i di - Ii
  
LBr  xr  UB r =1,...N   
 
r 
 
 
 
 
(1.7)

 
 
 
6 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 1.2  (a) i-th moving rigid link and (b) point-mass system for i-th moving link. 
The design constraints depend on the permissible values of the param­
eters of the link [20]. While the strength of links defines the maximum 
and minimum masses of the link, similarly, the allowable values of the 
moment of inertias determine the limits on parameters, aij [23]. UBr and 
LBr are the upper and lower limits of the rth design variable. While the 
number of design variables is denoted by N. 
Moreover, an unconstrained optimization problem is obtained from 
the constrained multi-objective problem defined in Eqs. (1.5)–(1.7) using 
penalty concept [24]. A significant penalty value is utilized to the objec­
tive function for the violation of each constraint [25]. Thus, the optimal 
solution is determined that satisfies all the constraints using a suitable 
optimization algorithm. Then, the optimization problem is stated in term 
of penalty and objective function as: 
( )
n
Minimize 
f
x
1 
= f , 
+ pnx2
c
sh rms 
 
  
c =1 max
,
( 0 gi ( )
x )  
(1.8)
Minimize 
f
x
n
2 ( ) = M sh
+ pnx 2
c 
 , rms 
c=1 max
,
( 0 g  x   
(1.9)
 
i ( ))

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
where nc is the number of constraints, while pm is the penalty value of 
the order of 104 which assigned to the objective function for constraint 
violation [24]. Finally, the formulation of the MOOP is given as: 
Minimize Z(x) = 
 
 
 f
x
1  f
x
2    
T 
(1.10)
 
LBr  x  UB r   1,.... N  
(1.11) 
 
r 
r
1.4 OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM 
The formulated problem as described in the previous section can be solved 
by posteriori based algorithms like GA [26], MPSO [27], PSO [28], NSGA-II 
[29], etc. Although these algorithms give a global solution, it is no assurance 
that the solution is optimal [24]. Moreover, these algorithms need algorithmic 
control parameters, which affect their performance [30]. However, the NSJAYA 
algorithm is also the posteriori based algorithm which does not require an 
algorithm-specific parameter. The solutions obtained using this algorithm are 
improved in a similar way as in the Jaya algorithm, which proposed by Rao 
in 2016 [30]. Moreover, the NSJAYA algorithm uses the crowding distance 
computation mechanism and nondominated sorting approach to solve the 
MOOP as given in Ref. [11]. Also, the determination of best and worst solu­
tion in multi-objectives is difficult due to the multiple opposing objectives. 
Therefore, the NSJAYA algorithm is developed to find the best and worst 
solutions. This algorithm uses the ranking approach of solutions based on 
crowding distance value and the non-dominance concept to find these solu­
tions. In starting, initial solutions “p” are randomly created. Then, initial 
solutions are arranged in ascending order with rank using the non-dominance 
approach [30]. The best and worse solutions are selected based on higher 
and lower rank, respectively. If solutions have the same rank, then crowding 
distance value is calculated for these solutions. Then, the worse solution (low 
crowding distance value) and the best solution (large crowding distance value) 
are identified in each iteration. The solutions are modified according to the 
general equation of the Jaya algorithm [11]. Then, the population-based on 
updated solutions is merged with the initial solutions, and 2p populations are 
generated. The ranks of these merged solutions are arranged again. Further, 

 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
the value of crowding distance for every solution is determined. The best solu­
tions are chosen according to the new rank and value of crowding distance. 
The higher rank and more crowding distance value solutions are chosen as 
the best solution than other solutions [31]. The rank of solutions based on the 
dominant approach, the computation of crowding distance, and the operator of 
crowding comparison are detailed in Refs. [11, 29, 31]. 
FIGURE 1.3  A flow chart for the nondominated sorting Jaya algorithm (NSJAYA). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
TABLE 1.1 Link Parameters of the Original Mechanism [23] 
Mass Center Location 
Link i 
(m) 
(kg) 
IG  (kg‑m2)
ri
mi 
i
di(m) 
Ɵi(deg) 
#1 
0.1 
0.392 
0.0004 
0.05 
0 
#2 
0.4 
1.570 
0.213 
0.2 
0 
#3 
0.3 
1.177 
0.0091 
0.15 
0 
#0
0.3
–
– 
– 
– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
This algorithm is terminated based on the number of function evaluations 
and generations. The optimization procedure of the algorithm is described 
in Figure 1.3. Further, this algorithm decreases the computational time than 
the other multi-objective optimization techniques. Moreover, the first time 
it is applied to the dynamic balancing of the planar mechanism in this study. 
1.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
This section describes the effectiveness of the proposed method by the 
balancing of the four-bar mechanism taken from the literature [17]. In this 
research, a three-point mass system is used for each moving link of the 
mechanism as shown in Figure 1.2(b). The five parameters of each link 
are assigned as [20]: 
= 0; Өi2 =120o; Өi3 = 240o, and ai1= ai2 = ai3.
Өi1 
Hence, mi1, mi2, mi3, and ai1 other parameters of each link are taken as the 
design variables and the upper and lower bound of, mi, di and ai are taken 
o
o 
o
o
as, m ≤ m ≤ 2m 
0 ≤ d ≤ r 
. a ≤ a ≤ 1 5a , respectively. 
i ,  and 0 5  
.
i
i
i
i 
i1 
i1 
i1
, 
A planar four-bar mechanism [23] is balanced using the proposed 
approach. Link #1 rotates at a constant speed of 100 rad/s [23]. The link 
parameters of the original mechanism are presented in Table 1.1. 
The optimization problem for multi objectives defined in Eqs. (10–11) is 
solved using the NSJAYA algorithm. MATLAB code is developed for this 
algorithm. To compare the computation efficiency of the algorithm, the same 
optimization problem is handled by NSGA-II. The detailed procedure of this 
algorithm is described in Ref. [29]. NSGA-II and NSJAYA algorithms take 

 
10 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
200 iterations while NSGA-II and NSJAYA  algorithms consider the popula-
tion size of 150 and 100, respectively. Moreover, NSGA-II needs the tuning  
of specific 
 parameters, whereas the NSJAYA  algorithm is a parameterless  
algorithm. Hence, the default parameters are considered for NSGA-II.  
The function evaluations of 30,000 and 20,000 are taken by NSGA-II and  
NSJAYA  algorithms to find 
 
the nondominated set of solutions, respectively.  
These algorithms provide the nondominated set of solutions as presented in  
Figure 1.4. The figure 
 
shows that the NSJAYA  algorithm gives better results  
than the NSGA-II algorithm. It requires 33.33% lesser function evaluations  
than the NSGA-II. Thus, the NSJAYA  algorithm is computationally more  
efficient 
 
compared to NSGA-II for the balancing of the mechanism. The  
nondominated solutions are obtained using the NSJAYA  algorithm, and ten  
solutions out of them are reported in Table 1.2. Further, the designer can  
select any solution out of them based on the importance of the objective  
functions. Table 1.2 shows that the nondominated solutions with higher rank  
are in descending order of the crowding distance. Solutions 1 and 2 have the  
same crowding distance and considered as best solutions than other solu­
tions. These solutions are likened with those of the original mechanism and  
solutions obtained by a priori approach based on algorithms like TLBO and  
GA [23] as shown in Table 1.3. The variations of the shaking force and the  
shaking moment for one cycle of the crank are shown in Figure 1.5. 
g
y
g
FIGURE 1.4  Comparison of non-dominance solutions provided by NSJAYA  and 
NSGA-II. 

 
 
TABLE 1.2 The Nondominated Solutions Obtained Using NSJAYA 
Sl. No. 
Shaking Force (N) 
Shaking Moment 
Crowding 
(N‑m) 
Distance 
1. 
8.280534 
58.47477 
∞ 
2. 
239.4591 
1.126149 
∞ 
3. 
14.48232 
41.36432 
0.01108 
4. 
13.15304 
50.6761 
0.010124 
5. 
182.8893 
2.608544 
0.008765 
6. 
35.20479 
32.31548 
0.007557 
7. 
60.41955 
26.00544 
0.007477 
8. 
18.62965 
36.61707 
0.006981 
9. 
109.8948 
12.70748 
0.006883 
10. 
72.73956 
23.60199 
0.006652 
 
 
11 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
Table 1.3 shows that solution 1 minimizes the R.M.S values of 
the shaking force and the shaking moment up to 99.65% and 86.24%, 
respectively while solution 2 minimizes 89.94% and 99.73% in the R.M.S 
values of the force and moment, respectively, compared to the original 
mechanism values. It shows that the NSJAYA algorithm provides better 
results than those of GA and TLBO. 
TABLE 1.3 The R.M.S Values of Shaking Force and Shaking Moment 
Shaking Force (N) 
Shaking Moment (N‑m) 
Original Mechanism [23] 
2.3807e+03 
424.9080 
GA [23] 
917.28 
144.95 
(w1= 0.5; w2 =0.5) 
(–60.65%) 
(–65.52%) 
TLBO [23] 
811.77 
112.161 
(w1= 0.5; w2 =0.5) 
(–65.30) 
(–73.36%) 
Solution 1 
8.280534 
(–99.65%) 
58.47477 
(–86.24%) 
Solution 2 
239.4591 
(–89.94%) 
1.126149 
(–99.73%) 

 
 
 
 
12 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 1.5  Variation of shaking force and shaking moment with respect to time. 
1.6 CONCLUSIONS 
The optimization procedure of multi-objectives to balance the planar 
mechanism is described in this chapter. The optimization problem with multi 
objectives as shaking forces and shaking moments is stated by applying 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
the dynamically equivalent point-mass system. A posteriori approach 
based algorithm as NSJAYA is proposed for a four-bar planar mechanism 
balancing taken from Ref. [23]. This algorithm takes 33.33% fewer function 
evaluations for finding the optimal non-dominance solutions than NSGA-II. 
Hence, it is computationally more efficient compared to NSGA-II. 
Solutions 1 and 2 correspond to a higher rank, and larger crowding 
distance obtained using NSJAYA are likened with the solutions generated 
by a priori approach based on algorithms like TLBO and GA. Solutions 1 
and 2 reduce the R.M.S values of the shaking force and shaking moment 
by (99.65%, 86.24%) and (89.94%, 99.73%), respectively. Thus, the 
NSJAYA algorithm provides better results than those of GA and TLBO. 
The proposed approach helps the designer for choosing the more alter­
natives based on the importance of objectives. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
balancing 
•  
four-bar mechanism 
•  
Jaya algorithm 
•  
multi-objective optimization problem 
•  
Pareto set 
•  
point mass parameters 
REFERENCES 
1. Chaudhary, H., & Saha, S. K., (2007). Dynamic performance improvement of a 
carpet scrapping machine. J. Sci. Ind. Res. (India), 66(12), 1002–1010. 
2.  Walker, M. J., & Oldham, K., (1978). A  general theory of force balancing using 
counterweights. Mech. Mach. Theory, 13(2), 175–185. 
3. Kochev, I. S., (1987). General method for full force balancing of spatial and planar 
linkages by internal mass redistribution. Mech. Mach. Theory, 22(4), 333–341. 
4. Chaudhary, H., & Subir, K. S., (2008). Dynamics and Balancing of Multibody  Systems  
(37th edn.). Springer Science & Business Media. 
5. Berkof, R. S., (1973). Complete force and moment balancing of inline four-bar 
linkages. Mech. Mach. Theory, 8(3), 397–410. 
6. Esat, I., & Bahai, H., (1999). Theory of complete force and moment balancing of 
planer linkage mechanisms. Mech. Mach. Theory, 34(6), 903–922. 

 
14 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
7. Bagci, C., (1979). Shaking force balancing of planar linkages with force transmission 
irregularities using balancing idler loops. Mech. Mach. Theory, 14(4), 267–284. 
8. Arakelian, V. H., & Smith, M. R., (2005). Shaking force and shaking moment 
balancing of mechanisms: A historical review with new examples. J. Mech. Des., 
127(2), 334–339. 
9. Chaudhary, K., & Chaudhary, H., (2015). Shape optimization of dynamically 
balanced planar four-bar mechanism. Procedia Computer Science, pp. 519–526. 
10.  Rao, R. V., Rai, D. P., & Balic, J., (2019). Multi-objective optimization of abrasive 
water jet machining process using Jaya algorithm and PROMETHEE method. J. 
Intell. Manuf., 30(5), 2101–2127. 
11.  Rao, R. V., Rai, D. P., & Balic, J., (2018). Multi-objective optimization of machining 
and micro-machining processes using nondominated sorting teaching-learning-based 
optimization algorithm. J. Intell. Manuf., 29(8), 1715–1737. 
12. Chaudhary, H., & Saha, S. K., (2007). Balancing of four-bar linkages using maximum 
recursive dynamic algorithm. Mech. Mach. Theory, 42(2), 216–232. 
13. Li, Z., (1998). Sensitivity and robustness of mechanism balancing. Mech. Mach. 
Theory, 33(7), 1045–1054. 
14. Chaudhary, K., & Chaudhary, H., (2014). Optimum balancing of slider-crank 
mechanism using equimomental system of point-masses. Procedia Technol., 14, 
35–42. 
15. Erkaya, S., (2013). Investigation of balancing problem for a planar mechanism using 
genetic algorithm. J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 27(7), 2153–2160. 
16. Chaudhary, K., & Chaudhary, H., (2014). Dynamic balancing of planar mechanisms 
using genetic algorithm. J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 28(10), 4213–4220. 
17.  Farmani, M. R., Jaamialahmadi, A., & Babaie, M., (2011). Multi-objective 
optimization for force and moment balance of a four-bar linkage using evolutionary 
algorithms. J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 25(12), 2971–2977. 
18. Singh, R., Chaudhary, H., & Singh, A. K., (2017). A  new hybrid teaching-learning 
particle swarm optimization algorithm for synthesis of linkages to generate path. 
Sadhana-Acad. Proc. Eng. Sci., 42(11), 1851–1870. 
19. Hayat, A. A., & Saha, S. K., (2017). Identification of robot dynamic parameters based 
on equimomental systems. Proceedings of the Advances in Robotics on—AIR 17 (pp. 
1–6). 
20. Chaudhary, H., & Saha, S. K., (2009).  Dynamics and Balancing of Multibody 
Systems. Springer Verlag, Germany. 
21. Chaudhary, H., & Saha, S. K., (2006). Equimomental system and its applications. 
ASME 8th Bienn. Conf. Eng. Syst. Des. Anal. Am. Soc. Mech. Eng., pp. 33–42. 
22. Zhang, D., & Wei, B., (2016). Dynamic Balancing of Mechanisms and Synthesizing 
of Parallel Robots. doi: 10.1007/978–3-319–17683–3. 
23. Chaudhary, K., & Chaudhary, H., (2016). Optimal dynamic design of planar 
mechanisms using teaching-learning-based optimization algorithm. Proc. Inst. Mech. 
Eng. Part C J. Mech. Eng. Sci., 203(19), 3442–3456. 
24. Singh, R., Chaudhary, H., & Singh, A. K., (2017). Defect-free optimal synthesis of 
crank-rocker linkage using nature-inspired optimization algorithms. Mech. Mach. 
Theory, 116, 105–122. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Dynamic Balancing of Planar Mechanisms 
25.  Singh, P., & Chaudhary, H., (2018). A modified Jaya algorithm for mixed-variable 
optimization problems. J. Intell. Syst., 1–21. 
26. Coello, C. A., (2000). An updated survey of GA-based multi-objective optimization 
techniques. ACM Comput. Surv., 32(2), 109–143. 
27. Feng, L., Mao, Z. Z., & Yuan, P., (2012). An improved multi-objective particle swarm 
optimization algorithm and its application. Kongzhi Yu Juece/Control Decis, 27(9). 
28. Parsopoulos, K. E., & Vrahatis, M. N., (2002). Particle swarm optimization method 
in multi-objective problems. 2002 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC 
2002), pp. 603–607. 
29. Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., & Meyarivan, T., (2002). A fast and elitist multi-
objective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 6(2), 182–197. 
30. Rao, R. V. R., (2019). Jaya: An Advanced Optimization Algorithm and its Engineering 
Applications. Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature, doi: doi. 
org/10.1007/978–3-319–78922–4. 
31.  Rao, R. V., Rai, D. P., & Balic, J., (2017). A multi-objective algorithm for optimization 
of modern machining processes. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., 61, 103–125. 


 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2  
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension 
System Using a Magnetorheological 
Damper with a Fuzzy Logic Controller 
G. POHIT 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Jadavpur University,  
Kolkata – 700032, West Bengal, India, E-mail: gpohit@gmail.com 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The suspension system of a car is responsible for the smooth ride and 
keeping control of the car. Specifically, the suspension system maximizes 
the friction between the tires and the road to provide steering stability and 
good handling. Additionally, suspension systems provide comfort to the 
passengers by limiting the impact of particular road irregularities to the 
car, as well as the passengers riding inside. 
The suspension system is made up of several components, including 
the chassis, which holds the cab of the car. The springs along with the 
shock absorbers and struts support the vehicle’s weight and absorb and 
reduce excess energy from road shocks. Finally, the anti-sway bar shifts 
the movement of the wheels and stabilizes the car [1]. 
2.1.1 HISTORY OF SUSPENSION SYSTEM 
The earliest form of suspension would be the ox-drawn cart. It consisted 
of a platform swing placed on iron chains attached to the wheel frame 
of the carriage. By the 17th century, the iron chains were replaced with 
leather straps. This system remained the template for all other suspen­
sion systems till the 19th century. This is a very primitive form of a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
suspension and no modern automobile uses this kind of ‘strap suspen­
sion’ system. 
The world’s first automobile was built in 1885. It was developed to be 
a self-driven variation of the horse-drawn vehicles. However, the suspen­
sion system present in horse-drawn vehicles was designed for relatively 
low speeds and low loads. The same suspension system would not meet 
the high load and high-speed demands of an internal combustion engine 
used nowadays in an automobile. 
The first workable spring-suspension required advanced metallur­
gical knowledge and skill, and only became possible with the advent of 
industrialization. The first patent for a vehicle with a spring suspension 
was registered by Obadiah Elliot. Each wheel had two leaf springs on 
both sides and the body of the vehicle was fixed directly on to the springs 
which were in turn attached to the axles. Within a decade, most British 
horse carriages followed a similar design; the light carriages used wooden 
springs to avoid taxation while the larger carriages used steel springs. The 
springs were usually made up of low carbon steel and were placed one on 
top of the other to give it a tandem arrangement. 
Leaf springs have been in use since the early Egyptians. Leaf springs were 
used by ancient military engineers in the form of bows to power their siege 
engines-a device which was used to break down castle doors—with little 
success at first. The use of leaf springs in catapults was later refined and made 
to function properly many years later. Springs were not necessarily made of 
metal; a sturdy branch of a tree could also be used as a spring, such as a bow. 
The British steel would not function effectively on America’s rough 
roads. For this reason, the Abbot-Downing Company of Concord, New 
Hampshire re-introduced the leather strap suspension. The leather strap 
suspension produced a swinging motion instead of the previous bouncing 
vertical motion of the spring suspension. 
In 1901, Mors of Paris was the first to fit an automobile with shock 
absorbers. The ‘Mors Machine’ had the advantage of being equipped with 
a “damped” suspension system, because of which Henry Fournier won the 
prestigious Paris-to-Berlin race on 20 June 1901. Fournier’s superior time 
was 11 hours 46 minutes 10 seconds whereas the best competitor was Léonce 
Girardot in a Panhard with a time of 12 hours 15 minutes 40 seconds. 
In 1906, coil springs first appeared in a production vehicle by the British 
Runabout Company, designed by British Motor Car Company. At present, 
coil springs are used in almost all cars. Leyland Motors introduced torsion 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
bars in a suspension system in 1920. In 1922, the Lancia Lambda became 
the first automobile to have independent front suspension. This became 
more common in other cars from 1932 onwards. At present, most cars 
have independent suspension on all four wheels [2]. 
In the early 1930s, Monroe introduced the direct-acting telescopic 
shock absorber, which was derived from aircraft practice. This type of unit, 
based on the resistance due to forcing oil through orifices, has become the 
most popular damping device. 
In 1985, dramatic advances in the application of electronic control 
to dampers started taking place resulting from the intense competition 
to improve the ride quality of the traditional passenger vehicle. In these 
systems, the damper adjustments were made as a function of a wide variety of 
sensed parameters such as body attitude, yaw rate, acceleration, disturbance 
frequencies, brake controls, steering input, etc. These types of suspension 
systems are known as active and semi-active suspension system whereas a 
conventional suspension system is known as a passive system. The control 
algorithms would vary from being relatively simple to highly complex [3]. 
2.1.2 FUNCTIONS OF SUSPENSION SYSTEMS 
The main purpose of suspension systems are as follows: 
•  
Providing vertical compliance, so the wheels can follow an uneven 
road, isolating the chassis from unwanted vibrations. 
•  
Maintaining proper wheels geometry parameters such as camber, 
toe, and kingpin inclination angles. 
•  
Reacting to different control forces produced by the tires-longitu­
dinal (acceleration and braking) forces, lateral (cornering) forces, 
and braking and driving torques. 
•  
Preventing chassis roll. 
•  
Ensuring maximum contact between the tire and the road with 
minimal load variations [4]. 
2.1.3 TYPES OF SUSPENSION SYSTEMS 
In terms of control, suspension systems can be divided into three broad 
categories: 

 
20 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
1. Passive suspension; 
2. Semi-active suspension; and 
3. Active suspension. 
A schematic diagram of the different suspension systems is shown in 
Figure 2.1. 
The passive suspension system (PaS) is the traditional system which is 
employed in most passenger cars. The major components are the conven
tional hydraulic shock absorber, which is essentially a damper, and the 
coil spring as shown in Figure 2.1(a). The spring absorbs the vibrations 
coming from the road and the damper dissipates it. The movement of the 
vehicle greatly depends on the nature of the road. From the viewpoint of 
passengers, the ride is fairly comfortable and from the driver’s point of 
view, ride handling is rather robust. 
­
Active suspension allows movement of the wheels relative to the 
chassis through an on-board system. Active suspension is available in 
luxury cars such as BMW, Audi, Citroën, Mercedes-Benz, etc. There 
is no spring and damper system present, as shown in Figure 2.1(c). In 
this system, numerous sensors are present which provide information 
about the road condition, wheel rotation speed, ground clearance, engine 
vibrations, transmission vibrations, steering geometry, pedestrians, and 
adjacent vehicles. This information is then sent to the engine control unit 
(ECU). The ECU contains multiple processors and a variety of algorithms 
for different systems. The ECU processes the information and sends the 
appropriate voltage signal to the active suspension system. The active 
suspension system comprises many actuators. The voltage signal from the 
ECU produces movement of the chassis through the actuators. Actuators 
can be solenoid actuators, motorized actuators, stepper motors, synchro­
nous motors, or thermal actuators. Active suspension systems provide a 
great deal of comfort to the passengers; however, they come up short in 
terms of vehicle handling. 
Ride handling and ride comfort are two conflicting properties of any 
vehicle system. To improve one, the other parameter has to be sacrificed. 
Balancing these two quantities is a laborious task. While active and PaS are 
located on opposite ends of the spectrum, semi-active suspension follows 
a middle path and provides an optimal solution to the handling-comfort 
paradox. 
Semi-active suspensions provide better ride comfort than passive 
suspensions and at the same time provide better ride handling than active 

 
 
21 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
suspensions. In the event the ECU malfunctions or ceases to functions 
or the wiring is compromised, the active suspension system will fail 
completely. Semi-active suspension systems are designed in such a way 
that if any of the above problems occur, it will revert back to a PaS. In 
this way, semi-active suspensions have an added safety feature. The 
most prominent aspect of semi-active suspension systems is the use of 
a controllable damper, as shown in Figure 2.1(b). Real-time vibration 
reduction is done through this controllable damper. A commonly used 
controllable damper is the magneto-rheological damper which utilizes a 
magneto-rheological fluid. 
FIGURE 2.1  Suspension systems: (a) passive, (b) semi-active, and (c) active. 
2.2 TYPES OF VEHICLE MODELS 
In order to analyze the effectiveness of a suspension system, different 
models have been developed with increasing complexity. The vertical 
dynamic characteristics of the sprung mass, namely, displacement, velocity, 
and acceleration, give an understanding of how the sprung mass is moving. 
This, in turn, determines how comfortable the ride is. The analysis of these 
dynamic characteristics is done by considering mathematical models of a 
vehicle. The models are shown as follows: 

 
 
22 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
1.  Quarter Car Model: This takes into consideration one tire, the  
unsprung mass connected to the tire, the suspension linkage of  
that tire, and the sprung mass acting on the tire. In other words,  
it represents one-fourth of a vehicle. Excitation comes from  
road disturbances. It is the least complex out of the vehicle  
models. A schematic diagram of a quarter car model is shown  
in Figure 2.2. 
FIGURE 2.2  Quarter car model. 
2.  Half Car Model: These are extensions of quarter car models. 
A half-car model represents one half of a vehicle split along the 
longitudinal axis. It is essentially two quarter car models coupled 
with a rigid element. It takes into account pitching motion along 
with the vertical motion. A schematic diagram of a half-car model 
is shown in Figure 2.3. 

 
 
23 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
FIGURE 2.3  Half car model. 
3.  Full Car Model: These are extensions of half car models. They 
represent the dynamic structure of the entire vehicle. It is essen­
tially two-half car models coupled with two-rigid elements at the 
front and the rear. A schematic diagram of a half-car model is 
shown in Figure 2.4. 
FIGURE 2.4  Full car model. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
In this study, the displacement, velocity, and acceleration of the sprung 
mass of a quarter car model are analyzed to understand the efficacy of the 
suspension system. 
Modeling and simulation of the semi-active quarter car system are 
done in the Simulink environment of MATLAB. 
2.3 MAGNETORHEOLOGICAL (MR) DAMPERS 
Magnetorheological (MR) dampers contain MR fluids and are used in semi-
active systems. MR dampers have become a hot topic for research due to 
their intriguing physical features and their ability to control the damping 
characteristics of a variety of mechanical systems. The construction of 
the MR damper is similar to a conventional hydraulic damper, with some 
minor changes. The piston inside the MR damper is an electromagnet. 
When a magnetic field is applied, the rheological properties of the MR fluid 
get altered. The yield strength of the fluid increases and this changes the 
damping characteristics. In this system, damping characteristics are regu­
lated by controlling the strength of the magnetic field. Semi-active systems 
combine the positive aspects of both active and passive control systems [4]. 
MR fluids have shown the greatest promise in the application of dampers 
in the field of semi-active control systems. Small MR dampers are used in 
seat suspension systems of heavy-duty trucks to prevent unwanted vibra­
tions from reaching the driver. Large MR dampers are used in suspension 
systems of automobiles. Some MR dampers are specially made to be used 
in prosthetic devices. In all of these devices, one of the most important 
fluid properties is low off-state viscosity. MR dampers allow for control of 
certain properties in real-time, without the use of high-end technology [5]. 
2.3.1 TYPES OF MR DAMPERS 
1.  The Mono Tube Damper: The monotube MR damper contains a 
single piston and cylinder. The MR fluid is present in the reservoir 
and there is an accumulator mechanism to adjust the change in 
volume that occurs from the movement of the piston rod. The 
accumulator piston acts as a barrier between the MR fluid reservoir 
and the compressed gas reservoir. The compressed gas (usually 
nitrogen) is used to compensate for the change in volume caused 

 
25 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
by the movement of the piston rod into the housing. This damper 
is most commonly used because it is very compact and can be 
installed in any orientation. 
2.  Twin Tube Damper: This type of MR damper has two fluid 
reservoirs. As per the Figure, there are two housing: the inner and 
the outer separated by a foot valve. The inner housing guides the 
piston rod assembly, in a manner similar to that of the monotube 
MR damper. The volume enclosed by the inner housing is known 
as the inner reservoir. The volume present between the inner and 
outer housing is known as the outer reservoir. MR fluid is present 
inside the inner reservoir, ensuring that there are no air pockets. 
Due to the movement of the piston rod, some change in volume will 
occur. To compensate for this movement, the outer reservoir is partially 
filled with MR fluid. Hence, the outer reservoir functions the same way 
as the pneumatic accumulator in the monotube damper. A valve assembly 
– known as “the foot valve assembly” – is present at the bottom of the 
inner housing to control the flow of fluid between the two reservoirs. As 
the piston rod enters the damper, some MR fluid flows from the inner 
reservoir to the outer reservoir through the compression valve, which is a 
component of the foot valve assembly. The volume of liquid displaced by 
the piston rod as it enters the inner housing is equal to the volume of liquid 
entering the outer reservoir from the inner reservoir. As the piston rod is 
retracted from the damper, the MR fluid moves back to the inner reservoir 
from the outer reservoir through the return valve, which is also a part of 
the foot valve assembly [6]. 
2.3.2 APPLICATION OF MR DAMPERS 
MR dampers are becoming increasingly sought-after in semi-active 
vehicle suspension systems because of their mechanical simplicity, high 
dynamic range, low power requirements, large force capacity, and reli­
ability. Ride quality and ride handling are two very important aspects of 
vehicle dynamics. They are at constant odds with each other. Good ride 
quality implies poor ride handling and vice versa. MR dampers offer a 
compromise solution for these two conflicting properties. The BMW R 
1200 GS has an additional MR damper for even smoother running and 
superior ride ability. 

 
 
 
26 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
MR dampers offer superior properties that can be incorporated in 
motorcycle suspension designs. Changing the viscosity of the fluid is the 
best way to tune a motorcycle suspension. In the case of an MR damper, 
this is achieved by controlling the applied magnetic field. The range of 
control is virtually infinite within the off-state and saturation state, making 
them a perfect substitute for traditional hydraulic shock absorbers for front 
motorcycle suspension systems [7]. 
2.4 MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR MR DAMPER 
A number of mathematical models have been developed to describe the 
nature of MR damper. The models use physical characteristics such as 
friction to describe the dynamics of the device. The key features of some 
models are given in the following sub-sections: 
1.  Bingham Model: It is based on the Bingham plastic model. 
In this model, the body is assumed to behave like a solid until 
the minimum yield stress is exceeded and then follows a linear 
relationship between stress and the rate of shear deformation. The 
Bingham model is shown in Figure 2.5. 
FIGURE 2.5  Bingham model. 
The governing equation for this model is: 
f mr = f c (ẋ) + c0ẋ + f0  
(2.1)

 
 

27 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
where fmr is the force due to the damper, c0 is the damping coef­
ficient, fc is the frictional force, x. is the piston velocity and f0 is to 
account for the presence of an accumulator [8]. 
2.  Hyperbolic Tangent Model: It has two Voight elements connected 
by an inertial element that resists motion through the Coulomb 
friction element. The hyperbolic tangent model is shown in Figure 
2.6. 
FIGURE 2.6  Hyperbolic tangent model. 
The governing equations for this model are: 
 
  
 x .  
0  
x .
0  1 x0 
 2 x   3
0f tanh
 
 
(2.2)
  V  

r   
 
  
 
T 
 
 
T
 
k
f mr   
1 
k
 
 x
c
0   
1
 
  
(2.3) 
  1  
  c1  
 
 
 
0
1
 
  
  
1  
k
(2.4)
  
0  k1  
c0  c1  
 
 
 
m
m 
 

 
0
0 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  0
0   
 
 
2   
k
c
 
1 
1   
(2.5)
 
 
 
  m0
m0   
  0    
 
 
3   
1 
 
  
(2.6)
 
 
 
  m0   
28 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
where k1 and c1 are the spring and dashpot which predict the 
pre-yield viscoelastic behavior while k1 and c1 are the spring and 
dashpot which predict the post-yield viscoelastic behavior. m0 is 
the inertia of the device and f0 is the yield force. x0 denotes plastic 
deformation. Vr is the reference velocity [9]. 
3.  Dahl Friction Model: The Dahl model consists of a Coulomb 
friction element with a lag in the change of friction force when 
the direction of motion changes. The Dahl model is shown in 
Figure 2.7. 
The governing equations for this model are given as: 

fmr = k
 
v x t
 w  
(2.7)
x ( )  ( ) + k
 v z t 
( )  ( )
x
x
z
p
 =
(  ­
z) 
(2.8) 
where kx and kw are voltage dependant parameters [10]. 
FIGURE 2.7  Dahl friction model. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
4.  Bouc‑Wen Model: The Bouc-Wen hysteresis model is one 
of the simplest and the most effective models to predict the 
hysteretic behavior of devices. The Bouc-Wen model is shown 
in Figure 2.8. 
FIGURE 2.8  Bouc-Wen model. 
The governing equations for this model are: 
f  = k 
-
c y
(2.9)
( x
x
 ) + 
mr 
1 
0
1 
y c(
( 
c x
  
+ c ) = k
x
y
 
- ) + 
+a z 
(2.10)
1 
0
0 
0 
n
A x  y 


(2.11) 


z   x
 
y z
 
z 
n 1 
 x
 
y z  


   
   
where xis the piston velocity, c0 is the damping coefficient, k0 is 
the stiffness of the device, x0 is the initial deflection of the spring, 
x0 is the initial deflection of the spring and z is the unmeasurable 
evolutionary variable which accounts for hysteresis behavior. 
α,β,φ,n and A are parameters used to control the hysteresis loops. 
In traditional mathematical models, these parameters are given 
constant values. To produce an adaptive nature in the device, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
these parameters should vary based on the external environment. 
This variation can be produced through fuzzy logic control [11]. 
The input voltage to the MR damper is governed by the 
following equations: 
α= α a + αbu 
(2.12) 
c0=c0a+c0bu 
(2.13) 
c1=c1a+c1bu 
(2.14) 
where u is the first order filter for the voltage, given by the 
following equation: 
u= -1 (u - v) 
(2.15) 
where, ν = applied voltage. Here, A change in the voltage will be 
carried through Eqs. (2.9)–(2.15) to ultimately produce a change 
in the force of the MR damper. The voltage input to the MR 
damper is held at a constant value of 5 V. The remaining variables 
including z are mathematical parameters and do not have any 
physical meaning. The Bouc-Wen model in Simulink is shown in 
Figure 2.10. 
2.5 SEMI-ACTIVE SUSPENSION SYSTEM MODELING 
Simulation of a quarter car suspension model is a very effective method 
to investigate the influence of damping forces on the response charac­
teristics of a vehicle under different road surface inputs. In this case, the 
MR damper model (Bouc-Wen model) is incorporated into a quarter car 
suspension system for subsequent dynamic analysis of the entire system. 
The quarter car model of Bouc-Wen-based semi-active suspension system 
(BWSAS) is shown in Figure 2.9. 
The quarter car system described here has been modeled with Simu­
link software for subsequent response analysis of the vehicle due to road 
disturbance. The quarter car model with a semi-active suspension based on 
the Bouc-Wen model in Simulink is shown in Figure 2.10. The simulation 

 
31 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
is carried out to plot vehicle performance for body acceleration, body 
velocity, and body displacement. 
FIGURE 2.9  Bouc-Wen-based semi-active suspension. 
2.6 FUZZY LOGIC CONTROLLED SEMI-ACTIVE SUSPENSION 
The dynamic model of the fuzzy logic controlled semi-active suspension 
is given by Figure 2.9 and governed by Eqs. (5.3) and (5.4). The Bouc-
Wen model is given in Figure 2.8 and governed by Eqs. (2.12)–(2.15). 
To produce effective damping, the voltage input to the MR damper 
should not be constant. If the voltage is constant, the damping rate would 
depend on the excitations arising from the road surface. Then this would 
essentially become a stiffer passive suspension. The voltage should change 
depending on the road surface. This will give rise to a closed feedback 
circuit, allowing the force of the MR damper to vary continuously with 
the road surface. This closed feedback circuit will give the semi-active 
suspension the ability to adapt to the irregularities of the road surface. 

 
 
 
 
 
32 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
The inputs to the fuzzy logic controller are displacement and velocity 
of the sprung mass. The output is the applied voltage. The first stage of the 
controller is the fuzzification of the inputs. Here, the inputs are converted 
into grades of membership. The Gaussian membership curves are used for 
the displacement and velocity input variables. 
FIGURE 2.10  The BWSAS model in Simulink. 
The next stage of the controller is developing the fuzzy inference 
engine. The Mamdani-type fuzzy inference method is used. Here, 
a number of rules are made to relate the membership grades of the 
displacement and velocity to the voltage. These rules are known as 
fuzzy rules. 

 
 
33 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
The last stage of the fuzzy logic controller is defuzzification. In this 
stage, the linguistic values of the voltage are converted to crisp values 
which can be read by the MR damper. This is done by means of a trian­
gular membership function and using the centroid method. 
The quarter car model with a semi-active suspension based on fuzzy 
logic control (FLCSAS) in Simulink is shown in Figure 2.11. There 
are three scalar gains present, namely Gd
, and G . They are for the 
, Gvel
v
displacement of the sprung mass, the velocity of the sprung mass, and 
input voltage to the MR damper. They are assumed as unity. 
FIGURE 2.11  The FLCSAS model in Simulink. 
2.7 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The fuzzy logic controlled semi-active suspension is validated for a step 
road profile and its effectiveness is analyzed by comparing the results of 
the other models. Optimization of the fuzzy logic controlled semi-active 
suspension is done and the results are compared with the non-optimized 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
model. Vertical displacement, velocity, and acceleration of the sprung 
mass of different models will be compared. 
2.7.1 ROAD PROFILE 
The analysis of all models is done using a step road profile of height 0.1 m 
with a phase delay of 1 second. The road profile is shown in Figure 2.12. 
FIGURE 2.12  
Step road profile. 
2.7.2 RESPONSE TO STEP ROAD PROFILE 
In the next phase, passive suspension, BWSAS, and FLCSAS models are 
compared taking step road profile as the input. The results for vertical 
displacement, velocity, and acceleration for the passive suspension, 
BWSAS, and FLCSAS models are shown in Figures 2.13–2.15, respec­
tively. Detail analysis of the PaS is not shown here, only the results are 
presented. 
From Figure 2.13, it is observed that the FLCSAS and BWSAS 
models have a better response than the passive suspension model. 
The response of the BWSAS model starts to lag slightly behind the 
FLCSAS response after 15 seconds. The magnitude of displacement 

 
 
 
35 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
of the FLCSAS and BWSAS are both lower than that of the passive 
model. The FLCSAS and BWSAS models dissipate the vibrations 
quicker than the passive system. 
Figure 2.14 shows that the FLCSAS and BWSAS model have higher 
initial velocity values compared to the passive system. The FLCSAS and 
BWSAS models dissipate vibrations fast and the magnitude of velocities 
drop quickly. 
FIGURE 2.13  Displacement response for step road profile. 
FIGURE 2.14  Velocity response for step road profile. 
FIGURE 2.15  Acceleration response for step road profile. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 2.1 Tuned Values for the Scalar Gain Parameters 
Scalar Gains 
Tuned Values 
Gd 
7.2 
Gvel 
6.8 
G 
10 
v 
36 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
However, from Figure 2.15 it is also noticed that the FLCSAS and 
BWSAS have very high initial values of acceleration. Although the high 
values start to dissipate quickly, there is too much noise associated with 
their drop. This noise is very prominent and continues even after 30 seconds. 
The analysis of the semi-active suspension systems (BWSAS and 
FLCSAS) and PaS demonstrates that both the BWSAS and FLCSAS 
models have superior dynamic characteristics than the PaS. However, 
BWSAS and FLCSAS show very similar responses. The only difference is 
that the BWSAS starts to lag slightly behind the FLCSAS after 30 seconds. 
The BWSAS has reached its saturation state considering 5 V as the input. 
It cannot be changed any further. The FLCSAS, on the other hand, can 
undergo further tuning, as explained in the next section. 
2.7.3 OPTIMIZATION FUZZY LOGIC CONTROLLER 
The FLCSAS model analyzed so far did not have any scalar gain. Opti­
mization of the FLCSAS model is done by tuning these values [12]. 
This is done manually by trial-and-error. A particular value for a scalar 
gain is initially assumed and the results are analyzed. Another value 
is assumed for another scalar gain and the results are analyzed. This 
process is repeated until the best response is achieved. A multitude of 
values was obtained for these three gains; however, Table 2.1 shows the 
values which give the best results. The optimized FLCSAS model will 
be abbreviated as OFLCSAS. 
2.7.3.1 OPTIMIZED RESULTS FOR STEP ROAD PROFILE 
The FLCSAS and OFLCSAS are compared taking step road profiles as 
the input. The results for vertical displacement, velocity, and acceleration 
for the FLCSAS and OFLCSAS models are shown in Figures 2.16–2.18, 
respectively. 

 
 
37 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
FIGURE 2.16  Optimized displacement for step road profile. 
It is observed from Figure 2.16 that the peak values of displacement 
obtained from the OFLCSAS model are significantly lower than that of 
the FLCSAS model. The vibrations are dissipated faster as well, providing 
lesser settling time. 
The response of the OFLCSAS model is better than the FLCSAS 
model (Figure 2.17). The rugged peaks present in the FLCSAS response 
are absent in the OFLCSAS response, allowing smoother dissipation of 
the unwanted vibrations. 
FIGURE 2.17  Optimized velocity for step road profile. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
From Figure 2.18, it can be seen that the OFLCSAS model has 
higher initial acceleration than that of the FLCSAS model. However, this 
peak value falls very rapidly. The overall acceleration response of the 
FLCSAS is very jagged, having too many irregularities. The response 
of the OFLCSAS is far smoother having almost no irregularities. The 
smoothness of the acceleration profile plays a major role in the comfort 
of the passengers. 
FIGURE 2.18  Optimized acceleration for step road profile. 
2.8 CONCLUSION 
In this chapter, different types of suspension systems are discussed. The 
advantage of a semi-active suspension system is highlighted. It is shown 
that MR damper is an important part of automotive suspension systems 
and, hence, plays a major role in controlling the dynamic nature of the 
vehicle. The effectiveness of the MR damper was studied. Initially, a 
quarter car model with PaS was designed. Another quarter car model was 
developed with an MR damper as a member of the semi-active suspension 
system. The behavior of the MR damper was predicted by the Bouc-Wen 
hysteresis model. The final quarter car model was developed with an MR 
damper based on the Bouc-Wen model and controlled by a fuzzy logic 
controller. These three models were analyzed by considering the step road 
profile. The fuzzy logic controller was optimized by altering the values of 

 
 
 
 
39 
Vibration Control of a Car Suspension System 
the scalar gains to produce better results. The results of the analysis are as 
follows: 
1.  The step road profile was considered first. The performance of the 
models was analyzed by monitoring the displacement, velocity, 
and acceleration profiles. The FLCSAS and BWSAS models 
showed an overall better response than the PaS. The FLCSAS and 
BWSAS models had high initial values of acceleration. The values 
dissipated quickly, but there was still too much noise present. 
2.  The OFLCSAS model showed a better response than the FLCSAS 
model. Since the BWSAS and FLCSAS models showed similar 
results, by extension, the OFLCSAS model performed better than 
the BWSAS as well. 
3.  The only drawback of the OFLCSAS is the slightly higher initial 
acceleration in all the road profiles. After 5 seconds, the accel­
eration starts to drop rapidly and the profile generated is much 
smoother than the profile of the FLCSAS model. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
Bouc-Wen model 
•  
engine control unit 
•  
fuzzy logic controller 
•  
passive suspension system 
•  
semi-active suspension 
•  
step road profile 
REFERENCES 
1. Why is Your Car’s Suspension so Important? (2018). WIYGUL Automotive Clinic.  
Conceptual Minds. 
2. Wikipedia Contributors, 
 
(2018). Suspension (Vehicle). Wikipedia, the Free 
Encyclopedia. 
3. Milliken, W. F., & Milliken, D. L., (1995). Race car vehicle dynamics. Warren Dale: 
Society of Automotive Engineers. 

 
40 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
4. Gillespie, T. D., (1992). Fundamentals of vehicle dynamics. Society of Automotive 
Engineers (SAE). 
5.  Świtoński, E., Mężyk, A., Duda, S., & Kciuk, S., (2007). Prototype magneto 
rheological fluid damper for active vibration control system. Journal of Achievements 
in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering, 21(1), 55–62. 
6. Kciuk, M., & Turczyn, R., (2006). Properties and application of magneto rheological 
fluids. Journal of Achievements in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering, 
18(1–2), 127–130. 
7.  Ashfak, A., Saheed, A., Rasheed, K. K. A., & Jaleel, J. A., (2011). Design, fabrication, 
and evaluation of MR damper. International Journal of Aerospace and Mechanical 
Engineering, 1, 27–33. 
8.  Shames, I., & Cozzarelli, F., (1992). Elastic and Inelastic Stress Analysis Prentice-
Hall. Inc. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
9.  Gavin, H., Hoagg, J., & Dobossy, M., (2001). Optimal design of MR dampers. 
Proceedings of the US-Japan Workshop on Smart Structures for Improved Seismic 
Performance in Urban Regions, 14, 225–236. 
10.  Aguirre, N., Ikhouane, F., Rodellar, J., Wagg, D., & Neild, S., (2010). Modeling and 
identification of a small scale magneto rheological damper. Proceedings of ALCOSP  
2010 Adaptation and Learning in Control and Signal Processing (pp. 19–24). IFAC. 
11.  Spencer, Jr. B. F., & Sain, M. K., (1997). Controlling buildings: A  new frontier in 
feedback. IEEE Control Systems, 17(6), 19–35. 
12.  Ross, T. J., (2009). Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications. John Wiley & Sons. 

CHAPTER 3  
A Review of the Application of 
Mechatronics in Manufacturing 
Processes 
T. MUTHURAMALINGAM 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and 
Technology, Kattankulathur – 603203, Tamil Nadu, India,  
E-mail: muthu1060@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
In the present scenario, the importance of enhancing the performances of 
conventional manufacturing processes is being increased. It is possible 
only where integrating the mechatronics approaches in manufacturing 
processes. The adaptation of control algorithms and modification of 
existing electronics circuits in the manufacturing processes can consid­
erably enhance the performances of the manufacturing technology. The 
efficacy of the untraditional machining processes can be well enhanced by 
the mechatronics engineering concepts. In the present study, an endeavor 
has been made to analyze the various literature related to the adaptation 
of mechatronics knowledge in manufacturing technology. The responses 
of the processes with and without mechatronics approaches have been 
compared and the merits of those systems over the existing systems have 
been analyzed. The influences of the various control strategies have also 
been analyzed and compared. It has been observed that the still better 
research works can be made to increase the efficacy the manufacturing 
technology. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
All engineering products are being manufactured using various types 
of manufacturing processes. The various performance measures of 
the manufacturing technology can always have to be upgraded. Then 
only it is possible to enhance the quality of the engineering products. 
The integration of mechatronics with manufacturing technology can 
lead to developing intelligent manufacturing technology as shown in 
Figure 3.1. 
FIGURE 3.1  Mechatronics integration with manufacturing technology. 
Mechatronics is a multidisciplinary stream, which can integrate the 
various domains of technological aspects to enhance the existing tech­
nology. The inclusion of sensing technology and controllers along with 
existing actuators can convert the automatic control of the mechanism of 
any system. The adaptation of the various intelligent controls and algo­
rithms can further improve the performance measures considerably. The 
modeling and simulation of the processes and systems can reduce the 
duration of the design life cycle of the product. It can also further reduce 
capitalization costs. Software-in-loop (SIL) simulation and hardware­
in-loop (HIL) simulation can virtually able to design and develop the 
product in an efficient way. In the present chapter, the adaptation of 
the mechatronics approaches with conventional machining, additive 
manufacturing, and precision engineering has been discussed as shown 
in Figure 3.2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
A Review of the Application of Mechatronics 
FIGURE 3.2  Recent trends in mechatronics in manufacturing technology. 
3.2 MECHATRONICS IN MACHINING PROCESS 
The exclusion of the material from the specimens, i.e., subtractive manu­
facturing can able to produce the engineering product with the required 
shape and size. The material removal processes can be further classified 
into the traditional and unconventional machining process. In the tradi­
tional machining process, the specimen and the cutting tool are directly 
making contact with each other. However, the strength of the tool should 
be higher than the workpiece. In the unconventional machining process, 
the tool does not touch the specimen during the machining process. 
Electrical discharge machining (EDM) is one of the important uncon­
ventional machining processes in which electrical sparks applied across 
the machining zone to remove the material by melting and vaporization. 
The adaptation of mechatronics technology in the machining process can 
significantly enhance the various performance measures such as material 
removal rate, surface roughness, surface hardness, tool wear rate, and 
other considerable machinability parameters in any machining process. 
The incorporation of virtual simulation with online real measure­
ments of systems can eliminate fake tool breakdown detection and 
momentary overloads of the tools during employing the adaptive 
control. The system has been realized on a CNC machining center 
for the utilization in production to enhance the efficacy [1]. The 
improvement in the overall equipment efficacy of machine tools can 
enhance the resource-efficiency and productivity in any manufacturing 
process. The adaptation sensors for online monitoring of real systems 
availability could accomplish the more usefulness and eminence of 
machining processes. It is necessary to establish an important data 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
source which will facilitate the extraction of error-pattern and the 
allotment of the pattern to machining processes [2]. The enhance­
ment of energy efficiency involved in machine tools can considerably 
improve the environmental quality of machining systems. An on-line 
energy effectiveness monitoring system is essential for the same. Many 
conservative approaches can supervise energy performance by directly 
measuring cutting power with torque measuring sensors. A new on-line 
approach has been developed without the utilization of any torque 
sensor which can lead to a decreased commissioning cost [3]. 
The surface roughness of the specimen can be effectively reduced 
by selecting the proper control algorithms in the EDM process. The iso­
energy pulse generator could produce a better surface finish due to the 
uniform spark energy distribution as shown in Figure 3.3 [4, 5]. The duty 
factor indicates the time period at which the spark energy applied across 
the machining zone. The higher duty ratio can lead to higher material 
exclusion whereas lower duty ratio provides higher surface finish. The 
automatic switching of the duty factor from higher to a lower value during 
the roughing to finishing using fuzzy logic controller based mechatronics 
approach could enhance the machining process in EDM [6]. The tool wear 
is directly proportional to surface morphology of the machined workpiece 
in EDM process. The online tool wear monitoring using the mechatronics 
approach can effectively control the tool wear by implementing the 
uniform spark energy distribution across the machining zone in machining 
process as shown in Figure 3.4. The integration of mechatronics approach 
can reduce the surface roughness in an efficient way [7]. 
FIGURE 3.3  Effect of mechatronics approach on the machined workpiece surface. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
A Review of the Application of Mechatronics 
FIGURE 3.4  Effect of mechatronics approach on tool surface after machining. 
The melted specimen particles can resolidify on the machined surface 
as white layer thickness in the EDM process. This layer thickness and 
distribution can highly contribute to surface hardness in the EDM process. 
The integration of the intelligent technique along with the existing pulse 
generator can produce a tiny and uniform recast layer owing to the 
uniform spark energy distribution in the EDM process. It could reduce 
the surface hardness of the machined specimen in such a process [8]. The 
distance between the tool electrode and the specimen in the EDM process 
has a significant role and nature on the machining characteristics. This air 
gap can affect the diameter of the plasma column during the machining 
process. The accumulation of the black carbon layer is developed owing 
to the arcing effect in the EDM process. The monitoring of the distance 
using the fuzzy controller with the existing technique could reduce the 
arcing effect, surface roughness, and waviness in the EDM process [9]. 
The arcing effect is happened owing to the improper deionization of the 
dielectric medium in EDM. The stochastic nature of the pulse generator 
could be considerably reduced by incorporating the mechatronics approach 
with an existing pulse generator for delivering the spark plasma energy in 
the EDM process [10]. 
The pulse shape of the spark pulse generator is one of the recent research 
trends in the EDM process. The uniform duration of the discharge current 
pulse could be obtained using the sensor integration of the current sensor and 
voltage sensor. The higher material removal rate could be obtained using this 
mechatronics approach [11]. The development of iso-energy pulse generator 
with the effective control algorithm can enhance the working performance 
of the pulse generator in the EDM process. The interfacing of the current 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
sensor in series with the specimen-tool combination can considerably control 
the discharge plasma column in the EDM process [12]. The tool wear is 
directly proportional to the surface morphology of the machined workpiece 
in the EDM process. The tool wear could be adjusted by monitoring control 
flow across the machining zone in the EDM process. The integration of a 
mechatronics approach can reduce surface roughness in an efficient way 
[13]. In recent production systems, data-driven system in-process health 
monitoring is growing in reputation owing to the extensive exploitation of 
low-cost sensors and their association to the Internet. In the meantime, deep 
learning offers valuable tools for conditioning and investigating the larger 
system machinery data [14]. The spark energy can be effectively modified 
by incorporating the mechatronics approach in the EDM process. The white 
layer thickness may affect the surface quality of the machined workpiece. 
The uniform energy can effectively reduce the white layer thickness with 
uniform in nature [15]. 
3.3 MECHATRONICS IN ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING 
In the machining process, the material is removed as debris, burr, and wast­
ages. Moreover, it can be reused for auxiliary consumption. Nevertheless, 
the product is formed by the layer by layer formation of specimens under 
required shapes and size in case additive manufacturing. However, the addi­
tive manufacturing processes have to be enhanced in all the possible ways, 
since the processes have been involved with many input process parameters. 
The melt pool thermal controller has been designed to control the melt pool 
high temperature in the constant value, path, and trajectory formulation 
algorithm is made to preserve a steady glass filament feed direction rela­
tive to the scan velocity. The experimentation results exhibit that the melt 
pool temperature controller can able eliminate the bubble creation over an 
extensive range of build speeds and that the path planned directional-control 
is able to obtain better dimensional accuracy throughout closed contours 
[16]. The micro-scale additive manufacturing μ-AM processes are types 
of production processes utilized to manufacture micron-sized structures in 
a series of straight additions of materials as trained by the binary file, as 
opposed to the lithographic patterning and subtractive etching utilized at 
existing micro-scale manufacturing. Numerically controlled tools, material 
addition is an open-loop approach, which necessitates continual user inter­
vention to heuristically tune system parameters [17]. Effective feed-forward 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
A Review of the Application of Mechatronics 
control of additive manufacturing of fully dense metallic sections has been 
proposed. The study is an enhancement of existing control methods of the 
process, providing high robust and industrially acceptable metrological 
approaches. The proposed algorithms can successfully moderate these 
disturbances and sustain the stable deposition while the uncontrolled deposi­
tion fails [18]. Two control-oriented models have been proposed to portray 
the layer-to-layer height evolution of the ink-jet 3D printing technology. 
While the process has found broad applicability, as with a lot of industrial 
3D printing systems, ink-jet 3D printers operated in an open loop, even when 
sensor measurements are available. One of the primary causes of this is the 
deficiency of optimal control-oriented models of the process. Two control-
oriented models have been developed to eliminate this drawback [19]. Inte­
grated metrology is highly influential for quality control and explanation of 
micro-scale additive manufacturing and machining processes. The present 
approach in micro-scale additive manufacturing is to fabricate a component 
as die. The separate proposed metrology tool has created high production 
time, lower risking contamination, and lower datum. A new system that 
integrates electrohydrodynamic jet prints, a promising micro-scale additive 
production approach, with on-line atomic force microscopy for rapid, die­
by-die in-process metrology and performance monitoring [20]. 
3.4 MECHATRONICS IN PRECISION ENGINEERING 
The precision engineering involves various fields of manufacturing tech­
niques such as positional accuracy, precision linear movement, metrology, 
automatic guided vehicles, and image processing monitoring. The position 
accuracy and precision movement is a very important parameter in the 
present scenario of manufacturing technology. The accuracy of the positional 
can be done using an interconnected cylinder based mechatronics approach. 
Where one cylinder can be used for coarse movement as that of other cylin­
ders used for fine movement. The precise movement can be evaluated using 
sensors arrangement. Proportional-integral-derivative (PID) based control 
in the servo pneumatics can considerably increase the positional accuracy 
[21]. Even though the speed of response for obtaining linear movement by 
pneumatics is better than the electrical drives, it is still enhancement needed 
for obtaining the positional accuracy. The adaptation of the various predic­
tive control and intelligent algorithms can efficiently enhance the positional 
accuracy with precise movement [22]. The parameters for the interconnected 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
cylinders based servo pneumatic systems should be automatically tuned 
with optimal process parameters. The better system parameters have been 
identified using the response surface methodology based on multiple criteria 
decision making in the servo pneumatics system [23]. The surface rough­
ness is important to surface performance measures. The non-contact-type 
surface roughness measurement is one of the non-destructive testings which 
has been used to measure surface performance measures. The principle of a 
capacitance-based mechatronics approach can be used to forecast the surface 
performance measures in an efficient way [24]. The sensor integration based 
mechatronics approach with conventional automated guided vehicles can 
able to identify the different color pallets in warehouses. These low cost 
automated guided vehicles can able to perform in well manner [25]. The 
sensor integration with any conventional approach can enhance the target 
accuracy in an efficient way. The automatic gun target can be efficiently 
performed by adaptation of a mechatronics approach [26]. The utilization of 
line-scan machine vision, ‘incremental’ image processing based integrated 
mechatronics design approach can provide better performance than existing 
frame-based techniques [27]. 
3.5 CONCLUDING REMARKS AND SUGGESTIONS 
The chapter has been framed to analyze the influence of mechatronics 
approaches in manufacturing processes for enhancing performance 
measures. The advantages of integrated mechatronic systems over the 
active systems have been analyzed. It has been inferred that the efficiency 
of the subtractive, additive manufacturing processes, and precision engi­
neering can be effectively increased by the mechatronics engineering 
concepts. It has been observed that the still better research works can be 
made to increase the efficacy the manufacturing technology. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
electrical discharge machining 
•  
hardware-in-loop 
•  
mechatronics 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  
multidisciplinary stream 
•  
proportional-integral-derivative 
•  
software-in-loop 
49 
A Review of the Application of Mechatronics 
REFERENCES 
1. Altintas, Y., & Aslan, D., (2017). Integration of virtual and on-line machining process 
control and monitoring. CIRP Annals, 66(1), 349–352. 
2.  Emec, S., Krüger, J., & Seliger, G., (2016). Online fault-monitoring in machine 
tools based on energy consumption analysis and non-invasive data acquisition for 
improved resource-efficiency. Procedia CIRP, 40, 236–243. 
3. Hu, S., Liu, F., He, Y., & Hu, T., (2012). An on-line approach for energy efficiency 
monitoring of machine tools. Journal of Cleaner Production, 27, 133–140. 
4. Muthuramalingam, T., & Mohan, B., (2014). Performance analysis of ISO current 
pulse generator on machining characteristics in EDM process. Archives of Civil and 
Mechanical Engineering, 14(3), 383–390. 
5. Muthuramalingam, T., & Mohan, B., (2013). Enhancing the surface quality by 
ISO pulse generator in EDM process, Advanced Materials Research, 622–623(1), 
380–384. 
6.  Jaswanth, K., Ashwin, & Muthuramalingam, T., (2017). Influence of duty factor of 
pulse generator in electrical discharge machining process. International Journal of 
Applied Engineering Research, 12(21), 11397–11399. 
7. Muthuramalingam, T., Vasanth, S., & Geethapriyan, T., (2016). Influence of energy 
distribution and process parameters on tool wear in electrical discharge machining. 
International Journal of Control Theory and Applications, 9(37), 353–359. 
8.  Muthuramalingam, T., Mohan, B., & Jothilingam, A., (2014). Effect of tool electrode 
re-solidification on surface hardness in electrical discharge machining. Materials and 
Manufacturing Processes, 29(11–12), 1374–1380. 
9. Muthuramalingam, T., Mohan, B., Rajadurai, A., & Saravanakumar, D., (2014). 
Monitoring and fuzzy control approach for efficient electrical discharge machining 
process. Materials and Manufacturing Processes, 29(3), 281–286. 
10. Muthuramalingam, T., Mohan, B., Rajadurai, A., & Antony, M. D., (2013). 
Experimental investigation of ISO energy pulse generator on performance measures 
in EDM. Materials and Manufacturing Processes, 28(10), 1137–1142. 
11. Muthuramalingam, T., & Mohan, B., (2013). Influence of discharge current pulse 
on machinability in electrical discharge machining. Materials and Manufacturing 
Processes, 28(4), 375–380. 
12. Muthuramalingam, T., & Mohan, B., (2013). Design and fabrication of control system 
based ISO current pulse generator for electrical discharge machining. International 
Journal of Mechatronics and Manufacturing Systems, 6(2), 133–143. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
13. Muthuramalingam, T., & Mohan, B., (2013). A study on improving machining 
characteristics of electrical discharge machining with modified transistor pulse 
generator. International Journal of Manufacturing Technology and Management, 
27(1–3), 101–111. 
14. Zhao, R., Yan, R., Chen, Z., Mao, K., Wang, P., & Gao, R. X., (2019). Deep learning 
and its applications to machine health monitoring. Mechanical Systems and Signal 
Processing, 115, 213–237. 
15. Muthuramalingam, T., (2019). Measuring the influence of discharge energy on 
white layer thickness in electrical discharge machining process. Measurement, 131, 
694–700. 
16.  Peters, D., Drallmeier, J., Bristow, D. A., Landers, R. G., & Kinzel, E., (2018). 
Sensing and control in glass additive manufacturing. Mechatronics, 56, 188–197. 
17.  Wang, Z., Pannier, C. P., Barton, K., & Hoelzle, D. J., (2018). Application of robust 
monotonically convergent spatial iterative learning control to micro-scale additive 
manufacturing. Mechatronics, 56, 157–165. 
18.  Hagqvist, P., Heralić, A., Christiansson, A. K., & Lennartson, B., (2015). Resistance 
based iterative learning control of additive manufacturing with wire. Mechatronics, 
31, 116–123. 
19.  Guo, Y., Peters, J., Oomen, T., & Mishra, S., (2018). Control-oriented models for 
ink-jet 3D printing. Mechatronics, 56, 211–219. 
20. Pannier, C. P., Ojeda, L., Wang, Z., Hoelzle, D., & Barton, K., (2018). An 
electrohydrodynamic jet printer with integrated metrology, Mechatronics, 56, 
268–276. 
21. Saravanakumar, M. B., & Muthuramalingam, T., (2017). A review on recent research 
trends in servo pneumatic positioning systems. Precision Engineering, 49(1), 
481–492. 
22. Saravanakumar, D., Mohan, B., Muthuramalingam, T., & Sakthivel, G., (2018). 
Performance evaluation of interconnected pneumatic cylinders positioning system. 
Sensors and Actuators: A. Physical, 274(1), 155–164. 
23. Saravanakumar, D., Mohan, B., & Muthuramalingam, T., (2014). Application of 
response surface methodology on finding influencing parameters in servo pneumatic 
system. Measurement, 54(1), 40–50. 
24. Mathiyazhagan, R., Sampathkumar, S., & Muthuramalingam, T., (2019). Prediction 
modeling of surface roughness using capacitive sensing technique in machining 
process. IEEE Sensors. doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2927174. 
25.  Muthuramalingam, T., Mohamed, R. M., Saravanakumar, D., & Jaswanth, K., (2018). 
Sensor integration-based approach for automatic fork lift trucks. IEEE Sensors, 
18(2), 736–740. 
26. Mohamed, R. M., & Muthuramalingam, T., (2018). Tracking and locking system for 
shooter with sensory noise cancellation. IEEE Sensors, 18(2), 732–735. 
27. King, T., (2003). Vision-in-the-loop for control in manufacturing.  Mechatronics, 
13(10), 1123–1147. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4  
Application of a Nature-Inspired 
Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
KUMAR GAURAV,1 RAMANPREET SINGH,2 AJAY KUMAR,1 and 
RAM DAYAL3 
1Department of Mechatronics Engineering,  
Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India,  
E-mails: kumar.gaurav@jaipur.manipal.edu;  
kumarmuj@gmail.com (K. Gaurav)  
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur,  
Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India  
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Malaviya National Institute  
of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India  
ABSTRACT 
A nature-inspired algorithm called hybrid teaching learning particle 
swarm optimization (HTLPSO) has been applied for odor source 
localization problem in an indoor environment with mobile agents. An 
optimization problem is formulated to identify the region of maximum 
odor concentration. With Gaussian plume model as the simulation 
environment its effectiveness has been demonstrated. Various set of 
mobile agents in range of {3-15} are used to find and detect the source 
of odor with high accuracy and concentration, respectively. Results are 
presented based on source declaration error, a parameter defining the 
accuracy in finding the odor source. It has been found that less number 
of mobile agents are required for fast convergence to detect the odor 
source. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
Odor source localization (OSL) is an important task, which supports the 
survival of many species in the animal kingdom, to locate food or their 
mating partners. Enhanced skills in localizing odor sources can give them 
an extra edge in a competitive environment where food availability is scarce 
and the search area is huge. Even for humans it can guarantee applications in 
various areas to detect materials such as plant matter and drugs in customs; 
locating unexploded mines and bombs; space exploration; detecting fire in 
its initial stages; landslides or avalanches; damaged buildings; searching for 
survivors in earthquakes or quarantine application [1]. One of the major 
catastrophes happened in 2015, when the fire broke out in a hazardous 
chemical warehouse at Ruihai International Logistics Co. Ltd., located at 
Tianjin Port, China. This company deals in the business of warehousing 
hazardous chemicals. This catastrophic accident resulted in 165 fatalities, 
798 injuries, and 8 missing people and caused damage to or destruction of 
304 buildings, 12,428 commercial automobiles, and 7533 containers. As 
much as CNY 6.866 billion direct economic losses were reported due to this 
accident, the costliest industrial disaster in China in recent years [2]. There­
fore, research interest in this field has grown immensely in recent times. 
Within active olfaction scope, researchers can develop either of two 
prominent approaches namely, a single robot and with multi-robots. 
In comparison with a single robot, the multi-robot strategy may prove 
to be a better player in terms of adaptability to a complex flow field 
environment, improved search efficiency, and success rate [3, 4]. 
Formation based algorithms, let a robot or group of robots maneuver 
in a particular spatial arrangement to find the target [5]. Multi-robots 
in OSL were reported long back using a distributed algorithm based on 
odor and flow information. It was only meant for indoor environment 
conditions having considerable airflow (>0.05 m/s) [6]. OSL problem 
has also been addressed in a dynamic environment by modified particle 
swarm optimization (M-PSO), which can continuously track a changing 
optimum over time. PSO can be improved or adapted by incorporating 
the change detection and responding mechanisms for solving dynamic 
problems. Charge PSO, which is another extension of the PSO has also 
been applied to solve the dynamic problem [7]. A new M-PSOT algorithm 
dynamically adjusts two learning factors in the velocity update equation 
based on the effect of wind on the self-cognition and social cognition of 
a particle [8]. Modified genetic algorithm (MGA) has been implemented 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
which can calculate preliminary source inversion, with the selection of 
best candidates through the crossover with eliminated individuals from 
the population. It is a three-stage solution by identifying the search zone 
using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, locating the leak 
source using a modified guaranteed convergence particle swarm optimi­
zation (PSO) algorithm [9]. PSO has been extensively used in OSL until 
it found that robots have a tendency to move towards the same local 
optimum (no odor source presence) [10], leading to a slow convergence 
rate and finally fail to declare the source due to reduced mobility. Lack 
of collaboration is another factor; mobile agents do not directly take 
concentration measurements of other agents into account [11]. 
The drawbacks in PSO have been eradicated to some extent by various 
strategies proposed such as adjusting the learning factors and the inertia 
weight. [12–14]. PSO has also been modified in which two learning factors 
kept updating based on the wind [8]. 
Apart from modifications in parameters of PSO, there are other efforts 
also to combine different methods with PSO to achieve hybridization. 
An approach for OSL utilizes the strength of both PSO and bacterial 
foraging optimization (BFO). Two new operations namely elimination 
dispersal and chemotaxis are combined with PSO. To avoid stagnation 
in local optima elimination dispersal is used whereas chemotaxis helps in 
tracing the plume area. The simulation was done to validate the approach 
[15]. The gravitational search algorithm and PSO may be hybridized for 
OSL simultaneously using the concept of the search counter [16]. Another 
approach could be, concatenating grey wolf optimizer with PSO [17]. The 
hybridization of PSO has not seen much work in recent times. In contrast 
to these algorithms in which parameter tuning is required, a parameterless 
algorithm known as teaching-learning based optimization may be used 
[18]. Nevertheless, its hybridized version may also be used. It’s reported 
that hybrid teaching-learning PSO outperforms the well-established 
benchmark algorithms synthesis of mechanisms generate path [19]. As it 
is a novel fused algorithm, we have implemented for OSL and its effec­
tiveness is demonstrated through simulation experiments. 
4.2 ENVIRONMENT FOR SIMULATION 
A controlled environment based on the advection-diffusion model [20, 21] 
is set up to test the developed algorithm. The mathematical expression for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
concentration ‘C’ of chemical gas at any point x = (x, y) in the domain of 
interest is given by: 
 
v d  x
x
 
(
-
+ I)  
q exp ­
o 
(
]
 
2k 
 
(4.1)
C x
(
0 x y ) =
,
,
, I
I
 
2nkd 
where ‘qo’ is chemical release rate, ‘v’ is the wind velocity in the positive 
direction of x-coordinate, is Euclidean distance between the point source 
and the point of interest, ‘k’ is the diffusion coefficient and (x’, y’) are the 
coordinates of the point source. The layout of the arena is 20 m × 20 m 
enclosed square area considered very similar to a large room in a building. 
Virtual agents (VA) start its search operation from random points at the 
beginning of the simulation run. Other parameters, which produced as 
shown in Figure 4.1 are furnished in Table 4.1. 
FIGURE 4.1  Simulation environment with the source at (5,12). 

 
 
TABLE 4.1 Parameters That Produced Figure 4.1 
Parameters → 
v 
k 
q 
x’
y’ 
Values 
0.03 m/s 
0.005 
0.5 mg/s 
5 m 
12 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
4.3 ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, the implementation of the HTLPSO algorithm is discussed. 
The HTLPSO is an ensemble of two well-established nature-inspired opti­
mization algorithms, namely, TLBO, and PSO. In HTLPSO, the teaching 
phase of TLBO is combined with the PSO while maintaining the size of 
the initial population and the best solutions are kept as it is. The flowchart 
of HTLPSO is depicted in Figure 4.2. 
The algorithm combines the random population (even) generated at the 
beginning. The generated population is utilized by both TLBO and PSO. 
Thereafter, the best half of the population obtained after PSO is combined 
with the best half of the population obtained after the teaching phase of 
the TLBO to assure that size of the population remains the same. The 
population so obtained is utilized for the learning phase of TLBO. The 
completion of the first iteration is indicated by the end of the learning 
phase. Thereafter, the final population obtained after the learning phase is 
utilized for the next iteration. The ensemble of TLBO with PSO helps in 
improving the computation speed and efficiency of the algorithm. 
4.4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND VALIDATION 
4.4.1 OUTLINE OF SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS 
Simulation experiments are designed for two categories. Each category 
has been made based on the number of iterations. In the first category 
all, the experiments are conducted with a maximum of 60 iterations 
whereas the second category consists of experiments with 120 iterations. 
In each category, there are 13 sets. Each set corresponds to a team size 
of VAs. For example, the first set corresponds to the VAs team size of 
three likewise VAs team size of 15 corresponds to set 13. In total, there 
are 26 sets. For a particular set, there are 100 simulation experiments to 
incorporate stochastic disturbances. Details of simulation time for both 

 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
categories have been furnished in Table 4.2. This simulation time is not 
comparable to real-time. To evaluate the performance of the adopted 
algorithm, two factors are taken into consideration. First is the success 
rate and the second one is average no. of iterations consumed. The next 
section describes source declaration error (SDE) based on which success 
rate has been defined. 
FIGURE 4.2  Flowchart of HTLPSO algorithm. 

 
 
TABLE 4.2 
Run Time 
Details of the Simulation Experiments with VAs Team Size of 3 to 15 with 
Sl. 
No. 
No. of  
Agents  
No. of 
Iterations/ 
Experiment 
Total Time 
(secs.): 60 
Iterations 
Total Time 
(secs.): 120 
Iterations 
No. of 
Simulation 
Experiments 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
1.97 
2.085 
2.26 
2.53 
2.84 
2.59 
2.66 
2.73 
2.86 
3.06 
3.18 
3.26 
3.37 
2.40 
2.56 
2.67 
3.11 
3.02 
3.23 
3.23 
3.38 
3.71 
3.83 
4.05 
4.20 
4.40 
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
57 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
4.4.2 SOURCE DECLARATION ERROR (SDE) 
“Source declaration error” (SDE) is a term introduced in this section to 
have a better understanding of the success rate. In an experiment when the 
agents close into the source but declare/identify it nearby other than the 
actual location, at that time Euclidean distance from the global best agent 
to the target location is computed. It is termed as SDE. In the present case, 
the source position is fixed at (5,12), therefore relative to his position SDE 
is calculated and it is a very important parameter which decides accuracy 
in declaring the source successfully. 
4.4.3 SUCCESS RATE 
In this subsection, the successful run has been defined as the closest reach 
of the global best agent to the odor source. Therefore, the VA  who reaches 
less than 0.02 meters in the vicinity of the source can be said to have 
successfully declared the source and named SDET1. Experiments are also 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
carried out for SDE at 0.05 meters named as SDET2. Hence the success 
rate is: 
R
  S = 
(4.2)
T 
where: R = successful runs; and T = total runs. 
4.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Simulation time for both categories namely 60 and 120 iterations have 
been tabulated in Table 4.2. It can be observed that for 100 simulation 
experiments, simulation time is only 1.97 secs for 60 iterations for VAs 
team size of 3 whereas it is 2.40 secs for 120 iterations. Likewise, all the 
run time pertaining to a different team size of VA can be referred from 
Table 4.2. It shows that the convergence of HTLPSO is very fast. A better 
picture will come from average no. iterations required. Figure 4.3 shows 
the standard deviation plot of SDE vs. no. of VA when maximum no. of 
iterations is 60 only. Minimum SDE in an experiment can be extracted out 
of 60 values. Therefore, for 100 runs a standard deviation of 100 SDEs is 
calculated which includes both successful and unsuccessful experiments. 
In Figure 4.3 it can be observed that SDE is higher, i.e., 3.06 when no. of 
agents are only 3 but monotonically decreases with no. of agents increasing 
up to 5. After that, for no. of agents 6 to 15, it immediately becomes zero 
by showing very high accuracy in source declaration/identification. It 
is noticeable that for successful experiments, the standard deviation for 
SDET1 is 0.0048, and SDET2 is 0.0114 for VAs team size of 3 shown in 
Figure 4.4. For both SDET1 and SDET2, the standard deviation is much 
lower than SDE (unsuccessful and successful experiments) shown in 
Figure 4.3 for 100 experiments. It can be concluded from both Figures 4.3 
and 4.4 that standard deviation converges to zero for VAs team size of 6 
or higher. 
In Figure 4.5, the success rate has been shown for 100 simulation 
experiment times for different no. of VA. For VAs, a team size of 3 only 
25 times out of 100 sources has been identified/declared. It has increased 
to 68 for VAs team size of 4 and further to 98 when it increased to 5. 
For VAs team size of 6 to 15, in each case, a 100% success rate has been 
achieved. 

 
59 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
FIGURE 4.3  Standard deviation plot of SDE for virtual agents. 
FIGURE 4.4  Standard deviation plot of SDE with virtual agents only for successful 
experiments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 4.5  Success rate with no. of virtual agents. 
It is an attempt to report average iterations utilized for this process in 
successful runs only. In Figure 4.6 it is observed that for VAs team size of 3, 
on an average 24.64 iterations are used with a standard deviation of 14.02 in 
25 successful runs. Similarly for VAs team size of 4 and 5, on an average 21.7 
and 16.11 iterations are utilized respectively. It is to be noted that the success 
rate for VAs team size of 4 and 5 is 68 and 95 respectively. The standard 
deviation of iterations in successful experiments, i.e., 25 is 14.02 for VAs team 
size of 3; it has been shown in Figure 4.6. The standard deviation of iterations 
in successful runs decreases as the no. of VA increases. But both, i.e., average 
iterations and standard deviation becomes almost constant when no. of VA is 
greater than 12. Hence, the maximum no. of VA has been limited to 15 in OSL 
observing no better results further. Even as we are getting a 25% success rate 
with on average 24.64 iterations there are chances to increase SDE to reach a 
100% success rate and compromising on SDE. 
Figure 4.7 presents the box plots of iterations with no. of VA in successful 
experiments. It gives an overview in one plot, i.e., the maximum and minimum 
value of iteration, outliers as well as the mean and median. It is evident that for 
no. of VA greater than 12, iterations used are almost constant. 

 
61 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
FIGURE 4.6  Average iterations and std. deviation of iterations in 100 experiments  with 
no. of virtual agents. 
FIGURE 4.7  Iterations details in successful experiments for SDET1 with no. of virtual 
agents. 

 
 
62 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 4.8  Maximum concentration values of the best result for SDET1 out of 100 
experiments with VAs team size of {3–15}. 
The maximum concentration values of the best result out of 100 
experiments are plotted with respect to a number of iterations. Figure 4.8 
shows that when no. of agents is less than 6, i.e., for 3, 4, and 5 more no. 
of iterations are required to reach the maximum value whereas for higher 
no. of VA less no. of iterations are required. It can be clearly observed in 
Figure 4.8 that, clusters are there separating the no. of VA in two groups, 
i.e., {3–5} and {6–15}. Indeed, with a larger no. of VA 100% success rate 
can be achieved with less no. of iterations. 
4.5.1 CONVERGENCE PLOTS 
Figure 4.9 shows the sequence of convergence while three VA are in pursuit 
of the odor source. It can be noted that at the first iteration to the third 
iteration their location changes in line with the wind direction as a result 
of fast communication with each other. Similarly, from 3rd iteration to 5th 
iteration they start following the plume centerline moving in collaboration 

 
63 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization
towards the source. At 10th iteration itself, they reach in the proximity to 
the source but take some iterations to declare/identify the source success­
fully. Figure 4.9(e) shows the final positions of three mobile agents finally 
converged at (5,12) means the source was successfully declared/identified. 
Similarly, in Figure 4.10 it is observed that with the VAs team size of 7, the 
pursuit lasted for few seconds only and the source is identified/declared 
immediately after the beginning of the simulation experiment. 
FIGURE 4.9  Convergence to odor source with VAs team size of 3: (a) first iteration, (b) 
3rd iteration, (c) 5th iteration, (d) 10th iteration, and (e) 20th iteration. 

 
64 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 4.10  Convergence to odor source with 7 virtual agents: (a) first iteration, (b) 3rd 
iteration, (c) 5th iteration, (d) 10th iteration, and (e) 20th iteration. 
4.6 CONCLUSION 
Hybrid teaching-learning PSO for OSL in an indoor environment has 
been implemented with the Gaussian plume model as a simulated envi­
ronment. The highlight of HTLPSO is very fast convergence with high 
accuracy in declaring the source of emission. Keeping the threshold as 
low as 0.02 meters, a 25% success rate was achieved with VAs team size 
of 3. Increasing the threshold can definitely increase the success rate. An 
important fact is that very less iteration were used to converge. For VAs 
team size of {3–5}, more iteration is required as compared to team size 
{6–15} to reach the maximum value. The standard deviation of iterations 
kept on decreasing with increasing no. of VA. When no. of iterations is 
increased, SDE decreased leading to higher accuracy. However, it didn’t 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
Application of a Nature-Inspired Algorithm in Odor Source Localization 
affect the success rate. Implementation in other plume models can be 
another application of this algorithm. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
Gaussian Plume model 
•  
hybrid teaching-learning particle swarm optimization 
•  
indoor environment 
•  
multi-robot  
•  
odor source localization  
•  
particle swarm optimization 
REFERENCES 
1. Kowadlo, G., & Russell, R. A., (2008). Robot odor localization: A taxonomy and 
survey. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 27, 869–894. 
2. Zhou, L., Fu, G., & Xue, Y., (2018). Human and organizational factors in Chinese 
hazardous chemical accidents: A case study of the ‘8.12( Tianjin Port fire and 
explosion using the HFACS-HC. International Journal of Occupational Safety and 
Ergonomics, 24, 329–340. 
3. Marjovi, A., & Marques, L., (2013). Optimal spatial formation of swarm robotic gas 
sensors in odor plume finding. Autonomous Robots, 35, 93–109. 
4. Chen, Y., Cai, H., Chen, Z., & Feng, Q., (2017). Using multi-robot active olfaction 
method to locate time-varying contaminant source in indoor environment. Building 
and Environment, 118, 101–112. 
5.  Soares, J. M., Aguiar, A. P., Pascoal, A. M., & Martinoli, A., (2016). A graph-based 
formation algorithm for odor plume tracing. In: Distributed Autonomous Robotic 
Systems (pp. 255–269). Springer. 
6. Hayes, A. T., Martinoli, A., & Goodman, R. M., (2002). Distributed odor source 
localization. IEEE Sensors Journal, 2, 260–271. 
7.  Jatmiko, W., Ikemoto, Y., Matsuno, T., Fukuda, T., & Sekiyama, K., (2005). 
Distributed odor source localization in dynamic environment. In: IEEE Sensors (p. 4). 
8. Gong, D. W., Qi, C. L., Zhang, Y., & Li, M., (2011). Modified particle swarm 
optimization for odor source localization of multi-robot. In: 2011 IEEE Congress of 
Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp. 130–136. 
9.  Wang, J., Zhang, R., Yan, Y., Dong, X., & Li, J. M., (2017). Locating hazardous 
gas leaks in the atmosphere via modified genetic, MCMC and particle swarm 
optimization algorithms. Atmospheric Environment, 157, 27–37. 

 
66 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
10.  Yang, X., Yuan, J., Yuan, J., & Mao, H., (2007). A  modified particle swarm optimizer 
with dynamic adaptation. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 189, 1205–1213. 
11.  Chen, X. X., & Huang, J., (2018). Odor source localization algorithms on mobile 
robots: A review and future outlook. Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 
12.  Zheng, Y. L., Ma, L. H., Zhang, L. Y., & Qian, J. X., (2003). On the convergence 
analysis and parameter selection in particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings of 
the 2003 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (IEEE Cat. 
No. 03EX693) (pp. 1802–1807). 
13.  Eberhart, R. C., & Shi, Y., (2001). Tracking and optimizing dynamic systems with 
particle swarms. In: Proceedings of the 2001 Congress on Evolutionary Computation 
(IEEE Cat. No. 01TH8546) (pp. 94–100). 
14.  Eberhart, R. C., & Shi, Y., (2000). Comparing inertia weights and constriction factors 
in particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings of the 2000 Congress on Evolutionary 
Computation. CEC00 (Cat. No. 00TH8512) (pp. 84–88). 
15.   Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., Hao, G., & Zhang, W., (2015). Localizing odor source with 
multi-robot based on hybrid particle swarm optimization. In: Natural Computation 
(ICNC), 2015 11th International Conference (pp. 902–906). 
16.  Jain, U., Godfrey, W. W., & Tiwari, R., (2017). A  hybridization of gravitational search 
algorithm and particle swarm optimization for odor source localization. International 
Journal of Robotics Applications and Technologies (IJRAT), 5, 20–33. 
17.  Jain, U., Tiwari, R., & Godfrey, W. W., (2018). Odor source localization by 
concatenating particle swarm optimization and grey wolf optimizer. In: Advanced 
Computational and Communication Paradigms (pp. 145–153). Springer. 
18.  Rao, R. V., Savsani, V. J., & Vakharia, D., (2011). Teaching–learning-based 
optimization: A novel method for constrained mechanical design optimization 
problems. Computer-Aided Design, 43, 303–315. 
19.  Singh, R., Chaudhary, H., & Singh, A. K., (2017). A  new hybrid teaching-learning 
particle swarm optimization algorithm for synthesis of linkages to generate path. 
Sādhanā, 42, 1851–1870. 
20.  Matthes, J., Groll, L., & Keller, H. B., (2005). Source localization  by spatially 
distributed electronic noses for advection and diffusion. IEEE Transactions on Signal 
Processing, 53, 1711–1719. 
21.  Cao, M. L., Meng, Q. H., Wu, Y. X., Zeng, M., & Li, W., (2013). Consensus based 
distributed concentration-weighted summation algorithm for gas-leakage source 
localization using a wireless sensor network. In: Control Conference (CCC), 2013 
32nd Chinese (pp. 7398–7403). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5  
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems: 
A Case Study in Automotive 
Mechatronics 
NARAYAN KUMAR and B. RAVINDRA 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Karwar, Jodhpur, 
Rajasthan, India, E-mail: ravib@iitj.ac.in (B. Ravindra) 
ABSTRACT 
Sensors are an integral part of mechatronic systems. It is common to 
introduce sensor characteristics such as range, span, error, accuracy, 
sensitivity, hysteresis, non-linearity, stability, dead band, resolution, etc., 
in a basic course on mechatronics. The static and dynamic responses 
of sensors are also explained in this context. Introducing real-life case 
studies, while teaching sensors, can motivate students. Recent advances 
in sensors include wireless transmission and energy harvesting from 
ambient sources. An interesting case study to understand these develop­
ments is the tire pressure monitoring sensor (TPMS). Underinflated tires 
can lead to accidents. Reduction in tire pressure may also increase wear 
out of tires and reduction in fuel economy. Tire pressure monitoring is a 
solution to address these issues. TPMS is made mandatory in some coun­
tries. In the existing implementation of TPMS in automobiles, the energy 
source is a CR battery. Battery operated TPMS have certain limitations. 
Frequent replacement of the battery is a concern for the user. The idea of 
using vibrational energy of the tire to power TPMS has been proposed in 
the literature as an alternative to batteries. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Sense and respond features are ubiquitous in mechatronic systems. The 
selection of physical quantity to be sensed is very important in their design. 
The availability of commercially off the shelf (COTS) sensors made this 
task simple in recent years. Sensors are often classified based on the input 
stimuli such as temperature sensor, pressure sensor, humidity sensor, etc. 
Another classification is based on an analog or digital sensor. The nature 
of the transduction of the input stimuli to a convenient electrical signal is 
a critical step. The noisy signal from the sensor is passed on to the signal 
conditioning circuit. The output of this circuit is fed to the data acquisition 
(DAQ) system. The following classification of sensors is often used in 
literature: 
1.  The physical principle on which the sensor works such as Hall 
Effect, piezoelectric effect, Seebeck effect, etc. 
2.  Whether the sensor is a contact/non-contact type. 
3.  Whether the sensor is wired or wireless. 
4.  If the sensor requires energy to operate then it is referred to as 
active else passive. 
Sensor selection involves in a clear understanding of the technical 
specifications given by the manufacturer. The following attributes need to 
be considered in this regard: 
1.  Sensitivity of the sensor which is the smallest detectable change 
in the output of the sensor to a change in the input, evaluated at a 
specific input. 
2.  Gain of the sensor defined as the absolute value of the output 
signal relative to the absolute value of the input signal. 
3.  Full scale output that specifies the working range of the measured 
physical quantity. 
4.  Span of the sensor which is the difference between electrical 
sensor output values corresponding to the max and min values of 
the electrical signal. 
5.  Threshold of the sensor is the minimum value of the input signal 
needed to stimulate or activate the sensor output. 
6.  Resolution refers to the incremental change in the input signal that 
would cause a corresponding change in the sensor output. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
7. Response time of the sensor. 
8. Linearity of the sensor. 
9. Repeatability and Accuracy of the sensor. 
10. Precision, Error, and uncertainty of the sensor. 
11. Dynamic response of the sensor. 
It is typical in mechatronics courses to introduce various kinds of 
sensors to the students. A typical reference material for this task is the 
IEEE Handbook of sensors. An alternate pedagogical approach is to 
present a case study on sensors and emphasize the system integration and 
design aspects from a mechatronic point of view. It may even be important 
to expose students to regulatory aspects of engineering systems and how 
mechatronics and sensors can play a role in meeting the requirements of 
society. The case of tire pressure monitoring sensors (TPMS) is discussed 
in this article from this perspective. 
5.2 NEED OF TPMS 
Most of the drivers are not experienced enough to judge whether tire pres­
sure is correct or not according to specifications. On average, there are ten 
centimeters thicker air and tire layers between rim and ground. Because 
of the underinflated tires, there has been a significant number of accidents 
occurring each year. One of the common causes of accidents is the failure 
of the tire due to lower pressure. Even if lower pressure may not cause tire 
failure it can still cause a fatality. In under-inflated tires, the driver does 
not get good control and may also lead to an increase in stopping distance. 
The NHTSA (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration) report 
estimates that the tire pressure sensor system in vehicles would prevent 
several fatalities. 
The contact patch of tire increases due to under-inflated tires, so the 
effective radius of tire reduces. This way mileage and fuel economy 
of the vehicle may also get affected. For example, tires that have 6psi 
lower than the recommended pressure can cause a 5% decrease in fuel 
economy. That is if any vehicle has a mileage of 20 km per liter then due 
to under-inflation of 6 psi causes 19 km per liter. In the long term, it is a 
significant loss to the economy. Not only mileage and fuel economy are 
affected due to under-inflation of tires but also tires wear very fast closer 
to sides. The tire expert Rastetter estimated that the tire wears out 25% 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
faster if the pressure is 6 psi below the specification [1]. It is still a chal­
lenge to save this loss in terms of tire wear and fuel economy. This loss 
is primarily due to the lack of monitoring of the tire pressure. TPMS (tire 
pressure maintenance system) is the best technological option that alerts 
the possibility of underinflated tires to the driver. Tires typically lose 
about one psi of pressure each month. This depends on environmental 
conditions as well. The seasonal changes and driving patterns also may 
play a role. 
It is interesting to take a look at the regulatory aspect of TPMS 
worldwide. As per a report of freescale, in the United States FMVSS138 
mandates TPMS for new vehicles starting from 2005. In the European 
Union EC661–2009 mandates TPMS for all new vehicles starting from 
November 2014. In South Korea and Japan TPMS is mandated on 
passenger cars from 2013 for new models. In Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, 
Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Philippines, TPMS may be required for all 
new vehicles starting November 2014. Similar efforts are underway in 
China as well. Thus, there is a strong impetus from the regulatory authori­
ties to install TPMS in all new vehicles. 
5.3 TYPES OF TPMS 
At present, TPMS can be divided mainly into two types: one of them is 
based on the wheel speed (also referred to as indirect TPMS). This system 
compares the differences of the speed values between the tires by the ABS 
wheel speed sensor system of the vehicle to achieve the purpose of moni­
toring the tire pressure. The main drawback of this system is that it can’t 
judge the situation when more than two tires are under normal pressure. If 
the vehicle speed is over 100 km/hr, a large error may result. Thus, only 
when the vehicle speed is below a certain threshold value, indirect TPMS 
seems to be useful. 
The second option is based on the pressure sensor (also referred to as 
direct TPMS). This TPMS system makes use of a pressure sensor which 
is installed in each tire of the vehicle to measure the tire pressure and that 
data is shown in driver’s display and monitors the pressure of each tire. 
These days many cars are fitted with tire pressure sensors. Rapid minia­
turization of sensors is an important development in the deployment of 
TPMS. The four sensors are connected in a wireless sensor network and 
the tire pressure information is displayed wirelessly. The main goal is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
to reduce the power consumption of the wireless sensors. This chapter 
deals with only direct TPMS as described in the next section. 
5.3.1 DIRECT TPMS 
A direct tire pressure monitoring system refers to a pressure sensor directly 
mounted on the wheels or tires of a vehicle. The pressure information is 
often transmitted to the vehicle using radio frequency (RF) technology. 
Typical specification of a Microchip TPMS is given below: 
•  
Operating voltage: 2.3–3.3 V. 
•  
Low voltage alert threshold: 2.3 V. 
•  
Stand by current: ~12 μA. 
•  
UHF transmitting frequency: 433.92 MHz. 
•  
UHF transmission baud rate (TE): 100, 200, 400, 800 μs selectable 
(system default is 400 μs). 
•  
UHF range: ~10 meters. 
•  
LF frequency: 125 kHz. 
•  
LF input sensitivity: ~3 mVPP. 
•  
LF range: Up to 3 meters. 
•  
Pressure sensor type: Analog. 
•  
Pressure sensor range: 1–7 bars absolute. 
•  
Pressure sensor temperature range: 40–125°C. 
A direct TPMS is often equipped with the following components in the 
vehicle: 
1.  A direct TPM sensor built-in to the back of the valve stem on each 
one wheel. 
2.  A TPM warning light. 
3.  Unique identifier for the tires providing the direction of rotation 
and speed. 
4.  A microcontroller unit. 
5.  Antenna. 
6.  Batteries. 
In existing TPMS a 3 V NiHM (CR2320) battery is often used. Battery 
operated TPMS have certain limitations and owner’s dissatisfaction 

 
 
 
 
 
72 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
with battery replacement is a concern. Piezoelectric based tire vibration 
harvesting is an option in this case. 
5.4 CHALLENGES IN TPMS 
TPMS must be designed to meet the following requirements: 
•  
The pressure sensor must be small enough because it should be fit 
inside the tire. 
•  
A small power source to supply power to the sensor. 
•  
The amount of data from the sensor (and the range) that should be 
sent to the driver’s display. 
•  
The environmental influences on sensor data and reliability of 
sensors. 
5.5 ENERGY HARVESTING THROUGH PIEZO BIMORPHS 
The idea of using piezoelectric harvesting of tire vibrations to power TPMS 
is discussed here. A discussion of other challenges outlined above can be 
found in the relevant literature. In the existing technology, the battery is 
used to power the sensor. But batteries have limitations in terms of total 
discharge period and replacement issue. Can batteries as power sources 
be replaced with piezoelectric energy harvester to meet the requirement 
of power for the sensor? This idea is around for over a decade. Several 
prototypes have been made but to the best of the author’s knowledge, no 
commercial solution seems to have been deployed in real vehicles. The 
space constraints and the tuning of the piezo harvester to the tire vibrations 
seem to pose some hurdles. 
Energy harvesting through piezoelectric materials in the form a bimorph 
that can extract power from ambient vibrations has been thoroughly 
researched in the literature. These materials exhibit electromechanical 
coupling between mechanical and electrical domains. Energy harvested 
is high when the piezo bimorph is excited at the resonance frequency. 
Various factors affecting the natural frequency of the piezoelectric bimorph 
are studied in the literature. Various piezoelectric materials, substrates, 
and geometrical conditions are compared for energy harvesting from 

 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
vibrations to power TPMS in the literature. The commercial feasibility 
of this option needs to be compared with existing battery-operated tire 
pressure monitoring systems. 
5.6 PIEZOELECTRIC ENERGY HARVESTER 
A schematic diagram of the bimorph structure for the TPS module is 
shown in Figure 5.1. A piezoelectric energy harvester is a cantilever beam 
of piezoelectric plates and metallic plates bonded tightly. As shown in 
Figure 5.1, the bimorph is fixed at one end and free at another end. The 
free end vibrates transverse to the length direction, to produce power. 
The harvester fits in the shell, so that the bender will not get affected 
from its surroundings and in the shell, the bender can vibrate freely. The 
following are the basic design elements for the module: 
•  
Selection of piezoelectric material; 
•  
Selection of metallic layer; 
•  
Harvester is fixed at one end. An insulating mount is required to 
fix the bender from one end; 
•  
Harvester is free from another end, so that it can vibrate freely. 
Sufficient free space should be in the shell for the vibration of free 
end freely; 
•  
The harvester is embedded in a shell. So, a shell or package should 
be designed to protect the bender as shown in Figure 5.2. 
This piezoelectric energy harvester comprises of two piezoelectric 
layers and three metallic layers. The proof mass is provided to tune the 
natural frequency of harvester. The whole assembly is embedded in a 
cylindrical shell. 
FIGURE 5.1  Piezo bimorph with a tip mass. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 5.2  Energy harvester embedded in the shell. 
5.7 DESIGN OF TPMS WITH PZT BIMORPH HARVESTER 
The challenges are (i) to know the natural frequency of the tire; actually, 
it can vary very randomly due to change of load, change of speed, change 
of roads, etc., (ii) design the bimorph which has natural frequency near to 
the natural frequency of the tire, (iii) design of electrical circuit which will 
supply undisrupted power to the sensor and required voltage to the sensor, 
(iv) compact and solid casing for the whole TPMS. 
The natural frequencies can be estimated from the solution of the 
governing equations of the vibrating cantilever beam with a tip mass. The tip 
mass selection can be made to bring the natural frequency down to match the 
tire lateral vibrations. The beam with no tip mass needs a distributed param­
eter mathematical model. The beam with large tip mass can approximate a 
lumped mass model. Therefore, It is necessary to overview the governing 
equations of the distributed parameter base excitation model. The standard 
Euler-Bernoulli beam assumptions (neglecting shear deformation and rotary 
inertia) for a uniform cantilever beam are used here. The following partial 
differential equation describes the free vibrations of the beam (Figure 5.3). 
u x t 
, 
a2u x t 
,
a (
) 
(
)
YI 
4 
+ m 
2 
= 0 
(5.1)
ax 
at 
The mathematical model used here is based on Erturk and Inman [9, 
10]. It describes different parameters that affect the natural frequencies of 

 
PZT bimorphs. On the basis of these parametric studies, one can choose 
proper geometrical and mechanical constraints to obtain desired natural 
frequency. The bimorph with a tip mass and an electrical circuit to evacuate 
power is shown in Figure 5.4. 
Assuming damping to be negligible, ω r the undamped natural frequency  
of the rth vibration mode in short circuit conditions (i.e., as RL→0) is given by:
 
2 
YL
 r   r 
4  
(5.2)
mL
The eigenvalues of the system (λ r for rth mode) are determined from 
following equation: 
M
 
1 + cos c
A oshA + A 
t (c os A sinhA - sin A cos hA) = 0  
(5.3)
mL 
75 
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
FIGURE 5.3  Cantilever beam excited by the motion to its base in the transverse direction. 
FIGURE 5.4  Bimorph cantilever configurations showing translational base excitation 
with a series connection. 

 
 
 
 
TABLE 5.1 Geometrical Parameters of Bimorph 
Geometric Parameters 
Piezoelectric (PZT‑5A) 
Substrate (Brass) (mm) 
(mm) 
Length, L 
20 
20 
Width, b 
3.39 
3.39 
Thickness, h 
0.13 
0.08 
TABLE 5.2 Material Parameters of Bimorph 
Material Parameters 
Piezoelectric (PZT‑5A) 
Substrate (Brass) 
Mass density, ρ 
7800 kg/m3 
9000 kg/m3 
Young’s modulus, Y 
66 GPa 
105 GPa 
Piezo. Constant, d31 
–190 pm/V 
—-
Permittivity, ε33 
1500 ε0 F/m 
—-
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
The natural frequencies of the bimorph with a tip mass can now be 
calculated from the equation (5.3). The authors considered a smooth radial 
195/65R15 91T tire inflated to 220 kPa [2, 3] and found that first mode 
natural frequency of tire as 515 rad/s. Here a PZT bimorph is designed for 
this natural frequency. The geometric and material parameters chosen for 
this design are shown in Tables 5.1 and 5.2. 
Brass and PZT-5A are the best options as substrate and piezoelec­
tric material for a bender/bimorph. The bender should fit inside a tiny 
hollow cylindrical shell, so space constraint for the bender should 
be considered. We can reduce the length of the bender to make it 
compact, but the natural frequency will also increase very rapidly; 
which is not our objective. To reduce the natural frequency we can 
attach a more weighted tip mass, but it will also increase the volume 
of tip mass. Due to increased dimensions of tip mass, the bender 
requires more space for deflection of the bimorph, which will increase 
the shell size. So the material should be chosen in such a manner that 
natural frequency should be at the desired value. Thus, the tip mass 
attached to the bimorph is selected as 1 gm. The given base excitation 
has an amplitude of 0.1 mm. using the mathematical framework outlined 
in Erturk and Inman [9–11] expressions for voltage, current, and tip 
deflection can be derived. The resulting voltage vs. frequency plot is 
shown in Figure 5.5. 

 
77 
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
FIGURE 5.5  Voltage vs. frequency of the bimorph at first mode of frequency at 35 kΩ of 
load resistance for 195/65R15 91T tire. 
The tip deflection is shown in Figure 5.6. Further analysis can be 
carried out by changing the load resistance and such sensitivity analyses 
are needed for the final design of the piezo harvester. 
5.8 ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS 
Safety is the prime motivation for the development of TPMS. The main 
goal is to reduce the number of accidents occurring every year. The use 
of TPMS in vehicles can also improve fuel economy and mileage. The 
US Department of Energy estimated that one psi (pound per square inch) 
drop in tire pressure is lowering the mileage by 0.4% [12]. This small loss 

 
 
78 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
for one vehicle becomes very large when it is multiplied with all running 
vehicles over a period of time. The estimates show that in the US alone, 
approximately 100,000,000 cars filling up once per week can save almost 
170,000,000 barrels of oil per year by maintaining specified tire pressure. 
Tests show that visual inspection to judge the specified tire pressure is not 
reliable. 
FIGURE 5.6  Tip deflection of the harvester at first mode of frequency at 35 kΩ of load 
resistance for 195/65R15 91T tire. 
The batteries used in TPMS have a negative environmental impact. 
The NHTSA estimated a 2% increase in US battery usage. Approximately 
71 million tiny batteries are used in the TPMS. But TPMS benefits the 
environment by saving extra fuel lost due to under-inflation of tire i.e., 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
reduce emission, so a smaller overall increase in battery volume may be 
justified [4]. Even this battery volume and chemical content can be nulli­
fied if we move to piezoelectric harvester operated TPMS. The NHTSA 
estimates that TPMS saves 660 lives per year, as well as preventing 33,000 
injuries and saving $511 million worth of gas [5]. 
The cost of piezoelectric bimorphs and associated electronics is drop­
ping significantly over the years. As per a roadmap of Freescale the fifth 
generation TPMS may have energy harvesting capability. Development 
of a highly miniaturized Tire Pressure Monitoring System for in-tire 
assembly with volume < 1 cm3 and mass < 5 gm with MEMS piezo energy 
harvester is being pursued by a consortium led by Infineon [6]. New piezo 
materials developed [7, 8, 13] and mass production of piezo devices may 
make TPMS affordable for all vehicles. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
commercially off the shelf 
•  
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
•  
piezoelectric energy harvester 
•  
radio frequency 
•  
tire pressure maintenance system 
•  
tire pressure monitoring sensor 
REFERENCES 
1.  Joe, W., (2012). Tire Pressure Affects Stopping Distance, Fuel Economy. http:// 
www.newsday.com/classifieds/cars/tire-pressue-affects-stopping-distance-fuel­
economy-1.3760110 (accessed on 13 May 2020). 
2. Hans, P., (2012).  Tire and Vehicle Dynamic. SAE International, Elsevier, ISBN: 
978–0-08–097016–5. 
3. Koizumi, T., Tsujiuchi, N., Matsubara, M., & Nakamura, F., (2010).  Vibration 
Analysis of Rolling Tire Based on Thin Cylindrical Shell Theory. Toyo tire and rubber 
Co., LTD, ISMA. 
4. Skip, S., (2011).  Changing TPMS Sensor Batteries. https://www.tirereview.com/ 
changing-tpms-sensor-batteries/ (accessed on 13 May 2020). 
5. Sean, P., (2014). TPMS Advantages and Disadvantages. https://www.tirereview.com/ 
author/sean_phillips/ (accessed on 13 May 2020). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
6. Thomas, H., et al., (2008).  An Energy Harvesting System for in-tire TPMS. 
Collaborative effort between Infineon Austria, Infineon Norway, TU Vienna, Vestfold 
University College, SINTEF, PwrSoC Workshop. 
7. Narayan, K., (2017).  M. Tech Thesis. IIT Jodhpur, Energy Harvesting through 
Piezoelectricity and its Application in TPMS. 
8. Roger, A., (2009). Energy Harvesting Looks to Solve Critical TPMS Issues. http:// 
electronicdesign.com/energy/energy-harvesting-looks-solve-critical-tpms-issues 
(accessed on 13 May 2020). 
9. Alper, E., & Denial, I., (2008). A distributed parameter electromechanical model for 
cantilevered piezoelectric energy harvesters. Journal of Vibration and Acoustics. 
10. Alper, E., & Denial, I., (2009). An experimentally validated bimorph cantilever 
model for piezoelectric energy harvesting from cantilevered beams. Smart Mater. 
Struct., 18(025009), p. 18. 
11.  Alper, E., & Denial, J. I., (2011). Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting. John Wiley & 
Sons, ISBN: 978-0-470-68254-8. 
12. 12.  How Tire Pressure Affects MPG, (2015). http://procarmechanics.com/how-tire­
pressure-affects-mpg/ (accessed on 13 May 2020). 
13.  13. Shashank, P., & Inman, D. J., (2009). Energy Harvesting Technologies. Springer, 
ISBN: 978-0-387-76463-4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6  
A Retrospective Assessment of 
Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation 
Behavior in Structural Components Like 
Discs, Cylinders, and Shells 
SHIVDEV SHAHI,1 SATYA BIR SINGH,2 AND A. K. HAGHI3 
1Research Scholar, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, 
India, E-mail: shivdevshahi93@gmail.com 
2Professor, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, Patiala, 
India, E-mail: sbsingh69@yahoo.com 
3Professor Emeritus, Canadian Research and Development Center of 
Sciences and Cultures, Montreal, Canada 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
The significance of studying the deformation behavior of components of 
complex structures in the form of bars, plates, cylinder, disc etc. is not 
only essential for the basic understanding of mechanical phenomenon 
but also to build reliable structures. Advances in the field are targeted 
to assure safety, reliability, and economy in the design of structure 
and complete systems, hence to the continued development in design 
of turbines, aerospace and surface transportation vehicles, prosthetics, 
material processing, and several other manufacturing technologies. The 
design engineer is interested in deformation behaviors in connection 
with his responsibility for avoiding excessive deflection or distortion 
in machine parts and engineering structures. The mechanical properties 
of the materials have to be considered for the various parts, thereby 
optimizing the available resources. The designer is also concerned with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
identification of the limiting condition of stress which further leads to 
fracture. Hence, necessary deformation rates have to be analyzed. He 
may base his calculation as far as they refer to pure elastic deforma­
tion upon the theory of elasticity, but he lacks in scope when the plastic 
state sets in. Therefore, the theory of plasticity is made necessary by 
demand for better design and more economic use of materials as well 
as for better control of metal working operations such as wire-drawing 
and cold rolling. Components such as a disc, cylinder, and a spherical 
shell will be considered in this chapter and the work done by various 
researchers will be analyzed to provide insights into the reliability of the 
structural components. 
6.2 STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS IN THE FORM OF DISCS, 
CYLINDERS, AND SHELLS 
Rotating disc play an importance role in machine design. The problems of 
rotating discs were first treated in the early nineteenth century. Solution 
of the isotropic discs including variable thickness, variable density, and 
other case can be found in most of the standard elasticity textbooks [1, 
2]. Rotating discs were considered to be one of the exhausted subjects 
in the field of solid mechanics. Recently new interests have been gener­
ated to reinvestigate these problems. The new interest is the result of the 
development of composite materials and their applications. Composite 
materials are characterized by high strength to weight ratios, heteroge­
neity, and anisotropy characteristics. The analytic method has proved to 
be a simple and reliable means of generating a biaxial state of stress when 
the loads cannot be directly applied to the material under investigation. In 
this case, an analytical solution of this problem is needed to interpret the 
experimental results generated in the laboratory. Because of the steady 
increase in the use of energy and the impact of that use on the environ­
ment, a flywheel made of composite materials has been proved to be an 
efficient mean of storing energy. Likewise, analytical solution of rotating 
discs made of composite materials is essential in design and analysis. The 
calculation of turbine disc involves the solution of second order differen­
tial equation having the elastic stress function. This equation is integrable 
analytically for discs of constant thickness, and for specific examples of 
discs of non-constant thickness. Arrowsmith [1] has given solutions for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
discs whose thickness is inversely proportional to radius to the power 
thickness parameter while Malkin [3] discusses a disc with exponential 
thickness variation. 
A cylinder is a commonly used component in various structural 
components. In most of the applications, such as pressure vessel for indus­
trial gases, transportation of high-pressurized fluids and piping of nuclear 
reactors, the cylinder has to operate under severe mechanical and thermal 
loads, resulting in significant creep and thereby decreasing its service life. 
Rimrott [4] has solved the problem of thick-walled isotropic cylinders 
subjected to internal pressure using finite strain theory and has shown 
that by considering finite strains the creep rate of a thick walled cylinder 
subject to internal pressure increases even though the creep rate of the 
same material when subjected to constant true stress in simple tension is 
constant. 
Love [5] studied vibrations and deformation in thin elastic shells. He 
assumed small deflections and for that, reason neglected all the higher 
terms of the quadratic in the energy equation. Thus, he obtained linear 
differential equations for the determination of the equilibrium position 
of shell under given forces. The buckling of cylindrical shells of uniform 
thickness under the action of uniformly distributed axial load was further 
studied but this was till then only confined to monolithic materials. In 
the design of shells made of functionally graded materials (FGMs) 
and homogeneous-isotropic materials, it is of technical importance to 
examine its resistance to bend under expected loading conditions. For 
that purpose, the determination of the bending load alone is not sufficient 
in general, but it is further required to clarify the post bending behavior, 
that is, the behavior of the shell after passing through the buckling load. 
Firstly, it is necessary to estimate the effect of practically unavoidable 
imperfections on the buckling load and the second is to evaluate the 
ultimate strength to exploit the load-carrying capacity of the shell 
structure. Von Kármán and Tsien [6] argued at the time, geometrical 
nonlinearity must play an important part in the phenomenon of thin shell 
deformation. Donnell and Wan [7] reported that the initial geometric 
imperfection has a significant effect on the buckling and post buckling 
behavior of cylindrical shells subjected to axial compression. In their 
analysis, however, the membrane pre-buckling state was assumed, like 
von Kármán and Tsien [6] did and, therefore, the boundary conditions 
cannot be incorporated accurately. 

 
84 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
Wahl [8, 9] considered a flat disc forged from chromium steel and 
analyzed it for steady state creep at 538(C. The experimental results for 
this system were examined theoretically using Tresca and von Mises yield 
criterion. It is seen that the creep deformations calculated using Tresca 
criterion provide a better agreement with experimental observations. The 
results obtained from von Mises criteria are too low in comparison to 
experimental results, which may be due to the anisotropy of the material 
used. Author further extended his study to analyze secondary creep in a 
disc of variable thickness in which he concluded that such a disc had lower 
difference in maximum and average stress levels as compared to a disc 
with constant radius. 
Rimrott [4] assumed a cylinder made of homogeneous isotropic 
material with large strain rates and used generally accepted assumptions 
of constant density, zero axial strain and distortion energy theory and 
derived equations of creep in a thick walled, closed end, hollow circular 
cylinder subject to internal pressure considering finite strains, the creep 
rates increase however the creep rate in the same material subjected to 
constant true stress in simple tension is constant. Author concluded that 
thick walled cylinder is an unsafe assumption. 
Baker [10] developed a theory for the elastic-plastic response of a thin 
spherical shell to spherically symmetric internal pressure loading. Analytic 
solutions were obtained to the linear, small-deflection equations of motion 
for shell materials which exhibited various degrees of strain-hardening. 
Numerical solutions obtained by digital computer were also presented for 
the equations for large deflections obtained by accounting for shell thin­
ning and increase in radius during deformation. The results of this theory 
are justified by the experimental results. 
Ma [11, 12] introduced the parameter of thermal gradient on rotating 
discs. The analysis was based on the theory of Tresca’s yielding criterion 
and its associated flow rule while the steady state condition was described 
by power law. The study revealed that the proposed analysis can be used 
to obtain closed form solutions for creep stresses. 
Seth [13] specified that the usage of classical theory of deformation 
in the transition stage is totally insufficient as it relies on linearity of the 
stage. Author defined a transition theory which dealt with the non linear 
character of the deformation and gave a generalized strain measure to study 
deformation behavior for different kinds of materials under compression. 
Author argued that the differential system attains some sort of criticality 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
at transition. These critical or transition points can be predicted giving us 
asymptotic solutions. Author also stated that at the Elastic-plastic deforma­
tion stage, the amount of plasticity will rely on geometry of deformation 
and not on the stresses. 
Hulsarkar [14, 40] applied Seth’s transition theory of elastic-plastic 
and creep deformations to solve the problem of creep in composite 
cylinders subjected to uniform internal pressure and rotating discs with 
steady state temperature. The generalized expressions for creep transition 
stresses were obtained, which, in a special case reduces to those derived 
by assuming the creep laws. 
Gupta and Shukla [15] obtained elastics-plastic and transitional 
stresses in a disc with variable thickness subjected to internal pressure 
using Seth’s transition theory. Non-homogeneity in the disc was due to 
variation of Poisson’s ratio of the material. It was found that the pres­
ence of non-homogeneity and thickness variation influence significantly 
the stresses and pressure required for initial yielding. The thickness 
variation reduces the magnitude of the stresses and pressure needed for 
fully-plastic state. 
Loghman and Wahab [16] developed a model to estimate creep 
damages in a thick-walled tube subjected to internal pressure and 
thermal gradient. The study predicted the changes in creep damage 
rates during life cycle of the tube due to variation in stresses with time 
and through-thickness variations. The θ projection concept was used to 
predict the long-term creep properties up to rupture and the creep rupture 
data (Figure 6.1). 
Güven [17–19] analyzed fully plastic rotating disc and a hyperbolic 
annular disc with a rigid shaft attached at the bore. The plane state of stress 
in these conditions has been considered. Exact solutions are obtained using 
Tresca yielding criterion. The numerical results indicate that maximum 
stresses and the plastic flow are influenced by the thickness parameter 
(Figure 6.2). 
Singh and Ray [20] first introduced creep analysis in an isotropic 
functionally graded material rotating disc of Al-SiCp composite. 
They investigated the creep analysis in an isotropic FGMs rotating 
disc made of a composite containing silicon carbide particles (SiCp) 
in a matrix of pure aluminum at uniform elevated temperature by 
using Norton’s power law and they assumed the particle distribu­
tion is linearly decreasing from the inner to the outer radius along the 

 
 
 
 
  
86 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
radial distance in the disc estimated by regression t of the available 
experimental data. It is observed that the steady state creep response 
of the functionally graded material disc in terms of strain rates is 
significantly superior as compared to a similar disk having uniform 
distribution of SiCp (Figure 6.3). 
FIGURE 6.1  The time increment variation and predicted path of creep strain [16]. 
FIGURE 6.2  Stress distribution at fully plastic state with m as thickness parameter [17]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
FIGURE 6.3  Variation of tangential and radial strain rate with radial distance in a particle 
reinforced composite disc with average particle content of 20 vol pct SiC rotating with 
angular velocity 15,000 rpm at 561 K for the cases when (a) particle content is uniformly 
distributed in the discs and (b) particle content is linearly decreasing from inner to outer 
radii. Content is linearly decreasing from inner to outer radii [20]. 
Singh and Ray [21] extended their work to the analytical treatment of 
anisotropy and creep in orthotropic aluminum silicon carbide composite 
rotating disc made of composites containing SiC whiskers under steady 
state using Hill yield criterion and compared with the results obtained 
using von Mises yield criterion for the isotropic composites. It is observed 
that the tangential stress distribution is lower in the middle of the disc but 
higher near the inner and the outer radius but the radial stress distribution 
does not get significantly affected due to anisotropy and also observed that 
anisotropy helped to reduce the tangential strain rate significantly, more near 
inner radius and the strain rate distribution in the orthotropic disc is lower 
than that in the isotropic disc following von Mises criterion. It should be 
noted that the anisotropy constants taken from the experimental results of 
other studies and the lowering of tangential creep rate may be significant in 
the context of real life engineering. The compressive radial strain rate also 
reduced in the disc following Hill criterion of yield plasticity as compared to 
that in isotropic disc. Thus, anisotropy appeared to help in restraining creep 
response both in the tangential and in the radial directions (Figure 6.4). 
Eraslan and Akis [22] obtained the plane strain analytical solutions, based 
on Tresca’s yield criterion, for FG elastic and elastic-plastic pressurized 
tube problems using small deformation theory. The Young’s modulus and 
the uniaxial yield limit of the tube material were assumed to vary radially 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.4  Variation of radial and tangential strain rates with radial distance in a 
rotating disc yielding according to von Mises isotropic yield criterion and Hill orthotropic 
yield criterion [21]. 
88 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
according to two-parametric parabolic forms. The study also investigated 
various types of stress states i.e., elastic, partially plastic and fully plastic. It is 
observed that the elasto-plastic response of the FG pressurized tube has been 
significantly affected by the material nonhomogenity. The non-homogeneous 
elasto-plastic solution has also been observed to reduce to that obtained for 
homogeneous one, when the material parameters were appropriately selected. 
You et al. [23] analyzed steady state creep in thick-walled cylinders 
made of arbitrary FGM and subjected to internal pressure. The stresses 
and strain rates were calculated by using Norton’s creep law. The impact of 
radial variations of material parameters was investigated on stresses in the 
cylinder. 
Abrinia et al. [24] obtained analytical solution to obtain radial and 
circumferential stresses in a functionally graded thick cylindrical vessel 
under the influence of internal pressure and temperature. The effect of 
non-homogeneity in functionally graded cylinder was analyzed in the 
context of achieving the lowest stress levels in the cylinder (Figure 6.5). 
Thakur [25–27] have studied elastic plastic and creep transition compre­
hensively in structures such as rotating annular and solid discs, circular 
cylinders with and without inclusion, cylindrical, and spherical shells subject 
to various parameters such as angular speed, variable density, thermal gradi­
ents and edge loading using Seth’s transition theory. Variations in radial 
and circumferential stresses have been determined for different situations 
for compressible and incompressible materials and results for situations of 
fractures in subsequent situations have been inferred. 

 
89 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
FIGURE 6.5  Variation in radial and circumferential stresses in a cylindrical vessel under 
the combined loading of pressure and temperature [24]. 
Rattan, Chamoli, Singh, and Nishi [28] studied creep behavior of 
anisotropic functionally graded rotating discs. They investigated the creep 
behavior of an anisotropic rotating disc of functionally gradient material 
using Hill’s yield criteria by Sherby’s constitutive model. It is concluded 
that the anisotropy of the material has a significant effect on the creep 
behavior of the FGM disc. It is also observed that the FGM disc shows 
better creep behavior than the non FGM disc. 
Vandana and Singh [29] analyzed the effect of residual stress and 
reinforcement geometry in an anisotropic composite rotating disc having 
varying thickness. The creep analysis carried out in a rotating disc made 
of Al-SiC (particle/whisker) composite having hyperbolically varying 
thickness using anisotropic Hoffman yield criterion and results obtained 
are compared with those using Hill’s criterion ignoring difference in yield 
stresses by Sherby’s creep law for the steady state creep behavior. It is 
observed that the stresses are not much affected by the presence of thermal 
residual stress, while thermal residual stress introduces significant change 
in the strain rates in an anisotropic rotating disc. Secondly, it is noticed 
that the steady state creep rates in whisker reinforced disc with/without 
residual stress are observed to be significantly lower than those observed 
in particle reinforced disc with/without residual stress. It is concluded that 
the presence of residual stress in an anisotropic disc with varying thick­
ness needs attention for designing a disc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
Nejad et al. [41] studied a closed-form analytical solution for the steady-
state creep stresses of rotating thick cylindrical pressure vessels made of 
FGMs. Creep response of the material has been described by Norton’s Law. 
Exact solutions for stresses and strain rate were obtained under the plane 
strain condition. The effect on radial and circumferential stresses together 
with the equivalent strain rate in rotating thick-walled cylindrical vessels 
under internal pressure has been investigated. The result obtained shows 
that the property of FGMs has a significant influence on the equivalent creep 
strain rate and stresses distributions along the radial direction (Figure 6.6). 
Vandana and Singh [30] studied mathematical modeling of creep in a 
functionally graded rotating disc with varying thickness. This study gave 
an analytical framework for the analysis of creep stresses and creep rates in 
the isotropic rotating non-FGM/FGM disc with uniform and varying thick­
ness by Sherby’s law. The creep response of rotating disc is expressed by 
threshold stress with value of stress exponent as 8. The results compared 
for isotropic non FGM/FGM constant thickness disc with those estimated 
for isotropic varying thickness disc with the same average particle content 
distributed uniformly and suggested the distribution of stresses and strain 
rates becomes relatively more uniform in the isotropic FGM hyperbolic 
thickness disc (Figure 6.7). 
Loghman et al. [31] investigated the creep behavior of composite 
cylinder made of polypropylene reinforced by functionally graded multi 
walled carbon nanotubes (FG-MWCNTs). It had been found that the 
radial and circumferential strains of the cylinder reduce with increasing 
content of carbon nanotubes. It was also concluded that the uniform 
distribution of MWCNTs reinforcement does not considerably influence 
on stresses. 
Sharma and Panchal [32] considered a pressurized thick-walled func­
tionally graded rotating spherical shell. Creep stresses were calculated 
under thermal effects. Transition theory and the concept of generalized 
measure were used to investigate these creep stresses. It was observed that 
angular velocity and non-homogeneity plays significant role on thermal 
creep stresses. Further, it was concluded that spherical shell made of thick 
walls is a safer prospect for designs. 
Thakur et al. [33] presented exact solution of rotating disc with shaft 
problem in the elastoplasic state of stress having variable density and 
thickness by using Seth’s transition theory. It is observed that the rotating 
disc made of the compressible material with an inclusion requires higher 

 
91 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
angular speed to yield at the internal surface as compared to the disc made 
of incompressible material, and a much higher angular speed is required to 
yield with the increase in radii ratio. The thickness and density parameters 
decrease the value of angular speed at the internal surface of the rotating 
disc of compressible as well as incompressible materials. 
FIGURE 6.6  Cross section of thick cylindrical vessel with variable thickness [35]. 
FIGURE 6.7  Geometry of the disc showing variation in thickness [30]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
6.3 DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION 
The linear theory has given rise to a vast amount of important results which 
have been corroborated by experiments more exactly than one may expect, 
covering all types of structural components. Elastic-plastic transition is 
obtained in current literature with the help of a semi-empirical yield condition 
like that of Tresca or Von-Mises. The stresses are obtained from the elastic 
solution and then substituted in the yield condition to get the transition surface. 
The possibility of treating it as a transition or turning point phenomenon in 
finite deformation has not been explored. When the plastic state tends to set in, 
the stress-strain relation undergoes a change. This is reflected in the equations. 
The linear classical theory cannot do it. In the transition state whole of the 
material participates, and not simply a selected region or a line as assumed by 
classical theories. The demands of high speed technology in transportation, 
communication, and energy conversion have forced us to take serious notice 
of non-linearity. Since this non-linearity is difficult to investigate, workers 
have taken to the artifice of replacing it by singular, non-differentiable, or 
discontinuous surfaces. This piecewise treatment necessitates the use of adhoc 
and semi-empirical law, which may or may not exist. Linearizing non-linear 
problems by perturbation, boundary layer and other techniques do not provide 
satisfactory explanation for some important characteristics of non-linearity. 
As a result, a number of important physical effects do not get adequate scien­
tific expression. There is hardly any information which we do not know about 
linear fields. Their existence, uniqueness, and stability are well established. 
Nature does not always confirm to our abstract concepts of linearity, smooth­
ness, symmetry, identity, and isotropy. It is true that physical phenomena tend 
to behave linearly in course of time, which may be millions of years. Thus 
transitions, which frequently occur in nature, have to be tackled. In fact, all 
inter-disciplinary fields which are so important in modern research give rise to 
important transition problems. Hence, both the macro and micro analysts must 
devote attention to non-linearity involved in the subject. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
creep 
•  
functionally graded materials 
•  
functionally graded multi walled carbon nanotubes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  
isotropic cylinders 
•  
non-linear problems 
•  
perturbation 
•  
semi-empirical law 
93 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
REFERENCES 
1. Arrowsmith, G., (1923). The Design of Rotating Discs (Vol. 116, p. 417.). Engineering, 
London. 
2.  Heyman, J., (1958). Plastic design of rotating discs. Proc, Inst. Mech. Engrs., 172, 
531–546. 
3. Malkin, I., (1934). Design and calculation of steam turbine disk wheels.  Trans. 
AMER. Soc. Mech. Engrs., 56, 585. 
4.  Rimrott, F. P. J., (1959). Creep of thick-walled tube under internal pressure considering 
large strains. Journal of Applied Mechanics-Transactions ASME, 26, 271–274. 
5. Love, A. E. H., (1888). The small free vibrations and deformation of a thin elastic 
shell. Phil. Trans. R. Soc., 179A, 491–546. 
6. Von, K. T., & Tsien, H. S., (1941). The buckling of thin cylindrical shells under axial 
compression. Journal of the Aerospace Sciences, 8, 303–312. 
7. Donnell, L. H., & Wan, C. C., (1950). Effect of imperfections on buckling of thin 
cylinders and columns under axial compression. Journal of Applied Mechanics 
ASME, 17, 73–83. 
8.  Wahl, A. M., Sankey, G. O., Manjoine, M. J., & Shoemaker, E., (1954). Creep tests 
of rotating disks at elevated temperature and comparison with theory. Journal of 
Applied Mechanics, 76, 225–235. 
9. Wahl, A. M., (1957). Stress distribution in rotating discs subjected to creep at elevated 
temperature. Journal of Applied Mechanics, ASME Transactions, 29, 299–305. 
10. Baker, W. E., (1960). The elastic-plastic response of thin spherical shells to internal 
blast loading. J. Appl. Mech., 27(1), 139–144. 
11. Ma, B. M., (1961). Creep analysis of rotating solid disks with variable thickness and 
temperature. Jour. Franklin Inst., 271, 40–55. 
12. Ma, B. M., (1964). A power function creep analysis for rotating solid disks having 
variable thickness and temperature. Journal of the Franklin Institute, 277(6), 
593–612. 
13. Seth, B. R., (1962a). Transition theory of elastic-plastic deformation, creep, and 
relaxation. Nature, 195, 896–897, 
14. Suresh, H., (1979). Thermo elastic-plastic transition in rotating disks with steady 
state temperature. Indian J. Pure Appl. Math., 10(5), 567–601. 
15. Gupta, S. K., & Shukla, R. K., (1994). Effect of non-homogeneity on elastic-plastic 
transition in a thin rotating disk. Indian J. Pure Appl. Math., 25(10), 1089–1097. 
16. Loghman, A., & Wahab, A., (1996). Creep damage simulation of thick-walled tubes 
using the θ projection concept. Int. J. of Pressure Vessels and Piping, 67(1), 105–111. 

 
94 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
17. Güven, U., (1997). The fully plastic rotating disk with rigid inclusion. ZAMM, 77(9), 
714–716. 
18. Güven, U., (1998). Elastic-plastic stress distribution in a rotating hyperbolic disk 
with rigid inclusion. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 40(1), 97–109. 
19. Güven, U., (1999). Elastic-plastic rotating disk with rigid inclusion. Mechanics of 
Structures and Machines, 27(1), 117–128. 
20. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (2001). Steady-state creep behavior in an isotropic functionally 
graded material rotating disc of Al-SIC composite. Metallurgical Transactions, 32, 
1679–1685. 
21. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (2002). Modeling the anisotropy and creep in orthotropic 
aluminum-silicon carbide composite rotating disc. Mechanics of Materials, 34(6), 
363–372. 
22. Eraslan, A. N., & Akis, T., (2006). Plane strain analytical solution for a functionally 
graded elastic-plastic pressurized tube. Int. J. of Pressure Vessels and Piping, 83, 
635–644. 
23. You, L. H., Ou, H., & Zheng, Z. Y., (2007). Creep deformations and stresses in 
thick-walled cylindrical vessels of functionally graded materials subjected to internal 
pressure. Composite Structures, 78, 285–291. 
24. Abrinia, K., Naee, H., Sadeghi, F., & Djavanroodi, F., (2008). New analysis for the 
FGM thick cylinders under combined pressure and temperature loading. American J. 
of Applied Sci., 5(7), 852–859. 
25. Pankaj, T., (2010). Elastic-plastic transition stresses in a thin rotating disc with rigid 
inclusion by infinitesimal deformation under steady-state temperature. Thermal 
Science, 14(1), 209–219. 
26. Pankaj, T., (2011). Effect of transition stresses in a disc having variable thickness and 
poison’s ratio subjected to internal pressure. WSEAS Transactions on Applied and 
Theoretical Mechanics, 6(4), 147–159. 
27. Pankaj, T., (2012). Elastic-plastic transitional stresses in a thin rotating disk with 
loading edge stresses in a thin rotating disc of variable thickness with rigid shaft. 
Journal of Technology for Plasticity, Serbia, 37(1), 1–14. 
28. Neeraj, C., Minto, R., Singh, S. B., & Nishi, G., (2013). Creep behavior of anisotropic 
functionally graded rotating discs. International Journal of Computational Materials 
Science and Engineering, 12(1). Imperial College Press. 
29. Vandana, G., & Singh, S. B., (2013). Effect of residual stress and reinforcement 
geometry in an anisotropic composite rotating disc having varying thickness. 
International Journal of Computational Materials Science and Engineering. 
30. Vandana, G., & Singh, S. B., (2016). Mathematical modeling of creep in a functionally 
graded rotating disc with varying thickness. The Regenerative Engineering Society 
Regen. Eng. Transl. Med. doi: 10.1007/s40883–016–0018–3. 
31. Loghman, A., Shayestemoghadam, H., & Loghman, E., (2016). Creep evolution 
analysis of composite cylinder made of polypropylene reinforced by functionally 
graded MWCNTs. Journal of Solid Mechanics, Article 11, 8(2), 372–383. 
32. Sanjeev, S., & Rekha, P., (2017). Thermal creep deformation in pressurized thick-
walled functionally graded rotating spherical shell. International Journal of Pure and 
Applied Mathematics, 114(3), 435–444. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95 
A Retrospective Assessment of  Elastic-Plastic and Creep Deformation Behavior 
33.  Pankaj, T., Monika, S., Shivdev, S., Singh, S. B., Fadugba, S. E., & Jasmina, L. 
S., (2018). Modeling of creep behavior of a rotating disc in the presence of load 
and variable thickness by using Seth transition theory. Structural Integrity and Life, 
18(2), 133–140. 
34. Neeraj, C., Minto, R., & Singh, S. B., (2010). Effect of anisotropy on the creep 
of a rotating disc of Al-SiCp composite. International Journal of Contemporary 
Mathematical Sciences, 5(11), 509–516. 
35. Nejad, M. Z., Abedi, M., Lotfian, M. H., & Ghannad, M., (2013). Elastic analysis 
of exponential FGM vessel subjected to internal and external pressure. Central 
European Journal of Engineering, 3, 459–465. 
36. Pankaj, T., (2010). Creep transition stresses in a thin rotating disc with shaft by finite 
deformation under steady-state temperature. Thermal Science, 14(2), 425–436. 
37. Pankaj, T., Sethi, M., Shivdev, S., Singh, S. B., & Emmanuel, F. S., (2018). Exact 
solution of rotating disc with shaft problem in the elastoplastic state of stress having 
variable density and thickness. Structural Integrity and Life, 18(2), 126–132. 
38. Seth, B. R., (1962). The general measure in deformation. Proc. IUTAM on Second 
Order Effects in Elasticity, Plasticity and Fluid Dynamics, Haifa. 
39. Singh, S. B., & Ray, S., (1998). Influence of anisotropy on creep in a whisker 
reinforced MMC rotating disc. Proceeding of the National Seminar on Composite 
Materials: COMPEAT-98 (pp. 83–102). 
40. Hulsarkar, S. (1981). Elastic plastic transitions in transversely isotropic shells under 
uniform pressure. Indian J. Pure Applied Math. 12(4), 552–557. 
41. Nejad, M., Hoseini, Z., Niknejad, A., & Ghannad, M. (2015). Steady-State Creep 
Deformations and Stresses in FGM Rotating Thick Cylindrical Pressure Vessels. 
Journal of Mechanics, 31(1), 16. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7  
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic 
Transitional Stresses in 
Zirconia-Based Ceramic Dental 
Implants under Uniaxial Compression 
SHIVDEV SHAHI,1 SATYA BIR SINGH,2 and A. K. HAGHI3 
1Research Scholar, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, 
India, E-mail: shivdevshahi93@gmail.com 
2Professor, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, Patiala, 
India, E-mail: sbsingh69@yahoo.com 
3Professor Emeritus, Canadian Research and Development Center of 
Sciences and Cultures, Montreal, Canada 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Zirconia (ZrO2) has been considered as a wear-resistant and osteoconductive 
ceramic, highly suitable for making stress-bearing crowns of dental implants. 
Various properties, namely, less inflammatory response, compatibility of 
zirconia in contact with gum tissues, lower plaque retention, and highly 
aesthetic tooth-like coloration has made zirconia a suitable alternative to 
titanium implants [2, 6, 19]. The production of ceramic dental implants have 
improved in past few years [7, 20]. The yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia 
polycrystal, popularly known as Y-TZP has been a preference for some years 
now, having the highest fracture strength [10, 12, 15, 27]. Muhammad et al. 
[11] confirmed in their chapter that zirconia is highly flexible in all directions 
of the lattice plane. The Poisson ratio obtained, i.e., from 0.16 to 0.31 also 
indicate high anisotropy. The stiffness constants so obtained will also be used 
in this chapter for the determination of elastic-plastic transitional stresses. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
This chapter is concerned with the investigation of elastic-plastic tran­
sition stress in Zirconia-based crowns of ceramic dental implants, further 
comparing the results with stresses in titanium-based implants. The chapter 
also checks the similarities between the implants and human tooth enamel 
using Seth’s transition theory. The crowns will be modeled as spherical 
shells exhibiting transversely isotropic macrostructural symmetry. Equa­
tions for modeling spherical shells made of isotropic materials are available 
in most standard textbooks [3, 9, 13, 14, 17, 29]. Following the classical 
methods of stress and strain determination, Miller [16] evaluated solutions 
for stresses and displacements in a thick spherical shell subjected to internal 
and external pressure loads. You et al. [30] presented a highly precise model 
to carry out elastic analysis of thick-walled spherical pressure vessels. The 
authors have studied the behavior of shells particularly when some assump­
tions, such as (i) incompressibility of material used, (ii) creep strain law 
derived by Norton, (iii) yield condition of Tresca, and (iv) associated flow 
rules; were made. The need of utilization of these specially appointed semi-
experimental laws in elastic-plastic transition depends on approach that the 
transition is a linear phenomenon which is unrealistic. Deformation fields 
related with the irreversible phenomenon, such as elastic-plastic disfigure­
ments, creep relaxation, fatigue, and crack, etc. are non-linear in character. 
The traditional measures of deformation are not adequate to manage tran­
sitions. The concept of generalized strain measures and transition theory 
given by Seth [21] has been applied to find elastic-plastic stresses in various 
problems by solving the non-linear differential equations at the transition 
points. Shahi and Singh [24] successfully calculated elastic-plastic transi­
tional stresses in human tooth enamel and dentine using this theory. The 
results for hydroxyapatite (HAP)-Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2, which structures 95% of 
enamel and 50% of dentine by weight, were also obtained for comparative 
analysis. The theory has been used to solve various problems of stress and 
strain determination in structures modeled in the form of discs and shells 
[25, 28]. All these problems based on the recognition of the transition state 
as separate state necessitates showing the existence of the used constitutive 
equation for that state. 
7.2 GOVERNING EQUATIONS 
We consider a spherical shell of constant thickness with internal and 
external radius a and b respectively under external pressure p. The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic Transitional Stresses 
external pressure will act radially to simulate the state of axial compres­
sion (Figure 7.1). 
FIGURE 7.1  Structure of the crown part of the implant. 
1.  Displacement Coordinates: The components of displacement in 
spherical coordinates (r, θ, ϕ) are taken as: 
u=r(1–β); v = 0; w = 0  
(7.1) 
where: β is position function depending on r. 
The generalized components of strain are given by Seth [21, 22] as: 
n 
n
n
err = 1 [1 -(rf '+ f r  J = 1 [1 - f (1 + P r J
  
 
 
n
n  
(7.2)
1 1 
n
eee = eqq =
[ - f J  
n  
erθ  = eθϕ = eϕr = 0 
where: n is the measure and rβ’ = βP ; P is a function of β and β is a 
function of r. 

 
100 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
2.  Stress‑Strain Relation: The stress-strain relations for isotropic 
material are given by Sokolinokoff [26]: 
 
Tij = cijkl ekl, (i, j, k, l = 1, 2, 3) 
where Tij  and ekl  are the stress and strain tensors respectively. These 
nine equations contain a total of 81 coefficients eijkl, but not all the 
coefficients are independent.  The symmetry of Tij  and eij reduces 
the number of independent coefficients to 36. For Transversely 
isotropic materials which have a plane of elastic symmetry, these 
independent coefficients reduce to 5. The constitutive equations 
for transversely isotropic media are given by Altenbach et al. [1]: 
  c 
c
c 
  
T  
0
0 
 
0
11   
11  
12
13 
  e  
 
 
 
 
c
 
 
c
c 
 
0 
0
 
11 
T
0
 
 22 
e
 
12  
11
13
1  
 
 
 c
c
 
 
 
13 
13 
c 
 
0
 
22
T
0
0
33
 
 
 
 
 
33
 
e 
 
   
 
  
 0
0
0 
c 
0
0
44 
 
 
33
 T23  
 e
  
  
 
 
 
0 
0 
0
0 
c 
 
 
23
 
T31 
 
0
e 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
1 (
) 
31 
  T12  
 
 
   0
0
0
0 
0  
 c11 -c12   
  e
  
 
12   
 
2  
 
 
(7.3)  
Substituting Eqn. (7.2) in Eqn. (7.3), we get: 
c33 
1 
T = 
[1-(rp' + p )
n ]
rr  
+ (2c )(1- p n ) = c e
 
n  
n 
12 
33 rr
 
(7.4) 
c 
n 
21
r
2
 
 
1 
 
c
2
11 c
n
1
66 
 
c e
;
n 
n  
12 rr 
 c11   c66 e 
T
T 
T
0
 
r
r 
  
 
3. Equation of Equilibrium: The equations of equilibrium are: 
oT  
1 
oTrT 
1 oT e 
2T
-
rr
r
rr 
Tee -TTT + Tre cote
+
+
+ 
= 0 
or
r sine oT 
r oe  
r 
; 
 
 ; 

 
101 
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic Transitional Stresses 
oT
 
T
r T  
1 
oT
+
TT 
1 oT
+
TT
3Tr + (T
-T )cot
+  
T
TT
TT
= 0 
or
r sinT oT 
r oT 
r 
 
;  
(7.5) 
oTrT 
1 
oTTT 
1 oTTT 
3TrT + 2TTT cotT
+
+
+  
= 0. 
or
r sinT oT 
r oT 
r 
 
 
Substituting Eqn. (7.4) in Eqn. (7.5), we see that the equations of 
equilibrium are all satisfied except: 
oT  
2Trr - TTT -
rr
T
+
""
 
= 0  
(7.6)
or
r 
 
oTrr 
2 
or 
+ (T
or
r 
rr -TTT ) = 0   
(7.7)
 
From Eqn. (7.7), one may also say that: 
 
T
 = 0  
ϕϕ – Tθθ
 
(7.8)
Eqn. (7.8) is satisfied by Tθθ  and Tϕϕ  as given by Eqn. (7.2). If c21  
= c31 , c22 – c33 – c32  – c23  the equation of equilibrium from Eqn. 
(7.6) becomes: 
oTrr 
2(Trr -TTT )
+
= 0,   
(7.9)
or
r
 
 
4.   Critical Points or  Turning Points: By substituting Eqn. (7.4) into 
Eqn. (7.9), we get a non-linear differential equation in terms of β: 
dP
 
n1 
 
2
P P
( 1)

 P P
(  1) n   2(1 C P
1 )   
n [Q
Q
1 
d

2] (7.10)
  
n  
 
 
where; 
Q1 = C1 {1–βn (1–P)n}, Q2 = C2 (1–C1) {1–βn}, C1 = (c33 – c13) /c33 
and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
C2 = (c11 + c12 – 2c13) / (c33(1-C1))
where P is function of β and β is function of r only. 
5.   Transition Points: The transition points of β in Eqn. (7.10) are P 
= 0, P → –1 and P → ± ∞ 
To solve the Elastoplastic stress problems we consider the case of  
P → ± ∞ 
6.  Boundary Condition:  The boundary conditions of the problem 
are given by: 
 
r = a, τ rr = 0 
 
r = b,   τ rr = – P  
(7.11) 
7.3 PROBLEM SOLUTION 
For finding the elastic-plastic stresses, the transition function is taken 
through the principal stresses at the transition point P → ± ∞, we define 
the transition function ζ as:
nTrr
n
(3
2
)
C 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 2(1 
 
 
 
1 
n P 
C1)
c
 	
 
(7.12)
 
 
33 
where ζ be the transition function unction of r only. Taking the logarithmic 
differentiation of Eqn. (7.12), with respect to r and using Eqn. (7.10), we 
get: 
d (log ? ) 
-2C1
  
(7.13)
dr 
r 
Taking the asymptotic value of Eqn. (7.13) as P → ± ∞ and integrating, 
we get: 
ζ = Ar–2C 
(7.14) 
1 
where A is a constant of integration and C1 = (c33 – 
. From Eqn.
c13)/c33
(7.12) and (7.14), we have: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 


 
c33 
 2C1
Trr  
(3  2
)
C1  Ar 
 
(7.15) 
n
Using boundary condition from Eqn. (7.11) in Eqn. (7.15), we get:
C 
33  
 
 
 
 2C 
c 
b 
1 
(3  2
)
 
 
C
1 
p =  
(3 2
) 1
1 
 
 
 
(7.16)
A =  
a
1 
n  
 
a
 2C  
 
 
 
 
and 
Substituting Eqn. (7.16) in to Eqn. (7.15) and using Eqn. (7.16) in 
equation of equilibrium, we get: 
2C1
c 
 
r 
 
33 


  
rr 
 
2
) 1

T   
(3  C1 


  
n  
a 

 
 
T  T
c33 (3
2
)
C C   
 
r 
 2C1  
(7.17)
  
rr 
 
1
1  
 
 
n  
a
 
 
1.  Initial Yielding: From Eqn. (7.17), it is seen that |Tθθ – Trr| is 
maximum at the outer surface (that is at r = b), therefore yielding 
of the shell will take place at the external surface of the shell: 
c 
(
)
b 
-2C1 
 
T -T  
-
33 (3 - C C
2
)
 
= Y Yielding
(
)
TT 
rr 
[ 
1
1  
 
1
- (
)
r b  external surface 
n  
a 
1
[ 
 
 
 
(7.18) 
Using Eqn. (7.18) in Eqns. (7.15)–(7.17), we get the transitional 
stresses as in non-dimensional components as: 
2C  
2C
1 
1 
2
1 
C1
1 1 R 
 
1 1 R 

 R
C 
 R0 
2 1
 rr  C 
2C1 
  C 
2C1 
  R 2C1  
Poi 
2C1
1  R0 
 
1 R0 

 
0 
 
C R
;  
and 
1
0
 
(7.19) 
where; 
103 
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic Transitional Stresses 

 
 
 
  
104 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
R
r
= / ,a R 0  = b a
/ ,( rr = T
Y
rr /
,(TT = TTT  /Y
 
 
and 
 
Poi = p/Y 
2.   Fully‑Plastic State: For fully-plastic case [23], C1 → 0; therefore 
stresses and pressure from Eqn. (7.19) becomes: 
 
σ = 2Y*
rr
 log R0 ;  σ
= 2Y* log R and Pof = Y* + σ 
θθ 
rr  
(7.20)
where,  
 
R = r/a, R  = b/a, σ = T /Y* , σ
Y*  
0
rr
rr 
θθ = Tθθ  /
 
and  
 
Pof = p/Y *   
7.4 NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The above investigations elaborate the initial yielding and fully plastic state 
of a crown made of zirconia and titanium modeled in the form of spherical 
shell subjected to external pressure, to analyze uniaxial compression. The 
elastic constants for the same are taken from the literature [11] which has 
been obtained by ultrasonic resonance spectroscopy, a nondestructive 
measure to obtain the stiffness constants. The results obtained for both 
types of crowns are compared with enamel. Enamel is made up of HAP 
mineral, 95% by vol. All these materials exhibit transversely isotropic 
macrostructural symmetry. 
In Figure 7.2, the curves are plotted for pressure at initial yielding at 
various radius ratios. It is observed that the intensity of pressure at initial 
yielding increases with an increase in the thickness of the shell. It has been 
observed that titanium had the lowest yield strength and yielded at lower 
levels of stress as compared to enamel and Zirconia. Figures 7.3 and 7.4 
show the trends of radial and circumferential stresses at initial yielding. 
Maximum stresses were observed at the external surface of the shell. In 
Figure 7.5, the curves are plotted for the pressure required at a fully plastic 
state for various radius ratios. It has been observed that shells exhibited 
high plasticity when the thickness of the shell was between ratios 1 < 
R0 < 3, particularly Zirconia. A significant drop in the levels of plasticity 
is observed when the thickness increases. The plasticity of Zirconia is 

 
105 
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic Transitional Stresses 
inferred to be greater than that of titanium. Figures 7.6 and 7.7 represent 
the trends of radial and circumferential stresses at a fully plastic state. 
The observations infer to the fact that the principal stress differences were 
maximum at the external surface of the crowns. 
FIGURE 7.2  Pressure in the Shell at initial yielding for radius ratio R0. 
FIGURE 7.3  Radial stresses at initial yielding. 

 
106 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 7.4  Circumferential stresses at initial yielding. 
FIGURE 7.5  Pressure in the shell at fully plastic state for radius ratio R0. 

 
107 
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic Transitional Stresses 
FIGURE 7.6  Radial stresses at fully plastic state. 
FIGURE 7.7  Circumferential stresses at fully plastic state. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
7.5 CONCLUSIONS 
The findings allow us to conclude that zirconia has a greater resem­
blance with enamel with the necessary elastic and plastic limit, which 
demonstrates considerable ability to suppress a crack growth. Varying 
values of pressure required for initial yielding and fully plastic state were 
calculated for various radius ratios depending on the geometry of the 
crown sample. Trends of the graphs were similar for enamel and HAP 
due to enamel’s composition. The significant difference between stress 
buildup at the inner and outer layer of the implant crown is observed by 
varying the radii ratios. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
boundary condition 
•  
critical points 
•  
equilibrium 
•  
hydroxyapatite 
•  
initial yielding 
•  
stress-strain relation 
REFERENCES 
1.  Altenbach, H., Altenbach, J., & Kissing, W., (2004). Mechanics of Composite 
Structural Elements. Springer-Verlag. 
2. Bianchi, A. E., Bosetti, M., Dolci, G., Sberna, M. T., Sanfilippo, F., & Cannas, M., 
(2004). In vitro and in vivo follow-up of titanium transmucosal implants with zirconia 
collar. J. Appl. Biomater. Biomech., 2, 143–150. 
3.  Boyle, J. T., & Spence, J., (1983). Stress Analysis for Creep. Butterworth’s Coy. Ltd. 
London. 
4.  Cuy, J. L., Mann, A. B., Livi, K. J., Teaford, M. F., & Weihs, T. P., (2002). 
Nanoindentation mapping of the mechanical properties of human molar tooth enamel. 
Arch. Oral. Biol., 47, 281–291. 
5. Zaytsev, D., Grigoriev, S., & Panfilov, P., (2012). Deformation behavior of human 
dentin under uniaxial compression. Int. J. Biomater, 8. Article ID: 854539. 
6. Degidi, M., Artese, L., Scarano, A., Perrotti, V., Gehrke, P., & Piattelli, (2006). A. 
Inflammatory infiltrate, microvessel density, nitric oxide synthase expression, and 

 
109 
Investigation of Elastic-Plastic Transitional Stresses 
proliferative activity in peri-implant soft tissues around titanium oxide healing caps. 
J. Periodontol, 77, 73–80. 
7.  Depprich, R., Ommerborn, M., Zipprich, H., Naujoks, C., Handschel, J., & 
Wiesmann, H. P., (2008). Behavior of osteoblastic cells cultured on titanium and 
structured zirconia surfaces. Head Face Med., 4, 29. 
8. Menéndez-Proupina, E., Cervantes-Rodríguezb, S., Osorio-Pulgara, R., Franco-
Cisternaa, M., Camacho-Montesc, H., & Fuentesb, M. E., (2011).  Computer 
simulation of elastic constants of hydroxyapatite and fluorapatite. Journal of the 
Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 4, 1011–1020. 
9. Fung, Y. C., (1965). Foundations 
 
of Solid Mechanics. Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 
Prentice-Hall. 
10.  Hallmann, L., Mehl, A., Ulmer, P., Reusser, E., Stadler, J., & Zenobi, R., (2012). The 
influence of grain size on low-temperature degradation of dental zirconia. J. Biomed. 
Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomat., 100, 447–456. 
11. Muhammad, I. D., et al., (2014). Modeling the elastic constants of cubic zirconia 
using molecular dynamics simulations. Advanced Materials Research, 845, 387–391. 
12.  Inokoshi, M., Zhang, F., De Munck, J., Minakuchi, S., Naert, I., & Vleugels, J., 
(2014). Influence of sintering conditions on low-temperature degradation of dental 
zirconia. Dent. Mater., 30, 669–678. 
13. Kraus, H., (1980). Creep Analysis. Wiley, New York, USA. 
14. Lubhan, D., & Felger, R. P., (1961). Plasticity and Creep of Metals. Wiley, New York, 
USA. 
15. Lughi, V., & Sergo, V., (2010). Low temperature degradation-aging- of zirconia: A  
critical review of the relevant aspects in dentistry. Dent. Mater., 26, 807–820. 
16. Miller, G. K., (1995). Stresses in a spherical pressure vessel undergoing creep and 
dimensional changes. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 32, 2077–2093. 
17.  Parkus, H., (1976). Thermo-Elasticity. Springer-Verlag, Wien, New York. 
18.  Craig, R. G., Peyton, F. A., & Johnson, D. W., (1961). Compressive properties of 
enamel, dental cements, and gold. J. Dent. Res., 40, 936–945. 
19. Rimondini, L., Cerroni, L., Carrasi, A., & Torricelli, P., (2002). Bacterial colonization 
of zirconia ceramic surfaces: An in  vitro and in  vivo study. Int. J. Oral Maxillofac 
Implants, 17, 793–798. 
20. Scarano, A., Piatelli, M., Caputi, S., Favero, G. A., & Piattelli, A., (2004). Bacterial 
adhesion on commercially pure titanium and zirconium oxide disks: An in vivo  
human study. J. Periodontol., 75, 292–296. 
21. Seth, B. R., (1962). Transition theory of elastic-plastic deformation, creep, and 
relaxation. Nature, 195, 896–897. 
22. Seth, B. R., (1966). Measure concept in mechanics. International Journal of 
 
Non-Linear Mechanics, 1(1), 35–40. 
23. Seth, B. R., (1963). Elastic-plastic transition in shells and tubes under pressure. Z. 
Angew. Math. Mech., 43, 345–351. 
24. Shahi, S., & Singh, S. B., (2020). Elastic plastic transitional stress analysis of human 
tooth enamel and dentine under external pressure using Seth’s transition theory, 
materials physics, and chemistry. Applied Mathematics and Chemo-Mechanical 
Analysis. AAP, Ch: 3 (in press). 

 
110 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
25. Shahi, S., Singh, S. B., & Thakur, P., (2019). Modeling creep parameter in rotating 
discs with rigid shaft exhibiting transversely isotropic and isotropic material behavior. 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research, 6(1), 387–395. 
26. Sokolinokoff, I. S., (1956). Mathematical Theory of Elasticity (2nd edn.), McGraw-
Hill, New York. 
27.  Stawarczyk, B., Ozcan, M., Hallmann, L., Ender, A., Mehl, A., & Hämmerlet, C. H., 
(2013). The effect of zirconia sintering temperature on flexural strength, grain size, 
and contrast ratio. Clin. Oral. Investig., 17, 269–274. 
28.  Thakur, P., Shahi, S., Gupta, N., & Singh, S. B., (2017). Effect of mechanical load 
and thickness profile on creep in a rotating disc by using Seth’s transition theory. 
AIP Conf. Proc., Amer. Inst. of Physics, USA, 1859(1), 020024. doi.org/10.1063/1.49 
90177. 
29.  Timoshenko, S. P., & Woinowsky-Krieger, S., (1959). Theory of Plates and Shells  
(2nd edn.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
30.   You, L. H., Zhang, J. J., & You, X. Y., (2005). Elastic analysis of internally 
pressurized thick-walled spherical pressure vessels of functionally graded materials. 
International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, 82, 347–354. 

CHAPTER 8  
Recent Developments in the 
Theory of Nonlocality in Elastic and
Thermoelastic Mediums 
SUKHVEER SINGH,1 PARVEEN LATA,2 and SATYA BIR SINGH3 
1Assistant Professor, Punjabi University APS Neighborhood Campus, 
Dehla Seehan, Sangrur, Punjab, India, E-mail: Sukhveer_17@pbi.ac.in 
2Associate Professor, Department of Basic and Applied Science,  
Punjabi University Patiala, Punjab, India 
3Professor, Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, Patiala, 
Punjab, India 
ABSTRACT 
In the present chapter, the recent developments in the concept of nonlocality 
have been discussed. The nonlocal theory of continuum mechanics 
considers that the various physical quantities defined at a point are not just 
a function of the values of independent constitutive variables at that point 
only but a function of their values over the whole body. Some nonclassical 
thermoelasticity theories based on Eringen’s Nonlocal theory of elasticity 
have been developed in the last two decades. All such theories have been 
very helpful in the development of the subject of thermoelasticity. A review 
work of all those theories and their influences on the further developments 
in thermoelasticity is being discussed here. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
The theory of elasticity is concerned with the study of elastic properties of a 
material having the property that once the deformation forces are removed, 

 
112 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
the material recovers back its original shape and size. But if the change of 
elastic properties of a material is due to the change in temperature, then 
the branch of applied mechanics dealing with this phenomenon is known 
as thermoelasticity. The deformations arising due to both mechanical and 
thermal causes were the reasons for the development of the subject of ther­
moelasticity. As the flow of heat through a body, causes heat conduction, 
stress, and strain in the body so thermoelasticity is a multi-field discipline 
governed by the interaction of a temperature deformation field. 
If any thermodynamical changes occur in a homogeneous body in 
equilibrium due to the action of external loads, forces within the body, 
and non-uniform heating; then all such changes are concerned with 
the theory of Thermoelasticity. Due to such type of changes, the body 
undergoes deformation, thus causing stresses in the body and a rise in the 
body temperature. In the classical theory of thermoelasticity, the change 
of temperature being very small has not much effect and so the corre­
sponding terms can be neglected. However, this is not true in such cases 
if the temperature undergoes a large and sudden change where the inertia 
term has to be considered in the equations of motion. 
The nonlocal theory of thermoelasticity considers that the various 
physical quantities defined at a point are not just a function of the values of 
independent constitutive variables at that point only but a function of their 
values over the whole body. Thus, the nonlocal continuum field theories 
are concerned with the physics of material bodies in which the stress at any 
reference point within a continuous body not only depends on the strain 
at that point, but is having a significant influence due to the strains at all 
other points. So the nonlocal stress forces can be termed as remote action 
forces. Nonlocality is an essential characteristic in solid-state physics as 
nonlocal attractions of atoms are common. Nonlocal continuum theories 
can describe the material properties from microscopic scales to the size 
of the lattice parameter. So the nonlocal theory can satisfactorily explain 
some phenomena related to atomic scales. 
The nonlocal theory in a way is just a generalization of the classical 
field theory. As: (i) the energy balance law is valid for the whole body, and 
(ii) the state of the body at a material point is considered to be attracted 
by all points of the body. This just means that a complete knowledge 
of the independent variables at all the points of the body is required to 
describe the state of the body at each point. Nonlocal effects are dominant 
in nature. So only, a nonlocal theory can provide the correct results where 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
Recent Developments in the Theory of Nonlocality 
the classical theory fails. If the effects of strains at points other than the 
reference point are neglected, classical theory is recovered. 
8.2 HISTORY AND RECENT ADVANCES IN THE CONCEPT OF 
NONLOCALITY 
The theory of coupling of thermal and the strain fields gave rise to 
Coupled Theory of Thermoelasticity. Duhamel [1] derived the equations 
for the coupling between the strain and the temperature fields in an elastic 
medium, but the heat equation derived by him being parabolic gave an 
infinite speed of propagation for temperature. Biot [2] gave a satisfactory 
derivation of the heat conduction equation. Lord and Shulman [3] formu­
lated a generalized dynamical theory of thermo-elasticity. According to 
this theory, the prediction is that the temperature travels with a finite speed 
due to the heat equation being hyperbolic. 
The theory of nonlocal elasticity was developed by the contribution of 
many researchers. This theory is based on nonlocal effects i.e., the various 
physical quantities at a point are not a function of that point only but depend 
on their values over the whole body. Kroner [4] developed a continuum 
theory for long-range cohesive forces in elastic materials. He explained 
how the range effects can be important in materials having Vander Waals 
interactions as local theory gave a zero force. Edelen and Law [5] discussed 
a theory of nonlocal interactions and agreed to the concept of nonlocality 
as suggested by Kroner. Edelen et al. [6] discussed the consequences of the 
global postulate of energy balance and obtained the constitutive equations 
for the nonlinear theory. They called this nonlinear theory of nonlocal 
elasticity as protoelasticity. 
Eringen and Edelen [7] developed the nonlocal elasticity theory via 
using the global balance laws and the second law of thermodynamics. 
This theory contains information about long-range forces of atoms as 
according to this theory the stress field at a particular point is affected 
due to the strain at all the other points of the body also. These are char­
acterized by the presence of nonlocality residuals of fields (like body 
forces, internal energy, entropy, etc.). Balta and Suhubi [8] developed a 
new theory of nonlocal generalized thermoelasticity within the frame­
work of the nonlocal continuum mechanics. The constitutive relations 
were obtained through the systematic use of the nonlocal version of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
generalized thermodynamics and investigated thermal waves in rigid 
conductors. 
Altan [9] studied the uniqueness in the linear theory of nonlocal 
elasticity. He concluded that under certain conditions the solutions of an 
initial-boundary value problem are unique. Wang and Dhaliwal [10] estab­
lished a reciprocity relation and addressed some other issues addressing 
the nonlocal theory of micropolar elasticity to extend the concept of 
nonlocality further to other fields. Dhaliwal and Wang [11] provided more 
results on nonlocal thermoelasticity. Artan [12] compared the results of 
local and nonlocal elasticity theories by differentiating between the stress 
distributions of the local and the nonlocal theories to prove the superiority 
of the nonlocal theory. 
The implications of the Eringen model of nonlocal elasticity theory 
were studied by Polizzotto [13]. He assumed an attenuation function and 
used it to further refine the theory. The attenuation function was supposed 
to be dependent on the geodetical distance replacing the Euclidean distance 
between material particles. He established the conditions for the unique­
ness of the solution in the case of the nonlocal boundary value problem for 
infinitesimal displacements. 
Eringen [14] presented a unified approach to the development of the 
basic field equations for nonlocal continuum field theories. He developed this 
theory for prevalent nonlocal intermolecular attractions in material bodies. In 
classical field theories, there exist a large number of problems falling outside 
their domain of applications. Some of the major deviations from the normal 
that confront with classical treatment are stress fields at the dislocation core, 
fracture of solids, short-wavelength behavior of elastic waves, etc. 
Sharma and Ganti [15] described the size-dependent elastic stress 
state of inclusions in nonlocal media. Paola et al. [16] represented the 
mechanical based approach to three-dimensional nonlocal elasticity 
theories and proved the size dependence of the results. The model as 
proposed by them modeled the long-range forces as the central body 
forces and so for any element, the equilibrium is attained not just by 
contact forces at adjacent elements but also by long-range forces due to 
non-adjacent elements. 
Ke and Wang [17] investigated the thermoelectric-mechanical vibra­
tion of the piezoelectric nanobeams-based on the nonlocal theory and 
Timoshenko beam theory. They discussed the influences of the nonlocal 
parameter, temperature change, external electric voltage, and axial force on 
the thermoelectric-mechanical vibration characteristics of the piezoelectric 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
115 
Recent Developments in the Theory of Nonlocality 
nanobeams in detail and found that the nonlocal effect is significant for the 
natural frequencies of the nanobeams. Khurana and Tomar [18] studied 
the propagation of plane longitudinal waves through an isotropic nonlocal 
micropolar elastic medium and showed that four dispersive waves and two 
sets of coupled transverse waves may propagate. As in Figure 8.1, they 
explained the variation of modulus of reflection coefficient with angle of 
incidence using local and nonlocal parameters. The solid curve denoted 
nonlocal micropolar solid and dotted denoted local micropolar solid. 
Zenkour et al. [19] developed a generalized thermoelasticity theory 
with non-local deformation effects and dual-phase-lag or time-delay 
thermal effects to study the vibration of a nanobeam subjected to ramp-type 
heating. They analyzed nonlocal effects as in Figure 8.2; the transverse 
deflection distributions in the axial direction with different nonlocal ther­
moelastic parameters were studied. The dotted line indicates the value at 
the points where nonlocal parameter is taken to be zero, while the other 
two lines indicate the values with a nonlocal parameter having nonzero 
values, i.e., 1 and 3. 
FIGURE 8.1  Variation of modulus of reflection coefficient with angle of incidence using 
local and nonlocal parameters. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 8.2  Transverse deflection distributions in the axial direction with different 
nonlocal thermoelastic parameters. 
Salehipour et al. [20] gave a modified nonlocal elasticity theory 
stating that the strain tensor at all the neighboring points contributes 
to the imaginary nonlocal strain tensor at a particular point. The need 
for this theory arose as in the case of functionally graded materials 
(FGMs), the nonlocal theory of Eringen was not found to be worthy 
enough. They used a nonlocal strain tensor very similar to the stress 
tensor as used in nonlocal theory given by Eringen. This assumed 
strain tensor was used for obtaining the nonlocal stress tensor. Then, 
Vasiliev and Lurie [21] developed a new nonlocal generalized theory. 
Using a variational approach, they developed a new variant of nonlocal 
elasticity theory for generalized stresses by introducing high gradient 
equilibrium equations. 
Jun Yu et al. [22] investigated the Buckling analysis of nanobeams with 
the aids of the size-dependent model, i.e., nonlocal thermoelasticity, and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 
Recent Developments in the Theory of Nonlocality 
size effect of heat conduction. They adopted the Euler-Bernoulli beam and 
reformulated it within the nonlocal theory. Hayati et al. [23] analyzed the 
static and dynamic behavior of a curved single-walled carbon nanotube 
which is under twist-bending couple based on nonlocal theory. They used 
the nonlocal theory to model the mechanical behavior of the structure on 
a small scale. Togun [24] studied nonlinear vibrations of a Euler-Bernoulli 
nanobeam resting on an elastic foundation using nonlocal elasticity theory. 
Hamilton’s principle was employed to derive the governing equations and 
boundary conditions. The nonlinear equation of motion was obtained by 
including stretching of the neutral axis that introduces cubic nonlinearity 
into the equations. 
Khurana and Tomar [25] studied the propagation of Rayleigh surface 
waves and explored the conditions for their existence. Singh et al. 
[26] studied the propagation of plane harmonic waves and derived the 
governing relations in nonlocal elastic solid with voids. Hosseini [27] 
developed a meshless method based on the generalized finite difference 
method for coupled thermoelasticity analysis. The Green-Naghditheory 
of the generalized coupled thermoelasticity and nonlocal Rayleigh beam 
theory were utilized for dynamic analysis of a micro/nanobeam resonator 
subjected to thermal shock loading. Zenkour [28] used a model of nonlocal 
thermoelasticity theory of Green and Naghdi without energy dissipation 
to consider the vibration behavior of a nano-machined resonator. He 
used nonlocality to bring in an internal length scale in the formulation 
and, thus, allowing for the interpretation of size effects. The governing 
frequency equation was given for nanobeams subjected to different 
boundary conditions. 
Kaur et al. [29] derived dispersion relation and investigated the propa­
gation of Rayleigh type surface wave in a nonlocal elastic solid. They 
studied the nonlocal effects in detail and their effects on the propagation 
of Rayleigh waves and continued the good work done by Khurana et al., 
Tomar et al., and Singh. A part of their research work can be elaborated as 
in Figure 8.3, where the variation of tilt with the nonlocality parameter is 
studied. 
Bachher and Sarkar [30] postulated a new nonlocal theory of ther­
moelasticity, which is based on Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity theory for 
thermoelastic materials with voids. A material needed to be classified 
according to its fractional and elastic nonlocality parameter by this theory. 
They studied the effects of nonlocality on various parameters such as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
temperature, displacement, stress, and change in volume fraction. For 
illustration, as in Figure 8.3, they studied the effect of the nonlocality 
parameter on dimensionless stress. It is clear from Figure 8.4, that there is 
a big effect of nonlocality on stress. Similarly, he proved identical results 
for other parameters too. 
FIGURE 8.3  Variation of tilt with nonlocality parameter. 
Lata [31] studied the reflection and refraction of plane waves in a 
layered medium of two semi-infinite nonlocal solids with the anisotropic 
thermoelastic medium as intermediate. She too depicted the nonlocal 
parameter effects graphically and proved that nonlocality is a significant 
parameter, which needs to be considered to get more accurate results. 
8.3 CONCLUSION 
The theory of elasticity and thermoelasticity are well established already. 
These are of wide interest in the fields where engineers, mathematicians, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119 
Recent Developments in the Theory of Nonlocality 
FIGURE 8.4  Effect of nonlocality parameter on dimensionless stress. 
and physicists work together as these have a wider deal of applications in 
aeronautical engineering, nuclear physics, shipbuilding, in technologies 
of space vehicles and missiles, etc. As the use of the concept of nonlocality 
provides more refined and corrected results so it is causing more and 
more benefits to the subject of elasticity and thermoelasticity and thus 
helping in their overall development. Also, some of the well-established 
theories have been already refined using nonlocality and many more are 
to come yet. From the above, we can conclude that in the last two decades 
there have been great advances in the concept of nonlocality in elasticity 
and thermoelasticity. Many of the authors have already provided some 
astonishing results in the subject of thermoelasticity due to the use of 
nonlocality. But still, there is a lot to be done in the field of the nonlocal 
theory of thermoelasticity. This review chapter is a little effort to boost 
the researchers so that much more can be achieved in this field. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
KEYWORDS 
•  
elasticity 
•   Eringen model of nonlocal theories 
•   micropolar elastic medium 
•   nanobeams 
•   nonlocality 
•   thermoelasticity 
REFERENCES 
1.  Duhamel, J. M. C., (1838). Memoires Par Diver’s Savants (Vol. 5, pp. 440–498). 
Paris. 
2. Biot, M. A., (1956). Thermoelasticity and irreversible thermodynamics. Journal of 
Applied Physics, 27(3), 240–253. 
3. Lord, H., & Shulman, Y., (1967). A generalized dynamical theory of thermoelasticity. 
Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 15, 299–309. 
4. Kroner, E., (1967). Elasticity theory of materials with long-range cohesive forces. 
International Journal of Solids and Structures, 3, 731–742. 
5. Edelen, D. G. B., & Laws, N., (1971). On the thermodynamics of systems with 
nonlocality. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 43, 24–35. 
6. Edelen, D. G. B., Green, A. E., & Laws, N., (1971). Nonlocal Continuum Mechanics: 
Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 43, 36–44. 
7. Eringen, A. C., & Edelen, D. G. B., (1972). On nonlocal elasticity. International 
Journal of Engineering Science, 10, 233–248. 
8. Balta, F., & Suhubi, E. S., (1977). Theory of nonlocal generalized thermoelasticity. 
International Journal of Engineering and Science, 15, 579–588. 
9. Altan, S. B., (1989). Uniqueness of initial-boundary value problems in nonlocal 
elasticity. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 25(11), 1271–1278. 
10.  Wang, J., & Dhaliwal, R. S., (1993). On some theorems in the nonlocal theory of micro 
polar elasticity. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 30(10), 1331–1338. 
11.  Dhaliwal, R. S., & Wang, J., (1994). Some theorems in generalized nonlocal 
thermoelasticity. International Journal of Engineering Science, 32(3), 473–479. 
12. Artan, R., (1996). Nonlocal elastic half plane loaded by a concentrated force. 
International Journal of Engineering Science, 34(8), 943–950. 
13. Polizzotto, C., (2001). Nonlocal elasticity  and related variational principles. 
International Journal of Solids and Structures, 38, 7359–7380. 
14. Eringen, A. C., (2002). Nonlocal Continuum Field Theories. Springer, New York. 
15. Sharma, P., & Ganti, S., (2003). The size-dependent elastic state of inclusions in 
non-local elastic solids. Philosophical Magazine Letters, 83(12), 745–754. 

 
121 
Recent Developments in the Theory of Nonlocality 
16. Paola, M., Failla, G., & Zingales, M., (2010). The mechanically based approach to 
3D non-local linear elasticity theory: Long-range central interactions. International 
Journal of Solids and Structures, 47, 2347–2358. 
17. Ke, L. L., & Wang, Y. S., (2012). Thermoelectric-mechanical vibration of piezoelectric 
nanobeams based on the nonlocal theory. Smart Materials and Structures. doi: 
10.1088/0964–1726/21/2/025018. 
18. Khurana, A., & Tomar, S. K., (2013). Reflection of plane longitudinal waves from the 
stress-free boundary of a nonlocal, microploar solid half-space. Journal of Mechanics 
of Materials and Structures, 8(1), 95–107. 
19. Zenkour, A. M., Abouelregal, A. E., Alnefaie, K. A., Abu-Hamdeh, N. H., & Aifantis, 
E. C., (2014). A refined nonlocal thermo elasticity theory for the vibration of nano 
beams induced by ramp-type heating. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 248, 
169–183. 
20. Salehipour, H., Shahidi, A. R., & Nahvi, H., (2015). Modified nonlocal elasticity 
theory for functionally graded materials. International Journal of Engineering 
Science, 90, 44–57. 
21.  Vasiliev, V. V., & Lurie, S. A., (2016). On correct nonlocal generalized theories of 
elasticity. Physical Mesomechanics, 19(3), 47–59. 
22.  Jun, Y. Y., Xue, Z. N., Li, C. L., & Tian, X. G., (2016). Buckling of nanobeams under 
nonuniform temperature based on nonlocal thermoelasticity. Composite Structures, 
146, 108–113. 
23.  Hayati, H., Hosseini, S. A., & Rahmani, O., (2016). Coupled twist-bending static 
and dynamic behavior of a curved single walled carbon nanotube based on nonlocal 
theory. Micro-System Technologies. doi: 10.1007/s00542–016–2933–0. 
24. Togun, N., (2016). Nonlocal beam theory for nonlinear vibrations of a nano 
beam resting on elastic foundation. Boundary Value Problems. doi: 10.1186/ 
s13661–016–056–3. 
25. Khurana, A., & Tomar, S. K., (2017). Rayleigh type waves in nonlocal microploar 
solid half-space. Ultrasonic’s, 73, 162–168. 
26. Singh, D., Kaur, G., & Tomar, S. K., (2017). Waves in nonlocal elastic solid with 
voids. Journal of Elasticity. doi: 10.1007/s10659–016–9618-x. 
27. Hosseini, S. M., (2017). Shock-induced nonlocal coupled thermoelasticity analysis 
(with energy dissipation) in a MEMS/NEMS beam resonator based on green-Naghdi 
theory: A mesh less implementation considering small-scale effects. Journal of 
Thermal Stresses, 40(9), 1134–1151. 
28. Zenkour, A. M., (2017). Nonlocal thermo elasticity theory without energy dissipation 
for nano machined beam resonators subjected to various boundary conditions. Micro-
System Technologies. doi: 10.1007/s00542–015–2703–4. 
29. Kaur, G., Singh, D., & Tomar, S. K., (2018). Rayleigh type wave in nonlocal 
elastic solid with voids. European Journal of Mechanics. doi: 10.1016/j. 
euromechsol.2018.03.015. 
30. Bachher, M., & Sarkar, N., (2018). Nonlocal theory of thermoelastic materials with 
voids and fractional derivative heat transfer. Waves in Random and Complex Media. 
doi: 10.1080/17455030.2018.1457230. 

 
 
 
122 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
31. Lata, P., (2018). Reflection and refraction of plane waves in layered nonlocal elastic 
and anisotropic thermo elastic medium. Structural Engineering and Mechanics, 
66(1), pp. 113–124. 
32. Sharma, N., Kumar, R., & Lata, P., (2015). Disturbance due to inclined load in the 
transversely isotropic thermo elastic medium with two temperatures and without 
energy dissipation. Material Physics and Mechanics, 22, 107–117. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9  
Investigation of Creep Performance 
of an Isotropic Composite Disc Under 
Thermal Gradients 
VANDANA GUPTA1 and SATYA BIR SINGH2 
1Department of Mathematics, Dashmesh Khalsa College, Zirakpur, 
Mohali, Punjab, India, E-mail: vaggarwal2584@gmail.com 
2Department of Mathematics, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
A rotating disc is a common component in turbines, gas turbine rotors, 
compressors, turbo generators, flywheel, aero-engines, rotors, auto­
mobiles, computer’s disc drive, and other dynamic applications are 
usually operated at relatively higher angular speed and subjected to high 
temperature. Materials of discs are required to sustain steady loads for 
a long period of time under different temperature conditions. In such 
conditions, the material may continue to creep until its usefulness is 
seriously impaired. As a result, a number of researchers have studied 
the creep behavior in composite materials with the property of superior 
heat resistance. The effect of anisotropy on the stress and strain rates 
have been studied and concluded that the anisotropy of the material has 
a significant effect on the creep of a rotating disc [1]. The steady-state 
creep response of an isotropic FGM disc with constant thickness by 
using Sherby’s constitutive model have been analyzed and the results 
obtained for nonlinear variation of particle distribution along the radial 
distance of the disc are compared with that of discs containing the same 
amount of particle distributed uniformly or linearly along with the radial 
distance [17]. Hasan Callioglu et al. [18] studied that stress analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
on functionally graded rotating annular discs subjected to temperature 
distributions parabolically decreasing with radius. He concluded that 
with the increase in temperature, the tangential stress component gets 
decreased at the inner surface but increased at the outer surface whereas 
the radial stress component gets reduced gradually for all the tempera­
ture distributions. The problem of rotating disc with variable thickness, 
thermal effect, heat generation effect, and pressure by using Seth’s 
transition theory has been studied [2, 19–21]. Gupta et al. [3] discuss the 
variation of Poisson ratios and thermal creep stresses and strain rates in 
an isotropic disc. Kaur et al. [4] study steady thermal stresses in a thin 
rotating disc of infinitesimal deformation with edge loading. An attempt 
has been made to investigate steady-state creep behavior of thermally 
graded isotropic discs rotating at elevated temperatures. The results are 
compared with the disc having a uniform temperature profile from inner 
to the outer radius and are displayed graphically in a designer-friendly 
format for the said temperature profiles. It is observed that there is a 
need to extend the domain of thermal gradation for designing rotating 
discs [22]. A theoretical solution for time-dependent thermo-elastic 
creep analysis of a functionally graded thick-walled cylinder based on 
the first-order shear deformation theory is presented. The effects of the 
temperature gradient and FG grading index on the creep stresses of the 
cylinder are investigated. A numerical solution using the finite element 
method is also presented and good agreement was found [5]. Keeping 
this in mind, the study ends with an effort to determine the plastic stress 
and strain analyses for the particle reinforced isotropic/anisotropic disc 
with constant thickness in presence of thermal gradients and compare 
it with those isotropic/anisotropic discs with the operating under 
isothermal conditions. The analysis has been done by using von Mises 
criteria/Hill’s criterion for yielding. The creep response of the disc under 
stresses developing due to rotation has been determined using Sherby’s 
law. The material parameters of creep vary along the radial direction in 
the disc due to varying composition. 
Keeping this in mind, the study ends with an effort to determine the 
creep behavior for the particle reinforced anisotropic disc with constant 
thickness in presence of thermal gradients and compare it with those 
anisotropic discs with the operating under isothermal conditions. 
In this chapter, the steady-state creep has been analyzed in composite 
disc made of material 6061Al base alloy containing 20 vol% of SiC 
particle. The creep behavior has been described by Sherby’s constitutive 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125 
Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite Disc 
model. The analysis has been done for particle reinforced isotropic disc 
with hyperbolic thickness. 
9.2 DISC GEOMETRY AND REINFORCEMENT PROFILE 
The present study assumes composite disc having a hyperbolically varying 
thickness is assumed to be of the form: 
h = cr m 
(9.1) 
where: c and m = –0.74 are constants. 
Since the volume of disc having hyperbolically varying thickness is 
assumed equal to the volume of constant thickness disc, therefore; 
2
2
m  2
b  a
t 
c  
(9.2)
m 2 
m 2
2(b
  a 
) 
The thickness of the disc is assumed to be h and a and b be inner and 
outer radii of the disc respectively. Let Iand I0 be the moment of inertia of 
the disc at inner radius a and outer radius r and b, respectively. A and A0 
be the area of cross-section of the disc at inner radius a and outer radius r 
and b, respectively. 
Here, 
m+1 
m+1
[
- a 
)
=
A
c 
r 
 
(9.3)
m +1
 
 
m 1 
m 1
 b 
 a 

A0  c 
 
(9.4)
m  1
 
 
m+3 
m+3
[ r 
- a 
)
I
c
=  
 
(9.5)
m + 3
 
 
m 3 
m 3
 b 
 a 

I0  c 
 
(9.6)
m  3
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
126 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
The temperature gradient originating due to the braking action of the 
discs has been obtained by Finite Element Analysis. The temperature T(r), 
obtained at any radius r is presented below in the form of regression equa­
tion as: 
T(r) = a0 + a1 r + a2 r2 + a3 r3 + a4 r4 + a5 r5 
(9.7) 
where the coefficients a0, a1, a2, a3, a4 and a5 for different disc are given 
below: 
a0 = 602.75, a1 = 1.4488 
a2 = – 0.0208, a3 = 3.27 x 10–4 
a4 = 1.96 x 10–6, a5 = 4.43 x 10–9 
9.3 ASSUMPTIONS IN VARIABLE THICKNESS DISC 
Consider an aluminum silicon-carbide particulate composite disc of 
constant thickness h having an inner radius, a and outer radius, b rotating 
with angular velocity, ω(radian/sec). From symmetry considerations, 
principal stresses are in the radial, tangential, and axial directions. For the 
purpose of analysis, the following assumptions are made: 
1.   Stresses at a radius of the disc remain constant with time, i.e., 
steady-state condition of stress is assumed. 
2.   Elastic deformations are small for the disc and can be neglected as 
compared to the creep deformations. 
3.   Biaxial state of stress (σ z = 0) exists at any point in the disc. 
4.   Frictional shear stress-induced due to braking action is estimated 
to be 105 MPa, which is very small compared to creep stresses and 
therefore, can be neglected. 
5.   The composite shows a steady-state creep behavior which may be 
described by following Sherby’s law [6], 

( )  
( r )
n
t = [M r (( -
( ) J  
(9.8)
 
 
0 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
127 
Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite Disc 
1
( )
1 [ AD
 
AA ]
/n
3
where, M r =
 
 
 
5 
is the creep parameter and s  

n 
 
,
, ,
 ( )
r  ,
E  
b
 
0
r
 
( )
 
A D
,
A , A,
,
b
E
r 
are the effective strain rate, effective stress, the stress 
 
exponent, threshold stress, a constant, lattice diffusivity, the subgrain size, 
the magnitude of burgers vector, Young’s modulus. 
The values of material parameters M(r) and σ0 (r)  in terms of P,T(r) 
and V have been obtained from the creep results by using the experimental 
results reported by Pandey et al. [7] for Al-SiCp composite under uniaxial 
loading using the following regression equations: 
 
M(r) = e–35  P 0.2077 T(r) 4.98  V –0.622  
(9.9) 
 
σ0 (r) = –0.03507P + 0.01057T (r) + 1.00536 – 2.11916  
(9.10) 
In a FGM disc, with the creep parameters M(r)  and  σ0(r)  will vary 
radially due to variations in temperature T(r). In the present study, the 
particle size (P) and the particle content (V) are taken as 1.7 μm and 20%  
over the entire disc. Thus, for a given FGM disc under known temperature 
both the creep parameters are functions of radial distance and their values 
M(r)  and  σ0(r) at any radius (r), could be determined by substituting the 
values of particle size, particle content, and temperature distributions into 
Eqs. (9.9) and (9.10), respectively. 
9.4 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION 
The generalized constitutive equations for creep in an anisotropic 
composite disc under multiaxial stress takes the following form: 
f
f r = 
2c -(c +c z ] 
(9.11) 

2c [ 
r 
e
J 
f
fe = 
[ 2c e -(c z +c r )] 
(9.12)
2c 
f
f z = 2c [ 2c z -(c r +ce )] 
(9.13) 

 
128 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
where £
£


r ,
,
8 £z and  σ r , σθ , σ z  are the strain rates and the stresses respec
tively in the direction r, θ and z. ε be the effective strain rate and σ  be 
the effective stress. For biaxial state of stress  (σr ,σθ )  the effective stress is:
 1
1 2
  
2  
/ 
 
 
2
2 
r 
r 
  
 
 
(9.14)  
 
  2  
 
Using Eqs. (9.8) and (9.14), Eq. (9.11) can be rewritten as: 
du
 2x r   1  M    
 
0  
8 
 
r 
 
  
 
r 
 
dr
2 x
r( )  x r   1 
1 2
/ 
2
 
 
(9.15)
 
 
 
Similarly from Eq. (9.12): 
u 
[ -
r
2 x r ] [M (
(
8 
 
= 
 
 
( )  
(
-
.
= 
0 )]  
g
 
(9.16) 
r 
2 [x
r
2 ( ) -
 
x r( )
1 2
 +1]
/
 
 
 

 

(9.17)
 
z    r      
O
where, x r( ) =
r is the ratio of radial and tangential stresses at any  
O
radius r. 
g  
Dividing Eq. (9.15) by Eq. (9.16), we get: 
2 x r( ) -1
¢( )
r = 
 
(9.18)
2 - x r( ) 
 
The equation of equilibrium for a rotating disc with varying thickness 
can be written as: 
d 
p( )
r o  2
2r
 
(rO r ) _O
=
dr
g + 
0  
(9.19)
 
g 
 
­

 
129 
Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite Disc 
where ρ(r) is the density of FGM disc. 
Boundary conditions are: 
 
σ  
r (a) = 0 = σ r (b)  
(9.20) 
We get the tangential stress σθ from Eq. (9.19) by using Eq. (9.15) and  
Eq. (9.16):

b 

 1   
r
A
 0   avg  È2   
r
d
. r
 
a 
 
   
b 
  
  
2   
r  
(9.21)
 
r
M r   
1 
dr
M r  
 
a 
where, 
I ( )
r 
I 1( )
r = 
(9.22)
[x
r
2 ( )
 
- x r( ) +
 
1J
1 2
/
 
 
 
 
 2   
r  
0
 
 
 
 x
r
2    x r  
(9.23)
 1 
1 2
/
 
 
 
and 
 
1 8
/
/
2 
r
}2 [ x
r( ) - x r( ) +1
1 2 
 
r
 
Æ
d
( )
r r }
I ( )
r =  
. 
.
 
- x r( )r
J
 
(9.24)
}r 
[ 2 
 
a
r
 
 
 
} 
The average tangential stress may be defined as: 
1
Cg avg = 
pm 2 I0  
(9.25)
A
 
0 
Now σ  
r (r) can be obtained by integrating Eq. (9.18) within limits a   
to b: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design
 r 
  
2 r 3  a 3
1 
 r ( )r  
    dr  
  
(9.26)
r  a 
3 
 
 
 
 
Thus, the tangential stress σθ and radial stress σ r are determined by Eqs. 
(9.21) and (9.26) respectively, for anisotropic disc with constant thickness. 
Then strain rates E
E


,
a nd E
r 
g 
z  calculated from equations (9.15), (9.16) 
and (9.17). 
9.5 NUMERICAL COMPUTATION 
The stress distribution is evaluated from the above analysis by the itera­
tive numerical scheme of computation. For rapid convergence, 75% of 
the value of σθ (r) obtained in the current iteration has been mixed with 
25% of the value of σθ (r) obtained in the last iteration for the use in the 
next iteration. 
9.6 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The stress exponent and density of disc material have been taken as n = 8 
and ρ = 2812.4kg/m3, respectively. A computer program based on the 
mathematical formulation has been developed to obtain the steady-state 
creep response of the rotating isotropic discs operating under the thermal 
gradient. The tangential stress operating under a thermal gradient is a 
little higher near the inner radius and slightly lowers near the outer radius 
as compared to the disc without thermal gradients as shown in Figure 9.1. 
The radial stress developing due to rotation in the isotropic disc operating 
under a thermal gradient is higher over the entire radius as compared to the 
isotropic disc without thermal gradients as shown in Figure 9.2. Although, the 
variation in the magnitude of tangential as well as radial stress distribution 
is very small in the isotropic discs due to the presence of thermal gradients. 
In Figure 9.3, the tangential strain rate decreases significantly over the 
entire radius in the isotropic discs operating under the thermal gradients 
compared to the discs without thermal gradients. Although, the tangential 
stress in disc under the thermal gradients is higher near the inner radius 
than the disc under thermal gradients as shown in Figure 9.4, but lower 

 
131 
Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite Disc 
FIGURE 9.1  Variation of tangential stress along with radial distance in composite 
hyperbolically varying discs with/without thermal gradient. 
FIGURE 9.2  Variation of radial stress along with radial distance in composite 
hyperbolically varying discs with/without thermal gradient. 

 
132 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 9.3  Variation of tangential strain rate along with radial distance in composite 
hyperbolically varying discs with/without thermal gradient. 
FIGURE 9.4  Variation of radial strain rate along with radial distance in composite discs 
with/without thermal gradient. 

 
 
 
 
 
KEYWORDS 
•  
anisotropy 
•  
creep strains 
•  
reinforcement profile 
•  
rotating disc 
•  
silicon carbide particles 
•  
thermal gradients 
133 
Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite Disc 
operating temperature near the inner radius of the disc with thermal gradi­
ents is able to reduce the creep rate overcoming the effect of higher stress. 
In Figure 9.4, the effect of imposing thermal gradients on the radial strain 
rate in the isotropic discs is similar to that observed for the tangential 
strain rate. The magnitude of the radial strain rate firstly increases rapidly 
with radial distance and then starts decreasing. 
9.7 CONCLUSION 
From the above discussion, it can be concluded that: 
1.  The thermal gradients significantly affect the strain rate distribu­
tion in an isotropic particle reinforced disc having a hyperbolic 
thickness, but its effect on the distribution of stresses is relatively 
small. 
2.  The thermal gradient plays a significant role in developing the 
creep strains, it may be taken care of while design a rotating disc. 
REFERENCES 
1. Chamoli, N., Rattan, M., & Singh, S. B., (2010). Effect of anisotropy on the creep 
of a rotating disc of Al-SiCp composite. International Journal of Contemporary 
Mathematical Sciences, 5(11), 509–516. 
2.  Thakur, P., Singh, S. B., Singh, J., & Kumar, S., (2016a). Steady Thermal stresses in 
solid disk under heat generation subjected to variable density. Kragujevac Journal of 
Science, 38, 5–14. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
3. Gupta, N., Singh, S. B., Thakur, P., (2016). Determine variation of Poisson ratios and 
thermal creep stresses and strain rates in an isotropic disc. Kragujevac Journal of 
Science, 38, 15–28. 
4.  Kaur, J., Thakur, P., & Singh, S. B., (2016). Steady thermal stresses in a thin rotating 
disc of finitesimal deformation with edge loading. Journal of Solid Mechanics, 8(1), 
204–211. 
5. Kashkoli, M. D., Tahan, K. N., & Nejad, M. Z., (2017). Time-dependent thermo 
mechanical creep behavior of FGM thick hollow cylindrical shells under non-uniform 
internal pressure. International Journal of Applied Mechanics, 9(6), 1–26, Article 
number: 1750086. 
6. Sherby, O. D., Klundt, R. H., & Miller, A. K., (1977). Flow stress, sub grain size and 
subgrain stability at elevated temperature. Metallurgical Transactions, 8A, 843–850. 
7. Pandey, A. B., Mishra, R. S., & Mahajan, Y. R., (1992). Steady state creep behavior 
of silicon carbide particulate reinforced aluminum composites. Acta Metallurgica. 
Materialia., 40(8), 2045–2052. 
8. Arya, V. K., & Bhatnagar, N. S., (1979). Creep analysis of rotating orthotropic disc. 
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 55, 323–330. 
9. Bhatnagar, N. S., Kulkarni, P. S., & Arya, V. K., (1986). Steady state creep of 
orthotropic rotating discs of variable thickness. Nuclear Engineering and Design, 
91(2), 121–141. 
10. Deepak, D., Gupta, V. K., & Dham, A. K., (2013). Investigating the effect of 
thickness profile of a rotating functionally graded disc on its creep behavior. Journal 
of Thermoplastic Composite Materials, 26(4), 461–475. 
11.  Durodola, J. F., & Attia, O., (2000). Deformation and stresses in functionally graded 
rotating discs. Composites Science and Technology, 60(7), 987–995. 
12. Gupta, V. K., Singh, S. B., Chandrawat, H. N., & Ray, S., (2004). Steady state creep 
and material parameters in a rotating disc of Al-SiCp composite. European Journal 
of Mechanics A/Solids, 23(3), 335–344. 
13. Gupta, V. K., Singh, S. B., Chandrawat, H. N., & Ray, S., (2005). Modeling of creep 
behavior of a rotating disc in presence of both composition and thermal gradients. 
Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology, 127(1), 97–105. 
14. Mishra, R. S., & Pandey, A. B., (1990). Some observations on the high-temperature 
creep behavior of 6061 Al-SiC composites. Metallurgical Transactions, 21A(7), 
2089–2091. 
15. Rattan, M., Bose, T., & Chamoli, N., (2016). Effect of linear thermal gradient on 
steady-state creep behavior of isotropic rotating disc. International Journal of 
Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering, 11(5), 1067–1073. 
16.  Wahl, A. M., Sankey, G. O., Manjoine, M. J., & Shoemaker, E., (1954). Creep tests of 
rotating risks at elevated temperature and comparison with theory. Journal of Applied 
Mechanics, 76, 225–235. 
17.  Singh, S. B., & Rattan, M. (2010). Creep Analysis of an Isotropic Rotating Al—SiCp 
Composite Disc taking into Account the Phase-specific Thermal Residual Stress. 
Journal of Thermoplastic Composite Materials, 23(3), 299–312. 
18.  Çallioğlu, H., Bektaş, N. B., & Sayer, M. (2011). Stress analysis of functionally 
graded rotating discs: analytical and numerical solutions. ActaMech Sin, 27, 950–955. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
135 
Investigation of Creep Performance of an Isotropic Composite Disc 
19. Thakur, P. (2013). Thermo Creep Transition Stresses in a Thick-Walled Cylinder 
subjected to Internal Pressure, Structure Integrity and Life, Serbia, 12(3), 165–173. 
20. Thakur, P. (2015). Analysis of Thermal Creep Stresses in Transversely Thick-Walled 
Cylinder subjected to Pressure, Structure Integrity and Life, Serbia, 15(1), 19–26. 
21. Thakur, P., & Kumar, S. (2016). Stress Evaluation in a Transversely Isotropic Circular 
Disk with an Inclusion, Structural Integrity and Life, 16(3), 155–160. 
22. Tania Bose, Minto Rattan, & Neeraj Chamoli (2017). Steady State Creep of Isotropic 
Rotating Composite Disc Under Thermal Gradation, International Journal of Applied 
Mechanics, 9(6), 1750077. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10  
Application of a Fractional-Order PID 
Controller to an Underactuated System 
TUNG-YUNG HUANG and SHIH-YING HUNG 
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
Southern Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Tainan,  
Taiwan, E-mail: huangt@stust.edu.tw (T. Y. Huang)  
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
The governing equations of dynamic systems or processes can be generalized 
by arbitrary or fractional-order differential equations including integer-order 
ones, therefore it would be suitable to apply fractional calculus to controller 
design. The concept of fractional calculus is first mentioned in a letter 
Leibniz wrote to de L’Hopital in 1695. And its applications may be dated 
back to the early 19th century, Abel uses fractional calculus to formulate 
the “tautochrone” problem and find its solution [1]. Later on, researchers 
such as Liouville and Heaviside also use fractional calculus to derive math­
ematical models for systems including potential theory, heat equation, and 
notch design of a dam, and solve those problems therewith. Then the related 
research seemed to have stalled inexplicably until the late 20th century. 
Researches on miscellaneous fractional-order systems, including rheology, 
viscoelasticity, diffusion, electromagnetic theory, electrochemistry of 
corrosion, and statistics have been made during the past several decades. 
Inevitably, researchers would apply the technique to control systems. 
The well-known PID controller is typical of controllers used in the 
industry. It uses the linear combination of the input error value, and it’s 
integral and derivative as the output. One advantage of PID control is 
that no complex algorithm or calculation is involved. In addition, there 
are empirical parameters tuning methods designed for it, such as the 

 
 
138 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
Ziegler-Nichols method [2] which requires only the system’s time response 
without knowing its parametric model. The simplicity and effectiveness of 
these tuning methods make the PID controller even more appealing. It is 
desired to introduce the fractional calculus technique to such a controller 
and find a suitable tuning rule for the adapted controller, namely the frac­
tion order PID controller. 
Most researchers propose to optimize fractional-order PID controllers’ 
parameters by using gain crossover frequency and phase margin [3]. Yet, 
this method requires fairly good initial guess so as to have the parameters 
converge to optimum. Valério and Sá da Costa [4] propose a scheme 
for tuning fractional-orders PID controllers’ parameters adhering to the 
concept of the Ziegler-Nichols method. However, it’s useful only when 
step response with time delay in sigmoidal shape, not suitable for system 
response without time delay. 
This research studied the feasibility of applying the fractional-order 
PID controller (a.k.a. PIλDμ controller, λ, μ > 0) to a DC motor-driven two-
link rotary pendulum system, an underactuated system. Some researchers 
also apply the fractional-order PID controller to underactuated systems 
such as an overhead 2D crane and an inverted pendulum on a cart [5, 6] 
without any specific approach. In view of the simplicity and effectiveness 
of the Ziegler-Nichols method, a variant of the Ziegler-Nichols method 
is proposed to determine the parameters of the fractional-order PID 
controller in this research. Different order PIλDμ controllers are tried for 
comparison in order to find a PIλDμ controller of appropriate order for the 
specified system. 
This chapter consists of the following sections: Section 10.1 is the 
introduction, Section 10.2 briefly introduces the fractional calculus, 
fractional-order PID controllers, and the proposed tuning method, Section 
10.3 presents the modeling of a DC motor-driven two-link rotary pendulum 
system, Section 10.4 estimates the controller parameters by using local 
linearization and the Ruth-Hurwitz stability criterion, Section 10.5 gives 
the simulation results, and Section 10.6 is the conclusion. 
10.2 FRACTIONAL-ORDER PID CONTROLLERS 
10.2.1 FRACTIONAL CALCULUS 
Fractional calculus operator is defined as follows [7]: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
139 
 d a
 
Re( )
a >  0
dta
 
Da   
a
t  1 
Re( )
a =  0  
(10.1)
 
I
t(
)
-  
 
a
 
 
a  dr 
Re( )
a < 0
  
where a and t are the lower limit and upper limit of the integral, respec
tively, and α is the fractional order, which will be taken as a real number 
afterwards. If α 
Dα
 > 0, a
t  is a fractional-order differential, and if α < 
0, Dα
a
t  is a fractional-order integral. Note that when the infinitesimal 
increment h in time equals t–a, both the left and right subscripts of the D  
operator can be omitted, and when α is an integer, the operator functions 
as the commonly seen integer D operator, that is, Dk = dk/dtk (k∈N) as 
a k-th order differentiator, and  D-1 = fdr  for the first order integral and 
­
D-k = ff...fdr... r r 
times k E N
d d  (k 
) for the k-th order integral. 
One most used fractional-order differential definition is the Grünwald-
Letnikov definition [7], which is expressed as follows: 
n 
 
 
D f t
 
  
lim  
 h 
 
 
r    f t  rh  
 
(10.2)
a
t 
 
1  
 
 
h 0 
nh t a  
   
r 0 
 r  
 
a )
a a  )... a r 1)
[
(
-1 
(
-
+
 
(10.3)
where 
 
 = 
r
r!
 
 
with 
1 
Meanwhile a famous fractional-order integral definition is the 
Riemann-Liouville definition [7], which is expressed as follows:
 
1 
  1 
a Dt 
   
  a
t  
 
t   
f  d 
(10.4)
f t 
  
   
0  

 
 
 
 
 
 
140 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
where 
 
 
 x  
x 1  y
y
 
 y
e
d
0 
  
(10.5) 
is the well-known Euler’s gamma function. 
As engineering problems described by ordinary differential equations 
in integer order can be solved using the Laplace transform, so are those 
systems in fractional-order differo-integral equations. 
According to the Riemann-Liouville definition, the Laplace transform 
for fractional-order differo-integrals is: 
n -1 
L {
a
a
0 Dt f ( )t }= s F( )s -Ls j [0 Da - j -1 
t
f ( )
0 ]  
(10.6)
 
j =0 
when (n–1)  ≤ α  <  n If 
 
0D
α–j–1 
t 
f (0) = 0, j= 0, 1, 2, ..., n–1, then  
L {0 Da 
t f ( )t }= sa F( )s 
Now the order of the Laplace operator s is a fraction in fractional-order 
differo-integral. 
10.2.2 PID CONTROLLERS AND ZIEGLER-NICHOLS METHOD 
10.2.2.1 PID CONTROLLERS 
PID controllers have been popularly used after its debut. Its control effort 
u(t) in time domain can be expressed as:
de  t 
u  t  K e  t  K
e  t dt  K
P
I 
D 
(10.7)
 
dt 
where Kp, KI and KD are the proportional gain, the integral gain, and the 
derivative gain, respectively. And the corresponding transfer function 
obtained by taking the Laplace transform of Eq. (10.7) is: 
U - )s 
KI 
C - )= 
= KP +
+ KDs 
(10.8)
G
s 
- )  
s
E s 
Alternatively, the parameter set is defined somehow in a different way as 
follows: 

 
 
  
 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
141 
( )
 
1
d
e( )
 
e( )t  
u t = KP [
+
[
t + fe( )t dt T
)
 
T
D 
)  
(10.9)
 
 
I 
dt  
And the corresponding transfer function of Eq. (10.9) is:
  
GC   
U s 
 
1  
 
s   
  K P   
 
 1 
T s  
  
 
 
  
(10.10)  
E s 
TI  
D 
 
 
 
s
   
By comparison of these two expressions, it is easy to conclude that K1  
= K p /T1 , and KD = KPTD. Furthermore, it’s noteworthy that the 3 terms 
inside the parenthesis of Eq. (10.9) have the same dimension of e(t), where 
the unit of T1 and TD  (both of physical quantity “time”) is “second” used to 
cancel the unit of “dt” in the integral and derivative, respectively. 
10.2.2.2 ZIEGLER-NICHOLS METHOD 
The Ziegler-Nichols method [2] is a heuristic method for tuning PID 
controllers. It is meant to make the closed-loop control system’s response 
acceptable though not optimal. The procedure of the Ziegler-Nichols 
method is first to set the integral gain and derivative gain to zero which 
results in a P controller. Then vary the proportional gain to yield a sustained 
periodic oscillation in the output (or close to it) by trial and error. Mark 
the critical gain as the ultimate gain Ku and the corresponding period as 
the ultimate period Tu. Then, according to the Ziegler-Nichols method, the 
empirical PID parameters are assigned to be K = 0.6K , T  = T /2 , and
p 
u 
I
u 
T = T / 8, which is equivalent to have the alternative parameter set: K = 
D
u 
p
0.6K , K  = 1.2K /T , and K  = 3K  T  /40. 
u 
I
u 
u 
D
u
u
10.2.3 FRACTIONAL-ORDER PID CONTROLLERS AND  
TUNING RULE 
10.2.3.1 FRACTIONAL-ORDER PID CONTROLLERS 
Oustalop [8] proposes to apply fractional-order controllers to dynamic 
systems, and names such robust controllers as “Commande Robuste 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
142 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
d’Ordre Non-Entier” (CRONE). He also introduces the fractional-order 
PID controller, or the PIλDμ controller (λ and μ are non-negative fractions). 
Similar to the PID controllers, the control effort of the fractional-order 
PID controller u(t) in the time domain can be expressed as: 
-Y 
f
u( )t = K e( )t + K 
D
e( )t + K 
D e( )t
P
I ,Y 
D,f 
(10.11) 
Y 
d fe( )t
= KP e( )t + KI ,Y 
( )(
)
 
dt 
D,f
f
e t 
+ K
f 
dt 
where Kp , KI, λ, and KD,μ are the proportional gain, the fractional-order 
integral gain, and the fractional-order derivative gain, respectively. 
And the corresponding transfer function takes the following form:
KI , 
 
G    
P  
 K 
 
C s
K 
D, s 
(10.12)
 s 
when λ = μ = 1 in Eq. (10.12), GC(s) is an integer PID controller; λ = 1, 
μ = 0, GC(s) an integer PD controller; λ = 0, μ = 1, GC(s) an integer PI 
controller; and λ = μ = 0, GC(s) an integer P controller. Without limiting λ 
and μ to be 0 or 1, the fractional-order differo-integral offers more flex­
ibility than the integer-order differo-integral in the controller design. 
10.2.3.2 TUNING RULE: GENERALIZED ZIEGLER-NICHOLS METHOD 
It is desired to find a general tuning rule, just like the Ziegler-Nichols 
method, of setting empirical values for fractional-order PID controllers’ 
parameters. As mentioned in Section 10.2.2.1, the three terms inside the 
parenthesis of Eq. (10.9) are of the same dimension, i.e., the unit of TI 
and TD cancels the unit of “dt” in the integral and derivative, respectively. 
Keeping this in mind, now the orders of the fractional integral and deriva­
tive are λ and μ in Eq. (10.11), respectively. In order to cancel the unit 
of “(dt) λ” in the integral and “(dt) μ “ in the derivative, (TI) and (TD) μ can 
be employed in the control law for the fractional integral and derivative, 
respectively. Therefore, the control law for the fractional PID controller 
can be expressed as: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
143 
( )
u( )t = KP e( )t + K I ,A f e( )t (
)
d  e t 
dt A + KD, 
dt  
 
 
1 
d  e( )t 
= K
A
P e
e( )t (
)
dt  + T  

 ( )t + 

 
TI A f
D dt  
 
  
 
 
(10.13) 
 
 


 
 T
 
 d  e t
 

 2 
 
 KP e t   
 

  e t 

dt   
u 
 
 

 




 T
 
 
u 
8  
dt 
 
 
  

K 
 
P 
 2 
 
 T 
which yields K

u 
I ,  
  KP 

 and 



K
 K T
 K 

TI 
 Tu 
D,
P
D 
P 
  
 8  
,
 . 
Note that λ = μ =  1 is a special case of the fractional-order PID controller, 
and indeed it becomes the commonly seen PID controller with parameters 
set by the Ziegler-Nichols method. Hence Eq. (10.13) generalizes the 
integer-order PID controller where λ = μ = 1. 
10.2.4 IMPLEMENTATION OF FRACTIONAL-ORDER PID 
CONTROLLERS 
10.2.4.1 APPROXIMATION OF FRACTIONAL-ORDER LAPLACE 
OPERATOR 
r
The fractional-order differentiator s 
(r is a positive fraction) in 
continuous-time domain can be expressed in terms of z–1 in discrete-time 
domain by a generating function s = w(z –1) just like the integer-order 
differentiator s (z is an operator in Z transform); similarly it applies to 
the fractional-order integrator s –r (r is a positive fraction). Adopting 
the Tustin generating function, the fractional differo-integral would be 
discretized as [9]:
 r 
 r 
 1  r 
 2  1 z 1   
s
 w 
 
z  
  
  
 1    
(10.14)
 
 
T 1 z
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
r 
where    
[1  
1 
-
+ 
1    
J can be expanded in Taylor series as follows: 
-
z
-
z 
[1 - z-1
1 
J
r 
1 (
)
-1 + ( r2 z-2 -  [ 2 r + 4 r3 J z-3
 
-   = - 2r z 
2 )
  1 + z  
 3
3 
 
 
z
r
(10.15)
 
 4
2
2
4  
 4 
 2 
4
3
4
5  
 5
  
r  
r  z 
  
r  
r  
r  z   
 
 3
3 

 5
3 
15 

 
Therefore, 
r
 ( 2 )
r 
 (1- (
)
-1 + (2r2 z-2 -  ( 2 r + 4 r3 ) z-3
s = 
 
2r z 
)
 
 
 T   
 3
3 
  
( 4
2
2
4 )
-4 
( 2 
4
3
4
5 )
-5 
) 
+  
r + r  z 
-  
r + r + 
r  z 
+   
(10.16)
 3
3 
 
 5
3 
15 
 
 
)
r
z-1 
 ( 2 
An (
)
, r
 
 
1
-
 T  An (z ,-r) 
and
An z 1, r 
 r
2 
    
    
 r  
s 
(10.17) 
 1
T  
An 
,  
(z–1
(z–1
where An 
, r), and likewise An 
, –r), can be found by the following 
iterations: 
(z–1
A0
, r) 
(10.18) 
(z–1
(z–1
A 
, r) = A 
, r)–c z–n An–1 (z,r)
n 
n–1
n 
with the coefficient: 
144 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 

 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
145 
 {r n, 
n is  odd
cn =  
 {0, 
n is  even
 
  
Without doubt the accuracy of the approximation is determined by the 
selection of n. 
10.2.4.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF FRACTIONAL-ORDER PID 
CONTROLLERS 
By substituting the above discrete-time approximation of the fractional-
order Laplace operator sr and s–r into Eq. (10.11), the fractional-order  
PID controller in Eq. (10.10) can be approximated in discrete-time  
domain as: 
  An 
 
 
 2 
z 1 
 
, 

 2 
 
z 1
 
A
 , 
u k  KP e k  KI , 
 
 
 e 
k 
n 
1 
 K
 T 
A z ,
D, 
 
 T
1 
 
 
n  
  An z , e 
k 
  
 
 
(10.19) 
where the index k stands for the k-th sampling time, e.g., e(k)= e(t = kT s) 
with sampling time Ts . 
10.3 AN UNDERACTUATED SYSTEM: A ROTARY PENDULUM 
SYSTEM 
A rotary pendulum system (Figure 10.1) which uses a permanent magnet 
DC motor to drive a two-link rotary pendulum is the underactuated system 
employed to demonstrate the performance of the fractional-order PID 
controller in this research. The rotary pendulum system is an underactuated 
system because there is only one actuator to drive link 1 but no actuator 
to drive link 2. Both links have one rotational degree of freedom (d.o.f.) 
around different axes. The motion of link 2 is coupled with link 1 so it has 
to be considered when controlling link 1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 10.1  The two-link rotary pendulum. 
10.3.1 DC MOTOR MODEL 
A DC motor model is used to drive the two-link rotary pendulum. The 
armature voltage is ea, and the current through the armature is i. The 
armature current generates a motor torque τM= K T i, where KT is the torque 
constant of the DC motor. Assume that the angular displacement of the 
motor shaft is θ and the load is τL, then the mechanical dynamics of the 
DC motor is: 
d 2 
d
J 
 B 
  K i 
(10.20)
M 
M
L
T
dt2 
dt 

 
 
 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
147 
where JM and BM are the rotational inertia and the rotational damping coef
ficient of the motor, respectively. 
As the motor shaft rotates at a speed ω = dθ/dt, the so-called back 
e.m.f. is induced by the relationship eb.e.m.f. = KEω where KE is the back
e.m.f. constant of the DC motor and KE = KT in the SI unit system. Then 
applying the Kirchhoff’s voltage law to the armature gives the electrical 
dynamics of the DC motor below: 
di
La 
+ Rai + K O = e  
 
E
 
(10.21)
dt
a
­
where La and Ra are the inductance and resistance of the armature, 
respectively. 
10.3.2 TWO-LINK ROTARY PENDULUM MODEL 
The mechanical part of the rotary pendulum, driven by the torque τL, 
consists of two rotational links of 1 d.o.f. each: link 1 and link 2 as shown 
in Figure 10.1. Link 1 is connected to the motor shaft and rotates around 
the center O, and link 2 is connected to the other end of link 1 and rotates 
around point P in a plane normal to link 1. The masses of link 1 and 2 are 
m1 and m2, respectively. The lengths of link 1 and 2 are l1 and l2, respec­
tively. And the moment of inertia of link 1 around O is J1. Assume that θ1 
and θ2 are the angular displacements of link 1 and 2, respectively. Then 
the angular velocities of link 1 and 2 are θ 
1 andθ 
2  respectively. Since the 
center O is on the motor shaft, it is straightforward θ1 = θ. 
The dynamic model of the two-link rotary pendulum can be derived 
using the Euler-Lagrange equation [10]: 
d    L   
 L 
 
  
 
 
 
 Q
 
(10.22)
dt  q 
 q
nc,i 
 
 
i 
i 
 
where the Lagrangian L is the difference of the kinetic energy T and  
potential energy V of the system (L = T – V), qi is the i-th generalized  
coordinate, and Qnc,i is the i-th non-conservative generalized force.  
The kinetic energy is: 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
1 
 2
1 
2  2
1 
2
2 
 2
1 
2  2
1 
 
T  
J 1  m2l1 1  m2l2 sin 2
 m2l2 2  m2l1l2 cos212
2
1
2
6 
1
6 
2 
(10.23) 
where only the first term accounts for link 1, and the other 4 terms are from 
link 2. Meanwhile, the potential energy only comes from link 2, which is: 
V = –m2 
g cosθ2 
(10.24)
l2 
Therefore the Lagrangian is: 
1 
 2
1 
2  2
1 
2
2 
 2
1 
2  2
1 
 
L  
J11  m2l1 1  m2l2 sin 21  m2l2 2  m2l1l2 cos212  m2l2 g cos2
2
2
6 
6
2 
(10.25) 
where θ1 and θ2 are chosen as the 2 generalized coordinates, then the 
corresponding Euler-Lagrange equations are: 
d [ oL )
oL
 
  -
-r 
(10.26)
 
L
-
dt oe 
oe
 
1  
1 
and 
d  oL  
oL
[
)) -
_ 0 
(10.27)
dt  [ oee
2  
oe2 
The dynamic equation of the mechanical subsystem then can be expressed 
as follows: 
2
2
1 
2
J   J   m l sin cos    m l l sin  

11 1 
12
2 
2 2 
2 
2 1 2 
2 1 2 
2
2 
L
3
2 
(10.28) 
 
 
1
2 
 2
J121  J 222  m2l2 sin2 cos21  m2l2 g sin2  0
(10.29)
3 
148 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where 
2
1
2
2 
1 
1
2
J  J  J  m l  m l sin  
J  m l l cos 
J 
 m l
11 
1 
m 
2 1 
2 2 
2
12 
2 1 2
2 
22 
2 2
3 
, 
2 
, and 
3
. 
10.3.3 COMPLETE SYSTEM MODEL 
The complete system consists of a DC motor represented by Eq. (10.20) 
and (10.21), and a two-link rotary pendulum represented by Eq. (10.28) 
and (10.29). Since Eq. (10.28) gives the term τL, it can be substituted into 
Eq. (10.20), and using the fact that θ1 = θ, then the whole system therewith 
can be represented by the dynamic model below. 
di 
d 1
La 
 Rai  KE 
 ea
dt 
dt 
(10.30)
d 2 1 
d 2 2
J M  J11  
 J12
dt2 
dt2 
2 
 d   d  1 
 d 
2 
 d 
2 
1
2 
2
1
 m l sin cos 

 


 
 m l l sin  
  B  
  K i
2 2 
2
2 
2 1 2
2 
M
T
3 
dt 
dt 
2 
dt 
dt 
(10.31) 
2
2
d  
d  
1
2 
 d 
2 
2
1 
J12 
2
1  J 22 
2  m2l2 sin2 cos2 
 m2l2 g sin2  0  
dt 
dt 
3 
dt  
(10.32) 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
149 
10.4 ESTIMATION OF CONTROLLER PARAMETERS 
The aforementioned fractional-order Laplace operator approximation is 
used to design the fractional-order PID controller for the rotary pendulum 
system, and the proposed fractional-order Ziegler-Nichols method is 
employed to tune parameters. Then the results will be compared with the 
result of using the traditional Ziegler-Nichols method tuned integer-order 
PID controller. One important step of the Ziegler-Nichols method is to find 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
150 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
the ultimate gain Ku and the corresponding period Tu for consistent oscil­
lation. However, the trial-and-error approach would be time-consuming; it 
is desired to have the theoretical groundwork to make a reasonable estima­
tion of K to save trouble. 
u
The Ruth-Hurwitz stability criterion [11] can be used to find the ultimate 
gain Ku in a linear system. Since the rotary pendulum system is nonlinear, it 
helps if the local linearization method is used to linearize the system around 
an operating point before using the Ruth-Hurwitz stability criterion to find 
the ultimate gain Ku. The approach will be detailed in this section. 
10.4.1 LOCAL LINEARIZATION OF THE TWO-LINK ROTARY 
PENDULUM SYSTEM 
The equilibrium point of the rotary pendulum, i.e., θ2 = 0, is chosen to be the 
operating point for local linearization. First assume that θ2 ≈0. Next linearize 
the dynamic Eqs. (10.31)–(10.32) by using the approximation sin θ2 ≈ θ2, cos 
θ2 ≈1, θ2 ≈0, and at equilibrium, then setting the higher order terms to zeros. 
Hence, the linearized model of the rotary pendulum can be expressed as: 
di 
d1
L 
 R i  K 
 e
a
a
E 
a
dt 
dt 
(10.33) 
d 21 
d 22 
d1
ˆ
ˆ
J 
 J 
 B 
 K i
11
2 
12
2 
M
T
dt
dt 
dt 
(10.34) 
d 2 
d 2
Jˆ
12 
2
1  Jˆ
22 
2
2  m2l2 g2  0 
dt 
dt 
(10.35) 
1 
1
2 
ˆ
2 Jˆ12 = m2l1l2 
Jˆ22 = m2l2
where J11 = J M + J1 + m2l1
2 
3
, 
, and 
.. 
Taking the Laplace transform of Eqs. (10.33)–(10.35) yields the 
following system of equations: 
LasI  RaI  KEs 1  Ea 
(10.36) 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
ˆ
2 
ˆ
2
J11s  1  J12s  2  BM s 1  KT I 
(10.37) 
Jˆ s2  Jˆ s2  m l g  0
12
1
22 
2 
2 2
2 
(10.38) 
Since Eq. (10.38) contains only two unknowns Θ1 and Θ2, Θ2 can be 
expressed in terms of Θ1 as: 
ˆ
2
J s
 2 -  ˆ 
2
12 
 1
J 22s  m2l2 g 
(10.39) 
By substituting the result into Eq. (10.37), Θ1 can be expressed in terms 
of I as:
2
K Jˆ s  m l g
T 
22 
2 2
  
I
1
ˆ
2 
ˆ
2 
ˆ 2
4
J s  B s J s  m l g  J s
M 
22 
2 2
12
11 
(10.40) 
and the transfer function of link 1’s angular displacement to armature 
current is:
8 
K Jˆ s2  m l g
1 
T
22 
2 2
 ˆ
2 
ˆ
2 
ˆ 2
4
I 
J s  B s J
s  m l g  J s
11 
M 
22 
2 2
12 
(10.41) 
Alternatively, Eq. (10.40) can be rewritten in a different way as:
ˆ
2 
ˆ
2 
ˆ 2
4 
I = J11s  BM s  J 22s  m2l2 g  J12s  
2
1
ˆ
KT J 22s  m2l2 g 
(10.42) 
Then by substituting Eq. (10.42) into Eq. (10.36), Θ1 can be expressed in 
terms of E as: 
a
2
K Jˆ s  m l g
T 
22 
2 2
1  
Ea
ˆ
2
ˆ
2 
ˆ 2
4 
ˆ
2
Las  Ra J11s  BM sJ 22 s  m2l2 g J12 s  KT KEsJ 22 s  m2l2 g 
(10.43) 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
151 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
152 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
And the transfer function of link 1’s angular displacement to armature 
voltage can be expressed as: 
  
K (Jˆ s2  m l g)
1 
T 
22 
2 2 
5
4 
3
2
Ea 
a0s  a1s  a2s  a3s  a4s 
(10.44) 
where 
2
a = L (Jˆ Jˆ - Jˆ
)
0 
a 
11
22 
12 
a1 = Ra (Jˆ11Jˆ22 - Jˆ12
2) + LaBM Jˆ22 
a = L Jˆ m l g + R B Jˆ + K K Jˆ 
2 
a 11 
2 2 
a
M 
22 
T
E 
22 
a = L B m l g + R Jˆ m l g
3 
a
M 
2 2 
a 11 
2 2 
a = R B m l g + K K m l g
4 
a
M 
2 2 
T
E 
2 2 
. 
10.4.2 TRANSFER FUNCTION OF THE CLOSED-LOOP 
CONTROLLED ROTARY PENDULUM SYSTEM 
Figure 10.2 shows the block diagram of a typical closed-loop control 
system. The plant is the DC motor-driven rotary pendulum system, the 
reference input r is the desired link 1’s angular displacement input θ1d, the 
system output y is the actual link 1’s angular displacement output θ1a, and 
the control effort u is the armature voltage ea in this research. When using 
a P controller with gain Kp to control the rotary pendulum system, the 
closed-loop transfer function of the actual angular displacement output θ1a 
to the desired angular displacement input θ1d becomes: 
KP1  
1a
E 
KP (k1s2  k2)  
K 
5
4
3 
2 

 
P1 
 a0s  a s  a2s  (a3  k1KP )s  a4s  k2 KP
1d 
1
1 
E 
(10.45) 
where k  = K J  and k  = K m l g. And its characteristic equation is: 
1
T 
22
2
T 
2 2 
a s5 + a s4 + a s3 + (a s3 + k K )s2 + a s + k K = 0 
(10.46)
0
1
2
2
1
p
4
2
p

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 10.1
 Ruth Table with KP as a Variable 
s5 
1.5691 × 10–9 
4.6355 × 10–7 
1.959 × 10–5 
s4 
8.5655 × 10–7 
(1.949 × 10–4 + 3.4278 × 10–6 K p ) 
6.3051 × 10–4 KP 
s3 
A1 
A2 
– 
s2 
B1 
6.3051 × 10–4 KP 
– 
s1 
C1 
– 
– 
s0 
6.3051 × 10–4 KP 
– 
– 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
153 
FIGURE 10.2  Block diagram of a closed-loop control system. 
10.4.3 ESTIMATION OF THE ULTIMATE GAIN USING THE RUTH 
TABLE 
The following DC motor parameters and two-link rotary pendulum 
parameters are used: La = 4.6909 × 10–3 , Ra = 2.5604 Ω, KT = 1.8259 × 
10–2 N·m/A, KE = 1.8259 ×10–2 V/(rad/s), JM = 7.2019 × 10–5 kg·m2, BM = 
9.1358 × 10–5 N·m(rad/s), m1 0.056 kg, l1 = 0.16 m, J1 0.001569 kg·m2, m2 
= 0.022kg, and l2 = 0.16m. The coefficients of the characteristic equation 
calculated are a0 ≈ 1.5691 × 10–9, a1 ≈ 8.5655 × 10–7, a2 ≈ 4.6355 × 10–7, 
a3 ≈ 1.949 × 10–4, a4 ≈ 1.959 × 10–5, k1 ≈ 3.4278 × 10–6, and k2 ≈ 6.3051 × 
10–4. And the Ruth table [11] is shown in Table 10.1. 
 5.3787 10 15 KP  9.1231014
where , A1  
8.565510 7
,
 2.2512 10 10 K
9
P  3.818 10
A 2 
3.4278 10 6 K
4
 
P 1.949 10 
,  

 
 
TABLE 10.2
 Ruth Table with KP ≈ 16.9592 
s5 
1.5691 × 10–9 
4.6355 ×10–7 
1.959 × 10–5 
s4 
8.5655 × 10–7 
2.5303 × 10–4 
0.0107 
s3 
1.2805 × 10–11 
6.3217 × 10–10 
– 
s2 
2.1075 × 10–4 
0.0107 
– 
s1
0 
–
– 
s0 
0.0107 
– 
– 
 
 
 
154 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
- 6.32 X10 -26 K 3 
P - 6.1148 X10 -24 K 2 
P + 8.275X10 -23 K P + 6.642 X10-22
B1 -
-1.8437 X10 -20 K 2 
 
1.7781
17
P - 7.3558 X10 -19 K
-
P +
X10 
,
C
C
n
1 - Cd 
C = (-2.1433X10 -43 K 5 
P - 4.9155X10 -42 
n 
K 4 
39 
P +1.0447 X10 - K 3
P 
-1.9461X10 -38 K 2 
P - 5.67889 X10 -38 KP
2.1721X10 -36
 + 
)  
C = (-1.8556 X10 -37 K 4 - 2.8504 X10 -35 K 3 
d
- 7.7785X10 -34 K 2
 
P
P
P 
+1.5764 X10 -32 KP +1.1088 X10 -31) 
 , 
There are three cases in determining the ultimate gain Ku: (1) A1 = 0, (2) B1 
= 0, and (3) C1 = 0. However, only the third case gives a reasonable solution.  
For the third case, i.e., C1 = 0 or the first term in the s1 row is zero, KP  ≈ 16.9592  
is found which gives A1 > 0, B1  > 0, and is chosen as the ultimate gain K u .
(The corresponding Ruth table is shown in Table 10.2.) Though the ultimate  
gain Ku  ≈ 16.9592 is calculated using the linearized model, not the actual  
nonlinear model, it’s good to choose it as an initial guess to find the closest  
Ku and Tu, and therewith determine the corresponding controller parameters  
(which will be given in the next section) to complete the controller design. 
10.5 SIMULATION RESULTS 
This research will evaluate the fractional-order PID controller’s performance 
by simulation in this section. The point-to-point maneuver is the task. To 
maneuver a system to a target position, step input is often used in textbooks 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
155 
to evaluate the controller’s performance by the response. It’s also used tradi
tionally in the Ziegler-Nichols method in determining the PID parameters.  
Yet trajectory planning makes the transition smoother and is practically used  
in motion control. Trapezoidal curve (T curve) and sigmoid curve (S curve)  
are two popularly used speed profiles in trajectory planning. For simplicity  
and demonstration purpose, a symmetric T-curve speed profile is adopted  
as θ 
1d  to generate the desired link 1’s angular displacement trajectory θ1d  
(as shown in Figure 10.2). And the planned trajectory serves for finding the  
ultimate gain Ku and the ultimate period Tu using Ziegler-Nichols method,  
and evaluating the performance of the tuned PID controller and fractional-
order PID controllers of 3 different fractions in this section. 
­
10.5.1 TRAJECTORY PLANNING 
A symmetric T-curve speed profile is adopted as the rotational speed and 
used for generating the desired angular displacement trajectory. Basically, it 
consists of one constant acceleration phase, one constant speed phase, and 
one constant deceleration phase. Assume the angular acceleration is α m at the 
first phase (0 ≤ t < t1), the angular speed ω  = α 
at the second phase (t1 ≤ 
m
m t1
t < t2), and the angular deceleration –α m at the third phase (t2 ≤ t < t3). After 
the third phase (t ≥ t3), the desired position stays at the target position (total 
angular displacement). The desired angular acceleration ad ( )t =i 
d ( )t , 
angular speed Wd ( )t =e 
d ( )t , and angular displacement θd(t) of a general 
symmetric T-curve angular speed (Figure 10.3) can be described as follows: 
FIGURE 10.3  Trapezoidal curve angular speed profile. 

 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 


    
 
 
1. 
0 ≤ t < t1 

m
 d
m 
t
 
1 
   t
 d
m 
 
1
2
d 
mt 
2
 
(10.47) 
2. 
t1 ≤ t < t2 
  0
 
d  
   d  m 
 
 d  1 mt1 m t  t1 
  
2 
(10.48) 
3. 
t2 ≤ t < t1 
ad = -am
  
    Od = Om -am (t - t2 )  
  
1 
1
2
 ( = O t +O (t - t )+O (t - t )-
a (t - t )
d
m 1 
m 
2
1 
m 
2 
m 
2
 
2
2
 
(10.49) 
4. 
t ≥ t3 
 ad = 0
jO = 0
 
d 
j
 (d = Omt2 
(10.50) 
 
156 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
10.5.2 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
This section presents simulation results of the DC motor-driven two-link 
rotary pendulum system. The parameters in Section 10.4.3 are used in this 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
157 
section. Initial values of θ

 
1 = 0, θ
  
   
2 = 0, 
1 
0, and
2
0  are chosen. The 
target link 1’s angular displacement is set to be θ  = π/2 = 90o
1d
. Hence 
the T-curve angular speed profile mentioned in the previous subsection is 
employed to generate link 1’s trajectory with parameters  
1, max   / 3 rad/s , 
t1 = 0.5 s, and t3 = 2 s. 
The first step of the Ziegler-Nichols method is to set KI = 0, and  
KD = 0, then find the ultimate gain Ku which makes the closed-loop system  
have consistent oscillation in the output. As suggested in Section 10.4.3,  
the theoretical value K u  ≈ 16.9592 calculated from the Ruth table built  
for the linearized model is used as an initial guess to find the ultimate  
gain of the actual nonlinear model. Within a few trials, it is found that  
the closed-loop system have consistent oscillation in the output when   
Kp  = 16.96 as shown in Figure 10.4, hence the ultimate gain Ku is chosen  
to be 16.96. Also, the ultimate period Tu is about 0.80736 s as seen in  
Figure 10.4. 
FIGURE 10.4  Link 1’s response under P control (Kp  = 16.96, KI = 0, KD  = 0). 
According to the Ziegler-Nichols method, choose the PID parameters to 
be Kp = 10.176, KI = 25.2081, and KD = 1.02696. The simulation results using the 
tuned PID parameters show that the maximum overshoot of link 1 is 5.135o, 
and the settling time for the settling window of ±5% (± 4.5o for 90o motion) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
occurs at ts = 2.163s (0.163 s after the 2-second T-curve motion) as shown in 
Figure 10.5. There is a trend of 1/4 decay oscillation after 2 s. The maximum 
swing angle of link 2 is θ2 ≈ –1.7o (Figure 10.6). And the time history of the 
control armature voltage is shown in Figure 10.7. The armature voltage also 
shows 1/4 decay oscillation after 2 s just like Figure 10.5. 
FIGURE 10.5  Link 1’s response under PID control (KP  = 10.176, KI  = 25.2081, KD  = 
1.02696). 
FIGURE 10.6  Link 2’s response under PID control (KP  = 10.176, KI  = 25.2081, KD  = 
1.02696). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
159 
FIGURE 10.7  Armature voltage under PID control (KP  = 10.176, KI  = 25.2081, KD  = 
1.02696). 
Next the fractional-order PID control will be employed so as to make 
comparison with the tuned (intger order) PID control. As proposed in 
/
/
Subsection 10.2.2.2, KP = 0.6Ku, K / = KP / T = KP (2 / Tu ) , and
I
I 
t
t
K 
= K T
 
= K (T / 8
D,t 
P
D 
P
u 
 are used for the fractional integral gain and 
the fractional derivative gain, respectively. Though the output θ1 and the 
internal state θ2 are coupled, there is a certain relationship between them. 
It would be straightforward to choose λ = μ then. Three sets of fractional-
order PID parameters are used for comparison: (1) λ = μ = 0.4, (2) λ = μ 
= 0.5, and (3) λ = μ = 0.6. Here are the results: 
1.  λ = μ = 0.4: The controller parameters are chosen to be KP = 10.176, 
≈ 14.62723, and KD, μ ≈ 4.0660. As shown in Figure 10.8, the 
KI, λ 
maximum overshoot of link 1 is about 0.71o and the actual angular 
displacement of link 1 stays within the settling window after the 
planned 2-sec. moving time. 
The maximum swing angle of link 2 is around –2.9o (Figure 
10.9). And the time history of the control armature voltage is 
shown in Figure 10.10. However, there is no sign of decay after 
2 s. After 2 s, Link 1 and link 2 are oscillating between ±1o and 
±1.3o, respectively, and the armature voltage is oscillating between 
±0.4o (V). 

 
 
 
 
160 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 10.8  Link 1’s response under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.4). 
FIGURE 10.9  Link 2’s response under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.4). 
2.  λ = μ = 0.5: The controller parameters are chosen to be KP = 10.176, 
K  ≈ 16.01616, and K
 ≈ 3.2327. As shown in Figure 10.11, the 
I, λ 
D, μ
maximum overshoot of link 1 is about 0.15o and the actual angular 
displacement of link 1 stays within the settling window after the 
planned 2-sec. moving time. 

 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
161 
FIGURE 10.10  Armature voltage under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.4). 
The maximum swing angle of link 2 is around –2.8o (Figure 
10.12). And the time history of the control armature voltage is 
shown in Figure 10.13. Again, there is no sign of decay after 2 s. 
After 2 s, Link 1 and link 2 are oscillating between ± 0.5o and ± 
0.8o, respectively, and the armature voltage is oscillating between 
± 0.15(V). 
FIGURE 10.11  Link 1’s response under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.5). 

 
 
 
 
162 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 10.12  Link 2’s response under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.5). 
FIGURE 10.13  Armature voltage under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.5). 
(3)  λ = μ = 0.6: The controller parameters are chosen to be KP = 
10.176, K  ≈ 17.53698, and K
 ≈ 2.57018. As shown in Figure 
I, λ 
D, μ
10.14, the maximum overshoot of link 1 is about 0.4o and the actual 
angular displacement of link 1 stays within the settling window 
after the planned 2-sec. moving time. 
The maximum swing angle of link 2 is around –2.8o(Figure 
10.15). And the time history of the control armature voltage is 

 
 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
163 
shown in Figure 10.16. However, there is no sign of decay after 
2 s. After 2 s, Link 1 and link 2 are oscillating between ± 1o and ± 
0.9o, respectively, and the armature voltage is oscillating between 
± 0.2 (V). 
FIGURE 10.14  Link 1’s response under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.6). 
FIGURE 10.15  Link 2’s response under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.6). 

 
 
 
164 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
Generally speaking, the performance of all three fractional-order PID 
controllers, designed using the proposed generalized Ziegler-Nichols 
method, is better than that of the integer-order PID controller, designed 
using the Ziegler-Nichols method in terms of tracking during 2-sec. 
motion, overshoot, and settling time. However, oscillation continues even 
after 10 sec. if any of these three fractional-order PID controllers is used, 
while oscillation decays to zero if the integer-order PID controller is used. 
This might suggest that the proposed generalized Ziegler-Nichols method 
should be further improved in order to have the system converges to zero. 
FIGURE 10.16  Armature voltage under PIλDμ control (λ = μ = 0.6). 
Now among these three fractional-order PID controllers, the one comes 
with λ = μ = 0.5 shows the best performance in every way which implies 
the system is more likely to have fractional order 0.5 than 0.4 or 0.6. 
10.6 CONCLUSIONS 
The performance of the tuned PID controller and three tuned PIλDμ control­
lers are compared when applied to control an underactuated system. The 
use of local linearization and Ruth-Hurwitz stability criterion gives a very 
close approximation of the ultimate gain for the actual nonlinear system. 
It seems that λ and μ should be equal based on the order of the coupled 

 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
KEYWORDS 
•  
Commande Robuste d’Ordre Non-Entier 
•  
fractional-order 
•  
parameter tuning 
•  
trajectory planning 
•  
underactuated system 
•  
Ziegler-Nichols method 
Application of a Fractional-Order PID Controller to an Underactuated System 
165 
dynamics of link 1 and link 2. A generalized Ziegler-Nichols method for 
the fractional-order PID controller is proposed to include the integer-order 
PID controller as a special case λ = μ = 1. It keeps the simplicity of the 
Ziegler-Nichols method. The simulation results show that the system is 
more likely to have fractional order 0.5 than 0.4 or 0.6 based on their 
performance. Meanwhile, these three tuned PIλDμ controllers work better 
in terms of tracking during 2-sec. motion, overshoot, and settling time, 
especially settling time, but not oscillation decay rate. Yet these results 
show the fractional-order controller is promising if the oscillation problem 
can be dissolved. Hence more vigorous researches should be conducted 
to improve the proposed generalized Ziegler-Nichols method so it can be 
used in versatile control applications. 
REFERENCES 
1. Miller, K. S., & Ross, B., (1993). An Introduction to the Fractional Calculus and 
Fractional Differential Equations. Wiley: New York. 
2.  Ziegler, J. G., & Nichols, N., (1942). Optimum settings for automatic controllers. 
Transactions of the ASME, 64, 759–768. 
3. Monje, C. A., Vinagre, B. M., Feliu, V., & Chen, Y., (2008). Tuning and auto-tuning of 
fractional-order controllers for industry applications. Control Engineering Practice, 
16(7), 798–812. 
4.  Valério, D., & Sá Da Costa, J., (2006). Tuning of fractional PID controllers with 
Ziegler-Nichols-type rules. Science Signal Processing, 86(10), 2771–2784. 
5. Singh, A. P., Srivastava, T., Agrawal, H., & Srivastava, P., (2017). Fractional-order 
controller design and analysis for crane system. Progress in Fractional Differentiation 
and Applications, 3(2), 155–162. doi: 10.18576/pfda/030206. 

 
166 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
6. Singh, A. P., Agarwal, H., & Srivastava, P., (2015). Fractional-order controller design 
for inverted pendulum on a cart system (POAC). WSEAS Transactions on Systems 
and Control, 10, 172–178. 
7. Fan, H., Sun, Y., & Zhang, X., (2007). Research on fractional-order controller in 
servo press control system. 2007 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics 
and Automation. Harbin, China. [Online] doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2007.4304026. https:// 
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4304026 (accessed on 13 May 2020). 
8. Oustaloup, (1995). La Derivation non-Entiere. Hermes: Paris, France. 
9. Chen, Y. Q., & Moore, K. L., (2002). Discretization schemes for fractional-order 
differentiators and integrators. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: 
Fundamental Theory and Applications, 49(3), 363–367. 
10. Meirovitch, L., (1970). Methods of Analytical Dynamics. McGraw-Hill: New York. 
11. Nise, N. S., (2015). Control Systems Engineering (7th edn.). Wiley: New York. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11  
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s 
Physical Parameters of Pressure on a 
Lower-Limb Prosthetic Socket Using a 
Fuzzy-Logic-Based Model 
VIMAL KUMAR PATHAK,1 CHITRESH NAYAK,2 and 
DEEPAK RAJENDRA UNUNE3 
1Assistant Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
Manipal University Jaipur, Dehmi Kalan, Jaipur – 303007, Rajasthan, 
India, E-mail: vimalpthk@gmail.com 
2Professor, Oriental Institute of Science and Technology, Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh, India 
3Assistant Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
The LNM Institute of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
Over the past few years, the requirement for implants and medical devices 
in orthopedics has undertaken rapid growth due to some important factors 
including growing elderly population, technology developments, the rise in 
chronic diseases, and improved healthcare facilities in developing countries. 
Currently, there are more than 30 million people worldwide having amputations 
[1] and most of them involve the lower limb at the transtibial level [2]. With the 
help of prosthesis, amputees can improve the quality of life. The amputation 
rate in developing countries, including India, is about 45% of diabetic foot 
problems, with an estimated 50,000 amputations occurring per year [3]. The 
prosthetic socket act as a critical interface between amputation and residual 
limb, which is designed and developed in an iterative process by the prosthetist. 

 
 
168 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
Regardless of the use of advanced technologies in socket manufacturing, 
definite stump-socket interaction takes place. This interaction results in 
excessive stresses, patient discomfort in wearing the prosthesis, pain, skin 
irritation, pistoning, and stump soft tissue damage [4]. It is accepted that 
the superiority of the socket fit is directly related to the pressure distribution 
produced at the residual limb-socket interface. The quality of the socket 
fit is considered to be good if the total load is supported by the pressure 
tolerant areas (e.g., areas of thick tissue) of the limb. The pressure-sensitive 
areas (e.g., areas where the bone is close to the surface) should be non-load 
bearing for a better comfort. Currently, it is forecasted that 20 present of 
prosthetic sockets fabricated are either discarded due to improper fitting 
or significantly require modification to ensure satisfactory ‘fit,’ signifying 
knowledge gap in procedures. The amputee discomfort and pain occurs 
due to high-pressure interaction at the stump-socket interface, which is 
one of the important factors to be considered in the area of prosthetics and 
orthotics. For the reason above, the determination of pressure distribution 
is useful in effective socket design and development. Additionally, the 
determination of pressure distribution at the stump-socket interface proves 
to be an effective parameter to enhance the quality of the socket fit [5]. 
The transducers have been used for pressure assessment purposes 
since late 1970 [6]. Several researchers have studied and investigated 
about force, pressure, displacement, strain, normal, and shear stress at the 
stump-socket interface [4, 7] using a diaphragm strain gauge, piston-type 
strain gauge, capacitive, piezoresistive based sensors [8, 9]. Most of the 
investigators prefer to use piezoresistive sensors such as force sensing 
resistors (FSR) due to their eminent features including the small size with 
a simple structure, thin construction, adequate flexibility, good sensitivity, 
and ease of use [10, 11]. In comparison to other sensors that could be 
either positioned within prosthetic sockets or mounted on socket wall, all 
piezoresistive sensors are very thin sheets; ideal to be positioned in-situ 
inside the prosthetic socket. The accurate pressure measurement required 
a suitable measurement technique, appropriate sensor; correct positioning 
of the sensor at the stump-socket interface. A suitable pressure measure­
ment system should be able to produce actual results without changing 
the initial stump-socket interface condition. Pressure measurement help in 
the realization of the intricate problems confronted during a socket fitting. 
Presently researchers are more focused on determining novel bio­
materials for socket manufacturing and further integration of advanced 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
169 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
tools like reverse engineering, CAD, and FEM to produce accurate virtual 
model development and pressure measurement [12–14]. The past research 
concluded that transducers are applicable for gathering pressure data in 
limited regions within the prosthetic socket. FEM requires detailed infor­
mation of the patient’s limb and socket geometry and material properties 
that is not available for each patient. The aforementioned studies have 
provided results that deal with the aid in understanding the critical issues 
faced in socket fitting. It is also found that advanced tools are needed to 
overcome the limitations of the traditional socket fitting process, providing 
practical results helpful for clinical significance [15, 16]. 
In presently available methods of pressure measurement, the pressure 
can be measured either by sensor introduction into the socket/limb inter­
face, which affects the results collected or by altering the socket to insert 
the pressure transducer, leading to difficulties in daily use. For overcoming 
these drawbacks, a computational approach will be beneficial in predicting 
the pressure at the socket interface. For this reason, a fuzzy logic-based 
artificial intelligence model have been proposed for the determination of 
pressure under different conditions, i.e., static, and dynamic. In the field of 
prosthetics and orthotics, no work is available on applying the fuzzy logic 
model in pressure measurement and evaluation at the socket interface. 
Soft computing techniques have the ability to describe non-trivial 
complex problems where input and output relations are non-linear. Soft 
computing techniques such as Fuzzy logic, ANN, evolutionary, and nature-
inspired algorithms provide an adequate solution to the variety of complex 
problems, while acknowledging the uncertainty involved in the problem 
[17]. Fuzzy logic is effective when an accurate mathematical model is not 
available, can work with imprecise inputs, and at last can handle the non­
linearity with ease. Therefore, in the present study, the authors have selected 
fuzzy logic technique to model pressure measured at different specific 
regions in terms of amputee physical parameters. The capability to model 
the relations amid the different loading conditions and pressure effects on 
the residual limb would provide an enhanced tool for examination and aid 
clinicians to analyze socket discomfort issues. It would also enable research 
on socket interface design and material and will help clinicians in advising 
involvements for amputees with complex residual limbs. Determining the 
influence of amputees’ physical parameters on real-life pressure values at 
the socket will aid the prosthesis to better design ensuring the comfort of 
the amputees. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
11.2 MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Ten unilateral below-knee male amputees have been selected for the 
acquisition of pressure data for this investigation. The details of the 
amputees are given in Table 11.1. This study considered clinically 
in different cases. The selected amputees regularly used a prosthesis 
patella tendon bearing (PTB) socket with a uniform thickness of 5 mm 
with cotton liner. They had been using exo-skeletal transtibial pros­
thesis from the last 3 to 21 years with PTB socket manufacturing in 
Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti (BMVSS), Jaipur, India. 
The measurements have been carried out using the Flexi-Force sensor 
as shown in Figure 11.1. 
TABLE 11.1 General Information about Patients 
Patient Age Height Weight  Using 
Type of 
Clinically 
Stump 
(cm) 
(kg) 
Prosthesis Amputee 
Significant 
Length 
(Year) 
Cases 
(cm) 
P1 
30 
172 
66 
4 
Unilateral 
Accident 
Right 18.1 
(±2.0) 
P2 
42 
173 
70 
3 
Unilateral 
Trauma-
Left 15 
vascular 
(±2.0) 
disease 
Short) 
P3 
36 
174 
72 
3 
Unilateral 
Accident 
Left 28 
(Long) 
(±2.0) 
P4 
56 
171 
68 
10 
Unilateral 
Infection 
Left 16 
(±2.0) 
P5 
70 
168 
63 
9 
Unilateral 
Accident 
Right 23 
(±2.0) 
P6 
40 
166 
70 
21 
Unilateral 
Conjugation Right 22.8 
(±2.0) 
P7 
46 
162 
63 
8 
Unilateral 
Diabetic 
Right 20.3 
(± 2.0) 
P8 
26 
168 
52 
12 
Unilateral 
Accident 
Left 25 (± 
2.0) 
P9 
50 
167 
64 
15 
Unilateral 
Accident 
Left 19.1 
(±2.0) 
P10 
38 
170 
58 
7 
Unilateral 
Diabetic 
Right 19.3 
(±2.0) 

 
 
TABLE 11.2 Characteristics of Flexi-Force Standard Model A201 
Sl. No. 
Parameters 
Value 
Unit 
1. 
Thickness 
0.208 
mm 
2. 
Length 
197 
mm 
3. 
Width 
14 
mm 
4. 
Sensing Area 
9.53 
mm2 
5. 
Force Range 
0–445 
N 
171 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
FIGURE 11.1  Flexi-force pressure sensor. 
The characteristics of the flexi-force sensor are listed in Table 11.2. The 
sensor is of small thickness, flexible printed circuit, lightweight custom 
shape, and size. It can measure the force between any two contacting 
surfaces and is durable enough to stand up in most environments with 
a force range (0 to 445 N). These sensors can be easily integrated into 
the stump-socket interface. The sensor measure both static and dynamic 
forces between stump and socket. It is constructed from two layers of the 
substrate; this substrate is composed of polyester film (or polyimide in the 
case of the high-temperature sensors). On each layer, a conductive mate­
rial (silver) is applied, followed by a layer of pressure-sensitive ink sensor. 
The adhesive is then used to laminate the two layers of substrate together 
to form the sensor. The sensor acts as a variable resistor in an electrical 
circuit. When the sensor is unloaded, its resistance is very high (greater 
than 5 MΩ); when a force is applied to the sensor, the resistance decreases. 
11.3 EXPERIMENTATION AND DATA ACQUISITION (DAQ) 
The experiments have been carried out on the amputees using an 
experimental setup as shown in Figure 11.2. One step-down transformer 

 
 
172 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
is used to convert an AC voltage of 220 V to 9–0–9 V. Analogue to digital 
converter (ADC) is used to converts an analog signal to digital. The result 
is a sequence of digital values that have been converted from a continuous-
time and continuous-amplitude analog signal to a discrete-time and 
discrete-amplitude digital signal. 
FIGURE 11.2  Flexi-force set up with a national instrument system. 
One capacitor is used to stabilize the DC voltage. Resistance is used to 
drop the voltage. Then the experimental setup is connected to data acqui­
sition (DAQ) block/card (DAQ-9171), four channels NI 9234 chassis 
(national instruments) by BNC probe cable to the virtual instrumentation 
software (Lab-view) for DAQ. DAQ is the process of measuring an elec­
trical or physical phenomenon such as voltage, current, temperature, pres­
sure, or sound with a computer. A DAQ system consists of sensors, DAQ 
measurement hardware, and a computer with programmable software. 
Compared to traditional measurement systems, PC-based DAQ systems 
exploit the processing power, productivity, display, and connectivity 
capabilities of industry-standard computers providing a more powerful, 
flexible, and cost-effective measurement solution. A Flexi-Force sensor is 
attached to the curved portion of the plastic frame, and the accelerometer 
board is mounted on its base of the oscillating mass. Flexible force sensor 
(FFS) system is ready to plug-n-play. The FFS works like any other bridge 
transducer, by converting non-linear resistance changes to a linear output 
voltage proportional to force. The calibration of FFS is performed by using 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
173 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
the dead weights following standard calibration procedure. The accuracy 
and repeatability of measurements of FFS were analyzed. The static and 
dynamic loading tests were performed to obtain pressure sensing param­
eters. The linearity, repeatability, and hysteresis were found to be +/–4.5%, 
+/–4.1%, +/–6.1%. The drift was found to less than 5.6%. 
In the current study, eight specific regions, as shown in Figure 11.3, have 
been identified to measure pressure at different loading conditions (half, full, 
and walking). The regions are Lateral Tibia (P1), Gastrocnemius (P2), PTB 
(P3), Kick Point (P4), Medial Tibia (P5), Medial Gastrocnemius (P6), Popli­
teal Depression (P7), and Lateral Gastrocnemius (P8). The interface pressure 
values have been recorded for two standing, viz. half body weight, and full 
body weight, for 50 seconds. For walking conditions, the amputee is asked to 
walk for 12 meters distance. Before initiating a measurement, all hardware 
components of the FFS system (socket, connecting the cable, converter) 
must be appropriately connected. The FFS is placed between the liner and 
socket at eight specific regions. Further, a pressure measurement at all eight 
regions can be viewed simultaneously in real-time using the software on a 
laptop/PC screen, and the measurement can be repeated if required. 
FIGURE 11.3  The pressure points (Left) and fitting of the sensor (Right) on the limb. 
The measured values of pressure at the eight specific regions are 
presented in Table 11.3. For this study, three trials were performed, and an 
average of the pressure data is selected and reported. The maximum pres­
sure at all the three (walking, full, and half) conditions are shown in bold. 
From Table 11.3, it has observed that the strongest impact of maximum 
pressure between stump-socket interfaces is on the PTB. 

 
 
 
174 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
TABLE 11.3 Static and Dynamic Pressure (KPa) Data Using Flexi-Force Sensor 
Patient 
Loading 
Pressure Points 
Cond­
ition 
P1 
P2 
P3 
P4 
P5 
P6 
P7 
P8 
Patient 1 (W) 
161.4 206.5 
278.5 
242 
193.4 
165.12 179.6 179.4 
(F) 
110.2 184.81 223.1 
202.8 152.23 151.12 196 
148.6 
(H) 
24 
39 
55.2 
46 
36 
33.2 
49 
29 
Patient 2 (W) 
79.4 
198.4 
315.2 
222.5 146.4 
210 
204.4 210.6 
(F) 
56 
98.8 
267 
196 
121.6 
200.2 
183 
164.6 
(H) 
24 
42.4 
65 
48 
41 
35 
42.8 
35 
Patient 3 (W) 
125.6 111.4 
239.5 
148.8 166.4 
79.6 
153.6 86 
(F) 
108.2 65.8 
185 
120 
63 
72 
135.6 75.4 
(H) 
29 
24.2 
49 
34.5 
24 
25 
45 
20 
Patient 4 (W) 
108 
167.4 
271.6 
229.6 136 
204 
220.6 224.4 
(F) 
135.2 171.4 
259 
156 
108 
116 
176 
210.8 
(H) 
27.2 
40.4 
36.3 
66.3 
41 
36 
27 
28 
Patient 5 (W) 
102 
127 
246 
176 
243 
100 
184 
169 
(F) 
98.4 
132 
201.2 
110.8 196 
81.06 
129.6 100.2 
(H) 
21 
26 
39 
42.2 
36 
36 
36 
27 
Patient 6 (W) 
72.2 
130.2 
346.8 
226.4 165.6 
196 
234 
222.2 
(F) 
51.2 
93.3 
295 
138 
120 
167 
250.2 146 
(H) 
36.2 
41.3 
65.5 
37.6 
38 
34 
32 
29 
Patient 7 (W) 
112.6 61.4 
310.7 
208.3 164.1 
103.4 
257.5 124.3 
(F) 
101.1 45.6 
274.4 
140.1 60.4 
82.9 
184.3 97 
(H) 
26.1 
22.4 
76.2 
41.1 
22.5 
24.4 
56.2 
18 
Patient 8 (W) 
98.9 
118.7 
142.1 
112.4 141.5 
122.6 
136.7 117.7 
(F) 
91.4 
110.6 
125.86 109.9 69.4 
53.4 
127.6 90.1 
(H) 
22.5 
13.4 
29.9 
26.2 
25.2 
26.5 
21.7 
24.7 
Patient 9 (W) 
117.9 57.7 
293.4 
242.6 159.7 
82.8 
162.9 118.4 
(F) 
94.7 
41.1 
251.3 
141.1 63.9 
91.6 
198.4 148.9 
(H) 
29.5 
22.4 
50.4 
29.6 
26.2 
23.7 
29.4 
21.4 
Patient 
(W) 
59.9 
156.4 
240 
186.3 135.4 
161.1 
201.8 148.7 
10 
(F) 
57.1 
123.4 
227.6 
174.7 132.6 
144.4 
199.6 141.9 
(H) 
19.7 
22.9 
32.9 
33.5 
31.5 
24.4 
27.9 
24.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
175 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
11.4 FUZZY LOGIC 
Fuzzy logic is a multi-valued continuous system providing intermediate 
values to be defined between conventional evaluations such as true or 
false, yes or no, and high or low as was used in binary logic. The concept 
of fuzzy logic has its inception in 1965 by L. A. Zadeh. In fuzzy logic, 
the available data is represented in the terms of linguistic variables and 
reasoning, which is easy to apprehend and interpret [18]. The fuzzy logic 
has extensive application areas and scope of work, due to its suitability to 
be used as an effective inference system. Such fuzzy inference systems do 
not only consider two alternatives, instead it takes complete truth space for 
logical reasoning and propositions. The fuzzy inference system provides 
middle values to be established between traditional yes or no solutions 
[19]. In engineering applications, the fuzzy inference system utilizes this 
incessant subset membership function to transform crimped numerical 
problems into fuzzy linguistic regions. Fuzzy inference system makes use 
of conventional linguistics to state variables and fuzzy language procedures 
to define associations as opposing to employ with numeric variables and 
mathematical functions. In contrast to the mathematical expression, fuzzy 
logic offers to use amassed knowledge and experience based on practice 
rather than theory form. By sustaining the physical inference and effects 
of all variables, fuzzy logic simulates the complex and nonlinear systems. 
It is observed that very few works is available in literature which attempts 
to model pressure at different specific points in terms of patient physical 
characteristics. Therefore, the present study employed fuzzy logic to model 
the magnitude of a response variable, such as intra-socket pressure, changes 
with the values of the independent casual variables, such as weight, height, 
and SL (for amputee). 
The fuzzy membership function characterizes the degree of associa­
tion between input and output linguistic variables which are represented 
in Table 11.4. The linguistic terms for different input membership func­
tions are described low (L), medium (M), high (H). Similarly, the output 
response of pressure is fuzzified in fuzzy sets as very low (VL), low (L), 
medium (M), high (H), and very high (VH). The membership function and 
the connected linguistic variables were determined based on the available 
literature. 

 
 
TABLE 11.4 Fuzzy Linguistic Term Characteristics 
Factors 
Linguistic Term 
Range 
Weight (A) 
Height (B) 
Stump 
Length (C) 
Pressure at 
Point 1 (P1) 
Pressure at 
Point 2 (P2) 
Pressure at 
Point 3 (P3) 
Pressure at 
Point 4 (P4) 
Pressure at 
Point 5 (P5) 
Pressure at 
Point 6 (P6) 
Pressure at 
Point 7 (P7) 
Pressure at 
Point 8 (P8) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
Very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and 
very high (VH) 
52–72(Kg) 
162–175 (cm) 
15–28 (cm) 
21–162 (KPa) 
10–210 (KPa) 
25–360 (KPa) 
25–245 (KPa) 
24–250 (KPa) 
22–212 (KPa) 
20–260 (KPa) 
15–225 (KPa) 
176 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
11.5 FUZZY MEMBERSHIP FUNCTIONS 
The performance of different membership functions for the linguistic 
terms of input factors and output response was examined based on the 
least root mean square error (RMSE). From the commonly  used member
ship functions such as triangular, trapezoidal, and Gaussian, this study 
employs triangular membership function for assessment of input variables 
and triangular type functions are chosen for output variables as shown 
in Figure 11.4. The triangular membership function for the output was 
defined using three parameters m, n, p with vector x: 
­

 
177 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
FIGURE 11.4  Triangular membership function for input and output. 

 
 
 
 

 
0, x
m
:
 
x
m
-
 
f = (
 
x;
,
m n, p) =  
m
x
:
: n 
n
m
-
 
 p
x
-
n
x
:
:
 
p 
 p
n
-
 
 
   
   
178 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
11.6 FUZZY RULE BASE 
In this study, the membership function resulting from the expert is used 
to produce the fuzzy rule base. The Mamdani method of fuzzy rule base 
containing a set of if-then statements for 10 rules with three inputs, patient’s 
weight (A), height (B), and stump length (C) with eight outputs as the pres­
sure at eight points (P1 to P8) are considered for all the three conditions 
(walking, half, and full). The easiness of the Mamdani model makes it a 
suitable candidate to be widely used in solving complex optimization and 
complicated manufacturing problems. The rules were recognized from the 
experimental trials performed in Table 11.1. 
11.7 DEFUZZIFICATION 
The defuzzification process was performed to obtain fuzzy output and 
transform fuzzy set data into numerical data value. For defuzzification, 
a commonly employed method of the centroid of gravity (COG) is used 
to convert fuzzy membership function to the crisp or precise output of a 
particular data pair. Due to the wide acceptance, easiness, and applica­
bility to produce precise results, the COG method is applied, which can be 
expressed by the below formula: 
* 
c x xdx 
x   c x dx 
where x* represents the center of gravity location along the x-axis. The 
fuzzy rule viewer is graphically represented as shown in Figure 11.5. The 

 
 
 
179 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
rows represented individual fuzzy rule and the first three columns depict 
the input desirability. The last eight columns represent the defuzzified 
output of pressure at different specific regions. 
FIGURE 11.5  Graphical representation of fuzzy rule. 
11.8 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
From the experimental results, it is clear that the strongest impact of 
maximum pressure between stump-socket interfaces is on the PTB (point 3). 
Therefore, the surface plot predicted by the fuzzy-based model for PTB 
at point 3 is shown in Figure 11.6. Figure 11.6 depicts the variation of 
pressure in terms of different physical parameters of an amputee. It can 
be shown from Figure 11.6 that for 60–65 kg patient weight combining 
with a higher value of SL is providing maximum pressure of 270 KPa. 
Similarly, the 60–65 kg weight patients along with the height in the range 
of 170–175 cm provide a maximum pressure of about 330 KPa. Moreover, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
180 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
the final plot shows that with the height of the patient in the range of 
170–175 cm with SL of over 20 cm can produce the maximum pressure of 
approximately 330 KPa. 
FIGURE 11.6  Predicted pressure at point 3 for different combinations of input parameters. 
In the present study, the pressure at different loading conditions is math­
ematically formulated using the regression analysis technique [20]. Further­
more, regression analysis is carried out on the experimental data collected 
from the ten patients (Table 11.5) using statistical software Minitab 16. The 
pressure for three loading conditions was expressed as a function of weight 
(WT), SL, and height (HT) as shown in Eqs. (11.1)–(11.3). 
P
 = 1313.41 – 5.497 SL – 8.697 HT + 8.018 WT 
(11.1) 
Walking
PFull = 1387.21 – 7.240 SL – 8.590 HT + 6.866 WT 
(11.2) 
PHalf = 356.359 – 1.384 SL – 2.404 HT + 2.047 WT 
(11.3) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 11.5 ANOVA Results for Walking Load Condition 
Source 
Degree of 
Sum of 
Mean 
F‑Value 
P‑Value 
Freedom 
Squares 
Squares 
Regression 
3 
26416.2 
8805.4 
20.9 
<0.001 
SL 
1 
6321.2 
4357.1 
10.3 
0.0181 
HT 
1 
1776.1 
7761.5 
18.4 
0.0051 
WT 
1 
18318.9 
18318.9 
43.5 
0.0005 
Error 
6 
2522.4 
420.4 
– 
– 
Total 
9 
28938.7 
– 
– 
– 
R2 = 91.28% 
Adjusted R2 = 86.93% 
 
 
181 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
The analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was executed to statistically inves­
tigate the established models for three loading conditions. ANOVA results for 
the walking condition response model are tabulated in Table 11.5. The ANOVA 
results for the walking load with model F-value of 20.9 suggest that the model 
is significant. There is only a 0.01% chance that such a higher model F-value 
may have happened due to noise. The higher value of the determination coef­
ficient (R2 = 91.28%) and adjusted determination coefficient (adjusted R2 = 
86.93%) signifies that the model does not clarify only less than 8.72% of the 
total variation. Hence, this model can be used to navigate the design space. 
Table 11.6 shows the ANOVA results for the full load condition 
response. The ANOVA results for the full load response with a model 
F-value of 18.1 implying that the model is significant. There is only a 
0.01% chance that such a higher model F-value may have occurred due 
to noise. The higher value of the determination coefficient (R2 = 90.07%) 
and adjusted determination coefficient (adjusted R2 = 85.10%) signifies 
that the model does not clarify only less than 9.93% of the total variation. 
Hence, this model can be used to navigate the design space. 
ANOVA results for the half load condition response model are listed 
in Table 11.7. The model F-value of 10.9 with P-value <0.01 implies that 
the developed model is significant. There is only a 0.01% chance that 
such a higher model F-value may have occurred due to noise. From Table 
11.7, the higher value of the determination coefficient (R2 = 84.56%) and 
adjusted determination coefficient (adj. R2 = 76.84%) signifies that the 
model does not clarify only less than 15.44% of the total variation. Hence, 
this model can be used to navigate the design space. 

 
 
 
TABLE 11.6 ANOVA Results for Full Load Condition 
Source 
Degree of 
Sum of 
Mean 
F‑Value 
P‑Value 
Freedom 
Squares 
Squares 
Regression 
3 
25336.8 
8445.6 
18.1 
<0.001 
SL 
1 
9552.7 
7559.2 
16.2 
0.0068 
HT 
1 
2353.5 
7573.7 
16.2 
0.0068 
WT 
1 
13430.6 
13430.6 
28.8 
0.0017 
Error 
6 
2794.4 
465.7 
– 
– 
Total 
9 
28131.1 
– 
– 
– 
R2 = 90.07% 
Adjusted R2 = 85.10% 
TABLE 11.7 ANOVA Results for Half Load Condition 
Source 
Degree of 
Sum of 
Mean 
F‑Value 
P‑Value 
Freedom 
Squares 
Squares 
Regression 
3 
1752.4 
584.1 
10.9 
<0.01 
SL 
1 
395.2 
276.1 
5.1 
0.0631 
HT 
1 
163.0 
593.7 
11.1 
0.0156 
WT 
1 
1194.2 
1194.2 
22.3 
0.0032 
Error 
6 
319.9 
53.3 
– 
– 
Total 
9 
2072.46 
– 
– 
– 
R2 = 84.56% 
Adjusted R2 = 76.84% 
 
 
 
  
182 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
The accuracy and error percentage determination is a prerequisite for 
validating newly developed prediction models to know how close the 
predicted value is from the measured experimental value. In the same 
context, to check the accuracy and individual error% of the developed fuzzy 
model in predicting the pressure values is compared with the experimental 
value at different regions of nine patients (see Table 11.8). The variation 
of predicted values (Em) from the actual measured experimental value 
) are used to calculate error percentage (EP) after dividing the absolute 
(Ef  
difference between the above values by the measured experimental value.  
 E f  Em
E  
X100%
p 
Em 

 
 
 



 
 
Am 
1 n 
 
1  E f  Em  
 X100% 
n i1 
Em 
 
 
 
183 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
Furthermore, the accuracy is calculated by determining the closeness 
of the predicted fuzzy model value to the measured experimental value. 
The below equation is used, where Am is the accuracy of the model and n is 
the total number of considered datasets for finding the average individual 
accuracy. 
The predicted and measured values of output responses were utilized 
for the determination of error and accuracy percentage of the applied fuzzy 
logic model. The highest and lowest error percentage between measured 
and predicted fuzzy model results for P1–P8 points are 11.57 and 0.11 
respectively. Such a consistent and lower error percentage of the overall 
model specifies that the fuzzy model predicted the outcome which is in 
close proximity with the experimental results. It is worth noting that the 
overall model accuracy comes out to be 98.54% in predicting the values 
of pressure at different points of reconstructed surface. Such high overall 
model accuracy justifies the utilization of a fuzzy model for successful 
prediction of output response of pressure at different specific regions in 
terms of patient physical parameters making it suitable for socket fit. 
From the Fuzzy logic-based model for walking load conditions and 
regression equations fitted for half load, full load, and walking load condi­
tions, it can be said that weight and SL of the patient will affect the pres­
sure developed at the socket interface. Overall, it has perceived that the 
developed pressure is maximum for the walking condition as compared 
to full load and half load conditions. It is obvious that while walking 
condition, the amputee will exert maximum effort and thus the exhibiting 
maximum pressure at limb/socket interface. The most important outcome 
of results is that amputee’s weight is a most important factor that attributes 
in determining the amount of pressure at transtibial prosthetic limb/socket 
interface. The pressure will increase with an increase in amputee’s weight. 
The pressure essential to bear the amputee’s weight on a socket would be 
sovereign of the surface area of the stump/socket interface. 

 
 
 
E
Output Parameters
No.  
Height Weight Stump 
Pressure (KPa)
(cm) 
(kg) 
Length P1  
P2 
(cm) 
Experimental Fuzzy 
Error%  Accuracy Experimental 
Fuzzy 
 
Error
Accuracy 
% 
%
% 
1 
172 
66 
18 
161.4 
163.10 
1.05 
98.95 
206.5 
207.81 
0.63 
99.37 
2 
173 
70 
15 
79.4 
81.12 
2.17 
97.83 
198.4 
199.04 
0.32 
99.68 
3 
174 
72 
28 
125.6 
125.75 
0.12 
99.88 
111.4 
112.67 
1.14 
98.86 
4 
171 
68 
16 
108 
110.10 
1.94 
98.06 
167.4 
171.89 
2.68 
97.32 
5 
168 
63 
23 
102 
101.72 
0.27 
99.73 
127 
125.42 
1.24 
98.76 
6 
166 
70 
23 
72.2 
74.87 
3.70 
96.30 
130.2 
129.65 
0.42 
99.58 
7 
162 
63 
20 
112.6 
115.05 
2.18 
97.82 
61.4 
62.92 
2.48 
97.52 
8 
168 
52 
25 
98.9 
110.34 
11.57 
88.43 
118.7 
119.78 
0.91 
99.09 
9 
167 
64 
19 
118 
117.15 
0.72 
99.28 
57.7 
59.03 
2.31 
97.69 
10 
172 
66 
18 
278.5 
281.70 
1.15 
98.85 
242 
240.82 
0.49 
99.51 
11 
173 
70 
15 
315.2 
316.12 
0.29 
99.71 
222.5 
219.04 
1.56 
98.44 
12 
174 
72 
28 
239.5 
242.75 
1.36 
98.64 
148.8 
152.67 
2.60 
97.40 
13 
171 
68 
16 
271.6 
274.10 
0.92 
99.08 
229.6 
231.89 
1.00 
99.00 
Model accuracy for Pressure = 98.54 
184 
TABLE 11.8 Accuracy and Error Percentage Results
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 

 
E 
Output Parameters
No.  
Height Weight Stump 
Pressure (KPa)
(cm) 
(kg) 
Length P1  
P2 
(cm) 
Experimental Fuzzy 
Error%  Accuracy Experimental 
Fuzzy 
 
Error
Accuracy 
% 
%
% 
14 
168 
63 
23 
246 
244.72 
0.52 
99.48 
176 
175.42 
0.33 
99.67 
15 
166 
70 
23 
346.8 
346.87 
0.02 
99.98 
226.4 
229.65 
1.44 
98.56 
16 
162 
63 
20 
310.7 
311.05 
0.11 
99.89 
208.3 
210.92 
1.26 
98.74 
17 
168 
52 
25 
142.1 
141.34 
0.53 
99.47 
112.4 
112.78 
0.34 
99.66 
18 
167 
64 
19 
293.4 
292.05 
0.46 
99.54 
242.6 
241.56 
0.43 
99.57 
19 
172 
66 
18 
193.4 
191.70 
0.88 
99.12 
165.12 
167.81 
1.63 
98.37 
20 
173 
70 
15 
146.4 
148.12 
1.17 
98.83 
210 
209.04 
0.46 
99.54 
21 
174 
72 
28 
166.4 
165.75 
0.39 
99.61 
79.6 
82.67 
3.86 
96.14 
22 
171 
68 
16 
136 
138.10 
1.54 
98.46 
204 
206.89 
1.42 
98.58 
23 
168 
63 
23 
243 
244.72 
0.71 
99.29 
100 
102.42 
2.42 
97.58 
24 
166 
70 
23 
165.6 
167.87 
1.37 
98.63 
196 
195.65 
0.18 
99.82 
25 
162 
63 
20 
164.1 
169.05 
3.02 
96.98 
103.4 
104.92 
1.47 
98.53 
26 
168 
52 
25 
141.5 
144.34 
2.01 
97.99 
122.6 
124.78 
1.78 
98.22 
27 
167 
64 
19 
159.7 
161.72 
1.26 
98.74 
82.8 
83.9 
1.33 
98.67 
28 
172 
66 
18 
179.6 
181.70 
1.17 
98.83 
179.4 
182.8 
1.90 
98.10 
 
185 
TABLE 11.8 (Continued) 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 

 
E 
Output Parameters
No.  
Height Weight Stump 
Pressure (KPa)
(cm) 
(kg) 
Length P1  
P2 
(cm) 
Experimental Fuzzy 
Error%  Accuracy Experimental 
Fuzzy 
 
Error
Accuracy 
% 
%
% 
29 
173 
70 
15 
204.4 
206.12 
0.84 
99.16 
210.6 
209.04 
0.74 
99.26 
30 
174 
72 
28 
153.6 
150.75 
1.86 
98.14 
86 
88.67 
3.10 
96.90 
31 
171 
68 
16 
220.6 
218.10 
1.13 
98.87 
224.4 
226.89 
1.11 
98.89 
32 
168 
63 
23 
184 
187.72 
2.02 
97.98 
169 
175.42 
3.80 
96.20 
33 
166 
70 
23 
234 
236.87 
1.23 
98.77 
222.2 
224.65 
1.10 
98.90 
34 
162 
63 
20 
257.5 
261.05 
1.38 
98.62 
124.3 
124.92 
0.50 
99.50 
35 
168 
52 
25 
136.7 
137.34 
0.47 
99.53 
117.7 
120.78 
2.62 
97.38 
36 
167 
64 
19 
162.9 
164.01 
0.68 
99.32 
118.4 
119.2 
0.68 
99.32 
Model accuracy for Pressure = 98.54 
 
186 
TABLE 11.8 (Continued) 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 

 
187 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
11.9 CONCLUSIONS 
A methodology has been developed using the low-cost piezo-resistive 
Flexi-Force sensor for quantitatively analyzing the pressure distribution 
at eight specific regions. Namely, lateral tibia, gastrocnemius, PTB, kick 
point, medial tibia, medial gastrocnemius, popliteal depression, and lateral 
gastrocnemius. Ten clinically significant cases have been considered for 
pressure prediction under different loading conditions. The present study 
deals with employing fuzzy logic-based modeling for predicting the 
pressure at specific locations for the limb socket interface for varying 
physical characteristics of ten clinical cases. The developed fuzzy logic 
model is validated by performing confirmation experimental trials and an 
accuracy of 98.53% is obtained in predicting the response of limb socket 
interface pressure. The present approach significantly evaluates the pres­
sure variation for different loading conditions. The regression analysis has 
been employed to evaluate the relation been amputee specific physical 
parameters on maximum pressure condition at the limb-socket interface. 
From the results, it has found that the amputee’s weight and SL are critical 
parameters and play a major role in pressure prediction. The adopted 
methodology will help in predicting maximum pressure values at the limb-
socket interface using which better designed prosthetic sockets can ensure 
comfortable socket fitting. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the patients of below-knee amputees at BMVSS (Jaipur 
Foot) who voluntarily participated in the study. This study was carried 
under a project grant (Project Number 180400044) by the Department of 
Science and Technology, Government of India. 
KEYWORDS 
•  
force-sensing resistors 
•  
Fuzzy logic analysis 
•  
patella tendon bearing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  
pressure measurement 
•   socket fitting 
•   stump-socket interface 
188 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
REFERENCES 
1. Alcaide-Aguirre, R. E., Morgenroth, D. C., & Ferris, D. P., (2013). Motor control 
and learning with lower-limb myoelectric control in amputees. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., 
50(5), 687–698. Pub. Med. PMID: 24013916. 
2. Sagar, R., Sahu, A.,  Sarkar, S., et al., (2016). Psychological effects of 
amputation: A review of studies from India. Ind. Psychiatry J., 25(1), 4–10. doi: 
10.4103/0972–6748.196041. 
3.  Peters, E. J., Lipsky, B. A., Aragón-Sánchez, J., et al., (2016). Interventions in the 
management of infection in the foot in diabetes: A systematic review. Diabetes 
Metab. Res. Rev., 32, 145–153. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2706. 
4. Al-Fakih, E., Abu, O. N., & Mahmad, A. F., (2016). Techniques for interface stress 
measurements within prosthetic sockets of transtibial amputees: A review of the past 
50 years of research. Sensors, 16(7), 1119. doi: 10.3390/s16071119. 
5.  Sewell, P., Noroozi, S., Vinney, J., et al., (2012). Static and dynamic pressure 
prediction for prosthetic socket fitting assessment utilizing an inverse problem 
approach. Artif. Intell. Med., 54(1), 29–41. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2011.09.005. 
6. Carlson, C. E., Mann, R. W., & Harris, W. H., (1974). A Radio telemetry device for 
monitoring cartilage surface pressures in the human hip. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, 
BME-21, 257–264. doi: 10.1109/tbme.1974.324311. 
7. Al-Fakih, E., Abu, O. N. A., & Mahamd, A. F. R., (2012). The use of fiber bragg 
grating sensors in biomechanics and rehabilitation applications: The state-of­
the-art and ongoing research topics. Sensors, 12(12), 12890–12926. doi: 10.3390/ 
s121012890. 
8. Williams, R. B., Porter, D., Roberts, V. C., et al., (1992). Triaxial force transducer for 
investigating stresses at the stump/socket interface. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., 30(1), 
89–96. doi: 10.1007/bf02446199. 
9.  Tiwana, M. I., Shashank, A., Redmond, S. J., et al., (2011). Characterization of a 
capacitive tactile shear sensor for application in robotic and upper limb prostheses. 
Sens. Actuators A Phys., 165(2), 164–172. doi: 10.1016/j.sna.2010.09.012. 
10. Almassri, A. M., Wan, H. W. Z., Ahmad, S. A., et al., (2015). Pressure sensor: 
State of the art, design, and application for robotic hand. J. Sens., 1, 1–12. doi: 
10.1155/2015/846487. 
11.  Luo, Z. P., Berglund, L. J., & An, K. N., (1998). Validation of F-Scan pressure sensor 
system: A technical note. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., 35(2), 186–191. Pub. Med. PMID: 
9651890. 

 
189 
Evaluating the Effect of an Amputee’s Physical Parameters of Pressure 
12. Nayak, C., Singh, A., Chaudhary, H., et al., (2016). A novel approach for 
customized prosthetic socket design. Biomed. Eng. App. Bas. C,  28(3). doi: 10.4015/ 
s1016237216500228. 
13. Nayak, C., Singh, A., Chaudhary, H., & Unune, D. R., (2017). An investigation on 
effects of amputee’s physiological parameters on maximum pressure developed at 
the prosthetic socket interface using artificial neural network. Technology and Health 
Care, 25(5), 969–979. 
14. Pathak, V. K., Nayak, C., Singh, A. K., & Chaudhary, H., (2016). A virtual reverse 
engineering methodology for accuracy control of transtibial prosthetic socket. 
Biomedical Engineering: Applications, Basis and Communications, 28(05), 1650037. 
15. Pirouzi, G., Abu, O. N. A., Eshraghi, A., et al., (2014). Review of the socket design 
and interface pressure measurement for transtibial prosthesis. Sci. World J., 1, 1–9. 
doi: 10.1155/2014/849073. 
16.  Hafner, B. J., & Sanders, J. E., (2014). Considerations for development of sensing 
and monitoring tools to facilitate treatment and care of persons with lower-limb loss: 
A review. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., 51(1), 1–14. doi: 10.1682/jrrd.2013.01.0024. 
17. Singh, R. K., Gangwar, S., Singh, D. K., & Pathak, V. K., (2019). A novel 
hybridization of artificial neural network and moth-flame optimization (ANN-MFO) 
for multi-objective optimization in magnetic abrasive finishing of aluminum 6060. 
Journal of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and Engineering, 41(6), 270. 
18. Mariajayaprakash, A., Senthilvelan, T., & Gnanadass, R., (2015). Optimization of 
process parameters through fuzzy logic and genetic algorithm: A case study in a 
process industry. Applied Soft Computing, 30, 94–103. 
19. Nunes, I. L., (2010). Handling human-centered systems uncertainty using fuzzy 
logics-A. The Ergonomics Open Journal, 3, 38–48. 
20.  Neumann, E., Brink, J., Yalamanchili, K., & Lee, J. S., (2013). Regression estimates 
of pressure on transtibial residual limbs using load cell measurements of the forces 
and moments occurring at the base of the socket. J. Ortho and Prosthet., 25(1), 1–12. 
doi: 10.1097/JPO.0b013e31827b36. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12  
Experimental Investigation and 
Optimization of Process Parameters in 
Oblique Machining Process for  
Hard-to-Cut Materials Using Coated 
Inserts 
PURNANK BHATT,1 MIHIR SOLANKI,1 ANAND JOSHI,1 and 
VIJAY CHAUDHARI2 
1Mechanical Engineering Department, G. H. Patel College of 
Engineering & Technology, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat, India 
2Mechanical Engineering Department, CHARUSAT, Changa,  
Gujarat, India 
ABSTRACT 
The high-speed machining process is being widely used in the auto­
mobile and aeronautical industries these days where superfine surface 
finish is the basic requirement. For such a process, a force modeling is 
done that considers the friction law which is the function of the tool-
chip interface temperature which is, in turn, used to calculate different 
parameters, and ultimately the forces evolved in the machining process. 
The influence of parameters like velocity and depth of cut on cutting 
forces is investigated for the empirical relation of the coefficient of 
friction derived for CRS 1018 for different hard-to-cut materials. For 
this purpose, tests are carried out turning center for these materials 
using cryogenically treated cemented carbide tool inserts. The effect of 
cutting force variation is analyzed experimentally and is compared with 
the analytical results. Also, optimum cutting force, surface roughness, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
192 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
and power consumption are found out using Taguchi’s orthogonal array. 
For the machining of the Hard-to-cut materials, the temperature aspect 
plays an important role in the forces evolved during the process. This 
includes the temperature evolved in the primary shear zone as well as 
the tool-chip interface. 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
Machining of the hard-to-cut materials is a very critical aspect in the area 
of manufacturing technology. It is for this reason, the prediction of forces 
becomes the area of concern as the type surface finish obtained is majorly 
driven by the forces evolved. The prediction of forces may lead us to 
the prediction of tool wear thereby tool life and the surface finish. When 
we deal with high-speed machining, the temperature evolved during the 
process also plays an important in the calculation of the forces. High-speed 
steel (HSS) is widely used in manufacturing tool materials which are in 
turn used to machine the workpiece components. So for that purpose, 
cutting speed of over 120 m/min is considered in our analysis. So, the 
present study mainly focuses on the effect of different parameters for the 
oblique cutting process. The analysis of the orthogonal cutting process can 
be extended to the oblique cutting process using the transformation matrix 
in Tounsi et al. [1]. 
To incorporate the thermal effect in the oblique cutting process, some 
of the parameters like strain rate sensitivity and strain hardening have been 
considered in Oxley et al. [2]. The primary shear zone has been assumed 
to have been divided into two unequal parts Astakhov et al. [3]. A coulomb 
friction law as considered in Moufki et al. [4], has been used which gives 
the dependence of the coefficient of friction on the tool-chip interface 
temperature. Based on the empirical relations Moufki et al. [5], a more 
simplified relation for the coefficient of friction has been considered. For 
the analysis, the process has been considered as stationary and the analysis 
is for the one-dimensional flow. In addition to that, the shearing in the 
band is assumed to be Molinari and Clifton [6]. The chip flow angle ηc 
is calculated as the function of the cutting velocity V, the rake angle αn, 
friction angle λ, and the inclination angle λs. 
This law considers a constant thickness of the primary shear zone h = 
0.025 mm. The undeformed chip thickness is small compared to the width 

 
 
193 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
of cut and the chip is considered to have formed under approximately plain 
strain conditions. The chip flow direction is normal to the cutting edge. 
The chip flow direction is an important factor as it plays an important role 
in the tool chip contact length. The pressure along the tool chip interface 
is also considered in the analysis. The anisotropy of the material is not 
considered in the present analysis as in Johnson and Mellor [7]. The effect 
of the parameters like the Taylor-Quinney is assumed to be a constant 
value as the effect of the sliding and sticking zone has been neglected in 
the present analysis Kushner [8]. 
The present analysis is done using the MATLAB interface for the 
mathematical modeling Bhatt et al. [9]. For the mathematical modeling, in 
order to solve the equations for the stress induction in the primary shear 
zone, the results seemed to be diverging and the solutions of the equations 
were obtained in the form of hypergeometric functions. So to simplify the 
problem, there was an assumption made that the stresses induced at the 
entrance of the primary shear zone was equal to the yield strength of the 
material Bhatt, et al. [10]. Taking this value as the reference, the iterations 
were carried out and the stress variation along the primary shear zone has 
been obtained. 
For the effect of Depth of Cut Cutting and Thrust Force, Dudzinski et 
al. [18] stated that with an increase in the depth of cut the cutting forces 
increase for a particular constant value of the velocity. Here the value 
of velocity is taken as 120 m/min. This trend in analytical modeling has 
been validated by the experimental results. The numerical values of the 
experimental results are a bit different from the analytical model as the 
operating conditions like the feed rate, the diameter of the workpiece, 
length of the cut, etc. are not specified in Moufki et al. [4] so may differ 
from the experimental parameters considered. The increase in forces with 
an increase in the depth of cut can be understood as the force required to 
deform a larger thickness of the material is large [19]. This is because the 
number of bonds needed to be broken to initiate plastic deformation are 
more in the higher depth of cut compared to that in a smaller depth of cut. 
The range of the thrust force is very negligible as compared to the cutting 
force. This trend can also be observed in the analytical and experimental 
results. The study of HSS has been done in this chapter and the comparison 
for both the materials in terms of experimental results as well as analytical 
results has been shown. 

 
 
194 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
12.2 ANALYTICAL MODELING OF OBLIQUE CUTTING 
PROCESSES 
The effect of cutting velocity and depth of cut on cutting force, Thrust 
force, and interface temperature have been studied for Hard-to-cut mate­
rials. In the present study, we have considered HSS as our workpiece 
material. Various coated tool inserts have also been considered in the 
study and the effect of various cutting parameters on the tool wear have 
been demonstrated through microscopic images of the cutting edge under 
consideration. 
12.2.1 FOR DRY MACHINING 
•  
Constant Speed, Constant Feed, and Variable Depth of Cut (Figures 
12.1–12.3). 
FIGURE 12.1  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V = 2.638 m/s; DOC = 
0.15 mm; feed = 0.06 mm/Rev. 
FIGURE 12.2  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V = 2.638 m/s; DOC = 
0.2 mm; feed = 0.06 mm/Rev. 

 
 
195 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
FIGURE 12.3  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V = 2.638 m/s; DOC = 
0.15 mm; feed = 0.06 mm/Rev and V = 2.638 m/s; DOC = 0.2 mm; feed = 0.06 mm/Rev. 
Machining parameters play a very important role in the kind of finished 
component that is manufactured. In the same regards, we have considered 
a case wherein the cutting speed and the feed are kept constant for the 
process, and the depth of cut is varied. In such a case, the cutting force 
obviously increases as shown in the graphs obtained during the machining 
process. But the variation effect on the thrust force is negligible with an 
increase in the depth of cut. This means that the surface finish should not 
have such an effect by variation in the depth of cut during the machining 
process. This is verified by the surface roughness experimental data shown 
in Table 12.3. 
•  
Constant Depth of Cut, Constant Feed, and Variable Speed (Figures 
12.4–12.6). 
FIGURE 12.4  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V = 3.72 m/s; DOC = 
0.2 mm; feed = 0.02 mm/Rev. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
196 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 12.5  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V = 2.638 m/s; DOC = 
0.2 mm; feed = 0.02 mm/Rev. 
FIGURE 12.6  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V = 3.72 m/s; DOC = 
0.2 mm; feed = 0.02 mm/Rev and V = 2.638 m/s; DOC = 0.2 mm; Feed = 0.02 mm/Rev. 
The next case that we have considered is a case wherein the cutting 
feed and the depth of cut are kept constant for the process and speed is 
varied. In such a case, the cutting force almost negligibly varying as 
shown in the graphs obtained during the machining process. The varia­
tion effect on the thrust force is negligible as well. But as the length of 
the cut is increasing, the slight droop can be found in these quantities 
which maybe because of the thermal softening effect. For a case with 
higher velocity, a built-up edge formation can be found which suggests 
that the temperature reached during the machining process was sufficient 
enough to weld the debris onto the burnt-out part in on the tooltip as 
shown. 
•  
Constant Speed, Constant Depth of Cut, and Variable Feed 
(Figures 12.7–12.9). 

 
197 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
FIGURE 12.7  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V  = 5.2 m/s; DOC = 0.1 
mm; feed = 0.04 mm/Rev. 
FIGURE 12.8  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V  = 5.2 m/s; DOC = 0.1 
mm; feed = 0.02 mm/Rev. 
FIGURE 12.9  Cutting force and thrust force plot for conditions: V  = 5.2 m/s; DOC = 0.1 
mm; feed = 0.04 mm/Rev and V = 5.2 m/s; DOC = 0.1 mm; Feed = 0.02 mm/Rev. 
Here cutting speed and the depth of cut are kept constant for the process 
and feed is varied. In such a case, the cutting force is significantly high for 
a higher feed rate as shown in the graphs obtained during the machining 

 
198 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
process. The variation effect on the thrust force is negligible again just like 
in case of varying depth of cut. But the slight droop can be found in these 
quantities which maybe because of the thermal softening effect, as the 
length of cut is increasing. The tool wear in case of higher feed rate is more 
than that in case of a lower value of feed rate. But again, the wear is not 
significant if we compare it with other parameters studied in this literature. 
12.3 EFFECT ON TOOL WEAR FOR WET AND DRY MACHINING 
The above figures clearly suggest the difference in the effect of the tool 
wear due to wet machining and dry machining. Figures 12.10(a)–(c) are 
the tool wear profiles observed under the metallurgical microscope for 
50x zoom under dry machining conditions. It can be observed that in the 
case of dry machining, the built-up edge formed can be identified on the 
burnt-out portion. Built-up edge formation has been shown in one instance 
under dry machining (Figure 12.10b). 
FIGURE 12.10  Tool wear for dry and wet conditions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
199 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
We can also observe that there’s no or hardly any delamination on the 
tool tip in the case of dry machining. Similarly, Figures 12.10(i)–(k) are 
the tool wear profiles observed under the metallurgical microscope for 50x 
zoom under wet machining conditions. But in the case of wet machining, 
we can observe the surface delamination of the coating. Though, the 
figures suggest that there’s no built-up edge formed on the tool surface in 
case of wet machining. This can be explained in a way that for built-up 
edge to form, proper adhesion of the debris and the tool surface must take 
place. But because of the use of a coolant, we can’t find any built-up edge 
formed as the coolant takes away the heat generated during the machining 
process. Thus in absence of heat required to soften the metal and allow it 
to undergo adhesion, there is no built-up edge formation in wet machining 
conditions. 
12.4 COMPUTATIONAL INVESTIGATION 
Figure 12.11 shows the variation in forces (cutting and thrust) and tempera­
ture over a primary shear zone. As in line with our experimental results, the 
force values increase with the cutting velocity. But an important observation 
that one can go for from the force plots is that at a lower value of cutting 
velocity, the length of the tool chip interface is lower. Also, the temperature 
at the interface is higher for higher velocity plots as observed in the figure. 
As the velocity increases, the point of maximum temperature shifts farther 
from the tool tip. This aspect is yet to be analyzed in the experimental results 
which can be considered as the future work for this course which may help 
us the probable location of the built-up edge formation. 
FIGURE 12.11  (A, B) Cutting force, thrust force, and temperature variations for two 
different conditions of cutting speed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 12.11  (C, D, E, F) Cutting force, thrust force, and temperature variations for 
two different conditions of cutting speed. 
12.5 EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION 
The design of experiment study is carried out to plan and construct the 
machining of hard-to-cut material. For this study, Taguchi’s L-18 orthogonal 
array is selected with five variables and mixed-level design. Taguchi’s 
orthogonal array gives near the same result as full factorial design, Solanki 
and Desai [11]. Minitab statistical software is used to construct and analyses 
the experiment. Parameters selected for this experiment are cutting condi­
tions, cutting tool, speed (rpm), feed rate (mm/rev.), and depth of cut (mm). 
For high speed, machining it is important to do the machining above the 
cutting velocity of 120 m/minute. The diameter of the workpiece is 71 mm 
and corresponding to that minimum chuck speed is 538 rpm. The outlet 
of design from the Minitab is as shown in Table 12.1. Cutting conditions 
are selected as wet and dry; cutting tools used for this experiment are­
CNMG235, CNMG 4235 and 710; feed rate based on initial study selected 
as 0.02, 0.04 and 0.06 m/revolution; depth of cut is selected as 0.10, 0.15, 
and 0.20 mm; cutting speed is selected as 710, 1000, and 1400 rpm. 

 
 
201 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
TABLE 12.1 Outlet of Design of Experiment (L-18 OA) 
Sl. No. Working 
Conditions 
Tool Tip 
Speed 
(rpm) 
Feed Rate 
(mm/rev) 
Depth of Cut 
(mm) 
1. 
Wet 
CNMG-710 
710 
0.02 
0.1 
2. 
Wet 
CNMG-710 
1000 
0.04 
0.15 
3. 
Wet 
CNMG-710 
1400 
0.06 
0.2 
4. 
Wet 
CNMG-235 
710 
0.02 
0.15 
5. 
Wet 
CNMG-235 
1000 
0.04 
0.2 
6. 
Wet 
CNMG-235 
1400 
0.06 
0.1 
7. 
Wet 
CNMG-4325 
710 
0.04 
0.1 
8. 
Wet 
CNMG-4325 
1000 
0.06 
0.15 
9. 
Wet 
CNMG-4325 
1400 
0.02 
0.2 
10. 
Dry 
CNMG-710 
710 
0.06 
0.2 
11. 
Dry 
CNMG-710 
1000 
0.02 
0.1 
12. 
Dry 
CNMG-710 
1400 
0.04 
0.15 
13. 
Dry 
CNMG-235 
710 
0.04 
0.2 
14. 
Dry 
CNMG-235 
1000 
0.06 
0.1 
15. 
Dry 
CNMG-235 
1400 
0.02 
0.15 
16. 
Dry 
CNMG-4325 
710 
0.06 
0.15 
17. 
Dry 
CNMG-4325 
1000 
0.02 
0.2 
18. 
Dry 
CNMG-4325 
1400 
0.04 
0.1 
With process parameters mentioned in Table 12.1, the response vari­
able selected for optimization study are surface roughness and material 
removal rate. 
12.6 OPTIMIZATION OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS AND MATERIAL 
REMOVAL RATE 
With the input process parameters mentioned in Table 12.1, experiments 
are carried out in random order. The machining process is carried out on 
a conventional lathe machine. Surface roughness is measured with the 
help of sophisticated surface texture measuring instrument SV-2100 from 
Mitutoyo Corporation. Measurement conditions are selected as sample 
length of 25 mm, the total number of 8 samples, and pitch of 1.0 µm 
with filter setting of Gaussian element and speed of stylus movement is 

 
 
TABLE 12.2 Surface Texture Profile for L-18 OA 
202 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
0.5 mm/second. The outcome profile of the surface roughness for all the 
iteration is shown in Table 12.2. To measure the material removal rate 
during the turning process, a cut for a specific length of 25 mm is carried 
out. Weight of specimens before and after the turning process is measured. 
The outcome of the experiment results is mentioned in Table 12.3. 

 
 
TABLE 12.2 (Continued) 
203 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
204 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
TABLE 12.3 Outcome Results of MRR and Ra for L-18 OA 
Conditions 
Tool 
Speed 
(rpm) 
Feed Rate 
(m/rev) 
Depth of 
Cut (mm) 
MRR 
(mm3/sec) 
Ra 
(µm) 
Wet 
CNMG-710 
710 
0.02 
0.1 
9.8 × 10–7 
0.9234 
Wet 
CNMG-710 
1000 
0.04 
0.15 
2.45 × 10–7 
0.9737 
Wet 
CNMG-710 
1400 
0.06 
0.2 
3.68 × 10–7 
3.7104 
Wet 
CNMG-235 
710 
0.02 
0.15 
9.8 × 10–7 
0.9234 
Wet 
CNMG-235 
1000 
0.04 
0.2 
1.229 × 10–7 4.4354 
Wet 
CNMG-235 
1400 
0.06 
0.1 
1.228 × 10–7 0.912 
Wet 
CNMG-4325 710 
0.04 
0.1 
3.68 × 10–7 
0.8782 
Wet 
CNMG-4325 1000 
0.06 
0.15 
3.68 × 10–7 
1.6535 
Wet 
CNMG-4325 1400 
0.02 
0.2 
24.5 × 10–7 
1.3932 
Dry 
CNMG-710 
710 
0.06 
0.2 
49 × 10–7 
0.9363 
Dry 
CNMG-710 
1000 
0.02 
0.1 
11.06 × 10–7 1.5729 
Dry 
CNMG-710 
1400 
0.04 
0.15 
8.6 × 10–7 
1.8205 
Dry 
CNMG-235 
710 
0.04 
0.2 
54 × 10–7 
1.175 
Dry 
CNMG-235 
1000 
0.06 
0.1 
44.2 × 10–7 
1.8346 
Dry 
CNMG-235 
1400 
0.02 
0.15 
3.68 × 10–7 
3.7104 
Dry 
CNMG-4325 710 
0.06 
0.15 
4.9 × 10–7 
1.221 
Dry 
CNMG-4325 1000 
0.02 
0.2 
2.45 × 10–7 
3.563 
Dry 
CNMG-4325 1400 
0.04 
0.1 
6.14 × 10–7 
1.0971 
The significance of the parameters is studied on the basis of experi­
mental data. As the output characteristic (surface roughness) is to be 
studied for this process, Taguchi’s signal to noise(S/N) ratio concept is 
utilized. Because surface roughness is a small-the-best type of character­
istic, the S/N ratio formula used for this analysis is 10log(Y/S2), where y 
is considered as average and s is the standard deviation [16]. The values 
of S/N ratio are calculated for all 18 experiments and these values of 
S/N ratio further analyzed for checking the statistical significance of 
parameters. The graph of S/N ratio for surface roughness is shown in 
Figure 12.12. From the graph of S/N ratio, optimum values for process 
parameters should be selected at a higher level. Working condition at 
level-1 (wet), tool at level-1 (CNMG-7115), feed at level-1 (0.20 mm/ 
rev), the speed at level-3 (1400 rpm), and depth of cut at level-1 (0.10 
mm), should be selected to minimize the roughness of the surface, Wu 
and Hamada [12]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
205 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
FIGURE 12.12  S/N ratio plot for surface roughness (Ra). 
As the material removal rate is a larger-the-best type of characteristic, 
the S/N ratio formula used is 10log (1/Y)/S2). The values of S/N ratio are 
calculated for all experiments. The plot of S/N ratio for MRR is shown in 
Figure 12.13. From the graph of S/N ratio, optimum values for process 
parameters should be selected at a higher level. Working condition at 
level-2 (dry), cutting tooltip at level-2 (CNMG-711), cutting speed at 
level-1 (710 rpm), Feed rate at level-1 (0.02 mm/rev), and depth of cut at 
level-3 (0.20) should be selected to maximize MRR. 
To investigate the process parameters, ANOVA (analysis of variance) 
are performed, Montgomery and Runger [13], as shown in Table 12.4. It 
is not convenient to identify the significance level of process parameters 
based on S/N ratio graph. Thus, to establish statistical significance, the 
confidence interval is assessed with 95% (α = 0.05) for the differences in 
mean. Using Minitab software depth of cut had DF (degree of freedom) 
(2), the adjacent sum of square (Adj SS) (26.985), adjacent mean square 
(Adj MS) (26.9853), F-value (4.63) and P-value (0.042). Since p ≤ 0.05, 
depth of cut is a significant factor for surface roughness, Gijo and Scaria 
[14]. For working conditions, cutting tooltip, speed, and feed rate have 
p≥0.05, they are not statistically significant. 

 
 
TABLE 12.4 Analysis of Variance for Surface Roughness  
Source 
DF 
Adj SS 
Adj MS 
F‑Value 
P‑Value 
Condition 
1 
6.879 
6.8791 
1.21 
0.364 
Tool tip 
1 
0.001 
0.0014 
0.00 
0.298 
Feed rate 
1 
0.971 
0.9711 
0.17 
0.690 
Speed 
1 
0.276 
0.2756 
0.05 
0.831 
Depth of cut 
1 
26.985 
26.9853 
4.64 
0.042 
Error 
12 
69.871 
5.8226 
– 
– 
Total 
17 
69.871 
– 
– 
– 
206 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
FIGURE 12.13  S/N ratio plot for MRR.  
To assess the significance of the process parameter on MRR, ANOVA  
is conducted as shown in Table 12.5. The ANOVA  study is conducted 
with 95% of the confidence interval. As the p-value for the parameters has 
greater than 0.05, the null hypothesis gets accepted. Hence, none of the 
factors is significant in this study for MRR. 

 
 
TABLE 12.5 Analysis of Variance for MRR 
Source 
DF 
Adj SS 
Adj MS 
F‑Value 
P‑Value 
Condition 
1 
854.0 
854.0 
3.35 
0.092 
Tool tip 
1 
128.3 
128.3 
0.50 
0.492 
Feed rate 
1 
579.0 
579.0 
2.27 
0.157 
Speed 
1 
171.7 
171.7 
0.67 
0.428 
Depth of cut 
1 
287.6 
287.6 
1.13 
0.309 
Error 
12 
3059.9 
255.0 
– 
– 
Total 
17 
3059.8 
– 
– 
– 
KEYWORDS 
•  
analysis of variance 
•  
degree of freedom 
•  
dry machining 
•  
high-speed steel 
•  
machining parameters 
•  
thrust force 
207 
Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Process Parameters 
REFERENCES 
1.  Tounsi, N., Vincenti, J., Otho, A., & Elbestawi, M. A., (2002). From the basics of 
orthogonal metal cutting towards the identification of the constitutive equation. Int. 
J. Mach. Tools Manuf., 42(2), 1373–1383. 
2.  Oxley, P. L. B., & Welsh, M. J. M., (1963). Calculating the shear angle in orthogonal 
metal cutting from fundamental Stress, strain, and strain rate properties of the work 
material. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Machine Tool Design and Research 
Conference (pp. 73–86). Oxford. 
3. Astakhov, V. P., Osman, M. O. M., & Hayajneh, M. T., (2001). Re-evaluation of 
the basic mechanics of orthogonal metal cutting: Velocity diagram, virtual work 
equation, and upper bound theorem. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf., 41, 393–418. 
4. Moufki, Molinari,  A., & Dudzinski, D., (1998). Modeling of orthogonal cutting with 
a temperature-dependent friction law. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 46(10) 2103–2138. 
5. Moufki, A., Dudzinski, D., Molinari, A., & Rausch, M., (1999). Thermo viscoplastic 
modeling of oblique cutting: Forces and chip flow predictions. International Journal 
of Mechanical Sciences, 42(2000), 1205–1232. 

 
208 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
6.  Molinari, A., & Clifton, R. J., (1987). Analytical determination of shear localization 
in thermoviscoplastic materials. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 54, 80612. 
7.  Johnson, W., & Mellor, P. B., (1983). Engineering Plasticity. John Wiley & Sons, 
New York. 
8. Kushner, V. S., (1982). Thermo Mechanical Approach in Metal Cutting. Irkutsk Univ. 
Pabl. Ltd, Irkutsk, Russia. 
9. Bhatt, P., Tewari, A., & Raval, H. K., (2018). Modeling of oblique cutting process 
using coulombs friction law for Ti-6Al-4V  Alloy. Materials Today: Proceedings, 
5(11), 23596–23602. 
10. Bhatt, P., Tewari, A., & Raval, H. K., (2018). Parametric study and modeling of 
orthogonal cutting process for AISI 4340 and Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Materials Today: 
Proceedings, 5(2), 4730–4735. 
11. Solanki, M., & Desai, D., (2015). Comparative study of TQM and six sigma. 
International Journal of Industrial Engineering and Technology, Trans Stellar 
Publication, 5(4), 1–6. 
12.   Wu, C. F. J., & Hamada, M., (2011). Experiments-Planning, Analysis, and Parameter 
Design Optimization. John Wiley, New York, NY. 
13. Montgomery, D. C., & Runger, G. C., (2007). Applied Statistics and Probability for 
Engineers (4th edn.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc, London. 
14.  Gijo, E. V., & Scaria, J., (2010). Reducing rejection and rework by application of six 
sigma methodology in the manufacturing process. International Journal of Six Sigma 
and Competitive Advantage, 6(1/2), 77–90. 
15. Binglin, L., Yujin, H., Xuelin, W., Chenggang, L., & Xingxing, L., (2011). An 
analytical model of oblique cutting with application to end milling. Machining 
Science and Technology: An International Journal, 15(4), 453–484. doi: 
10.1080/10910344.2011.620920. 
16. Taguchi, G., (1987). Systems of Experimental Design (Vols. 1 and 2). UNIPUB and 
American Supplier Institute, New York, NY. 
17. Astakhov, V. P., & Osman, M. O. M., (1996). An analytical evaluation of the cutting 
forces in self-piloting drilling using the model of the shear zone with parallel 
boundaries. Part 1: Theory. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture, 
36(11), 1187–1200. 
18. Dudzinski, D., & Molinari, A. (1997). A modelling of cutting for viscoplastic 
materials. Int. J. Mech. Sci., 39(4), 369–389. 
19. Merchant, M. E. (1944). Basic mechanics of the metal cutting process. ASME J. Appl. 
Mech. 66, 168–175. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13  
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank 
Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
Using the Jaya Algorithm 
RAMANPREET SINGH and VIMAL KUMAR PATHAK 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Manipal University Jaipur,  
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India,  
E-mail: ramanpreet.singh@jaipur.manipal.edu (R. Singh)  
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
Human gait is a complex function that requires repetitive and coordi­
nated rhythmic movement of lower-limbs. Its control is dependent on 
the coordination of the musculoskeletal system, locomotion mechanism, 
and motor control. Any disturbance in their coordination may lead to 
stroke. Stroke destroys many the cortical neurons whereas remaining 
neurons are temporarily affected. The temporarily affected neurons may 
regain functioning to some extent. Therefore, post-stroke patients are 
suggested to undergo rehabilitation and try to relearn walking. Typically, 
this is done with the help of manual physiotherapies and with assistive 
devices [1, 2]. Traditional therapies are done manually with the help of 
therapists, treadmills, bodyweight support systems, etc. However, they 
are physically demanding for therapists. Also, frequent and consistent 
training sessions may not be available which may leave a patient with 
permanent disability [3]. 
Various treadmill-based exoskeletons have been explored over the 
years. Typically, these are multi-degree of freedom (DF) devices that 
contain mechanisms, actuators, and control technology for manipulating 
users’ lower limb motion while walking. Some of the treadmill-based 
rehabilitation devices are discussed here. The ReoAmbulatorTM which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
210 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
is commercialized by Motorika USA Inc. powered to lift a patient from 
a wheelchair and transports the patient over the treadmill [4]. Lokomat 
is developed from the prototype of driven gait orthosis and it is provided 
with virtual reality environment along with audio and visual biofeed­
back which is commercially available [5] while driven gait orthosis [6], 
LokoHelp [7], Alex [8], and Lopes [9] are among other treadmill-based 
rehabilitation devices. Also, the treadmill-based exoskeletons are bulky 
and they are often used in rehabilitation centers and hospitals. The other 
categories of exoskeletons may be over-ground and portable exoskel­
etons. The mobile base over-ground rehabilitation exoskeletons may 
consist of a mobile base, a BWS, and joint level assistance to provide 
comfort to the patients for rehabilitation. They do not restrict training 
to the treadmill or a confined area rather they allow patients to regain 
their natural walk. In addition, the patients move voluntarily despite 
considering a predetermined pattern for moving. Some of the over-
ground exoskeletons are explored to identify the mechanism used for the 
joints. EXPOS developed by Sogang University is used especially for 
the elderly and the patients [10]. Another version of the EXPOS which is 
known as SUBAR (Sogang University biomedical assistive robot) may 
also be used for over-ground rehabilitation [11]. LEER (lower extremity 
exoskeleton robot) [12], NatTUre-gaits [13], WalkTrainerTM [14], and 
Kine Assist robotic device [15] are among other rehabilitation devices 
which may also be used. 
Another category of lower-limb robotic devices is portable rehabili­
tation exoskeletons or assistive devices. These exoskeletons are mobile 
and do not require any base or treadmill. As opposed to treadmill-based 
exoskeletons, they are lightweight and easy to don and doff. Their 
simple and small structure makes them relatively more comfortable 
in comparison with treadmill-based and mobile-based overground 
exoskeletons. Besides, one of the most notable features of the portable 
exoskeletons is that they allow natural walking, and the power source is 
attached to the exoskeleton for actuating the joints. In addition, the users 
require crutches along with the exoskeleton during walking, because 
of their impaired physical ability. Some of these portable multi-DOF 
exoskeletons are explored here. ReWalk [16] and HAL [17] are the 
commercially available portable exoskeletons that can be used with 
crutches for rehabilitation. Other portable rehabilitation devices devel­
oped by researchers include Powered Orthosis of Vanderbilt University 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
211 
[18], modified motor-powered gait orthosis [19], powered gait orthosis 
(PGO) [20], knee-ankle-foot robot [3], etc. 
It is found that linkage mechanisms play a vital role in the actuation 
of mechanism, gait speed, step length, etc. Hence, it is also worthwhile 
to investigate the area of assisting devices or orthosis for knee joint 
while synthesizing a mechanism for supporting an injured knee, or gait 
rehabilitation. Typically, it is used to correct the functions of physically 
impaired patients. Some of the important features of an orthosis are 
restraining joint mobility, correcting limb malformations, assistance 
in ambulation, stability, etc. [21]. Various orthoses that are used for 
assisting an injured knee or rehabilitating gait are explored. The orthosis/ 
knee brace uses a three-point fixation system to avoid hyperextension 
and effectively control hyperextension [22]. Another device is an off-
the-shelf knee brace with a hinged between the thigh and shank which 
can be used by osteoarthritis patients [23]. Another orthosis that can be 
used for providing relief to osteoarthritis patients can be an adjustable 
unloader knee brace which uses a polycentric joint between thigh and leg 
segments. In addition, this novel knee brace does not require straps for 
providing the needed moment [24]. 
Besides, the orthoses can be extended to ankle and foot and those types 
of orthoses are called knee-ankle-foot orthoses (KAFO). KAFO contains 
a cam mechanism with friction rings and lock that enable the KAFO to 
lock the knee joint at any position to assist the patients with knee flexion 
contractures [25]. Another KAFO uses a four-bar linkage for coupling the 
knee and ankle movement [26]. In addition, actuators with linkage mecha­
nism at the knee joints are also found [27–29]. A four-bar linkage actuator 
for knee assisting devices can be used to mimic the motion of the human 
knee joint for the rehabilitation of hemiplegic patients [30]. Devices which 
couple the knee and ankle movement through linkage mechanisms and 
which use linkage mechanisms for actuation are among others. Thus, the 
mechanisms play a vital role in the functioning of the exoskeleton and 
assisting devices. A mechanism can be employed in rehabilitation devices, 
bipeds, exoskeletons, etc. 
Single DF walking mechanism is another area in which researchers 
are working actively. Various synthesis techniques and mechanisms have 
been explored for designing them. A cam-driven mechanism in which 
a cam system attached to the body frame connects the feet of the robot 
through a pantograph mechanism that can be used [31]. A six-bar linkage 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
212 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
can be used to approximate the femur and tibia motions while a third 
leg can be included to ensure the frontal stability [32]. Alternatively, a 
six-bar Stephenson III mechanism can be used for designing a walking 
linkage. The mechanism can be synthesized in two stages; four-bar 
linkage that generates the inverted gait should be synthesized in the first 
stage followed by the synthesis of a dyad that inverts and magnify the 
gait [33]. Another six-bar linkage, i.e., Klann linkage can also be used 
for producing a variety of gaits [34]. 
It is found that most of the devices are treadmill-based gait rehabilita­
tion systems, overground, and portables devices that have multi-degrees 
of freedom, in addition, they use a single-axis, revolute joint at the 
knee, which allows only rotational motion. The devices that use linkage 
mechanisms at the knee, hip, ankle, and foot are rare and they require 
the large value of peak torque to their actuation design. Therefore, in this 
chapter, an optimized design of the slider-crank knee orthotic device is 
proposed. Its mechanical design is inspired from the design of a compact 
portable knee-ankle-foot robot which can be referred in detail from 
Ref. [3]. 
The remainder of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 13.2 
discusses the biomechanics of the human knee joint. Section 13.3 
illustrates the mechanism design and optimization problem formula­
tion. The optimization algorithm required to solve the optimization 
problem is presented in Section 13.4. Lastly, conclusions are outlined in 
Section 13.5. 
13.2 BIOMECHANICS OF HUMAN KNEE 
Comprehension of physiological gait patterns is crucial for defining the 
trajectories to guide walking. Human walking (gait) pattern varies with 
individuals; hence, it should be studied for many subjects. The kinematics 
and kinetics data for human gait can be obtained from the normative gait 
database [35, 36]. Typically, it is presented in a statistical average and 
standard deviation of several sets of values normalized for a complete gait 
cycle. The measurement techniques and subjects may differ for distinct 
research groups; therefore, the reported data may differ. Figures 13.1 and 
13.2 demonstrate the biomechanics of the human lower limb in terms of 
knee flexion/extensions and torques. 

 
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
213  
FIGURE 13.1  Average knee flexion/extension. 
FIGURE 13.2  Joint torque. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
13.3 MECHANISM DESIGN AND OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM 
FORMULATION 
A slider-crank mechanism is used in this design for the knee joint. The 
Schematic diagram of the slider-crank mechanism for the orthotic knee 
joint is shown in Figure 13.4. An optimization problem is formulated to 
minimize the required peak force by the actuator. To obtain an adequate 
and safe motion range, the physical structure and geometrical constraints 
are adapted from Ref. [3]. Figures 13.3 and 13.4 show various definitions 
of the slider-crank mechanism for the knee joint. is the crank angle when 
the relative angle between femur and tibia, θ
becomes 0. Also, to ensure 
knee,
that at the peak value of the required torque the crank and connecting 
rod becomes perpendicular, consequently, it maximizes the length of the 
lever-arm to apply force a constraint is used as follows: 
θ
 + α = 90o 
(13.1)
kneemax
k 
In which, θ
represents knee joint orientation corresponding to 
kneemax 
maximum torque. 
To optimize the geometrical parameters of the four-bar slider-crank 
mechanism, and to ensure the allowable range of motion, following kine­
matics of the slider-crank mechanism is considered: 
d cos θ  = c  + c  cos θ
(13.2)
k1
1
2
k2 
FIGURE 13.3  Various definitions of slider-crank mechanism. 

 
 
d sin θk1 = c2 sin θk2  
(13.3)
[ d 2
min - c2 
1 )
where, (k 2 = acoscos  
 ; also θ  = α + θ
 
2c c
1 2   
k2
k 
knee
The torque generated at the knee joint can be posed as: 
 
M = Fc2 sin (θk2 – θk1) 
(13.4)
Since the only unknown in Eq. (13.4) is . Therefore, it is posed as 
minimization of peak actuator force problem in the form of an infinite 
norm, as follows: 
M
Min f   
x   F  c sinsin  
  
 
2 
k 2 
k1   
The geometrical constraints for the above objective function can be 
posed as follows, as in Ref. [3]: 
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
215 
FIGURE 13.4  Schematic of the orthotic knee joint with the slider-crank mechanism. 

 
 
 
 
 
216 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
Subject to d max < c1 + c2 
 
dmin > c1 – c2  
 
c1 – c2  
 
θkneemax_req ≤ θk2 – αk  ≤ θkneemax_limit  
 
θkneemin_limit ≤ θk2 – αk  ≤ θkneemin_req  
13.4 OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM AND RESULTS 
In this section, an optimization algorithm, Jaya, is used to solve the 
problem formulated in the previous section (as adopted from Ref. [3]). 
Jaya [37] is a simple algorithm that tries to move the candidate solution 
towards the best candidate and away from the worst candidate. 
The algorithms begin with the random population initialization using 
Eq. (135) in which xt
ji, is the jth candidate for j = 1, ..., c, that contains 
design variables (i = 1, ... d). Li and Ui are the lower and upper limits on 
the ith design variable and t represents tth iteration. 
xt  L  rand U
 
 L
ji 
i 
 
i
i  
(13.5) 
From the population of candidates, best, and worst candidates are iden­
tified. These best and worst candidates are utilized to move the candidate 
solution towards the best and away from the worst solution. This can be 
achieved by using Eq. (13.6) as follows: 
t 1 
t 
t 
t
 
x
x  rand  x 
 x   rand  x 
 x  
(13.6)
ji 
ji 
1 
best 
ji 
2 
best 
ji 
In which, rand1 and rand2 are the random numbers between [0, 1]. 
The updated population of the candidates is then compared with 
the previous population of candidates. A new population is formed by 
the greedy selection of candidates between two populations. Lastly, the 
termination criterion is checked and this step completes the first iteration 

 
 
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
217  
of Jaya algorithm. The details of the Jaya algorithm are provided in 
Figure 13.5. 
FIGURE 13.5  Flowchart of the Jaya algorithm. 

 
 
  
TABLE 13.1 Optimized Parameters of Robotic Knee Joint 
Parameters 
Knee Joint [3] 
Knee Joint Proposed 
Initial Angle αk (degrees) 
70 
73.17 
θkneemix_req   –θkneemax_req 
0–120 
8.67–74 
(limiting range) 
c1 (mm) 
168 
177.6 
c2 (mm) 
45 
53 
Peak Force (N) 
687 
554.176 
 
 
218 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
The algorithm is implemented to minimize peak force for the design of 
a slider-crank mechanism. The algorithm helped in reducing the required 
actuator force. The results of the new design after optimization are 
presented in Table 13.1. 
FIGURE 13.6  Required output force. 
Figure 13.6 shows the comparison between the required output 
forces by the slider-crank mechanism with that of the mechanism 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KEYWORDS 
•  
biomechanics 
•  
knee-ankle-foot orthoses 
•  
lower extremity exoskeleton robot  
•  
optimization algorithm  
•  
powered gait orthosis 
•  
Sogang University biomedical assistive robot 
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
219 
presented in Ref. [3]. It is found that there is a reduction of 19% in the 
required peak force using the proposed slider-crank mechanism in the 
orthotic device. 
13.5 CONCLUSIONS 
The chapter proposed a slider-crank linkage for an orthotic device that 
required less peak force for actuation. The mechanism is synthesized using 
the optimal synthesis technique. An optimization inspired problem and 
geometrical constraints are formulated based on the notion presented in 
the literature. A metaphor-less algorithm, Jaya, is used to solve the opti­
mization problem. It is found that the required peak force has reduced to 
around 19% of the peak force presented in the literature. The proposed 
slider-crank mechanism can be used for the orthotic devices to provide 
support to the injured knee joint. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Kora, K., Stinear, J., & McDaid, A., (2017). Design, analysis, and optimization of an 
acute stroke gait rehabilitation device. Journal of Medical Devices, 11(1), 014503. 
2.  Langhorne, P., Stott, D., Knight, A., Bernhardt, J., Barer, D., & Watkins, C., (2010). 
Very early rehabilitation or intensive telemetry after stroke: A pilot randomized trial. 
Cerebrovascular Diseases, 29(4), 352–360. 
3. Chen, G., Qi, P., Guo, Z., & Yu, H., (2016). Mechanical design and evaluation of 
a compact portable knee-ankle-foot robot for gait rehabilitation. Mechanism and 
Machine Theory, 103, 51–64. 

 
220 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
4. West, R. G., (2004). Inventor; Health South Corporation, assignee. Powered Gait 
Orthosis and Method of Utilizing Same. United States patent US 6,689,075. 
5.  Riener, R., Lunenburger, L., Jezernik, S., Anderschitz, M., Colombo, G., & Dietz, 
V., (2005). Patient-cooperative strategies for robot-aided treadmill training: First 
experimental results. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation 
Engineering, 13(3), 380–394. 
6.   Colombo, G., Joerg, M., Reinhard, S. B. N., & Dietz, V., (2000). Treadmill training of 
paraplegic patients using a robotic orthosis. Development, 37(6), 693–700. 
7.   Freivogel, S., Mehrholz, J., Husak-Sotomayor, T., & Schmalohr, D., (2008). Gait 
training with the newly developed ‘Loko Help’-system is feasible for non-ambulatory 
patients after stroke, spinal cord, and brain injury: A feasibility study. Brain Injury,  
22(7–8), 625–632. 
8.  Banala, S. K., Agrawal, S. K., & Scholz, J. P., (2007). Active leg exoskeleton (ALEX) 
for gait rehabilitation of motor-impaired patients. In: Rehabilitation Robotics (pp. 
401–407). ICORR 2007, IEEE 10th International Conference on 2007 Jun 13 IEEE. 
9.   Veneman, J. F., Kruidhof, R., Hekman, E. E., Ekkelenkamp, R., Van, A. E. H., & 
Van, D. K. H., (2007). Design and evaluation of the LOPES exoskeleton robot 
for interactive gait rehabilitation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and 
Rehabilitation Engineering, 15(3), 379–386. 
10.   Kong, K., & Jeon, D., (2006). Design and control of an exoskeleton for the elderly 
and patients. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 11(4), 428–432. 
11.   Kong, K., Moon, H., Hwang, B., Jeon, D., & Tomizuka, M., (2009). Impedance 
compensation of SUBAR for back-drivable force-mode actuation. IEEE Transactions 
on Robotics, 25(3), 512–521. 
12.   Guo, Z., Fan, Y., Zhang, J., Yu, H., & Yin, Y., (2012). A  new 4M model-based 
human-machine interface for lower extremity exoskeleton robot. In: International 
Conference on Intelligent Robotics and Applications (pp. 545–554). Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg. 
13.  Wang, P., Low, K. H., & Tow, A., (2011). Synchronized walking coordination for 
impact-less footpad contact of an overground gait rehabilitation system: NaTUre­
gaits. In: Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR) (pp. 1–6). IEEE 
 
International Conference 
on 2011 Jun 29. IEEE. 
14.  Bouri, M., Stauffer, Y ., Schmitt, C., Allemand, Y., Gnemmi, S., Clavel, R., 
Metrailler, P., & Brodard, R., (2006). The walk trainer: A robotic system for walking 
rehabilitation. In: Robotics and Biomimetics (pp. 1616–1621). ROBIO’06, IEEE 
International Conference on 2006 Dec. 17. IEEE. 
15.   Peshkin, M., Brown, D. A., Santos-Munné, J. J., Makhlin, A., Lewis, E., Colgate, J. 
E., Patton, J., & Schwandt, D., (2005). Kine assists: A  robotic overground gait and 
balance training device. In: Rehabilitation Robotics (pp. 241–246). ICORR 2005, 9th  
International Conference on 2005 Jun 28. IEEE. 
16.  Zeilig, G., Weingarden, H., Zwecker, M., Dudkiewicz, I., Bloch, A., & Esquenazi, 
A., (2012). Safety and tolerance of the ReWalk™ exoskeleton suit for ambulation by 
people with complete spinal cord injury: A pilot study. The Journal of Spinal Cord 
Medicine, 35(2), 96–101. 
17.  Kawamoto, H., Hayashi, T., Sakurai, T., Eguchi, K., & Sankai, Y., (2009). 
Development of single leg version of HAL  for hemiplegia. In: Engineering in 

 
Mechanical Design of a Slider-Crank Mechanism for a Knee Orthotic Device 
221 
Medicine and Biology Society (pp. 5038–5043). EMBC 2009, Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE 2009 Sep. 3. IEEE. 
18. Quintero, H., Farris, R., Hartigan, C., Clesson, I., & Goldfarb, M., (2011). A powered 
lower limb orthosis for providing legged mobility in paraplegic individuals. Topics in 
Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation, 17(1), 25–33. 
19. Ohta, Y., Yano, H., Suzuki, R., Yoshida, M., Kawashima, N., & Nakazawa, K., 
(2007). A two-degree-of-freedom motor-powered gait orthosis for spinal cord injury 
patients. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part H: Journal of 
Engineering in Medicine, 221(6), 629–639. 
20.  Ruthenberg, B. J., Wasylewski, N. A., & Beard, J. E., (1997). An experimental 
device for investigating the force and power requirements of a powered gait orthosis. 
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development,  34(2), 203. 
21. Masiero, S., Mastrocostas, M., & Musumeci, A., (2018). Orthoses in older patients. 
In: Rehabilitation Medicine for Elderly Patients (pp. 133–145). Springer, Cham. 
22.  Butler, P. B., Evans, G. A., Rose, G. K., & Patrick, J. H., (1983). A  review of selected 
knee orthoses. Rheumatology, 22(2), 109–20. 
23. Draganich, L., Reider, B., Rimington, T., Piotrowski, G., Mallik, K., & Nasson, S., 
(2006). The effectiveness of self-adjustable custom and off-the-shelf bracing in the 
treatment of varus gonarthrosis. JBJS, 88(12), 2645–52. 
24. Hangalur, G., Bakker, R., Tomescu, S., & Chandrashekar, N., (2018). New adjustable 
unloader knee brace and its effectiveness. Journal of Medical Devices, 12(1), 015001. 
25.  Jonathan, K. P. E., (2009). PhD engineering design review of stance-control knee-
ankle-foot orthoses. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 46(2), 
257. 
26.  Berkelman, P., Rossi, P., Lu, T., & Ma, J., (2007). Passive orthosis linkage for 
locomotor rehabilitation. In: Rehabilitation Robotics (pp. 425–431). ICORR 2007, 
IEEE 10th International Conference on 2007 Jun 13. IEEE. 
27. Singh, R., Chaudhary, H., & Singh, A. K., (2017). Defect-free optimal synthesis of 
crank-rocker linkage using nature-inspired optimization algorithms. Mechanism and 
Machine Theory, 116, 105–122. 
28. Singh, R., Chaudhary, H., & Singh, A. K., (2018). A novel gait-based synthesis 
procedure for the design of 4-bar exoskeleton with natural trajectories. Journal of 
Orthopaedic Translation, 12, 6–15. 
29. Singh, R., Chaudhary, H., & Singh, A., (2019). A novel gait-inspired four-bar lower 
limb exoskeleton to guide the walking movement. Journal of Mechanics  in Medicine 
and Biology, 1950020. 
30.  Kim, J. H., Shim, M., Ahn, D. H., Son, B. J., Kim, S. Y., Kim, D. Y., Baek, Y. S., & 
Cho, B. K., (2015). Design of a knee exoskeleton using foot pressure and knee torque 
sensors. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 12(8), 112. 
31.  Zhang, Y., Arakelian, V., & Le Baron, J. P., (2017). Design of a legged walking 
robot with adjustable parameters. In: Advances in Mechanism Design II (pp. 65–71). 
Springer International Publishing. 
32.  McKendry, J., Brown, B., Westervelt, E. R., & Schmiedeler, J. P., (2008). Design and 
analysis of a class of planar biped robots mechanically coordinated by a single degree 
of freedom. Journal of Mechanical Design, 130(10), 102302. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
222 
Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics: System Integration and Design 
33. Batayneh, W., Al-Araidah, O., & Malkawi, S., (2013). Biomimetic design of a single 
DOF Stephenson III leg mechanism. Mechanical Engineering Research, 3(2), 43. 
34.  Sheba, J. K., Elara, M. R., Martínez-García, E., & Tan-Phuc, L., (2017). Synthesizing 
reconfigurable foot traces using a Klan mechanism. Robotica, 35(1), 189–205. 
35.  Majernik, J., (2013). Normative human gait databases. Statistics Research Letters, 
2(3), 69–74. 
36.  Perry, J., & Davids, J. R., (1992). Gait analysis: Normal and pathological function. 
Journal of Pediatric Orthopaedics, 12(6), 815. 
37.  Rao, R., (2016). Jaya: A simple and new optimization algorithm for solving 
constrained and unconstrained optimization problems. International Journal of 
Industrial Engineering Computations, 7(1), 19–34. 

Index  
A 
Accelerometer, 172  
Active  
olfaction scope, 52  
suspension, 19–21, 33, 38  
Additive manufacturing, 42, 46, 47, 48  
mechatronics, 46  
Advection-diffusion model, 53  
Algorithm  
implementation, 55  
specific parameter, 7  
Algorithmic control parameters, 7  
Analogue to digital converter (ADC), 172  
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), 181, 182,  
205–207  
Anisotropic  
discs, 124  
rotating disc, 89  
thermoelastic medium, 118  
Anisotropy, 82, 84, 87, 89, 97, 123, 133,  
193  
Armature  
current, 146, 151  
voltage, 146, 152, 158, 159, 161–163  
Automobile, 18, 19, 191  
Automotive suspension systems, 38  
B 
Bacterial foraging optimization (BFO), 53  
Balancing, 1–3, 9, 10, 13, 20  
Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata  
Samiti (BMVSS), 170, 187  
Bimorph cantilever, 75  
Bingham plastic model, 26  
Biomechanics, 212, 219  
Black carbon layer, 45  
Bouc-Wen  
based semi-active suspension system  
(BWSAS), 30, 32, 34–36, 39  
hysteresis model, 29, 38  
model, 29, 30, 38, 39  
Boundary condition, 83, 102, 103, 108,  
117, 129  
C 
Cantilever beam, 73, 74, 75  
Carbon nanotubes, 90  
Center of mass, 2  
Centroid  
method, 33  
of gravity (COG), 178  
Ceramic dental implants, 97, 98  
Chemical warehouse, 52  
Chemotaxis, 53  
Chronic diseases, 167  
Circumferential strains, 90  
Closed-loop  
control system, 141, 152, 153  
controlled rotary pendulum system  
transfer function, 152  
system, 157  
Cohesive forces, 113  
Commande Robuste d’Ordre Non-Entier  
(CRONE), 142, 165  
Commercially off the shelf (COTS), 68, 79  
Controller parameters estimation, 149  
Conventional  
hydraulic  
damper, 24  
shock absorber, 20  
optimization techniques, 2  
suspension system, 19  
Convergence plots, 62  
Corrosion, 137  
Coulomb friction element, 27, 28  
Coupled theory, 113  
Creep, 83–90, 92, 98, 123, 124, 126, 127,  
130, 133  
laws, 85  
strains, 133  

 
224 
Index 
Critical points, 101, 108  
Crowding distance, 1, 7, 8, 10, 13  
D 
Dahl  
friction model, 28  
model, 28  
Damping characteristics, 24  
Data  
acquisition (DAQ), 68, 171, 172  
driven system, 46  
DC motor model, 146  
Defuzzification, 33, 178  
Degree of freedom (DF), 145, 205–207,  
209, 211  
Determination coefficient, 181  
Diaphragm strain gauge, 168  
Digital sensor, 68  
Dimensionless stress, 118, 119  
Disc geometry, 125  
Dry machining, 194, 198, 199, 207  
Dynamic  
analysis, 3, 30, 117  
characteristics, 21, 36  
environment, 52  
forces, 171  
responses, 67, 69  
E 
Eigenvalues, 75  
Elastic  
deformation, 82  
shells, 83  
stress  
function, 82  
state, 114  
Elasticity, 82, 111, 113, 114, 116–120  
Elastic-plastic  
deformation stage, 85  
disfigurements, 98  
response, 84  
stresses, 98, 102  
transition, 92, 98  
Elasto-plastic  
solution, 88  
stress, 102  
Electrical  
discharge machining (EDM), 43–46, 48  
domains, 72  
dynamics, 147  
Electrochemistry, 137  
Electrohydrodynamic jet prints, 47  
Electromagnet, 24  
Electromagnetic theory, 137  
Empirical parameters, 137  
Energy equation, 83  
Engine control unit (ECU), 20, 21, 39  
Equilibrium, 83, 100, 101, 103, 108, 112,  
114, 116, 128, 150  
Equivalent point mass system, 3  
Eringen  
model, 114, 120  
nonlocal theories, 120  
nonlocal theory, 111  
Euclidean distance, 54, 57, 114  
Euler  
Bernoulli  
beam, 74, 117  
nanobeam, 117  
gamma function, 140  
Lagrange equations, 148  
Exoskeletons, 209–211  
F 
Finite element analysis, 126  
Flexible force sensor (FFS), 172, 173  
Flexi-force  
pressure sensor, 171  
sensor, 170–172, 174, 187  
Force sensing resistors (FSR), 168, 187  
Four-bar  
mechanism, 9, 13  
planar mechanism, 3, 13  
Fractional  
calculus, 137, 138  
order PID controllers, 138, 164  
fractional calculus, 138  
fractional-order Laplace operator  
approximation, 143  
tuning rule, 141, 142  
Ziegler-Nichols method, 140, 141  
order, 137–143, 145, 149, 154, 159, 164,  
165  

 
225 
Index 
Fully-plastic state, 85, 104  
Functionally graded  
materials (FGMs), 83, 85, 90, 92, 116  
multi walled carbon nanotubes  
(FG-MWCNTs), 90, 92  
Fuzzification, 32  
Fuzzy  
inference engine, 32  
logic, 30–33, 36, 38, 39, 44, 169, 175,  
183, 187  
analysis, 187  
controlled semi-active suspension,  
31, 33  
controller, 32, 33, 38, 39, 44  
membership function, 175, 176, 178  
model, 182, 183  
output, 178  
rule, 32, 178, 179  
base, 178  
G 
Gastrocnemius, 173, 187  
Gaussian, 51, 64, 65, 176, 201  
membership curves, 32  
plume model, 51, 64, 65  
Genetic algorithm (GA), 3, 7, 10, 11, 13, 52  
Geometry parameters, 19  
Grey wolf optimizer, 53  
Grünwald-Letnikov definition, 139  
H 
Half car model, 22, 23  
Hard-to-cut materials, 192, 194  
Hardware-in-loop (HIL), 42  
Hazardous chemicals, 52  
Height (HT), 34, 47, 170, 175, 176,  
178–182, 184–186  
Hemiplegic patients, 211  
Heterogeneity, 82  
High (H), 18, 24, 25, 36, 39, 46, 47, 51,  
58, 64, 72, 82, 83, 92, 97, 104, 116, 123,  
168, 171, 175, 176, 183, 191, 192, 197,  
200, 207  
speed steel (HSS), 192–194, 207  
Hill orthotropic yield criterion, 88  
Hoffman yield criterion, 89  
Homogeneous-isotropic materials, 83  
Hybrid teaching learning particle swarm  
optimization (HTLPSO), 51, 55, 56, 58,  
64, 65  
Hybridization, 53  
Hydroxyapatite (HAP), 98, 104, 108  
Hyperbolic tangent model, 27  
Hyperextension, 211  
Hypergeometric functions, 193  
Hysteresis, 29, 38, 67, 173  
I  
Idler loops, 2  
Incompressible materials, 88, 91  
Independent front suspension, 19  
Indoor environment, 51, 52, 64, 65  
Initial yielding, 85, 103–106, 108  
Ink-jet 3D printing technology, 47  
Intelligent algorithms, 47  
Inter-disciplinary fields, 92  
Internal combustion, 18  
Isoenergy, 44  
pulse generator, 45  
Isothermal conditions, 124  
Isotropic  
composites, 87  
cylinders, 83, 93  
discs, 82, 87, 124, 125, 130, 133  
macrostructural symmetry, 98, 104  
J 
Jaya algorithm, 1, 3, 7, 8, 13, 217  
K 
Kick point, 173  
Kinetic energy, 147  
Kingpin inclination angles, 19  
Knee-ankle-foot orthoses (KAFO), 211, 219  
L 
Laplace operator, 140, 145, 149  
Lateral gastrocnemius, 173  
Lattice parameter, 112  
Linear  
classical theory, 92  

 
226 
Index 
differential equations, 83, 98  
fields, 92  
Line-scan machine vision, 48  
Lithographic patterning, 46  
Local  
micropolar solid, 115  
optima elimination dispersal, 53  
Low (L), 7, 18, 24, 25, 46, 48, 64, 71, 84,  
175, 176, 187  
Lower extremity exoskeleton robot  
(LEER), 210, 219  
Lumped mass model, 74  
M 
Machining  
parameters, 195, 207  
process mechatronics, 43  
Magnetic field, 24, 26  
Magnetorheological (MR), 24–26, 30, 31,  
33, 38  
dampers, 21, 24  
application, 25  
mono tube damper, 24  
twin tube damper, 25  
fluid, 21  
mathematical models, 26  
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), 53  
Mass  
density, 76  
production, 79  
MATLAB, 9, 24, 193  
Mechatronic, 41–48, 67, 69  
point, 69  
systems, 48, 67, 68  
Medial  
gastrocnemius, 173  
tibia, 173  
Medium (M), 45, 113, 115, 118, 120, 175,  
176  
Membrane pre-buckling state, 83  
Metaphor-less algorithm, 219  
Micro analysts, 92  
Microcontroller unit, 71  
Micropolar  
elastic medium, 115, 120  
elasticity, 114  
Micro-scale  
additive manufacturing, 46, 47  
manufacturing, 46  
Microscopic scales, 112  
Mises  
criteria, 84, 87, 124  
isotropic yield criterion, 88  
yield criterion, 84, 87  
Modified  
genetic algorithm (MGA), 52  
particle swarm optimization (M-PSO), 52  
Monolithic materials, 83  
Monotube  
damper, 24, 25  
MR damper, 25  
Mors machine, 18  
Motorcycle suspension, 26  
Motorized actuators, 20  
Multidisciplinary stream, 42, 49  
Multi-objective optimization problem  
(MOOP), 1, 5, 7, 13  
Multi-robot, 52, 65  
N 
Nanobeams, 114–117, 120  
National Highway Traffic Safety Adminis­
tration (NHTSA), 69, 78, 79  
Natural frequency, 72–76  
Newton-Euler equations, 3  
Non-adjacent elements, 114  
Non-dominance  
approach, 7  
solutions, 10, 13  
Nondominated sorting Jaya algorithm  
(NSJAYA), 1, 3, 7–11, 13  
algorithms, 7, 9, 10, 13  
Non-linear  
differential equation, 101  
problems, 92, 93  
theory, 113  
Nonlinearity, 67, 83, 92, 117, 169  
Non-local  
deformation effects, 115  
elastic solid, 117  
elasticity, 113, 114, 116  
micropolar solid, 115  
strain tensor, 116  

 
227 
Index 
stress  
forces, 112  
tensor, 116  
theory, 111, 112, 114, 116, 117, 119  
thermoelastic parameters, 115, 116  
thermoelasticity theory, 117  
Nonlocality, 111–114, 117–120  
Norton’s  
creep law, 88  
law, 90  
Nuclear reactors, 83  
O 
Oblique cutting processes  
analytical modeling, 194  
Odor source localization (OSL), 51–53,  
60, 64, 65  
On-line atomic force microscopy, 47  
Open-loop approach, 46  
Optimization  
algorithm, 3, 6, 7, 55, 212, 216, 219  
fuzzy logic controller, 36  
step road profile optimized results, 36  
problem formulation, 3, 4, 212  
Optimized FLCSAS (OFLCSAS), 36–39  
Orthosis, 210, 211  
Osteoarthritis, 211  
Ox-drawn cart, 17  
P 
Parameter  
mathematical model, 74  
tuning, 53, 165  
Parameterless algorithm, 10, 53  
Parametric model, 138  
Pareto  
optimal solutions, 2  
set, 1, 13  
Particle swarm optimization (PSO), 3, 7,  
52, 53, 55, 64, 65  
Passive  
control systems, 24  
suspension, 20, 31, 34, 39  
system (PaS), 20, 21, 34, 36, 38, 39  
system, 19, 35  
Patella tendon bearing (PTB), 170, 173,  
179, 187  
Pedestrians, 20  
Periodic oscillation, 141  
Perturbation, 92, 93  
Piezo  
bimorph, 72, 73  
energy harvesting, 72  
harvester, 72, 77  
Piezoelectric (PZT)  
bimorphs, 72, 79  
harvester, 74  
energy harvester, 72, 73, 79  
harvesting, 72  
materials, 72, 73, 76  
plates, 73  
Piezoresistive sensors, 168  
Piston-type strain gauge, 168  
Planar  
mechanism, 1–3, 9, 12  
dynamic analysis, 3  
standard mechanism, 1  
Plane strain condition, 90  
Plasma column, 45, 46  
Plasticity, 82, 85, 87, 104  
Plume models, 65  
Pneumatics, 47, 48  
Point mass, 1, 3, 5, 9, 13  
parameters, 1, 5, 13  
system, 1, 4, 6, 13  
Poisson ratios, 124  
Polycentric joint, 211  
Popliteal depression, 173  
Posteriori approach, 1–3, 13  
Potential theory, 137  
Power law, 84, 85  
Powered gait orthosis (PGO), 211, 219  
Precision engineering mechatronics, 47  
Pressure  
measurement, 168, 169, 173, 188  
sensor  
temperature range, 71  
type, 71  
Primary shear zone, 192, 193, 199  
Priori approach, 2, 10, 13  
Proportional-integral-derivative (PID), 47,  
49, 137, 138, 140–143, 145, 149, 154,  
155, 157–159, 164, 165  
Prosthetic socket, 167–169  
Protoelasticity, 113  
Prototypes, 72  

 
 
228 
Index 
Q 
Quarter car  
model, 22, 24, 30, 33, 38  
suspension model, 30  
system, 30  
R 
Radial  
strain rate, 87, 132, 133  
stress, 87, 105, 107, 124, 130, 131  
Radii ratios, 91, 108  
Radio frequency (RF), 71, 79  
Rayleigh beam theory, 117  
Reaction forces, 3, 4  
Real-time vibration reduction, 21  
Regression equations, 127, 183  
Rehabilitation, 209–212  
Reinforcement profile, 125, 133  
Residual stress, 89  
Resonance frequency, 72  
Rheological properties, 24  
Riemann-Liouville definition, 139, 140  
Road profile, 34  
Root mean square error (RMSE), 176  
Rotary pendulum system, 138, 145, 149,  
150, 152  
Rotating disc, 82, 84, 85, 87–91, 123, 124,  
128, 133  
Ruth  
Hurwitz stability criterion, 138, 150, 164  
table, 153, 154, 157  
S 
Saturation, 26, 36  
state, 26, 36  
Scalar gain parameters, 36  
Semi-active  
quarter car system, 24  
suspension, 19–21, 30, 31, 33, 36, 38, 39  
based on fuzzy logic control  
(FLCSAS), 33–39  
system modeling, 30  
systems, 24  
vehicle suspension, 25  
Semi-empirical  
law, 92, 93  
yield condition, 92  
Semi-infinite nonlocal solids, 118  
Sensor  
characteristics, 67  
integration, 45, 48  
Seth’s transition theory, 85, 88, 90, 98, 124  
Shaking  
force, 2–5, 10–13  
moment, 2–5, 10–13  
Shell deformation, 83  
Sherby’s law, 90, 124, 126  
Sigmoid curve (S curve), 155  
Silicon carbide particles (SiCp), 85, 86, 127,  
133  
Simulink, 24, 30, 32, 33  
software, 30  
Slider-crank mechanism, 214, 215, 218, 219  
Small-deflection equations, 84  
Socket fitting, 168, 169, 187, 188  
Software-in-loop (SIL), 42, 49  
Sogang University biomedical assistive  
robot (SUBAR), 210, 219  
Solenoid actuators, 20  
Source declaration error (SDE), 51, 56–60,  
64  
Spark  
plasma energy, 45  
pulse generator, 45  
Speed sensor system, 70  
Spring suspension, 18  
Sprung mass, 21, 22, 24, 32, 33, 34  
Stagnation, 53  
Standard deviation, 58, 60, 64, 204, 212  
Steering geometry, 20  
Step road profile, 33–39  
Stepper motors, 20  
Stochastic disturbances, 55  
Strain-hardening, 84  
Strap suspension, 18  
Stress-strain relation, 92, 100, 108  
Stump  
length (SL), 170, 175, 178–187  
socket interface, 168, 171, 173, 179, 188  
Stylus movement, 201  
Subtractive manufacturing, 43  
Surface  
delamination, 199  

 
229 
Index 
hardness, 43, 45  
morphology, 44, 46  
Suspension system, 17–21, 24–26, 30, 38  
active suspension, 20  
history, 17  
functions, 19  
types, 19  
passive suspension, 20  
semi-active suspension, 20  
T 
Taguchi’s  
orthogonal array, 192, 200  
signal to noise, 204  
Tangential  
strain rates, 88  
stress, 87, 124, 129–131  
Telescopic shock absorber, 19  
Thermal  
actuators, 20  
creep stresses, 90  
effects, 90, 115  
gradation, 124  
gradients, 88, 124, 130, 133  
residual stress, 89  
softening effect, 196, 198  
Thermodynamics, 113, 114  
Thermo-elastic  
creep analysis, 124  
materials, 117  
Thermoelasticity, 111–120  
Thermoelectric-mechanical vibration char­
acteristics, 114  
Thickness parameter, 83, 85, 86  
Threshold, 64, 70, 71, 90, 127  
Thrust force, 193–200, 207  
Timoshenko beam theory, 114  
Tip mass, 73–76  
Tire pressure  
maintenance system (TPMS), 70, 79  
monitoring sensor (TPMS), 67, 69–74,  
77–79  
challenges, 72  
design, 74  
direct TPMS, 71  
types, 70  
sensor system, 69  
Titanium implants, 97  
Tool wear rate, 43  
Torsion bars, 18  
Trajectory  
formulation algorithm, 46  
planning, 155, 165  
Transition  
points, 85, 98, 102  
theory, 90  
Transitional stresses, 85, 97, 98  
Transmission vibrations, 20  
Trapezoidal curve (T curve), 155, 157, 158  
Tresca  
criterion, 84  
yielding criterion, 85  
Tustin generating function, 143  
Twin tube damper, 25  
Two-link rotary pendulum  
model, 147  
system, 138, 156  
local linearization, 150  
U 
Ultra high frequency (UHF)  
transmission baud rate, 71  
transmitting frequency, 71  
Ultrasonic resonance spectroscopy, 104  
Unconventional machining process, 43  
Underactuated system, 138, 145, 164, 165  
Uniaxial yield limit, 87  
Uniform  
cantilever beam, 74  
internal pressure, 85  
V  
Vander Waals interactions, 113  
Variable thickness disc, 126  
Vector, 3–5, 127, 176  
Vehicle  
dynamics, 25  
models types, 21  
Velocity, 21, 24, 27–29, 31–37, 39, 46,  
52, 54, 87, 90, 126, 147, 191–194, 196,  
199, 200  
Vertical dynamic characteristics, 21  
Very  
high (VH), 36, 58, 171, 175, 176  
low (VL), 175, 176  

 
230 
Virtual agents (VA), 54, 57–62, 64  
Viscoelastic behavior, 28  
Viscoelasticity, 137  
Voight elements, 27  
Voltage sensor, 45  
W 
Weight (WT), 2, 17, 53, 82, 98, 170, 173,  
175, 176, 178–187, 202  
Wireless sensor network, 70  
Index 
Y 
Young’s modulus, 76, 87, 127  
Z 
Zero axial strain, 84  
Ziegler-Nichols method, 138, 141–143,  
149, 155, 157, 164, 165  
Zirconia, 97, 98, 104, 108  

