
Inkscape 0.48 Starter
Get started with this quick introduction to Inkscape,  
its features, and the community
Bethany Hiitola
  BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

Inkscape Starter
Copyright © 2011 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the 
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without 
warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers 
and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or 
indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies 
and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt 
Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: September 2011
Production Reference: 1050811
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-849517-56-0
www.packtpub.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book 
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at service@
packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
 
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 

www.PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt’s online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt’s entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
 
Ê
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
 
Ê
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
 
Ê
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.

Table of Contents
Inkscape Starter 
1
So, what is Inkscape? 
2
What are vector graphics? 
3
Installation 
4
1 – What do I need? 
4
2 – Downloading Inkscape 
4
3 – Installing Inkscape 
4
And that's it!! 
5
Quick start—Creating your first vector graphic 
6
1 – Opening a new document 
7
2 – Creating shapes 
7
3 – Changing shape options 
8
4 – Saving your graphic 
9
Top features you'll want to know about 
11
1 – Using paths  
11
2 – Combining shapes 
13
3 – Creating and editing text tools 
17
4 – Text styling keyboard shortcuts 
19
5—Using Drop Shadows and Reflections 
20
Drop Shadows 
20
Reflections 
20
6 – Using layers 
23
7 – Importing images 
25
8 – Embedding images 
25
People and places you should get to know 
27
Official sites 
27
Articles and tutorials 
27
Community 
28
Blogs 
28
Twitter 
28
Index 
29

Inkscape Starter
Welcome to the Inkscape Starter. Here you’ll learn the basics of Inkscape, get 
started with a few basic vector graphic projects, and discover some tips and tricks 
for using Inkscape. 
This document contains the following sections:
So what is Inkscape? – find out what Inkscape actually is, what you can do with it, 
and why it’s so great.
What are vector graphics? – understand what vector graphics are and the 
characteristics that make them invaluable in web and print design.
Installation – learn how to download and install Inkscape with the minimum fuss 
and then set it up so that you can use it as soon as possible.
Quick start—this section will show you how to perform one of the core tasks of 
Inkscape; building vector graphics. Follow the steps to create your own vector 
graphic, which will be the basis of most of your work in Inkscape.
Top features you need to know about – here you will learn how to perform seven 
tasks with the most important features in Inkscape. By the end of this section you 
will be able to use paths and layers, combine shapes, create and edit text tools, 
and import and embed images. 
People and places you should get to know – every Open Source project is centered 
around a community. This section provides you with many useful links to the 
project page and forums, as well as a number of helpful articles, tutorials, blogs 
and the Twitter feeds of Inkscape super-contributors.
This document was written to Inkscape version 0.48

2
Inkscape Starter
So, what is Inkscape?
Inkscape is an Open Source, free program that creates vector-based graphics that can be 
used in web, print, and screen design as well as interface and logo creation, and material 
cutting. Its capabilities are similar to those of commercial products such as Adobe Illustrator, 
Macromedia Freehand, and CorelDraw and it can be used for any number of practical 
purposes—creating vector graphics for use in illustrations, business letterheads, computer and 
electronic wallpapers, designing logos, and—as is the focus of this book—designing web pages 
and the elements within web page design.
You not only get a free download under the GNU General Public License (GPL), but can use the 
program to create items with it and freely distribute them, modify the program itself, and share 
that modified program with others.
Inkscape uses Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG), a vector-based drawing language that uses some 
basic principles:
 
Ê
A drawing can (and should) be scalable to any size without losing detail
 
Ê
A drawing can use an unlimited number of smaller drawings used (and reused) in any 
number of ways and still be a part of a larger whole
SVG and World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) web standards are built into Inkscape, giving it a 
number of features including a rich body of XML (eXtensible Markup Language) format with 
complete descriptions and animations.
Inkscape drawings can be reused in other SVG-compliant drawing programs and can adapt to 
different presentation methods. It has support across most web browsers (Firefox, Chrome, 
Opera, Safari, and Internet Explorer).
When you draw your objects (rectangles, circles, and so on), arbitrary paths, and text in 
Inkscape, you also give them attributes such as color, gradient, or patterned fills. Inkscape 
automatically creates a web mark up (XML) for each of these elements. If need be, the graphics 
can then be transformed, cloned, and grouped in the code itself. Hyperlinks can even be  
added for use in web browsers, multi-lingual scripting (which isn't available in most commercial 
vector-based programs) and more—all within Inkscape or in a native programming language. It 
makes your vector graphics more versatile in the web space than a standard JPG or GIF graphic.
There are still some limitations in the Inkscape program, even though it aims to be fully  
SVG compliant. For example, as of version 0.48 it still does not support animation or the  
full SVG specification.

3
Inkscape Starter
What are vector graphics?
Vector graphics are made up of paths. Each path is basically a line with a start and end point, 
curves, angles, and points that are calculated with a mathematical equation. These paths are 
not limited to being straight—they can be of any shape, size, and even encompass any number 
of curves. When you combine them, they create drawings, diagrams, and can even help create 
certain fonts.
These characteristics make vector graphics very different than JPEGs, GIFs, or BMP images—all 
of which are considered rasterized or bitmap images made up of tiny squares which are called 
pixels or bits. If you magnify these images, you will see they are made up of a grid (bitmaps) 
and if you keep magnifying them, they will become blurry and grainy as each pixel with bitmap 
square’s zoom level grows larger.
Computer monitors also use pixels in a grid. However, they use millions of them so that when 
you look at a display, your eyes see a picture. In high-resolution monitors, the pixels are smaller 
and closer together to give a crisper image.
How does this all relate to vector-based graphics? Vector-based graphics aren’t made up of 
squares. Since they are based on paths, you can make them larger (by scaling) and the image 
quality stays the same, lines and edges stay clean, and the same images can be used on items 
as small as letterheads or business cards or blown up to be billboards or used in high definition 
animation sequences. This flexibility, often accompanied by smaller file sizes, makes vector 
graphics ideal—especially in the world of the Internet, varying computer displays, and hosting 
services for web spaces, which leads us nicely to Inkscape, a tool that can be invaluable for use 
designing for both web and print.
If you are new to design, you might be surprised to learn that even when you are using a word 
processing program, you are using vector graphics all the time—fonts!  Fonts, are objects that are 
grouped together to make the shape of letters and illustrate the behaviors of all vector graphics. 
 
Ê
An entire font with all its letters, numbers, and symbols is a very small file size. 
 
Ê
Fonts can be set to any size without losing quality. 
Some vector-based applications allow you convert text to paths so you can modify the shapes of 
the letters themselves.

4
Inkscape Starter
Installation
In three easy steps, you can install Inkscape 0.48 and get it set up on your system.
1 – What do I need?
Inkscape is available for download for Windows, Macintosh, Linux, or Solaris operating systems. 
Before you install Inkscape, you will need to check that you have all of the required elements,  
as listed below:
 
Ê
Operating system: Windows Me, NT, or XP and Vista. Mac OS X version 10.3 (Panther) 
or higher. Most Linux distributions are supported.
 
Ê
Disk space: A minimum of 200MB free. More free space is required to store your 
graphics projects.
 
Ê
Inkscape requires an internet connection if you plan to use the Open Clip Art Library.
To run on the Mac OS X operating system, Inkscape typically runs under X11—an 
implementation of the X Window System software that makes it possible to run 
X11-based applications in Mac OS X. The X11 application has shipped with the 
Mac OS X since version 10.5. 
When you open Inkscape on a Mac, it will first open X11 and run Inkscape within 
that program. Loss of some shortcut key options will occur but all functionality is 
present using menus and toolbars.
2 – Downloading Inkscape
Go to the official Inkscape website at: http://www.inkscape.org/ and download the 
appropriate version of the software for your computer.
For the Mac OS X Leopard software, you will also need to download an additional application. 
It is the X11 application package 2.4.0 or greater from this website: http://xquartz.
macosforge.org/trac/wiki/X112.4.0.
Once downloaded, double-click the X11-2.4.0.DMG package first. It will open another 
folder with the X11 application installer. Double-click that icon to be prompted through an 
installation wizard.
3 – Installing Inkscape
Double-click the downloaded Inkscape installation package to start the installation.
For the Mac OS, a DMG file is downloaded. Double-click on it and then drag and drop the 
Inkscape package to the Application Folder.

5
Inkscape Starter
For any Windows device, a .exe file is downloaded. Double-click that file to start and complete 
the installation.
For Linux-based computers, there are a number of distributions available. Be sure to download 
and install the correct installation package for your system.
Now find the Inkscape icon in the Application or Programs folders to open the program:
Double-click the Inkscape icon and the program will automatically open to the main screen:
And that's it!!
By this point, you should have a working installation of Inkscape 0.48 and are free to play around 
and discover more about it.

6
Inkscape Starter
Quick start—Creating your first vector graphic
Vector graphics are made up of paths. Each path is basically a line with a start and end point, 
curves, angles, and points that are calculated with a mathematical equation. These paths are 
not limited to being straight—they can be of any shape, size, and even encompass any number 
of curves. When you combine them, they create drawings, diagrams, and can even help create 
certain fonts.
Inkscape uses both paths and a series of pre-determined shapes when creating graphics. Paths 
have no pre-defined lengths or widths. They are arbitrary in nature and come in three basic types:
 
Ê
Open paths (have two ends)
 
Ê
Closed paths (have no ends, like a circle)
 
Ê
Compound paths (use a combination of two open and/or closed paths)
In Inkscape there are a few ways we can make paths; with the Pencil (Freehand), Bezier (Pen), 
and Calligraphy tools—all of which are found in the tool box, which is located at the side of 
your screen.
They can also be created by converting a regular shape or text object into paths.
In general, we use paths to build unique objects that aren't part of the SVG standard shapes 
in Inkscape. Since we can combine paths and make them closed objects—they again can be 
resized, manipulated, and then exported in a number of formats.
In this section, we will show you how to create some basic vector graphics with shapes and paths 
in Inkscape (which thankfully, doesn't require you to do any mathematical equations when using it) 
and export them in a couple of different formats.

7
Inkscape Starter
1 – Opening a new document
As stated when you first open Inkscape, a new document is opened and ready to start. However, 
it uses a default canvas size of 8.5in x 11in (standard letter size) and you may need to change 
orientations and sizes for a graphic you are creating.
1. Select File | New. A menu appears with the many pre-defined sizes Inkscape has 
for you.
2. Choose one and a new document opens with the specified size.
3. If you want to manually change your document properties just go to the main menu 
and select File | Document Properties. You'll see the Document Properties window 
displayed with a number of options for customizing your canvas and "printable" page.
2 – Creating shapes
Inkscape can also create shapes that are part of the SVG standard. These include: rectangles/
squares, circles/ellipses/arcs, stars, polygons, and spirals. To create any of these shapes,  
do the following:
1. Select (click) the shape tool icon in the tool box, as highlighted in the screenshot below.

8
Inkscape Starter
2. Then draw the shape on the canvas by clicking, holding, and then dragging the shape to 
the size you want on the canvas:
3. To switch between creating stars and polygons, select that star/polygon icon in the tool 
box on the left-hand side of your screen, and then select either the polygon or the star 
icon in the Tool controls (just above the canvas).
3 – Changing shape options
Shapes have a number of attributes or options that are assigned to them. In Inkscape, the 
user interface gives you easy tools to change options such as fill color, stroke color, size, and 
placement of the shape.
1. Change the fill color of the shape by selecting a color in the color palette:
2. Change the stroke or border color by pressing and holding the Shift key and then 
selecting that color from the color palette.

9
Inkscape Starter
3. Change the position of the shape on the canvas by choosing the Select tool in the tool 
box, clicking and holding the shape, and moving it where you need it to be:
4. Change the size of the shape by also choosing the Select tool from the tool box, 
clicking and holding the edge of the shape at the node (small square or circles at edges), 
and dragging it outward to grow larger or inward to shrink until the shape is of the 
desired size.
4 – Saving your graphic
1. Inkscape will, by default, save projects in its default format, SVG. To do this, you click 
File | Save.
2. However, you might also want to export in a bitmap graphic format like PNG. To do this, 
choose File | Export Bitmap.

10
Inkscape Starter
3. In the Export Bitmap window, you can choose to save the Page (all objects), the 
Drawing, the Selection (only the object you have selected), or customize it.
4. Choose the Export area, the graphic size you want (will select pre-defined size by 
default), and click Browse to choose the same location.
5. Verify the file name in the text box and click Export.
6. To save in another format besides PNG, go to File | Save As and choose the file format 
of your choice. Inkscape allows you to save in a number of formats such as: PDF, EPS, 
ODG, WMF, and others. However, remember that if you want to save the file in a format 
that will allow you to edit in the future, you need to save it in Inkscape SVG.

11
Inkscape Starter
Top features you'll want to know about
As you start to use Inkscape, you will realize that there are a wide variety of things that you can 
do with it. This section will teach you all about the most commonly performed tasks and most 
commonly used features in Inkscape. 
1 – Using paths 
You can also use the Bezier (Pen) Tool to create objects in a bit more of a freehand form. This 
tool allows you to create straight lines and curves and connect them to create a freehand object. 
Here's an example of how to create a lightning bolt:
1. From a new document, choose the Bezier Pen tool from the tool box:
2. Click somewhere on the canvas to start drawing a straight line; click to establish a 
node. Click again to change the direction of the straight line to create an angle in our 
lightning bolt:
3. Continue to create the lightning bolt object by joining line segments.
4. Don't worry if you stop a line and realize you need to extend its length. Just drag a 
straight line to add on to the original to make it as long as you need. Click again when 
you are ready to change directions.

12
Inkscape Starter
5. Also, if you made a mistake, there's no need to start over. Press the Backspace or Delete 
key and it removes the last line segment.
6. To "close" the lightning bolt, just create a line segment and join it to the starting point 
with a final click. You'll see that all of the lines are combined into one continuous closed 
path—a lightning bolt.
7. 
When you select the lightning bolt, the entire object is selected. You can resize it, fill it 
with a color (select it and choose a color from the color palette), and move it to another 
location on the canvas. It's become a unique object for you to work with.
8. Remember, if you want to save this graphic, from the main menu select File | Save.

13
Inkscape Starter
2 – Combining shapes
Sometimes as a designer you are asked to create logos or shapes that are outside the standard 
ones provided in the software. Since Inkscape is vector-based, you can combine simple shapes, 
masking, hiding, and layering them to create these more complex shapes. Let's perform an 
exercise to see how this can be done. We'll create a heart as an example:
1. Open a new document (any size will do, since we are just practicing).
2. Select the Circle/Ellipse tool in the tool box. 
3. Create a circle shape:
4. On the main menu choose Edit | Duplicate or use the keyboard shortcut Ctrl/Cmd and D.

14
Inkscape Starter
5. From the tool box, choose the Select tool and then select the topmost circle object 
(the duplicate) and move that circle to the right side of the first, to make the crest of the 
heart. Press and hold the Ctrl key while you drag the circle to lock the horizontal axes of 
both circles:
6. From the tool box, choose the Star/Polygon tool.
7. 
In the Tool Control bar, make sure that the Polygon tool is selected:

15
Inkscape Starter
8. Draw a polygon just below the circles on the canvas, with a point facing downward:
Rotating an object
While drawing the polygon on the canvas, you can swivel it up, down, left, and 
right to position it with a point downward (for the bottom of the heart).
It is okay if you don't do this while drawing it initially; you can always choose the 
Select tool from the tool box, and click the polygon until the nodes turn to arrows 
with curves (this might require you to click the polygon object a couple of times). 
When you see the curved arrow nodes, click and drag on a corner node to rotate 
the object until it is positioned correctly.
9. Now choose the Select tool from the tool box, and drag the polygon so it creates the 
bottom point of the heart:

16
Inkscape Starter
10. To readjust the size of the polygon so that the "top" doesn't ruin the crest of the heart 
and so that side points align with the sides of the circles, just make sure the Select tool 
is active, and click the polygon. The resize nodes appear.
11. Click the node on a side that needs to be adjusted and resize it. Repeat this as necessary 
until the polygon "fits" within the circles correctly:
12. With the polygon still selected, press and hold the Shift key while you select each circle 
so all objects are selected.
13. On the main menu select Path | Union.
14. This merges all three shapes into one... and voila, it's a heart!

17
Inkscape Starter
3 – Creating and editing text tools
 
Ê
Creating text in a project is simple—select the Create and Edit Text tool in the tool box, 
as shown in the image below, click at the insertion point within an open project, and  
start typing.
 
Ê
The text is immediately displayed on the canvas:
 
Ê
The text tool (the A icon) in the tool box shown above is the only way of creating new 
text on the canvas. The T icon shown in the Command Bar is used only when editing the 
text that already exists on the canvas.
 
Ê
You can use the Text and Font menu to change everything from the font, style, size, 
and alignment. To open this window, from the main menu select Text | Text and Font 
(or use the shortcut keys and press Shift and Ctrl and T).
 
Ê
This window dialog also has a unique (and often useful) feature where you can edit your 
text directly. Click the Text tab and select the text you want to change, or add/ delete.
 
Ê
Back in the Font tab you can change the font itself, the point size, alignment, line 
spacing, and even change from horizontal to vertical text layout. But note, even with 
options for Bold, Italics, or Bold Italics there is no option for Underline.

18
Inkscape Starter
 
Ê
You can also change the spacing of a selected text by using shortcut keys. Use the  
Alt and > or Alt and < keys to try it out. There are some limitations of these shortcuts 
with Mac, Linux, and Windows VistaOS versions.
 
Ê
You can change the kerning of the font as well. Double-click some text that you have 
already entered in an open project. This will take you into the Create and Edit Text tool 
allowing you to edit the text letter by letter.
 
Ê
Using the arrow keys, move the cursor between the two letters where you want to add 
or diminish the space between.
 
Ê
Then, press the Alt and the Right Arrow Key to add space between the letters. Or 
alternatively, press the Alt and the Left Arrow Key to lessen the space between those two 
letters. There are some limitations of these shortcuts with Mac, Linux, and Windows 
Vista OS versions.
 
Ê
Then press Alt and the Up Key to move the letter(s) up from the horizontal baseline.
 
Ê
Or use the Alt and the Down Key combination to move a letter down from the horizontal 
baseline. There are some limitations of these shortcuts with Mac, Linux, and Windows 
Vista OS versions.
 
Ê
You can even rotate letters. Select a letter you want to rotate left or right and then use 
the Alt and the [ or ] keys to start moving it.

19
Inkscape Starter
4 – Text styling keyboard shortcuts
Since not all text styling options are available via a menu item, here's an overview of all the text 
options via keyboard shortcuts.
Remember: There are limitations of using shortcuts that contain the Alt key with 
Mac, Linux, and Windows Vista operating systems.
Text Selection Shortcut Keys
Ctrl + Left/Right Arrows
Cursor moves word by word.
Shift + Left/Right Arrows
Selects/deselects letter by letter.
Ctrl + Shift + Left/Right Arrows
Selects/deselects word by word.
Double click on letters
Selects the word.
Triple click
Selects the entire line of text.
Shift + Home 
For Mac OS: Shift + Fn + Left Arrow
Selects from the beginning of the line until 
the cursor position.
Shift + End
For Mac OS: Shift + Fn + Right Arrow
Selects from cursor to the end of the line.
Ctrl + Shift + Home
For Mac OS: Ctrl + Shift + Fn + Left Arrow
Selects from the beginning of the text until 
the cursor position.
Ctrl + Shift + End
For Mac OS: Ctrl + Shift + Fn + Right Arrow
Selects from the cursor position until the 
end of the text.
Hot Keys
Ctrl + B
Applies bold style to the selected text. 
Ctrl + I
Applies italic style to the selected text.
Alt + Right or Left Arrows 
Increase or decrease the space between 
characters (kerning). 
Alt + > or < keys
Changes the overall letter spacing within 
that text box.
Alt + [ or ] keys 
Rotates letters.
Alt + Up or Down Arrows
Change the vertical position of the selected 
text relatively to the baseline.
Alt + Shift + Arrows
Moves position by 10 pixel steps.
Ctrl + [ or ] 
Rotates 90°.

20
Inkscape Starter
5—Using Drop Shadows and Reflections
One of the most common effects seen with text elements—and one of the easiest to do—is 
creating a reflection or shadow of the letters in the word. We’ll learn how to do both with some 
example text.
Drop Shadows
Let’s work through an example of making a simple drop shadow.
1. Open a new document in Inkscape, Select the Create and Edit Text tool, and enter some 
text. In our example, we’ll use the words: Darkness and Mystery
2. With the text selected from the main menu select Filters, Shadows and Glows and 
then choose Drop Shadow.
3. In the Drop Shadow window, choose settings that work for the drop shadow you want 
to create. We’ll use a Blur radius of 5 pixels, Opacity of 80% and offsets for horizontal 
and vertical set at 5 pixels. 
4. Press Apply and the drop shadow will be set. 
But there are a lot more filters here that you can use that will give neat effects for your text.  
These include cutouts, cutout and glow, dark and glow, drop glow, fuzzy glow, glow, in and out, 
inner glow, inner shadow, and inset.
Reflections
In this example, we’re aiming to create a simple text heading that has a reflection below it and 
then add a little something special to the text (but very simple) to make it stand apart with very 
little other effects. Here’s what we’ll create:

21
Inkscape Starter
1. Open a new document in Inkscape, select the Create and Edit Text tool, and enter some 
text. In our example, we’ll use the words: simply beautiful
2. Next, we are going to clone the image. From the main menu select Edit, Clone, and 
then Create Clone.
3. Now we need to flip the cloned image vertically to create the basics for our reflection. 
An easy way to do this is to press the V key (or from the main menu select Object and 
then Flip Vertically). 
4. Move the “flipped” version below the original text. 

22
Inkscape Starter
5. From the tool box, select the rectangle tool and create a rectangle that covers the 
reflected (or cloned) image.
6. Since this image has the letter Y in it, and it dangles/overlaps the main text, we need 
to clip the text so there is no overlapping. Select this new rectangle and the text 
underneath it. 
Or you can select the text below by using Alt + clicking the text’s approximate location and then 
press Shift and click on Rectangle
1. From the main menu select Object and then Clip and Set. You’ll see that the Y dangler 
on the reflection now doesn’t exist.
2. Now create another rectangle, and cover the reflection again.
3. With the rectangle still selected, open the Fill and Stroke dialog and choose the 
gradient tab. 
4. Set a black to white gradient on rectangle. With the gradient white on top and black 
at the bottom.

23
Inkscape Starter
5. Again, select both the rectangle and the reflected text behind. Use the Select Tool, 
and drag around the rectangle. You should see a dotted line around the rectangle and 
the text behind it. Or you can select the text below by using Alt + clicking the text’s 
approximate location and then press Shift and click on the rectangle.
6. From the main menu select Object and then Mask, and Set. 
7. 
Now you have a reflection!  
8. If the reflection still seems a bit dark for your taste, change the opacity in the Fill and 
Stroke dialog box.
9. But let’s spice up this text just a little bit more.  Select the first letter in each word and 
let’s change the color—voila! 
Since you cloned the image, any change you make to original text will also be changed in the 
reflection automatically.
6 – Using layers
When you create documents within Inskcape, you can have layers of objects. This gives great 
flexibility when creating graphics. You can move groups of objects on a layer, separate objects 
by layers (for example a background can be on one layer and a logo on another), and stack, 
re-order, or hide layers. The settings can be adjusted layer by layer, so you can save drafts or 
different versions of mockups and keep all of this in one file.

24
Inkscape Starter
The layer you are currently using is called the drawing layer. It is selected in the Layer Dialog and 
is shown in a darker color.
 
Ê
To make the Layers Dockable Dialog viewable, from the main menu select Layer | 
Layers. On the right side of your screen the Layers Dialog is displayed:
 
Ê
You can also press Shift + Ctrl + L on your keyboard to display the Layers Dialog.
 
Ê
In the Layers dialog, press the + button to create a new layer:

25
Inkscape Starter
 
Ê
In the Layer Name field, type a descriptive name for your graphic and click Add. You 
will notice the new layer is added above the existing one in the Layers dialog:
7 – Importing images
 
Ê
Inkscape can import almost any image type—from the main menu, select File | Import. 
You can select common image file types and bring them into the open document.
 
Ê
Or you can copy an open image and paste it into the open document, drag an image 
into the Inkscape canvas, or click the Import icon in the Command bar.
Any way you choose to import the images, they are only "linked" or referenced in the open 
document. Meaning, if you move the original file from its current location, the Inkscape file 
won't be able to find the image and will give you an error. But you can also embed these images 
into your document.
8 – Embedding images
Most imported images are only linked to the original file. If you want to embed them you need 
to do the following:
 
Ê
In an open Inkscape document, select the image(s) you want to embed into  
the document.
 
Ê
From the main menu select Extensions| Images | Embed Images...:

26
Inkscape Starter
 
Ê
Check the Embed only selected images box:
 
Ê
If you want to embed all images in the document, then don't check this box.
 
Ê
Click Apply.
 
Ê
Now all images will be included within the Inkscape SVG file. This is useful if you want 
one all-inclusive file that can be sent or posted individually without worrying about 
additional source files or directory structures.
 
Ê
Please note, however, that there are some limitations to embedding images into the 
Inkscape SVG files:
 
°
An increase in file size. Most of the time, it can be increased by a third. (For 
SVG files used directly on the web, this increases bandwidth usage on the 
server or host).
 
°
You can't share images across documents. For example, if you do one PNG 
image as a background file, you can't share it across SVG files.
 
°
Sharing copyrighted fonts or images in a document could be illegal (depending 
on how extensive the rights you have purchased to use these items are to 
begin with). This is particularly important when working on commercial or 
widely used projects.
 
°
If there is extensive text-editing done with the SVG files themselves, then this 
can be complicated and time-intensive.

27
Inkscape Starter
People and places you should get to know
If you need help with Inkscape, here are some links to people and places which will  
prove invaluable.
Official sites
The site that you will find most valuable of all is, of course, the Inkscape Homepage at 
http://inkscape.org/:
It will provide you with all the manuals, current download release information, forums, and all 
the information about Inkscape you could want
Other important links from the official homepage are:
 
Ê
Manual and documentation: http://tavmjong.free.fr/INKSCAPE/MANUAL/html/
index.html
 
Ê
Wiki: http://wiki.inkscape.org/wiki/index.php/Inkscape
 
Ê
Blog: http://planet.inkscape.org/
 
Ê
For developers: https://launchpad.net/inkscape
 
Ê
Clip Art: http://www.openclipart.org/
 
Ê
Galleries: http://wiki.inkscape.org/wiki/index.php/Galleries
Articles and tutorials
Inkscape has a number of official tutorials that the developers helped create that teach you 
about the software. You can find those here: http://inkscape.org/doc/index.php?lang=en.
However, you might like some other self-guided tutorials. You can find some in these locations:
 
Ê
Inkscape Tutorials Weblog: http://inkscapetutorials.wordpress.com/
 
Ê
Floss Manuals: http://en.flossmanuals.net/Inkscape/
 
Ê
10 Must-Read Inkscape Tutorials: http://esdev.net/top-10-inkscape-tutorials/

28
Inkscape Starter
Community
As with many open-source programs, there are a number of mailing lists and forums you can join 
as a user for more resources. You can find key ones here:
 
Ê
Official mailing lists: http://inkscape.org/mailing_lists.php?lang=en 
 
Ê
Official forums: http://www.inkscapeforum.com/ 
 
Ê
User FAQ: http://wiki.inkscape.org/wiki/index.php/FAQ
Blogs
Also there are a number of blogs and screen casts (video blogs) that teach you how to use 
Inkscape. You can find my favorites here: 
 
Ê
How-To Category: Screencasters.Heathenx.org: http://screencasters.heathenx.
org/ 
 
Ê
Informational/How-to Category: Tavmjong Bah's Blog: http://tavmjong.free.fr/
blog/
 
Ê
Design/Graphic Category: 365 Sketches: http://365sketches.org/
Twitter
Here are some of the best Inkscape resources on Twitter:
 
Ê
For education and tutorials:
 
°
The official Inkscape twitter feed: http://twitter.com/inkscape
 
°
Inkscape Tutorials: http://twitter.com/inkscapetuts 
 
Ê
For design examples:
 
°
FossGrafis.com : http://twitter.com/fossgrafis
 
°
Linux Artist: http://twitter.com/linuxartist
 
Ê
For fun:
 
°
Inkscape Mag: http://twitter.com/inkscapemag 
 
°
John Lemasney: http://twitter.com/lemasney 
 
Ê
For Open Source news:
 
°
http://twitter.com/PacktOpenSource

Index
A
Adobe Illustrator  2
B
Bezier/Pen tool  6
blog URLs
365 Sketches  28
Heathenx.org  28
Tavmjong Bah’s Blog  28
BMP  3
C
Calligraphy tool  6
Chrome  2
community URLs
FAQ  28
official forums  28
official mailing lists  28
CorelDraw  2
D
drop shadows
creating  20
F
Firefox  2
Floss Manuals
URL  27
G
GIFs  3
GNU General Public License (GPL)  2
graphic
saving  9, 10
I
images
embedding  25, 26
importing  25
Inkscape
about  2
downloading  4
features  11
installing  4, 5
limitations  2
running, on Mack OS X  4
URL  4
Inkscape 0.48
Bezier/Pen tool  6
 blogs  28
Calligraphy tool  6
community URLs  28
graphic, saving  9, 10
installing  4
new document, opening  7
official sites  27
Pencil tool  6
shape options, changing  8, 9
shapes, creating  7, 8
Twitter URLs  28
URL, for articles  27
URL, for tutorials  27
vector graphic, creating  6
Inkscape 0.48 features
drop shadows, creating  20
images, embedding  25, 26
images, importing  25
layers, using  23, 25

30
paths, using  11, 12
reflections, creating  20-23
shapes, combining  13-16
text styling, via keyboard shortcuts  19
text tools, creating  17, 18
text tools, editing  17, 18
Inkscape 0.48 installation
about  4
Inkscape, downloading  4
prerequisites  4
Inkscape 0.48 installation, for Mac OS X
X11 application package 2.4  4
Inkscape Homepage URL  27
Inkscape Starter  1
Inkscape Tutorials
URL  27
Inkscape Tutorials Weblog
URL  27
installation, Inkscape 0.48  4
Internet Explorer  2
J
JPEGs  3
L
layers
using  25
M
Mac OS X Leopard software  4
Mac OS X operating system  4
Macromedia Freehand  2
O
Open Clip Art Library  4
Opera  2
P
paths
using  11, 12
Pencil tool  6
prerequisites, Inkscape 0.48 installation  
diskspace  4
internet connection  4
operating system  4
R
reflections
creating  20-23
S
Safari  2
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG)
about  2
basic principles  2
shape options
changing  8, 9
shapes
combining  13-16
creating  7, 8
T
text styling
via, keyboard shortcuts  19
text tools
creating  17, 18
editing  17, 18
Twitter URLs
FossGrafis.com  28
Inkscape Mag  28
Inkscape Tutorials  28
Inkscape twitter feed  28
John Lemasney  28
Linux Artist  28
V
vector graphics
about  3, 6
characteristics  3
creating  6
W
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)  2
X
X11 application package 2.4  4
XML (eXtensible Markup Language) format  2

About the author
Bethany Hiitola is a working writer and technology geek. With a degree in Scientific and 
Technical Communications, she's worked as a technical writer and multimedia developer for 
over 12 years—she spends the rest of her time as a wife, mother, gadget geek, and Master of 
the Household. She's written more user manuals than she can count, essays, novels, and a few 
technical books—including Inkscape 0.48 Essentials for Web Designers. More details are at her 
website: bethanyhiitola.com
About the Reviewer 
Richard Carter is the Creative Director at Peacock Carter Ltd (http://www.
peacockcarter.co.uk), a web design and development agency based in the North East 
of England, working with clients including Directgov, NHS Choices, and BusinessLink.
Richard is the author of MediaWiki Skins Design, Magento 1.3 Themes Design, Joomla! 1.5 
Templates Cookbook and Magento 1.4 Themes Design. He has acted as a technical reviewer on 
MediaWiki 1.1 Beginner’s Guide, Inkscape 0.48 Essentials For Web Designers, the Definitive Guide to 
Drupal 7 and Drupal 7 Business Solutions, and is a co-founder of the Drupal North East user group 
(http://www.drupalnortheast.org.uk).
He blogs at http://www.earlgreyandbattenburg.co.uk and tweets nonsense at 
http://twitter.com/RichardCarter. 

Thank you for buying  
Inkscape Starter
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective MySQL 
Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing highly focused 
books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting and 
customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give you the 
knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get the job done. 
Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in the past. Our 
unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving you more of what you 
need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home to books 
published on software built around Open Source licences, and offering information to anybody from 
advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open Source brand also runs Packt's Open 
Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open Source project about whose 
software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should be sent 
to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like to discuss it 
first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning editors will get in 
touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Inkscape 0.48 Illustrator's 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84951-266-4             Paperback: 340 pages
109 recipes to create scalable vector graphics with 
Inkscape
1. 
Create interesting illustrations and common 
web design elements that can be used in real-life 
projects
2. 
Gain a thorough understanding of all common 
Inkscape tools and advanced features of Inkscape 
0.48
3. 
Tips and tricks to speed up your drawing workflow
Inkscape 0.48 Essentials for 
Web Designers 
ISBN: 978-1-84951-268-8            Paperback: 316 pages
Use the fascinating Inkscape graphics editor to create 
attractive layout designs, images, and icons for your 
website 
1. 
The first book on the newly released Inkscape 
version 0.48, with an exclusive focus on web design
2. 
Comprehensive coverage of all aspects of Inkscape 
required for web design
3. 
Incorporate eye-catching designs, patterns, and 
other visual elements to spice up your web pages
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles


