Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Inside Book Publishing
Praise for previous editions
‘The deﬁ nitive text for all who need to learn about the publishing industry’
Publishing Training Centre
‘An excellent book … I recommend this book to everyone’
Gillian Clarke, Editing Matters, Society for Editors and Proofreaders
‘A crucial title if you are looking to enter the industry’
Suzanne Collier, bookcareers.com
‘Well worth reading as an overview of the global industry and publishing process’
Thomas Woll, Publishing Research Quarterly
‘Fabulous to have as a shelf reference whatever your department’
Rachel Maund, Marketability
‘No writer equipped with this book need ever feel like an ignorant outsider again’
Chris Holiﬁ eld, WritersServices
Now in its ﬁ fth edition, Inside Book Publishing remains the classic introduction to 
the book publishing industry, being both a manual for the profession for over two 
decades and the bestselling textbook for students of publishing.
This new edition has been fully updated to respond to the rapid changes in 
the market and technology. Now more global in its references and scope, the book 
explores the tensions and trends aﬀ ecting the industry, including the growth of 
ebooks, self-publishing and online retailing, and new business models and 
workﬂ ows. The book provides excellent overviews of the main aspects of the 
publishing process, including commissioning, product development, design and 
production, marketing, sales and distribution.
The book remains essential reading for publishing students, those seeking a 
career in publishing, recent entrants to the industry and authors seeking an 
insider’s view. The accompanying website (www.insidebookpublishing.com) 
supports the book by providing up-to-date and relevant content.
Giles Clark has recently retired from The Open University, where he was the 
Copublishing Adviser, Learning and Teaching Solutions.
Angus Phillips is Director of the Oxford International Centre for Publishing 
Studies at Oxford Brookes University, UK.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Inside Book Publishing
Giles Clark and Angus Phillips
Fifth edition
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
LONDON AND NEW YORK
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
First published 1988 by Blueprint
Second edition published 1994
Third edition published 2001
Fourth edition published 2008
by Routledge
This edition published 2014
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 1988, 1994, 2001 Giles Clark
© 2008, 2014 Giles Clark and Angus Phillips
The right of Giles Clark and Angus Phillips to be identiﬁ ed as authors of this work has been 
asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any 
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identiﬁ cation and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Clark, Giles N. (Giles Noel)
Inside book publishing / Giles Clark and Angus Phillips. -- Fifth edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Publishers and publishing. 2. Publishers and publishing--Vocational guidance.
3. Publishers and publishing--Great Britain. I. Phillips, Angus II. Title.
Z278.C557 2014
070.5--dc23
2013047921
ISBN: 978-0-415-53716-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-53717-9 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-77776-4 (ebk)
Typeset in Scala
by Saxon Graphics Ltd, Derby
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Contents
List of expert, focus and skills boxes 
ix
List of tables 
xi
Illustration credits 
xiii
Preface to the fifth edition 
xv
Preface to the ﬁrst, second, third and fourth editions 
xvii
1 
Introduction – publishing trends and digital transformations 
1
What publishers do 
1
Market sectors and publisher size 
4
Major business trends 
11
The digitization of publishing 
15
Adaptation and innovation 
23
2 
The development of modern trade publishing 
26
Stability and expansion 
26
Mergers and acquisitions 
28
Vertical integration 
29
The reshaping of retail 
33
A change in publishing strategy 
39
The rise of digital publishing 
42
Market share 
52
Children’s and young adult publishing 
54
3 
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets 
58
Consolidation 
59
Educational publishing 
60
Overview of academic, STM and professional publishing 
66
Textbooks 
68
Academic and professional books 
72
Journals 
75
4 
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors 
83
UK publishing 
83
Consumer publishing 
84
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Contents
vi
Children’s and young adult publishing 
89
Non-consumer publishing 
93
Education 
93
HSS, STM and professional publishing 
97
Journal publishing 
101
5 
Creating and protecting value in publishing 
106
Value chain 
106
Business model 
110
Intellectual property and protecting value 
119
6 
The author 
127
Starting out and self-publishing 
130
Agents 
133
7 
Commissioning 
138
Editorial commissioning 
138
New title costing 
148
Case study: Inside Book Publishing 
154
Success and failure 
163
8 
The author contract and editorial development 
165
Author contract 
165
Product development 
173
9 
Design and production 
189
Design 
192
Picture research 
202
Production 
205
Production processes 
213
10 Marketing 
221
The market for books 
224
Marketing mix 
227
Promotion and publicity techniques 
242
11 Sales and distribution 
255
Sales 
255
International sales 
266
Distribution 
271
12 Rights sales 
279
Rights work 
279
Subsidiary rights 
285
13 The sales channels for books in the UK 
297
Online 
300
The chains and supermarkets 
303
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Contents
vii
Bargain bookshops 
306
Wholesalers and intermediaries 
306
Other sales channels 
309
14 
Getting into publishing 
313
First steps 
314
Qualifications 
315
Finding vacancies 
316
Your application 
317
Interview 
320
You’re in! 
322
Glossary of publishing terms and abbreviations 
328
Bibliography 
334
Index 
339
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Expert, focus and skills boxes
Chapter 1
Global ranking of publishers Rüdiger Wischenbart, Journalist and 
consultant 
6
Global publishing markets Rüdiger Wischenbart, Journalist and consultant 
12
Chapter 2
Fixed book prices 
35
Trends in ﬁ ction and non-ﬁ ction – a US perspective Edward Nawotka, 
Founder and Editor-in-Chief of Publishing Perspectives 
40
The rise and fall of multimedia publishing 
50
Chapter 3
Digital content in UK schools 
63
Trade education 
64
Chapter 4
Audio publishing Nicholas Jones, Managing Director, Strathmore 
Publishing 
87
Reference publishing 
92
Chapter 5
Digital products: how to read the map Henry Volans, Head of Faber 
Digital 
113
Selling and valuing publishing assets William Mitchell, Partner, Bertoli 
Mitchell LLP 
118
Chapter 7
Working with authors Simon Winder, Publishing Director at Penguin Press 
141
The editor in educational publishing Brenda Stones, Author, editor and 
lecturer on educational publishing 
143
Commissioning skills 
162
Chapter 8
Blurb writing 
177
Editorial skills 
178
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Expert, focus and skills boxes
x
House style R. M. Ritter, Author of The Oxford Style Manual 
180
Chapter 9
Design skills 
196
XML Meg Barton, Project Editor, Multimedia – Health Sciences, Wiley 
198
Picture research skills 
203
Paper Adrian Bullock, Principal Lecturer, Oxford International Centre for 
Publishing Studies 
208
Production skills 
211
Chapter 10
Marketing plan 
223
Brands and travel publishing Stephen Mesquita, Travel publishing 
consultant 
228
Online communities in publishing Alastair Horne, Social Media and 
Communities Manager at Cambridge University Press 
236
Marketing ﬁction Professor Claire Squires, Director of the Stirling Centre for 
International Publishing and Communication at the University of Stirling 
241
Marketing skills 
249
Chapter 11
How sales data can inform publishing decisions Richard Knight, Formerly 
Business Development Director of Nielsen BookScan 
257
Sales skills 
262
International sales skills 
267
Chapter 12
Copyright Licensing Agency Kevin Fitzgerald, Chief Executive of the 
Copyright Licensing Agency 
281
Book fairs Lynette Owen, Copyright and Rights Consultant 
283
Rights skills 
287
Licensing electronic rights – a starter for 10 David Attwooll, Director of 
Attwooll Associates Ltd 
292
Chapter 13
Independent bookselling for the twenty-ﬁ rst century Patrick Neale, 
Co-owner of the Jaﬀ é & Neale bookshop and café, Chipping Norton, 
Oxfordshire 
298
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Tables
 
1.1 Global ranking of 25 publishers 
8
 1.2 Global ranking of publishing markets 
13
 2.1 Number of titles published in the UK from 1950 to 1980 
27
 2.2 Top ﬁve book genres for ﬁ ction and non-ﬁ ction 
42
 2.3 Top ﬁ ve book genres for men and women 
42
 2.4 Sales from digital – 2011 and 2012 
47
 2.5 Market shares (percentages) of publishers for consumer sales 2012 
52
 2.6 Carnegie Medal winners 2003 to 2013 
56
 4.1 UK publishers’ sales in 2012 
84
 4.2 Number of titles published in the UK 2003 to 2012 
84
 5.1 Average overheads of publishers 
117
 5.2 Bloomsbury Publishing accounts to 28 February 2013 
117
 7.1 Sales forecast for Inside Book Publishing, ﬁ fth edition 
158
 9.1 Standard book formats (UK) 
210
 10.1 Purchase prompts for UK consumers 
224
 10.2 Book buying in the UK – demographics 
225
 10.3 Man Booker Prize for ﬁction winners 2004 to 2013 
240
 10.4 Media spend in 2011 by consumer publishers 
250
 11.1 UK exports of physical books 2012 
271
 12.1 Top 10 translated languages 
290
 12.2 Top 10 target languages 
290
 13.1 Market share by volume in the UK book trade 
297
 13.2 Attitudes of book buyers in the UK (2013) to online book retailers 
302
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Illustration credits
The publisher would like to thank the following companies and individuals for 
permissions to reproduce the following illustrations:
page 12, IPA; page 17, John Taylor; page 39, Random House Group; page 47, 
Quercus; page 49, Faber & Faber; page 55 (left and right), Random House Group; 
page 61, Pearson UK; page 70, Palgrave Macmillan; page 90, Bloomsbury 
Publishing; page 91, Illetisim; page 113, Faber & Faber; page 124, HarperCollins; 
page 128, John Taylor; page 133, John Taylor; page 147, John Taylor; pages 155–7, 
Routledge; page 183, Routledge; page 185, Publishing Training Centre; page 194, 
Pearson UK; page 201, Antony Rowe; pages 216 and 217, Clays; page 229, Bradt; 
page 238, Proﬁ le Books; page 239 (top), Kate Wheeler; page 239 (bottom), Finn 
Beales; page 240, HarperCollins; page 247, John Taylor; page 283 (left and right), 
Angus Phillips; page 289 (top), Angus Phillips; page 289 (bottom), Mladinska 
Knjiga; page 295, John Taylor; page 298, Jaﬀ é and Neale; page 301, John Taylor; 
page 303, Waterstones; page 305, John Taylor; page 310, Scholastic; pages 316, 328 
and 329, John Taylor.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Preface to the fifth edition
The previous edition of this book was published in 2008, at a time when many 
publishers were facing a perfect storm. The start of a prolonged recession in 
Western markets coincided with unprecedented technological disruption and 
innovation which challenged their businesses. The large technology companies 
saw opportunities in the area of books, and the newly arrived Kindle reading 
device, ﬁ rst launched in the US in 2007, was to drive the purchase of ebooks by 
the public and create a new distribution channel for self-published authors. The 
uncertain economic climate helped to accelerate change across many dimensions 
as publishing houses searched for eﬃ  ciencies. By the time of the writing of this 
edition, the industry has proved to be both resilient and adaptive, and most 
publishers continue to operate successfully and proﬁ tably. New start-ups arise 
constantly and the possibilities of digital make this the most exciting time to be in 
publishing for centuries.
In this ﬁ fth edition, we cover the characteristics, dynamics and core functions 
of the business, including: diversity by sector; the growth in globalization; the 
strategic concentration in ownership and the dynamism of smaller ﬁ rms; the 
move from the sale of products to the provision of services; and how publishers 
operate within the digital world. Publishers are navigating the transition from 
print to digital publishing. We show the new ways in which they produce, market, 
sell and distribute books in print and digital formats to beneﬁ t readers, authors 
and shareholders. Some of their business models are fading and there is much 
experimentation in this area. We equip students and recent entrants to publishing 
with the knowledge and understanding to navigate the industry. The book also 
gives an insight into the industry for authors working with publishers, as well as 
authors who self-publish.
A good publisher guides, supports and invests in authors. Christoph Chesher 
(Group Sales Director of Taylor & Francis Group, which includes Routledge) 
suggested to the authors that the new edition should be more international in 
scope. Thus this book now takes a broader view and is bigger. Niall Kennedy, our 
development editor, likewise read drafts and provided helpful comments. He 
kindly supplied the costing information on this book reproduced here in the case 
study. We thank them greatly.
The book continues to be supported by a certiﬁcated course from the 
Publishing Training Centre. Called Train for Book Publishing, the course is 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Preface to the fifth edition
xvi
largely completed online. It summarizes key learning points from the book and 
reinforces the learning through a series of self-test exercises, before requiring 
delegates to submit an essay or project on a book-related topic for ﬁ nal 
assessment and grading. For further information please visit the website:
www.train4publishing.co.uk or call the Publishing Training Centre on 
020 8874 2718.
January 2014
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are indebted to cartoonist John Taylor for his wit; to the copy-editor Ruth 
Bourne and the production editor Anna Callander; to Niall Kennedy, Aileen 
Storry, Susan Dixon, Sarah Hartley, Christoph Chesher and other colleagues at 
Routledge for producing, marketing and selling this book.
A number of friends and colleagues have given their help with the new 
edition. The following read chapters in draft and oﬀ ered many useful comments 
on the text: David Attwooll, Emma Bourne, Adrian Bullock, Suzanne Collier, 
Clare Fletcher, Sheila Lambie, Sylvia May, Sue Miller, Lynette Owen, Beverley 
Tarquini, and Anthony Watkinson. The illustrations are credited separately but 
in all cases there was a cheerful and prompt response to the authors’ requests. 
A variety of people helped the search, including Clare Christian, Charlotte Clay, 
Martin Collyer, Kath Donovan, David Fickling, John Gerrard, Jonathan Glasspool, 
Donald Greig, Jon Howells, Sally Hughes, Ruth Killick, Kate McFarlan, Sylvia 
May, Stephen Mesquita, Patrick Neale, Richard Ogle, Bahar Siber, Beverley 
Tarquini, and Henry Volans.
All the contributors of the boxed panels deserve our gratitude for their 
readiness to have their arms twisted to write for the book.
Angus would like to thank Ann, Matthew, Charlotte and Jamie for their 
patience and support during the writing of the book; distractions were oﬀ ered by 
our two cats, Ginger and Whiskers.
Giles would like to thank Julia, the sausage dog and two black and white 
moggies for their humour and perseverance during the writing.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Preface to the ﬁrst, second, third and 
fourth editions
The history of this book’s publication reﬂ ects the dramatic changes in publishing 
over the decades. Since its conception in the 1980s, the copyright of Inside Book 
Publishing has passed through six changes of outright publishing ownership, has 
appeared under ﬁve publishing imprints and been worked on by seven editors. 
This story is not unique in publishing today.
In the 1980s, the Society of Young Publishers (SYP) asked Giles Clark to 
write a book for the beneﬁt of its members, to give an overview of publishing and 
the careers available. His employer, The Open University, supporting the project, 
gave him special leave to undertake the primary research: over 150 publishing 
managers were interviewed. The ﬁrst contract was with Allen & Unwin, a 
long-established, family-owned publisher of medium size and diversity most 
noted for its general list, including the classic works by J. R. R. Tolkien – The Lord 
of the Rings and associated titles. This publisher also had a respected school 
textbook list, and higher education and professional titles in the earth sciences and 
the social sciences. By the time Giles had pulled together his research, Allen & 
Unwin had been taken over by another privately owned company and became 
Unwin Hyman. The ﬁrst editor Adam Sisman left the restructured company (later 
going on to write a well-received biography of A. J. P. Taylor), and the new editor 
cancelled the contract and paid compensation. Unwin Hyman was then bought by 
HarperCollins, the international book publishing imprint of Rupert Murdoch’s 
News Corporation. The Tolkien classics joined the ranks of other famous dead 
and living authors of HarperCollins and were to become in the next century 
reissued bestsellers tied in to the international ﬁlm series, but at the time of 
purchase the staﬀ  were surplus as were the more specialist titles. A few of the 
Unwin Hyman managers formed University College London Press, which was 
later acquired by Taylor & Francis, and the social science titles were acquired from 
HarperCollins by Routledge, the respected academic imprint of the International 
Thomson Organization.
Giles was thankfully saved from the wilderness of being unpublished by 
Gordon Graham, then President of the Publishers Association and Chief 
Executive of Butterworths (legal and technical publishers) and subsequently the 
founder of the renowned publishing journal Logos, who introduced him to Dag 
Smith of the Book House Training Centre (renamed the Publishing Training 
Centre), who in turn contacted Blueprint Publishing – a new small publisher 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Preface to the ﬁrst, second, third and fourth editions
xviii
spearheaded and owned by Charlotte Berrill. She successfully focused on books on 
publishing and printing. Giles’s work was adapted to the brief they drew up. The 
ﬁrst edition of Inside Book Publishing (1988) was energetically published and sold 
by Blueprint.
Blueprint Publishing was later acquired by Chapman & Hall, the scientiﬁc 
and professional book imprint of Thomson. In 1993, Vivien James (the publisher 
in charge of the Blueprint list) needed a thoroughly revised second edition, which 
duly appeared in the autumn of 1994. German translation rights were sold to 
Hardt Wörner, which published their edition in 1996. During the summer of 
1995, International Thomson conducted a reorganization which included 
combining the business and management lists of Routledge and Chapman & Hall 
into a new company, the International Thomson Business Press, and the 
transference of Blueprint to the media studies list of Routledge under the 
editorship of Rebecca Barden. By the autumn of 1995 the ﬁrst printing of the 
second edition of Inside Book Publishing had fortuitously sold out, enabling the 
reprint to appear under the Routledge imprint. A management buy-out of 
Routledge occurred in 1996, supported by the venture capitalist Cinven. In 1998, 
the UK journal and book publisher, Taylor & Francis bought Routledge. The third 
edition appeared in 2001, reprinted three times and was translated into 
Vietnamese. In May 2004, Taylor & Francis and Informa merged under the 
public listing of Informa to provide specialist information to the global academic 
and scientiﬁc, professional and commercial communities via publishing, events 
and performance improvement.
The publication of the fourth edition in 2008 marked a step change in the 
book’s development with the aid of a new co-author Angus Phillips and a 
redesign. Why? When ﬁ rst published in 1988, the book was never conceived as a 
textbook but over the years it had become an ‘accidental textbook’. It was widely 
adopted by lecturers as a key set text on the growing number of respected courses 
on publishing, and student purchasing kept it alive. Textbook publishing is long 
term. Publishers need to issue new editions of successful books to keep them 
current, to fend oﬀ  competition and to overcome the attrition in sales from the 
used book market. They also face the possibility that the original author may not 
have the time to undertake yet another new edition alone, or more problematically, 
be able to consider their work afresh. Katrina Chandler, the development editor at 
Routledge, found for Giles Clark a new co-author, Angus Phillips, who brought 
signiﬁcant new ideas for additional content, structural reorganization, publishing 
knowledge, and teaching and illustrative approaches. Her successor, Aileen 
Storry, saw the book through to publication. The redesign of the book in a larger 
textbook format to match market needs and the ﬁnding of a new co-author of 
complementary strengths to work alongside the original author in a highly 
productive way, are good examples of a publisher adding value, a theme which 
runs throughout this book. Angus created the accompanying website www.
insidebookpublishing.com which stimulated internet interest. (By a happy 
coincidence he also succeeded Gordon Graham as editor of Logos.) An ebook 
edition was published after the publication of the printed edition, but its sales 
were modest initially. The book was translated into Romanian, and the rise in 
importance of Asian publishing was further reﬂ ected by translations into Korean 
and Chinese.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Preface to the ﬁrst, second, third and fourth editions
xix
Special thanks are therefore due on the ﬁrst edition to all Giles’s friends in 
the SYP, to The Open University, Gordon Graham, Dag Smith and Charlotte 
Berrill; on the second edition to Vivien James; on the third edition to Rebecca 
Barden; on the fourth edition to Katrina Chandler and Aileen Storry. Furthermore 
we are indebted to the many dozens of people who have helped with Inside Book 
Publishing over the years.
THE AUTHORS
Giles Clark, with a family background in publishing, and educated at 
University College London, worked at The Open University UK, where he 
was the Copublishing Adviser. He organized copublication arrangements 
between the University and a wide range of publishers from small to large, 
across most academic disciplines. The partnerships forged with commercial 
publishers extend the university’s readership internationally, reduce its costs 
and give it entrepreneurial income. He now chairs the Graham Greene 
Birthplace Trust in Berkhamsted, serves on other charities and works on 
business ventures.
Angus Phillips is Director of the Oxford International Centre for Publishing 
Studies at Oxford Brookes University. He has degrees from Oxford and 
Warwick Universities, and many years’ experience in the publishing industry 
including running a trade and reference list at Oxford University Press. He has 
acted as consultant to a variety of publishing companies, and trained publishing 
professionals from the UK and overseas in editorial, marketing and management. 
He is the author of Turning the Page: The evolution of the book (Routledge, 2014), 
and the editor, with Bill Cope, of The Future of the Book in the Digital Age (2006) 
and The Future of the Academic Journal (second edition, 2014). He is also the editor 
of the premier publishing journal Logos.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 1
Introduction – publishing trends and 
digital transformations
WHAT PUBLISHERS DO
Book publishing serves the million-copy ﬁction writer and the specialist author 
with sales of under 300 copies. Books can be published proﬁtably for tiny markets 
which though limited in scale are many in number. As a long-established 
industry, publishing developed over time a worldwide distribution system through 
which its output of physical books could be traded in a regulated and controlled 
way. This ecosystem now coexists with digital distribution through which content 
can be sold and distributed right around the world on to mobile devices such as 
smartphones and tablets. Whilst this oﬀ ers an exciting opportunity, at the same 
time publishers have to compete vigorously against other forms of entertainment, 
learning processes and information sources.
The primary deﬁ nition of ‘to publish’ given in the Oxford English Dictionary is 
‘to make public’. In a world where anybody can post content on their blog or 
Facebook page, is this enough of a deﬁ nition? Michael Bhaskar suggests the 
following thought experiment: ‘you write a novel, and leave it on a park bench. Is 
this a published novel? Let’s say you print 1,000 copies, leaving them on 1,000 
park benches. How about now?’ (page 18). Professional publishers go much 
further and undertake a range of activities. Publishers are not printers or mere 
‘middle men’ interjecting themselves between authors and readers while 
creaming oﬀ  the proﬁts. They both add value to authors’ works and protect the 
value of their copyrights. If they are doing their job well, they will develop an 
author’s career and make a market for their works. Publishers commission 
authors (often before manuscripts are written), confer the authority of their brand 
on authors’ works, project manage the publishing process, ﬁnance the production 
and marketing and sell the works in multiple forms and ways wherever possible. 
The publisher, aiming to generate a proﬁt for its owners and a surplus to ﬁ nance 
further activity:
 
▪
researches the markets in which it specializes,
 
▪
builds contacts, audiences and brands,
 
▪
seeks authors (in competition with other publishers) and is sought by them,
 
▪
matches marketable ideas to saleable authors,
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
2
 
▪
assesses the quality of the author’s work (sometimes externally refereed), 
costs of production and marketing, and the sales prospects,
 
▪
decides whether to risk its investment funds in projects to appear under its 
own brand or sub-brands, and sometimes pays risk capital to authors in the 
form of an advance against future royalties,
 
▪
negotiates and manages contracts with licensed suppliers (including authors, 
agents, other publishers and media); purchased suppliers (for example 
production specialists); resellers (often retailers); and end-users (for example 
institutions),
 
▪
edits and designs the work to meet market needs,
 
▪
produces a source ﬁ le of the work to enable it to be sold in multiple formats,
 
▪
speciﬁes, buys and oversees the activities of suppliers which help produce the 
work, print and distribute it,
 
▪
exploits new technology to reduce costs and stock levels, adopts new systems, 
products and allied services, and collects and analyses data to facilitate sales 
and marketing techniques and publishing eﬀ ectiveness,
 
▪
builds a worldwide sales network,
 
▪
markets and sells the work to intermediary resellers (retailers, wholesalers, 
and overseas ﬁrms) – the channels through which the works are mainly sold,
 
▪
markets the works to their intended audiences and users, and as appropriate, 
builds community sites to generate sales, and oﬄ  ine and online services,
 
▪
licenses the works to third parties, for example publishers in other countries,
 
▪
operates an e-commerce platform, sometimes with additional services, to 
promote and sell directly to end-users,
 
▪
holds bulk stock of titles, where necessary, to satisfy demand,
 
▪
fulﬁls orders, distributes the works in many forms and collects the money, 
paying royalties or sums to licensed suppliers (authors) on sales made, and
 
▪
protects the work and brand against illegal activity.
Additional income beneﬁting the publisher and author may be made from various 
licensing arrangements that enable other organizations at home and abroad to 
exploit the work in diﬀ erent ways, in diﬀ erent media and languages.
The problem with this list of activities is that they all involve costs to the 
publisher. Unless the publisher can add suﬃ  cient value to the author’s work over 
and above the costs to make a proﬁ t from revenue received, the publisher will go 
out of business. Publishers’ business models (the ways in which they make 
money) and the ways in which publishers add value to authors and shareholders 
are explored in Chapters 4 and 5.
Whilst the specialist staﬀ  of large publishers carry out all the above activities, 
some work (such as the detailed editing of books) is often contracted out to 
freelancers or possibly to other ﬁrms. Smaller publishers may not have the 
resources to employ their own sales staﬀ  or to distribute the books themselves so 
they may use larger publishers, or specialist ﬁrms. Apart from the decision to 
publish a book and raising the ﬁnance, all the other work can be outsourced, 
either to freelancers or to separate companies. Publishers of all sizes have 
increasingly outsourced work in order to reduce their staﬀ  overhead costs, a 
process that began in the editorial and production departments. But there are 
potential drawbacks: the publisher may have less control over the way the books 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
3
are produced, leading to a diminution of quality; lose the marketing emphasis 
projected by its own employees committed solely to its books; run the risk of 
outsourcing core competences including skills; and contribute to the proﬁt 
margins of sub-contractors.
In the above list, the word ‘work’ is used rather than ‘book’ for the following 
reasons. First, the so-called ‘book publishing industry’ encompasses signiﬁ cant 
non-book publishing operations, such as the publication of scholarly journals and 
database reference works. Moreover, the deﬁ nition of what constitutes a ‘book’ is 
becoming increasingly elusive. In the physical world, children’s publishers 
stretched the deﬁ nition through their publication of ‘novelty books’ for babies and 
toddlers and upwards. In the digital world, content may be published as apps, 
enhanced ebooks, or on websites. However, for the majority of book publishers 
the sale of printed books still constitutes by far their largest source of sales and 
revenue.
Second, publishers have traditionally deﬁ ned themselves through the printed 
book: an icon conveying authority, prestige and great cultural signiﬁ cance over 
the ages. Publishers are shifting from selling physical products to licensing 
digital content, for example in the form of ebooks. This is a fundamental change 
aﬀ ecting workﬂ ows and the whole mindset of the organization. Another way of 
deﬁ ning publishers is to say that they are traders of intellectual property (IP). The 
author creates the IP, and under copyright owns it, and is able to give it away for 
free or to sell it, usually via a publisher by means of an exclusive publishing 
licence – a publishing contract. The contract between the author and publisher not 
only conveys the right to the publisher to sell the work as a book, in whole or in 
part, but also other rights which enable the publisher to exploit and sell the work 
in many diﬀ erent ways. In the transition from printed books to digital publishing, 
the ways in which authors’ works can be sold are multiplying. The ‘book’ as a 
printed container of content represents a too restrictive view. In the 1980s, some 
publishers started describing books as products and were slated by authors and 
critics. Today some say that they are publishers of content and receive similar 
criticism.
Demand and supply-side publishing
The above list of publisher activities is based on two main assumptions. First, the 
publisher at its own risk and expense undertakes the production, marketing and 
the selling of the work. Second, the publisher attempts to earn its revenue from 
the demand-side, the market, with a view to making a proﬁ t. The assumption 
underlying most publishing is that publishing is a service to both authors and 
readers.
There is an alternative: supply-side publishing. The authors or their sponsors 
pay for the cost of publishing at their risk and expense, and the resulting product 
may be given away for free or charged for, but usually at a low price. The receipt 
of revenue from market demand may be of little or of no consequence. During 
the twentieth century, the Soviet Union adopted this method of ﬁ nancing 
publishing and extended the model by controlling politically the means of 
production (including authorship) and distribution. In the West, supply-side 
ﬁ nanced publishing has been present as well. For instance, in some countries, 
Stephen King 
says that 
‘books are life 
itself’ (Vanity 
Fair, 14 April 
2014)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
4
ministries of education pay publishers to produce textbooks for schools: the 
publishers earn their proﬁ t from the service provided. Universities subsidize the 
publication of scholarly works through their own presses. In this century, some 
supply-side publishing models have been growing enabled by digital technologies. 
In the USA and subsequently elsewhere, there has been an enormous growth in 
authors (especially of genre ﬁ ction) self-publishing books at their own risk and 
expense, and paying the author services companies for distribution and often for 
production and marketing. Philanthropists and universities ﬁ nance the production 
of Open Educational Resources (OER) available for free. In learned journal 
publishing, some researchers, consumer groups and politicians advocate free public 
access to online journal articles. Under the gold open access model the research 
funders pay the publishers for the cost of publication. When publishers or service 
companies charge for their work, they primarily provide a service for their 
customers (authors or sponsors), rather than readers. The creation of content 
abundance usually underpins the business model of supply-side ﬁ rms.
MARKET SECTORS AND PUBLISHER SIZE
The publishing industry divides into various market sectors within which the 
publishers specialize. The trade or consumer publishers (sometimes called 
‘general’ publishers) produce books for the public. They have historically been 
called ‘trade’ publishers because their business was and still is mainly conducted 
through the book trade.
Non-consumer publishing embraces other signiﬁ cant sectors based 
around readers’ places of study and work. The educational publishers produce 
textbooks and other instructional resources, which may be described as tools for 
asynchronous learning, for schools and higher education. However, educational 
publishing is usually more narrowly deﬁ ned as serving primary and secondary 
schools. They are sometimes referred to as ‘curriculum publishers’. Educational 
publishing is mainly non-international and deﬁ ned by countries or sub-national 
regions. In North America, school publishing is referred to as El-Hi (Elementary-
High School) or K-12, an abbreviation of kindergarten (4–6-year-olds) to 12th grade 
(18–19-year-olds). Trade education publishing describes learning materials used at 
home reﬂ ecting the convergence of home and school learning. English language 
teaching for all age-groups, both American and British English, is a signiﬁ cant 
international market and is called ELT publishing.
The publishers serving higher educational and professional markets are 
diﬀ erentiated into overlapping sectors. Academic publishers concentrate on the 
humanities and social sciences (HSS); and STM publishers focus on science, 
technical and medical areas. Sometimes engineering is added (STEM), or 
scholarly (STMS), to embrace other academic disciplines. All these publishers 
produce a wide range of products, such as textbooks for students, high-level 
books and reference works for researchers and practitioners, and learned 
journals. In the USA, the textbook business is so large it warrants its own name 
and the companies are referred to as college textbook publishers. The professional 
publishing sector for practitioners’ research, reference and training overlaps with 
academic and STM publishing, and additionally includes law, accountancy and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
5
business information. Sometimes it may overlap with ‘trade’, such as through the 
publication of books on management and business (professional/trade).
Subsequent chapters in this book expand on this topic. The key points here 
are that publishing is a very diverse industry, that there are signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences 
between the sectors (and within them the numerous subsectors), and that the 
business models operated by publishers diﬀ er markedly. The London Stock 
Exchange usually lists publishers under media. Overall, publishing is one of the 
most important creative industries, and it has a prominent place in the UK 
economy:
Book, journal and electronic publishing contribute over £5 billion to the 
domestic economy every year ... The value of UK book exports is higher than 
the export turnover of any other creative industry; in fact, the UK exports 
more than any other publishing industry in the world. 
(allpartypublishinggroup.org.uk, accessed 20 September 2013)
There is a controversial view that there is no such thing as the ‘publishing 
industry’: publishing activity should be seen as a subset of much larger groupings. 
Trade publishing is part of the leisure/entertainment industry; educational/college 
publishing part of the education industry; and STM publishing part of the 
research/professional information industry. To paraphrase an old industry saw: 
‘the only thing that the 7,000 publishers exhibiting at the annual Frankfurt Book 
Fair have in common is that they attend the Frankfurt Book Fair’. Moreover, many 
kinds of organizations, such as corporates, not-for-proﬁ t enterprises, universities 
and societies publish books and employ staﬀ  who undertake the publishing work 
described in this book. Their activities may not appear in publishing statistics – 
not least because they publish and sell directly to their communities.
The global publishers
Table 1.1 (page 8) reveals the international nature of the publishing business and 
how its ownership is dominated by European and US corporations and those from 
Japan. While the news media and publishing blogs give much coverage to the 
consumer book publishers, the industry’s giants are Pearson (UK), Reed Elsevier 
(UK/NL), Thomson Reuters (US) and Walters Kluwer (NL), all of which are 
non-consumer publishers. Reed Elsevier is the world’s leading STM publisher, 
while Thomson Reuters and Wolters Kluwer concentrate more on professional 
markets. These three companies derive much of their revenue from publishing 
high-priced products on a subscription business model to a relatively small 
number of organizations.
The world’s largest publisher, primarily in education (including ELT) and 
higher education, is Pearson. In 2012 it had global revenues of £6bn, employed 
more than 40,000 people and operated in 70 countries; digital revenues 
accounted for over a third of the company’s turnover. Although it was previously 
referred to as variously an unfocused conglomerate, a major book publisher, or as 
a media company, it now calls itself the world’s leading learning company. Whilst 
Pearson is listed as a public company in the UK, over half its revenue derives from 
the North American education market (K-12 and college texts), and just under a 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
6
quarter from Europe. International sales outside the US are growing, and like 
many other publishers, it has made large investments in fast-growing markets in 
China, India, Africa and Latin America. Pearson has invested heavily in 
technology and acquired companies to aid student learning outcomes and 
assessment, teacher support and a range of services to help education 
organizations (K-12 and higher education) run their operations more eﬃ  ciently.
Global ranking of publishers
Rüdiger Wischenbart, Journalist and consultant
In 2012, the 50 largest publishing groups worldwide had combined revenues 
of €54,800 million (up from 48,935 million in 2008), of which the 10 largest 
groups controlled over half (or 55 per cent, down from 57 per cent ﬁ ve years 
earlier). A number of new companies have entered the global rankings, 
notably publishers from emerging markets such as Brazil, Russia or China, 
with educational publishing being the focus of much of that growth. In the 
decade between 2001 and 2010, a process of consolidation and restructuring, 
coinciding with the move from print to digital, had already reframed the 
segment of Science, Technical, and Medical (STM) publishing.
The STM segment now accounts for 41 per cent of reported revenues, while 
educational publishing represents around a third, or 34 per cent, and trade (or 
consumer) is down to 25 per cent. The gap between the share of educational and 
trade publishing is opening ever wider, highlighting that ‘educational’ is 
currently perhaps the most competitive sector of the industry.

EP E R T
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012
Total Top 1-50
Total Top 10
Total Top 11-20
Total Top 21-50
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
7
At a ﬁ rst glance, the top segment of the global publishing industry seems to 
reﬂ ect a surprising stability and continuity, since the top four companies have 
remained in the same order for the past three years. Indeed the top ten list has 
not opened up to a new entrant despite the impact of the world economic 
crisis, and regardless of digital change and globalization. But taking such 
continuity as proof of stability would utterly misread the tidal shifts which are 
taking place. In fact the whole ecosystem of books and reading, and with this, 
the industry catering to it, is being re-invented. What used to be a sector 
governed by a few large conglomerates based in Western Europe, New York 
and Japan, now sees the publishing groups of China, Russia and Brazil 
becoming relevant on the global stage. They are not just heavyweights in their 
respective domestic markets, but also are ready either to partner 
internationally or, in the case of China, to reach out and become international 
players in their own right.
A closer examination of the ranking reveals that three out of the top ten 
focus on STM and professional publishing (Reed Elsevier, Wolters Kluwer and 
Thomson Reuters). One group has a similar focus on educational (McGraw-
Hill), while both the number one, Pearson, and number ten, Holtzbrinck, report 
revenues from educational that exceed those from trade. After a period of 
stability in trade publishing, 2012 and 2013 saw a major round of consolidation, 
including the merger between two of the leading trade houses, Penguin 
(Pearson) and Random House (Bertelsmann). But among local and regional 
publishing groups, some new perspectives and aspirations cannot be 
overlooked. In Scandinavia in 2011, Swedish Bonnier and Finnish Sonoma 
swapped their respective trade and educational divisions. In 2012, when Italian 
RCS put its French division, Groupe Flammarion, up for sale, Madrigall, the 
holding company of Gallimard, considered this as the opportunity to double its 
size and become the clear number three in France (Hachette Livre is number
STM
Education
Trade
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
  5%
  0%
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
8
one). The country’s second largest publishing group, Editis, had already been 
taken over by Spanish Grupo Planeta, but their prospects for further 
expansion were severely hit by the economic crisis that brought down the 
entire Spanish book market in 2012 by some 10 per cent.
Table 1.1 Global ranking of 25 publishers
Rank Rank
Revenues 
€m
Revenues 
€m
Revenues 
€m
2012 2011 Publishing Company (Group or Division)
Country
2012
2011
2010
1
1
Pearson
UK
6,913
6,470
6,102
2
2
Reed Elsevier
UK/NL/US
4,479
4,395
5,387
3
3
ThomsonReuters
US
4,080
4,181
4,248
4
4
Wolters Kluwer
NL
3,603
3,354
3,556
5
8
Random House
Germany
2,142
1,749
2,897
6
5
Hachette Livre
France
2,077
2,038
2,165
7
7
McGraw-Hill Education
US
1,627
1,466
1,443
8
6
Grupo Planeta
Spain
1,675
1,772
1,829
9
10 Scholastic
US
n/a
1,334
1,389
10
9
Holtzbrinck
Germany
1,608
1,501
1,423
11
11
Cengage
US
1,510
1,443
1,514
12
12 Wiley
US
1,351
1,341
1,282
13
13
De Agostini Editore
Italy
n/a
1,344
1,389
14
14 Shueisha
Japan
1,108
1,320
1,204
15
15
Kodansha
Japan
1,035
1,195
1,129
16
19 Springer Science and Business Media
Germany
976
875
866
17
18 Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
US
974
996
1,260
18
16 Shogakukan
Japan
949
1,112
1,086
19
20 HarperCollins
US
901
846
956
20
21 Informa
UK
850
826
783
21
23 Oxford University Press
UK
849
773
710
22
NEWChina Publishing Group Corporate
China
835
23
NEWPhoenix Publishing and Media Company
China
814
24
26 Kadokawa Publishing
Japan
756
696
599
25
24 Grupo Santillana
Spain
734
720
642
Source: The statistics are taken with permission from the Global Ranking of the 
Publishing Industry 2013 by Livres Hebdo; copublished in the United Kingdom by The 
Bookseller; research by Rüdiger Wischenbart.
Looking further down the table at other major K-12 and college textbook 
publishers, there is McGraw-Hill Education (spun oﬀ  from its parent McGraw-
Hill), Cengage Learning (also includes reference) and Houghton Miﬄ  in Harcourt 
(includes trade). The latter two are owned by private equity and such investors 
have played an important part in the reconﬁ guration of publishers and their 
assets. Wiley (US) is a signiﬁ cant college textbook publisher but is mainly a STMS 
and professional publisher. It has been divesting its pure trade publishing 
interests – for example in travel publishing – in order to acquire databases and 
educational technology companies.
Reed Elsevier dominates in the ﬁ eld of STM, publishing learned journals, 
reference works and databases, and to a lesser extent books. Much of the content 
is searchable and accessible via the online platform ScienceDirect. From a user’s 
standpoint – a researcher or student – demarcations between previous format 
containers (journals, reference works, books) have broken down. The other main 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
9
STM and professional publishers are Springer Science (owned by private equity) 
and Informa (the holding company of Taylor & Francis, which includes the HSS 
publisher Routledge, the publisher of this book). Reed Elsevier and Informa both 
operate signiﬁ cant professional events businesses. The STM and professional 
publishers supply digital content, plus tools and services to improve their clients’ 
workﬂ ow.
Just outside the top twenty largest publishers is Oxford University Press 
(UK), which is a department of the University of Oxford. Tracing its origins to 
1478, today OUP is by far the world’s largest university press. Its international 
publishing spans education (including ELT), STMS, reference and some trade 
(children’s and adult) publishing. It acts as a local publisher in many countries 
and publishes in 40 languages. Other university presses such as Cambridge 
University Press and many American presses publish beyond their core scholarly 
publishing remit and may publish in educational, STM and trade publishing 
markets.
Consumer book publishers
The ownership of international consumer book publishing is dominated by 
continental European publishers, mainly French, German and Spanish, and by a 
few US corporations. Some of the US media companies divested their book 
publishing operations to concentrate on television and movies decades ago. Today, 
two major publishers dominate: Random House, owned by the German media 
company Bertelsmann (privately held by the Mohn family and trusts); and 
Hachette Livre, owned by the French media company Lagardère. The operations 
of these media companies span books, magazines, newspapers, TV and radio. The 
consumer book publishers derive most of their revenue from the copy sale 
business model, selling books at low prices to very large numbers of people.
In 2013, Penguin (owned by Pearson) was merged with Random House 
(owned by Bertelsmann) to create the world’s largest consumer book publisher. 
The combined group has around a 30 per cent market share in the USA and UK, 
and is the publisher of many bestselling authors and titles. Bertelsmann’s book 
publishing imprints as a whole derive revenue mainly from the English, German, 
and Spanish languages (plus Portuguese in Brazil). Under the Random House 
brand, there are 200 independent publishing imprints in 15 countries. These 
include publishing houses such as Doubleday and Alfred A. Knopf (USA); 
Jonathan Cape and Bodley Head (UK); Plaza & Janés (Spain); Sudamericana 
(Argentina); and Goldmann (Germany).
Hatchette operates in 40 countries and is the leading publisher in French 
language markets. Its imprints, outside France, include Grand Central Publishing 
and Little, Brown (USA); Hodder Headline and Orion (UK); Anaya, Salvat, and 
Bruño (Spain); Aique (Argentina); and Patria (Mexico). Just under a ﬁ fth of 
Hachette’s revenue comes from education publishing. The other major English 
language trade publishers appear well down the global list and, like Penguin 
Random House, are headquartered in New York: HarperCollins, owned by News 
Corporation, and Simon & Schuster owned by CBS.
Grupo Planeta (Spain) is the world’s leading Spanish language book 
publisher, operating in Spain, Portugal, France, and Latin America with more 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
10
than 100 imprints. (The USA has many Spanish speakers but most read their 
books in English.) It also owns the second largest French publisher Editis and is 
associated with newspaper, magazine, TV and radio interests. It purchased 
Spain’s main book club from Bertelsmann, which used to own the major book 
clubs in the UK and elsewhere. Similar to Hachette it publishes part-works sold 
from news-stands and on subscription. Part-work publishing is still popular in 
southern Europe and Latin America. The Italian publisher De Agostini also 
publishes part-works, trade and educational books; Mondadori is the largest trade 
and education book publisher in Italy with a market share above 20 per cent.
Holtzbrinck (Germany), founded by Georg von Holtzbrinck, is family owned 
and active in over 80 countries. It publishes across the sectors of consumer, 
education, STM and professional – and newspapers. Outside Germany, its 
well-known English language imprints include the trade publishers Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux in the USA and Macmillan in the UK, the academic publisher 
Palgrave, and the science brands Nature and Scientiﬁ c American. Scholastic (US) is 
similar in size to Holtzbrinck. It is the world’s largest publisher and distributor of 
children’s/young adult (YA) books, including via its book clubs and book fairs 
based in schools. Outside the US, it has major operations in the UK, Asia and 
Australia. It has applied new technology to media products, platforms and services 
for entertainment and education. Bonnier (Sweden) and Egmont (Denmark) are 
leading Scandinavian media companies spanning trade books, magazines and 
new media products. Both are especially strong in children’s publishing and 
related products and services.
Small and medium publishers
While the trend is towards larger publishers, there will always be room for 
innovative, imaginative and entrepreneurial small publishers that are more agile 
compared to larger competitors either overburdened with bureaucracy and 
complexity, or slow to respond to fast-changing markets and technological 
development. The larger the giant publishers become, the more niches they leave 
open for smaller publishers to exploit. Small publishers must work hard at 
choosing and marketing their titles carefully, and at developing authors and books 
that endure on the backlist. Small publishers run the risk of losing their 
successful authors to larger publishers. Publishers of all sizes typically earn much 
of their revenue from established titles – their backlist. They can oﬀ er a more 
personal service to authors, who can receive less special attention from the larger 
publishers. All publishers give most attention to their important new books 
(frontlist titles), especially in respect of marketing and sales eﬀ ort.
A sign of a vigorous industry is the frequent start-up of new ﬁrms – 
compared with many industries, publishing needs only a little equipment and a 
relatively small amount of investment capital. The entry costs have become lower 
with the rise of digital publishing and printing. However, new publishers usually 
take at least four years from scratch to turn a proﬁ t. Some companies spring from 
management buy-outs of lists or imprints surplus to a large ﬁrm; some start-ups 
are created by employees leaving large companies. No professional qualiﬁcations 
are needed to be a publisher – publishing is commonly called a trade rather than a 
profession, and entry is unrestricted. Across all sectors, there are number of serial 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
11
publishing entrepreneurs: individuals who create new publishers and sell out or 
move on repeatedly. A good example in the UK is Anthony Cheetham, who 
founded Century (1981), Orion (1992), Quercus (2004), and House of Zeus (2012). 
Some of the small and medium-sized publishers grow at a much faster rate than 
larger companies. In comparison to the large corporate publishers, the smaller 
publishers are often far more open to discussing their innovations and sharing 
experiences.
The medium-sized publishers are arguably in a more diﬃ  cult position 
because they have neither the scale and ﬁ nancial beneﬁ ts of major publishers nor 
necessarily the agility and focus of smaller publishers. They are prime targets for 
takeovers by larger publishers provided they have valuable backlists which ﬁ t the 
objectives of the larger organization, and increasingly, if they possess digital 
publishing assets. These will include content and IP, and digital capital such as 
brand recognition and an established community of authors and readers. One of 
the fascinating aspects of publishing is that publishers do not need to be the size 
of Pearson, Elsevier, or Random House to be successful in the home market, to 
reach world export markets and to apply innovatory technology to expand sales 
and services.
MAJOR BUSINESS TRENDS
There are a number of trends which aﬀ ect the business of publishing around the 
world.
Tectonic shifts in the world economy
US and European publishers of all sizes are looking beyond their traditional and 
mature (slow-growing) markets of North America and of Europe – Western 
economies may also be heavily indebted – to the faster growing economies of the 
East and of the South. The faster growing countries often have rising populations, 
are investing heavily in education and research, and have expanding middle 
classes – people who are interested in self-improvement and business books, 
international ﬁ ction and non-ﬁ ction, and children’s books. In respect of 
geographical organization, Anglo/American publishers usually divide the world 
into vertical hemispheres: the Americas; Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA); 
and Asia. Meanwhile, Asian and Latin American publishers are growing and are 
looking to expand exports to the North and the West.
Globalization of publishing
The publishing industry used to be rather narrowly deﬁ ned by geography and 
limited by language, by nation states and empires. From the nineteenth century, 
the British publishers published in English and exported books to a worldwide 
empire and to America, the French publishers to their colonies in Africa and 
elsewhere, and the Spanish to Latin America. The very large German publishing 
industry exported to neighbouring countries where German was spoken. 
Meanwhile US publishers beneﬁ ted from a home market that became the world’s
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
12
Global publishing markets
Rüdiger Wischenbart, Journalist and consultant
Global publishing is not a level playing ﬁ eld. The six largest publishing 
markets alone, by value at retail (or consumer) prices, account for over 60 per 
cent of the global industry. Taken as a whole, the European Union would, 
technically, own the largest share in the international book market, but given 
it is fragmented by diﬀ erent languages as well as by largely diverse local 
traditions for both books and culture in general – with diﬀ erent tax regimes 
and reading habits – it can hardly be dealt with as one integral market for the 
trade in books.
A world map of the publishing industry illustrates how book publishing 
mirrors much larger economic and social characteristics across the continents. 
The recent rise of China, today arguably home of the second largest book 
market worldwide after the United States, reﬂ ects the prominent role of books 
in all emerging economies – as a key media in the modern knowledge society. 
But also Brazil, South Korea, India, Turkey and Russia are to be found among 
the 20 largest publishing nations, along with much smaller, yet much 
wealthier countries such as Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Belgium, 
Switzerland or Norway. With a total market value of €95.6 billion, we must 
assume that the 20 largest publishing markets account for just under 84 per 
cent of global spending on books, estimated at a total value of €114 bn.
Among all the various publishing, media and entertainment industries 
worldwide – which also include TV (subscriptions and advertisement), 
newspapers, magazines, movies and entertainment, video games and music, 
with a combined value of around $1,000 billion – books represent some 15 per 
cent, topped only by TV and newspapers, and outsizing both ﬁ lm and music.
Most markets in Western Europe and North America are highly mature 
or even showing a steady, albeit mostly modest, decline in recent years. The 
economic crisis of 2008 took a signiﬁ cant toll on those countries hit the 
hardest, such as Spain or Italy. In this context, ebooks are one of the few 
sectors of growth, for example in trade publishing in the USA, and even 
compensating in the UK for the decline in print sales.

EP E R T
The global map of 
publishing markets 
represents domestic 
publishing markets 
by market value at 
consumer prices
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
13
Assessing the scope of local book publishing is a diﬃ  cult exercise for 
many other parts of the world, especially in the Arab world and in Sub-
Saharan Africa, as most books in these regions are not produced domestically, 
but imported from notably the United Kingdom, followed by the United States 
and, in West Africa and in the Maghreb, from France. Also hardly any reliable 
data are available with regard to the modest domestic production in those 
markets.
Table 1.2 Global ranking of publishing markets
Country
Year
Publishers’ total 
net revenue (€m)
Total market 
value at 
consumer prices 
(€m)
New titles & new 
editions per 1 m 
inhabitants
2012 GDP per 
capita PPP* in 
USD 
(Worldbank)
Population
World
114,000
12,189
7,046,368,813
USA
2012 20,750
29,643
1,080
49,965
313,914,040
China
2012
14,200
306
9,233
1,350,695,000
Germany
2012
5,407
9,520
1,115
40,901
81,889,839
Japan
2012
7,878 
617
35,178
127,561,489
France
2012
2,771
4,534 
1,321
36,104
65,696,689
UK
2012
3,736
3,975
2,459
36,901
63,227,526
Italy
2012
3,072 
1,049
33,111
60,917,978
Spain
2011
1,820
2,890 
1,692
32,682
46,217,961
Brazil
2012
1,884
2,810 
339
11,909
198,656,019
Korea, Rep.
2012
2,734 
1,257
30,801
50,004,000
India 
2010
1,675
2,500 
3,876
1,236,686,732
Canada
2010
1,535 
2,342 
42,533
34,880,491
Turkey
2012
1,096
1,682 
564
18,348
73,997,128
Australia
2011
1,520 
877
44,598
22,683,600
Russian Federation
2012
1,494 
23,501
143,533,000
Netherlands
2012
1,363 
1,412
43,198
16,767,705
Poland
2012
654 
1,053 
775
22,162
38,542,737
Belgium
2011
519 
850 
39,788
11,142,157
Switzerland
2011
806 
53,367
7,997,152
Norway
2012
743 
1,486
65,640
5,018,869
Top 20 Publishing Markets
95,609
Other Markets
18,391
*purchasing power parity
richest and largest. Post war the USA dominated popular culture, science and 
technology, grew exports and became a major source of college textbooks that 
were sold to overseas markets or adapted. The UK, USA, France and Spain are 
still the main exporters. UK publishers owned by US and continental European 
publishers are sometimes used to expand the parent’s international English 
language reach, helping to make the UK one of the world centres of international 
publishing expertise.
While national and regional markets are still deﬁ ned by language (less so in 
science and technology where English is the world’s language), the international 
publishers increasingly operate in many countries. They publish original books in 
the local language and may export a selection in one or more of the main 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
14
transnational languages of English, Spanish and French; and they translate or 
adapt selected imported books, which they have originated and published 
elsewhere. Smaller publishers that do not own their own overseas companies are 
able to export by selling their books through networks of other companies and 
have them translated by other publishers. In addition ebooks can now reach all 
parts of the world. There is a signiﬁ cant market opportunity for publishers with 
the growth of the English language and reading in English in many countries.
The globalization of the supply side of publishing means that books may be 
printed in China or Hong Kong, or printed for sale in local markets using digital 
printing. The outsourcing of editorial, design and typesetting, for example in 
journal publishing, may lead to publishers merely retaining a project management 
function at their headquarters.
Strategic concentration
Major publishers have progressively sold oﬀ  publishing operations that do not ﬁ t 
with the main sectors in which they operate. The aim has been to be a major 
player in some sectors and markets, and to exit the other areas. From the 1980s, 
Anglo/American managements especially concentrated on sectors. Most of the 
owners of the trade publishers sold oﬀ  their educational, academic, STM and 
professional publishing interests. The STM and professional publishers continue 
to sell oﬀ  remnants of their trade book publishing operations which they see as 
lower margin and higher risk businesses, or educational publishing units 
requiring signiﬁ cant scale and technological investment, or if in professional 
publishing, print publishing units which are not amenable to the development of 
digital services.
There may be a counter trend developing. Some consumer book publishers 
and media corporations are investing in education; or they are diversifying into 
other sectors. For example, the consumer book publisher Bloomsbury re-invested 
proﬁ ts from the Harry Potter books in a series of acquisitions of academic and 
professional publishers.
Consolidation through merger and acquisition
The major publishers have raised their market share in their chosen sectors 
through organic growth and by acquiring or merging with similar publishing 
companies, or those serving adjacent markets or new geographies. They may also 
acquire technology companies or start-ups which are disruptive of their business 
models. For example in 2008, Springer bought the publisher BioMed Central 
which at that time was pioneering open access. They like to search for companies 
which add value (including those providing related services), can be easily 
absorbed, and do not create or introduce undue risk. They try to avoid companies 
that are over-priced, passing peak value, or which are not conducive to digital 
publishing and exploitation. In each Western market sector, three to four major 
publishers have come to dominate and together may account for more than half of 
a market sector’s revenue, with the leader accounting for around one quarter or 
more.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
15
Collaboration
In a fast-changing business environment, impacted by technology, there is a 
greater need for publishers to collaborate with other ﬁ rms, even if they are 
competitors. Experimentation in new areas forges partnerships and, for example, 
a publisher collaborates with software developers or ﬁ lm or games companies to 
produce new products. The importance of scale in the aggregation of content 
encourages publishers to form alliances with other publishers to strengthen their 
marketing and sales in existing or new markets, or those overseas. The cost of 
developing new technologies and software prompts publishers and partners to 
share costs, for example, in the development of platforms. Common goals to 
improve the user experience (UX), such as enabling an ebook to be portable across 
platforms and readable on diﬀ erent devices, or a researcher to link to citations in 
an article, drive publishers to support the development of universal standards.
The third party infringers of IP, unauthorized copying and changes in copyright 
law in respect of digital content, necessitate the sharing of information among 
publishers to reduce such risks and their support of organizations that defend IP 
rights globally.
THE DIGITIZATION OF PUBLISHING
Digitization is the mega trend of the age and aﬀ ects every aspect of the publishing 
process from authors to readers. Digital publishing is far more than just 
publishing ebooks. The transition from print to digital publishing might suggest 
that printed book publishing will end but that is not expected in the foreseeable 
future as purchasers still appreciate the appearance, collectability, gift value, 
usability and permanence of the physical object.
The use by publishers of digital processes stretches back decades. During the 
1970s and the 1980s, typesetters applied computers and software (the forerunner 
of today’s text mark-up languages) to the composition of books and lowered the 
cost to publishers. From the mid-1980s, desktop publishing and the development 
of word-processing programs aided authors, typesetters and publishers alike. Such 
technologies facilitated the origination of printed books. At this point the 
publishers had little use for the typeset ﬁ les of their books because there was no 
market for selling books electronically. Indeed even into the new century the 
major consumer publishers did not hold digital ﬁ les of their books.
The professional reference and STM publishers realized early on the threats 
and potential opportunities of digital publishing. For example, Reed Elsevier 
purchased the legal database LexisNexis in 1994 (which had oﬀ ered full text 
searching of US legal cases from 1980) and Wolters Kluwer the medical 
information database Ovid in 1998 (which had developed the ﬁ rst online interface 
in 1984). From around the mid-1990s onwards, the STM publishers applied 
digital methods to the peer review process and to the production of journal 
articles, and made their printed journal content available online to researchers, via 
libraries, in PDF format. From around 2006, the main consumer book publishers 
began to digitize their new books and selected backlist books.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
16
Reading devices, ecosystems and walled gardens
In the late 1990s, dedicated ebook reading devices came to the market though 
ebook sales were limited to enthusiasts. However, the launch of Amazon’s Kindle 
in the USA in 2007, and subsequently in the UK and elsewhere in 2010 had a 
dramatic impact on the public’s purchase of ebooks. The upward demand curve 
resembled a hockey stick as ebook sales started from a low point and accelerated 
upwards on a steep incline. The largest US bookstore chain, Barnes & Noble (at 
the time largely unknown outside America), launched its dedicated reading device, 
the Nook in 2009. Amazon had already become the leading online retailer of 
printed books through a focus on excellent customer service and a long-term 
strategy to gain market share. It had developed a very large database of loyal 
customers: avid readers who were quick adopters of ebooks, especially non-
illustrated narrative titles that were amenable to reading on the black-and-white 
dedicated reading devices of the period. Amazon is credited with creating the ﬁ rst 
ecosystem that encouraged people to buy publishers’ ebooks easily and legally. 
The founder of Amazon, Jeﬀ  Bezos, says ‘Amazon isn’t happening to the book 
business. The future is happening to the book business’ (Stone, page 11).
Apple launched the iPad in the USA in 2010 along with its iBookstore for 
purchasing ebooks. This led to an explosive growth in the purchase by consumers 
of tablet computers with the connectivity to consume all kinds of media. The 
increased availability of the new reading devices, linked to compelling websites for 
ease of purchase, drove ebook demand. The sharp rise in the use of mobile 
phones or smartphones on which people read books continues worldwide, and 
larger phones or phablets are popular in markets such as China.
Lying behind the impact of the reading devices on ebook uptake are the very 
diﬀ erent business models of the technology ﬁ rms. Amazon is primarily a retailer 
of products and services, intent on increasing the value of the user’s shopping 
basket. It develops software and sells hardware at cost. Apple, by contrast, is 
primarily a hardware ﬁ rm, that requires content to help sell its high margin 
products. Other companies, such as Sony and Kobo, developed reading devices 
with ebook stores. The business models of Google and Facebook are based 
primarily on attracting advertising revenue deriving from the search technologies 
of the former and the social network of the latter. It is in Google’s interests for 
content to be kept outside paywalls and to be freely searchable.
During this brief period of technological change, the importance of an entire 
proprietary ecosystem with a social component has emerged. In this respect, 
Amazon and Apple stand out. Both have developed walled gardens of content and 
services. Their customers beneﬁ t from the ease of remaining within their 
favoured system but the proprietary software locks them (and the publishers) into 
the system in various ways. The printed book, in contrast, has a universally 
available and non-proprietary operating system.
When there are a few buyers, such as Amazon and Apple on the demand 
side, facing a large number of sellers (the publishers on the supply side), the 
market demonstrates imperfect competition. Unless the publishers agree to the 
terms set by the buyers, they face the threat that the retailer will take down the 
‘buy button’ against their books or remove the books from automated 
recommendation systems. On the other hand, the major publishers that issue the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
17
majority of bestsellers can exert counter pressure by refusing to supply ‘must 
have’ titles to the main retailers. In previous eras, the publishers have faced 
similar concentration and buying power from bricks-and-mortar retailers.
Character of ebook sales
The growth in sales of consumer ebooks occurred ﬁ rst in North America, followed 
by the UK and Australia. The sales of genre ﬁ ction led the way whilst the ebook 
sales of highly illustrated titles, children’s books and textbooks were sluggish. The 
most popular books in the early phase of the ebook format were those with strong 
narrative content, and little or no illustration. They might be read in bed or while 
travelling, and their sales were not so dependent on the quality of the packaging 
and presentation. The US ebook market is the most advanced and provides 
insights around the eﬀ ects on authorship, publishing and bookselling. However, 
the uptake of ebooks in consumer markets worldwide is occurring at diﬀ erent 
speeds and caution is required around the extrapolation of US trends.
Disruption
The invention of the web and more recently the trend to mobile are often 
described as ‘disruptive technologies’, a term devised by Clayton Christensen who 
subsequently preferred ‘disruptive innovations’. Such innovations do not just 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
18
disrupt the business models of technology ﬁ rms but those engaged in the 
publishing business, along with many others. Christensen also developed the 
theory of ‘disruptive competitors’ – those ﬁ rms which start by selling inferior 
goods at low margins in areas ignored by incumbents operating on high margins, 
but which move up the value chain to eventually challenge and possibly replace 
the incumbents.
The main disruptors in the world of publishing are the big tech companies – 
Amazon, Apple and Google. Amazon is arguably more of a disrupter than Apple 
and Google because for many publishers it controls the main retail channel 
(pbook and ebook) to readers. Amazon started in 1995 as a mail-order discount 
bookseller, a direct to consumer (D2C) business. At that time, mail-order 
bookselling was generally seen as a low margin if not loss-making area of business 
and was ignored by large incumbents. Through the application of innovatory 
technology and its diversiﬁ cation into other products beyond books, Amazon 
overtook Barnes & Noble, expanded internationally and rose to threaten in size the 
world’s largest retailer Walmart. It provided a self-publishing service to authors 
most of whom would not receive a contract from a traditional publisher; and 
installed digital printing technology to manufacture books. It moved up the value 
chain in many areas such as becoming a consumer book publisher in its own 
right; though in the latter endeavour, competing booksellers boycotted its books 
thereby hindering sales of its titles.
During the last decades of the twentieth century and into the ﬁ rst decade of 
the twenty-ﬁ rst, most physical retailers (including the bookselling chains in the 
USA and UK) spent their resources investing in new and ever larger stores with 
more staﬀ , in expensive real-estate locations with high foot-traﬃ  c. However large 
their stores were, the shelf-space to display titles was limited. Amazon in contrast 
did not invest in high cost real-estate but in technology. It had no limits on the 
number of titles it could display on its website. Provided it could sign up the 
supplying publishers, the inventory of titles on its website was limitless. Amazon 
when negotiating with publishers argued that it should receive a high discount 
from them because of its wide title oﬀ er and far lower return rate of unsold books 
compared to that of the physical book stores. Although it built its own warehouses 
to store books, Amazon also fulﬁ lled orders by using the main US book 
wholesalers (Baker & Taylor and Ingram) to deliver books to readers in Amazon 
boxes. Another key advantage, lost on other retailers of the time, is that retailing is 
not just about enticing and retaining customers, but also about collecting data on 
those customers in order to sell them more products and services. Books and 
other media are described as passion products. Once the customer is acquired 
online they are likely to be retained.
The online retailers oﬀ ered convenience, speed of delivery, discounted prices 
and greater title availability. Internet selling aided the smaller specialist publishers 
since physical booksellers did not stock their titles. It gave them greater reach into 
export markets. The overall book market widened and deepened. During the long 
recession in Western markets, the online booksellers increased their market share 
against the physical stores. There are several reasons for the decline in physical 
bookselling but among the chief ones are the switch by consumers to online 
ordering of printed books; the ease of using smartphones in store to check 
comparative prices (a behaviour called showrooming); and the rapid growth in the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
19
purchase of ebooks, especially in some ﬁ ction genres. The decline of book display 
also occurred in other stores which had previously stocked books as a sideline. 
The US international companies, such as Amazon and Apple, threaten the once 
dominant national bookselling chains around the world; but in those same local 
markets they in turn face new competition. For example, Deutsche Telekom, in 
partnership with major German publishers and booksellers, launched the Tolino 
brand of e-reader in 2013.
The decline of retail bookshelf space in the USA, Australia and to a lesser 
extent the UK, and the rise of online retailers, arguably presents the greatest 
challenges to the consumer book publishers. The business model of such 
publishers has traditionally relied on their ability to sell and distribute large 
quantities of printed books into physical retailers. The retail exposure drives sales 
of printed books and of ebooks, fosters the discovery of books come across by 
chance, encourages impulse purchases, aids the launch of new writers and 
provides a venue for Christmas gift buying. As the physical consumer book retail 
market is being disrupted and reduced, the business model of consumer book 
publishers is being disrupted and potentially weakened. The key challenge is to 
aid discoverability in a world where the high street store is disappearing.
Since publishers have traditionally marketed and sold books through 
bookstores, they had no direct contact with readers. They are largely business to 
business (B2B) ﬁ rms. In other words the publishers, particularly the trade book 
publishers, long ago surrendered their customer relationship to intermediary 
ﬁ rms, the channels through which they sold their books. The retailers do not 
provide publishers with information on the customers to whom they sell. 
Publishers now recognize that it is of increasing importance to focus on end-users 
(rather than retailers) and to establish two-way relationships with them. Readers, 
however, are still likely to purchase books from retailers.
The educational, STM and professional publishers have supplied for decades 
their products directly to end-user organizations, cutting out suppliers, and 
increasingly do so via their own platforms, though various kinds of intermediaries 
still exist.
Disintermediation
The internet lowers transaction costs in the supply chain, for instance the cost a 
publisher incurs when handling orders from booksellers, which were once 
hand-written and which are now processed electronically with fewer people. 
Moreover, the internet oﬀ ers the potential for removing, or ‘disintermediating’, 
entire businesses in the supply chain from author to reader. Many specialist 
intermediaries punctuate the linear supply chain. All of them, such as authors’ 
agents, publishers, printers, wholesalers and booksellers, add costs and proﬁ t to 
their activities. The internet and other digital technologies revolutionize the ways 
in which books are produced and sold. Books can be published faster and cheaper.
All parts of the traditional supply chain are under pressure: each is prone to 
disintermediation. There are many examples. Authors self-publish stories and cut 
out agents and publishers. Librarians act as university publishers. Agents oﬀ er 
publishing services to authors and cut out publishers. Printers may supply 
customers direct; wholesalers may act as printers. Publishers cut out wholesalers 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
20
and retailers. And online retailers act as publishers, printers, aggregators and 
libraries thereby attempting to disintermediate everyone in order to create a total 
vertical business from author to reader. It is conceivable that synthetic authors 
might replace authors. An intelligent computer program might be devised that 
uses semantic textual analysis of competing and similar works and real-time 
analytics of current trends, information, interests and cultures to write books.
The publishing value chain is in a state of ﬂ ux. At the turn of the last century, 
publishers feared the end of the book and of their continued existence. Since then 
fears have receded and publishing as a whole has expanded and adapted.
Scarcity and abundance
Before the digital age, books were scarce and costly to reproduce. There was a 
scarcity of publishers that had the resources to produce, print and distribute them. 
The publishers were gatekeepers that made books available to readers. The 
booksellers were gatekeepers of the retail channel to market; guarding the shelf 
space on which books were displayed and sold to readers. Libraries were 
gatekeepers through their selection of titles, had limits of funding and of shelf 
space to store books for reference and lending. Scarcity helped the publishers to 
control pricing.
The coming of the web broke down over time the barriers to the scarcity of 
content and information, and abundance emerged. The connectivity aﬀ orded by 
the internet has given rise to a range of free-to-end-user business models that are 
used by businesses and organizations outside the publishing industry. Free 
sources of information, such as Wikipedia, eroded the sales of printed reference 
titles; and sites with user-generated content, such as TripAdvisor, challenged the 
publishers of printed travel guides. Classic books that were out of copyright (in the 
public domain) were digitized and made freely available. Piracy of in-copyright 
titles is a growing problem though far less prevalent than in the ﬁ lm and music 
industries. Freemium selling, whereby readers can sample the content before 
purchase, is a variant of the user-free model. Amazon’s Look Inside the book and 
Google Books have opened up the contents of books to readers which helps 
publishers sell to global audiences.
There has also been a philosophical shift around how content is created and 
appraised. Rather than rely on a few gatekeepers to assess the value of content, 
why not put it up for everyone to see, review, and oﬀ er their reaction? This shift is 
reﬂ ected in the huge growth in user-generated content and extends to the peer 
review of papers in some academic journals post publication.
However, scarcity is still present and comes in diﬀ erent guises, especially in 
respect of the resources needed to publish. Readers and institutional buyers have 
limits on their purchasing power. There are also and importantly individual limits 
on the amount of time available to read, be it a novel or a scientiﬁ c paper, versus 
competing media and activities: time is a scarce commodity. Good authors who 
people want to read are scarce, whether their writings are paid for by readers or 
available for free. From a publisher’s standpoint, it costs money to ﬁ nd, select and 
buy such authors. It takes resources to develop the author’s work for market 
needs, and to produce the book in whatever formats the content is published. The 
marginal cost of a digital ﬁ le may be close to zero, yet there is still a cost to the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
21
publisher to create a book and then distribute it through channels to market that 
are controlled and charged for by others. The sales and marketing costs to capture 
readers’ attention, to help them discover books, do not disappear in the transition 
from print to digital publishing.
In a world of abundance, the publishers oﬀ er a vital service in selecting 
authors and developing their content to meet readers’ needs. They manage the 
authors’ brands and focus readers on the books they have selected. That service is 
worth paying for when time is scarce. To attempt another deﬁ nition: the 
publishing process may be described as managing the scarcity of good authors 
and content to drive proﬁ tability.
Vertical communities and connectivity
Publishers have always published books for people sharing common interests, 
termed vertical communities. The non-consumer publishers have the advantage 
over the consumer publishers in that the places and objectives of work or study 
deﬁ ne communities of interest and are identiﬁ able. In the pre-digital age, the 
consumer publishers had to rely on booksellers and mail-order book club 
operators to reach readers. The readers of books were diﬃ  cult to identify and 
reach, and had no direct contact with the publishers. Readers spread through the 
general population too had great diﬃ  culty in connecting and sharing views with 
others. The internet and the development of social media tools have fostered the 
development of vertical communities, and the connectivity between readers, 
authors and publishers. Mike Shatzkin argues: ‘The shift from horizontal to 
vertical is inexorable, unstoppable. People need to understand what this means 
and, as uncomfortable as it is for many leaders of today’s trade, they need to start 
adjusting their business to meet that shift’ (Shatzkin, 19 March 2009).
Aggregation and curation
The ‘aggregation’ of content is the assembly of diﬀ erent objects from diﬀ erent 
sources to form a whole. In the publishing world, the largest aggregators are the 
online booksellers, wholesalers and library suppliers, and technology companies 
such as Google. The larger the amount of content they gather, the greater the 
beneﬁ t they oﬀ er to their customers, the greater amount of customer data they 
collect, and the greater their commercial prospects. Amazon is the premier 
aggregator in the world of books and dominates the consumer market in many 
parts of the world. Publishers too beneﬁ t from the aggregation of content, for 
example in the area of journals and databases – one important reason behind their 
merger and acquisition activity.
The term ‘curation’ (borrowed from the museum world) is the appraisal and 
selection of books. Mike Shatzkin writes about the connection between curation 
and aggregation: ‘the concept [of curation] in the digital content world means the 
selection and presentation of these disparate items to help a browser or consumer 
navigate and select from them. Aggregation without curation is, normally, not 
very helpful. Curation creates the brand’ (Shatzkin, 21 September 2009).
A number of players in the value chain carry out curating activities. Authors’ 
agents act as gatekeepers and curators of the authors they represent. They curate 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
22
the projects of their authors for submission to selected editors at publishing 
houses. Authors too may be described as curating publishers in that they appraise 
and select the publishers to whom they submit their ideas and projects. They want 
publication in an aggregation of similar books, such as an imprint, or, if a 
research scientist, in the most prestigious journal in their ﬁ eld – journals are 
curated, peer-reviewed and branded aggregations. In turn the editors curate 
authors and projects through their decision to publish a very small number from a 
large number of projects submitted. Agents and publishers sort the wheat from 
the chaﬀ . The publishers curate projects and then publish, whereas the practice 
on the internet is to publish ﬁ rst and curate afterwards.
The aggregation of published book titles forms the publisher’s imprint (a list 
of books within a publisher’s overall publishing programme). Publishers give 
great attention to building trusted brands in the minds of consumers, both of 
authors and imprints. The curation of projects to ﬁ t the objectives and personality 
of the imprint creates the brand. The publishers sell the aggregates of their brands 
to the booksellers or institutions. Additional curation within the publisher’s 
programme occurs at the sub-imprint level. The marketing staﬀ  select titles for 
promotion to diﬀ erent audiences and media. Sales staﬀ  select titles which are 
most attractive to the book buyers of intermediary ﬁ rms, or sell bundles of journal 
titles or collections of ebooks to university libraries. The staﬀ  selling translation 
rights to foreign language publishers match selected titles to selected editors of 
the publishers overseas.
The booksellers are of course both aggregators and curators. Physical stores 
curate titles by displaying them on shelves devoted to subject categories or by 
placing bestsellers in the window or on tables at the front of the shop. The online 
booksellers use the metadata (data about data, for example book title, author, 
cover, description) supplied by the publishers to place books in subject 
classiﬁ cations or to populate the algorithms which create recommendations for 
consumers.
Finally readers are curating content on the web, and a good example is Maria 
Popova with her blog Brain Pickings – ‘a human-powered discovery engine for 
interestingness, a subjective lens on what matters in the world and why, bringing 
you things you didn’t know you were interested in – until you are’ (brainpickings.
org, accessed 21 September 2013).
Granularity and personalization
The container of the printed edition of the book or journal ﬁ xes its content and 
presentation. The economics of print production necessitate boundaries on 
length: short books or very long books are problematic and uneconomic to 
publish. Digital publishing reduces or removes such boundaries. Additionally, it 
gives the opportunity for users to download a chapter or article – the container is 
chunked at the granular level. The publisher is able to oﬀ er users the ability to 
personalize content for themselves or, if a teacher, to customize resources for 
students. The scope to chunk and re-purpose content varies across publishing 
sectors and product types. The long-form book, as such ﬁ ction or narrative 
non-ﬁ ction, is not susceptible to disaggregation in the same way as the music 
album. At the level of content aggregation, publishers are able to oﬀ er digital 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
23
subject collections of books to academic libraries that would have been hitherto 
uneconomic to do in print, or bundle a novelist’s titles for sale.
There are broader issues connected with the granularization of content – how 
easily can the rights be licensed in a piece of IP (say an image or extended piece of 
text), when the value of the transaction may be quite low? The system of digital 
object identiﬁ er (DOI) – common in journal publishing – has not yet reached the 
rest of publishing. As Richard Hooper comments, ‘Even in the publishing 
industry I am not sure you have cracked the system for identifying, uniquely, a 
chart or a paragraph within an article or a book – i.e. a subset of an ISBN’ 
(Hooper, page 37).
Digital printing
Digital printing is a transformative technology that developed at the turn of the 
century and which was pioneered by Lightning Source, owned by the US 
wholesaler Ingram. Books have traditionally been printed on oﬀ set litho presses, 
which require print runs of at least 1,000 copies. A publisher, in advance of 
publication of a new book, estimates the quantity that could be sold in, say, one 
year, and places the order with the printer. The printed copies are stored in the 
publisher’s warehouse and dispatched over time to fulﬁ l customers’ orders. The 
publisher ties up its cash in the stock, which may not sell or be damaged, and pays 
for storage. Digital printing, by contrast, enables the production of just one copy 
and that copy can be printed after the customer order has been received: pure 
print on demand (POD). Digital printing also enables economic short print runs 
of say 10–500 copies. Formerly, backlist titles selling only small quantities went 
out of print and became unavailable because the publisher could not aﬀ ord to 
reprint them using litho presses. Digital technology reduces the publisher’s costs 
and risks, and allows books to remain in print and available for sale. For 
publishers of specialist books in particular, it oﬀ ers the prospect of ‘zero-
inventory’ (the publisher has no stock or warehouse). As digital printing improves 
in cost-eﬀ ectiveness and quality in comparison with litho and storage costs, the 
trend is from long litho print runs to short digital runs and POD. The quality and 
economies of digital colour printing are also improving.
ADAPTATION AND INNOVATION
Every aspect of the publishing process is changing. Publishers are ﬁ nding authors 
in new ways. They are developing streamlined digital workﬂ ows that enable the 
work to be published in print, ebook and web formats. Content management 
systems are used to hold the publisher’s IP in codiﬁ ed and retrievable form. The 
abundance of content on the internet makes it progressively diﬃ  cult to capture 
readers’ attention. The publisher’s signal has to rise above the noise. People 
discover or come across books in many ways, and their behaviour is constantly 
changing. The inﬂ uence of book reviews in the traditional media has been in 
decline. Retail shelf space devoted to books, so important for discovering 
consumer books and new writers through browsing, is in decline. Word-of-mouth 
recommendations among readers remain as important as ever.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
24
Digital marketing oﬀ ers to the publisher new routes to interact with 
consumers and to make books visible within search and communities. Publishers 
are seeing the importance of book recommendation sites, social media and 
bloggers; and building their own community sites to facilitate a dialogue with 
readers. Authors too are adapting by building an online proﬁ le through their own 
website, blog and Twitter.
In the pre-digital era, publishers held data on their content in separate parts 
of the business – often on paper. Examples were contracts, book production 
speciﬁ cations, bibliographic data, and customer sales information. It is now 
essential to impose consistency on the data and its structure, to ensure speed of 
retrieval and to connect content to the relevant data. Metadata helps computers 
and readers to discover books and content in the online environment. As Richard 
Hooper says, ‘The digital world drives data and is driven by data in a way that the 
analogue world is not. Sloppy data can just about get by in the analogue world but 
not in the digital world’ (Hooper, page 36). Data analytics informs publishing 
decisions: real-time sales and social media information help the analysis of the 
eﬀ ectiveness of marketing; data about readers guides the creation of new content 
and the way publishers interact with users across the whole value chain.
The velocity of change aﬀ ects every aspect of the publishing process. Former 
methods of working become uneconomic, ineﬀ ectual or redundant. Flexibility is 
key, as highlighted by Tim Hely Hutchinson of Hachette UK: ‘We used to have to 
print 10,000s, but I can get an economical print run now with 1,500 copies, so we 
can keep the stock low, and wait to see which formats the books are selling in’ 
(The Bookseller, 21 June 2013). Enduring business models that were once proﬁ table 
begin to fade. Constant experimentation forms an important part of navigating 
successfully the transition from print to digital publishing. Business models may 
vary from giving content away free to encouraging subscriptions, to pricing 
ebooks cheaply to gain market share, to bundling content together into a service.
The move from simply the creation and sale of products to the provision of 
services and solutions is apparent across all publishing sectors. Many of the 
services related to content are designed to make it more useful, personal and 
valuable to users. Services supplied to authors help them publish and build their 
brand. Services supplied to teachers help their professional development and 
teaching through using the publisher’s content. Online assessment services 
provided to students aid their learning outcomes. Tools supplied to researchers 
and professionals improve the speed of searching for relevant content, and aid 
their productivity and competitiveness. In some areas, the addition of services to 
the core business of publishing content is a way of occupying more of the value 
chain to gain new sources of revenue. All such services are examples of 
investment in developing the value of online vertical communities.
A criticism of publishers is that since they have traded through booksellers 
and in the academic context negotiate with librarians, they have little knowledge 
of, or direct connection with, readers. In turn a criticism of college textbook 
publishers is that they have focused mainly on the teachers, who adopt the 
textbooks which students buy, more than on the students’ learning. Most ebooks 
are replicas of printed books and do not yet take account of digital opportunities to 
aid users. User-centred design is still in its infancy.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Introduction
25
In response to the transition, publishers’ resources and infrastructure 
devoted to declining or uncertain revenue sources, such as printed books, are 
reduced or outsourced. Reductions occur in the staﬀ  categories primarily engaged 
in the manufacturing, selling and distribution of printed books, along with 
warehouse space. Conversely, increases occur in the staﬀ  categories engaged in 
digital production, marketing and selling, along with investment in technology, 
digital distribution and services. Moreover, the former distinctive activities of 
editorial, production, marketing and sales are overlapping, and merging into new 
job roles. Disruption and opportunity occur not only in the external environment 
but on a constant basis within the organization. It is essential for publishers to 
alter their mind-set to focus more clearly on the end-user and how they would like 
to interact with the product or service, whether they are reading for pleasure, 
teaching a class, or consulting must-have information. One of the key success 
factors for all organizations is to be able to manage change successfully.
Sources
Michael Bhaskar, The Content Machine: Towards a theory of publishing from the 
printing press to the digital network, Anthem Press, 2013.
Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When new technologies cause 
great ﬁ rms to fail, Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
Richard Hooper, ‘Copyright Licensing: Fit for purpose for the digital age’, 
Logos, 24:2 (2013), pages 33–40.
Angus Phillips, Turning the Page: The evolution of the book, Routledge, 2014.
Mike Shatzkin, The Shatzkin Files, Kobo Editions, 2011. This collects together a 
number of pieces from Mike Shatzkin’s blog.
Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeﬀ  Bezos and the age of Amazon, Little, 
Brown, 2013.
Web resources
Kent Anderson, ‘73 Things Publishers Do’, 22 October 2013, available from 
http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2013/10/22/updated-73-things-
publishers-do-2013-edition/
www.bbc.co.uk BBC R4 programme, The Bottom Line: Books, Saturday 9 
February 2013.
www.digitalbookworld.com Digital Book World (USA).
www.futurebook.net Blog from The Bookseller (UK).
www.idealog.com Blog from Mike Shatzkin (USA).
www.scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org Blog established in 2008 by the Society for 
Scholarly Publishing.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 2
The development of modern trade 
publishing
The aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of the development of modern 
trade publishing in the UK. Broad themes include the vertical integration of the 
hardback and paperback publishing houses, an increase in scale through merger 
and acquisition, the democratization of authorship, and the growth of digital sales, 
in particular of ebooks. Running alongside is the change in culture from a 
product-led to a market-led business.
STABILITY AND EXPANSION
In the 1950s book publishing was broadly based with around 50 medium-sized 
UK ﬁrms each employing around 50 staﬀ  and issuing several hundred titles per 
year, usually in hardback. The publishers were privately owned, usually by family 
members who held a majority share. They concentrated on ﬁction and non-ﬁction 
– termed ‘general’ or ‘trade’ or, more recently, ‘consumer books’ – although they 
also developed educational and academic lists subservient to the general book 
side.
The 1960s brought great optimism as in other cultural industries such as 
music and fashion. Rayner Unwin of George Allen & Unwin talks of the 
‘informal, almost casual, publishing that was still possible during the sixties’ 
(Unwin, page 238). For example, work on the travel writer Eric Newby’s book, 
Grain Race (1968), took place in Unwin’s ﬂat in the evenings. Censorship was 
dealt a blow with the publication of the unexpurgated version of D. H. Lawrence’s 
Lady Chatterley’s Lover on 10 November 1960 – a victory for Penguin, which had 
won the right to publish the previously banned novel against a charge that it was 
obscene. The ﬁrst print run of 200,000 sold out on the ﬁrst day and within a year 
Penguin had sold 2 million copies. ‘The trial was a turning-point, and after it was 
over previously forbidden works like The Ginger Man and The Kama Sutra were 
ﬁnally published in this country’ (Lewis, page 333).
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s (apart from in the recession of the early to 
mid-1970s), much of the publishers’ fast-growing prosperity was based on readers’ 
afﬂuence and increasing public expenditure (Table 2.1, page 27). Sales of hardback 
adult and children’s books were underpinned by generous government funding of 
schools and libraries. Mass-market paperback publishing grew substantially and 
The judge in 
the Lady 
Chatterley’s 
Lover trial 
asked the jury: 
‘Is it a book 
you would wish 
your wife or 
servants to 
read?’
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
27
was carried out by separate ﬁrms. In the main they acquired reprint paperback 
rights from the houses that originated titles in hardback. Literary agents, who 
increasingly began to represent the interests of ﬁction and non-ﬁction authors, 
were resented by some traditional publishers, who saw them as unwarranted 
intruders into the publisher–author relationship. New publishers arose producing 
highly-illustrated non-ﬁction books in full colour at low and aﬀ ordable prices – 
viewed by traditionalists as ‘down-market’. Paul Hamlyn (1926–2001), the greatest 
exponent of aﬀ ordable illustrated books, made a series of fortunes from illustrated 
book publishing. In turn he sold his Paul Hamlyn imprint to the magazine 
company IPC, founded Octopus by buying back the Paul Hamlyn imprint for a 
nominal sum, plus liabilities, and then sold his imprints to Reed Consumer Books 
for an enormous sum. In his lifetime, he founded the Paul Hamlyn Foundation to 
give greater access to the arts.
Table 2.1 Number of titles published in the UK from 1950 to 1980 (source: Norrie, 
page 220)
Year
Number of titles and new editions
1950
17,072
1960
23,783
1970
33,489
1980
48,158
The publication of The Reader’s Digest Great World Atlas (1961), which had 
double-page spreads displaying superb full-colour graphics, and extended captions 
not unlike those found in magazines, and the Treasures of Tutankhamun, tied in to 
the British Museum exhibition (1972), were inspirational to some embryonic book 
packagers. They went on to produce highly illustrated full-colour information 
books which they presold to publishers around the world to be marketed and 
distributed under the publishers’ imprints. In the late 1970s, the highly illustrated 
publishers brought colour books into the supermarkets by producing own brand 
books for them at very low prices.
By the end of the 1970s the era of the ‘gentleman publisher’ was fast 
disappearing. The phrase had been used to describe grand publishers of literary 
ﬁction, typically derided as gentlemen who ran their companies by the seat of their 
pants, who adopted a paternalist management style, or who according to some 
literary agents exhibited ungentlemanly behaviour in their contractual 
arrangements with authors. Some of the foremost publishers, who had personally 
built great publishing companies, had reached the end of their careers. Some of 
their descendants, given senior management positions, were either incompetent 
or ill prepared for the changes to come.
The stable and expansionary publishing world of the 1960s and 1970s was 
rudely shattered by the recession of 1980 which forced publishers to cut their lists 
and overheads – making redundant both older staﬀ  and the weaker staﬀ  sucked in 
during the era of fast growth. From then on progressive cuts in public expenditure 
throughout the English-speaking world would be the order of the day. Reductions 
in public funding adversely aﬀ ected the publishing and availability of some kinds 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
28
of books including hardback ﬁ ction destined for public libraries and children’s 
books supported by school libraries. Further factors of the 1980s and early 1990s 
were high book-price inﬂation (there was a steep rise in the cost of paper) and the 
appreciation of sterling against the currencies of countries to which UK publishers 
traditionally exported. This led to a continued decline in export sales to the beneﬁt 
of US publishers. General books from America, particularly mass-market 
paperbacks, were more competitively priced in mainland Europe and Australia.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
The rise of European publishers through their purchase of US publishing began 
in the 1970s. The UK banking, investment and publishing group Pearson, owner 
of the Financial Times, bought the UK publisher Penguin in 1970, and the New 
York based Viking Press in 1975. The German media group Bertelsmann broke 
out of Europe through the purchase of the US publishers Bantam Books in 1980, 
Doubleday in 1986, and Random House in 1998. By 2013 Penguin had merged 
with Random House to create the world’s largest consumer book publisher 
(Penguin Random House) with its headquarters in New York.
In the UK, the 1980s were an important period of mergers and acquisitions 
that restructured the publishing industry and saw, like in the USA, its ownership 
largely transferred overseas. In the next century three large international 
publishing groups (Bertelsmann, Hatchette and HarperCollins) came to control a 
large part of the UK home market; long-established, medium-sized British owned 
ﬁrms were to become a rarity – today Faber & Faber is one of the few left. The 
deregulation of ﬁnancial markets led to the increased availability of equity and 
debt ﬁnancing allowing the large players to take over medium-sized publishers, 
and small publishers to expand or start in business. Book publishing was 
attractive to investors who could see that the industry had consistently, that is until 
1987, returned pre-tax proﬁts and return on capital above the average level of all 
industries. News International, having acquired the US publisher Harper & Row, 
took control of the UK publisher Collins in 1988 and created HarperCollins. 
Random House, at the time in American ownership, bought Cape, Chatto, Virago 
and Bodley Head in 1987, Century Hutchinson in 1989, and subsequently Secker 
& Warburg and Heinemann before it itself was purchased by Bertelsmann in 
1998. Around that time the German Holtzbrinck media company acquired 
Macmillan. In 2004–6, Hachette (owned by the French media corporation 
Lagardère) purchased the UK trade publishers of Hodder Headline, Orion and 
John Murray; and the US trade publishers owned by Time Warner which included 
Little Brown and Company and the paperback publisher Grand Central 
Publishing.
The turn of the new century was marked by an increase in the gathering 
strategy of European-based publishers to acquire US publishers and the 
willingness of some of the giant US media corporations to sell oﬀ  their book 
publishing interests. From the latter’s perspective, book publishing represented a 
small fraction of their stock market capitalization and was seen as a mature and 
niche business in comparison to their faster growing and central media interests 
(television and the internet). By contrast, the smaller European-based media 
Founded in 
1929, Faber & 
Faber remains 
an independent 
publishing 
house. William 
Golding’s Lord 
of the Flies was 
published by 
Faber in 1954
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
29
corporations, focused to a greater extent on book publishing, seized the 
opportunity. Their purchase of US publishers gave them access to the world’s 
largest and richest nation and the ability to grow quickly their dominant market 
share of English language book publishing worldwide. The steady earnings 
growth derived from book publishing in US and UK markets is more attractive to 
mainland European publishers, some with a strong history of family ownership; 
in France and Germany companies have historically been less exposed to the 
vagaries of the stock market and activist shareholders.
VERTICAL INTEGRATION
The restructuring of UK book publishing in the 1980s aﬀ ected all types of 
publishing but its eﬀ ects were most dramatic in consumer publishing, the fault 
lines having appeared in the 1970s. Ownership was traditionally divided between 
many hardback publishers and around a dozen separate mass-market paperback 
houses. In 1969 the top paperback houses were Penguin (selling 27 m copies), 
Fontana (13 m), Corgi (13 m) and Panther (9 m).
The publishing strategy was to establish a book in hardback at a high price 
and subsequently to reissue it, around a year later, in a paperback format at a 
lower price to a wider audience. Hardback ﬁction and non-ﬁction were published 
in half-yearly seasons (the spring/summer, and autumn/winter) headed by major 
‘lead titles’ and sold to booksellers, libraries and book clubs. Mass-market 
paperbacks were fast-moving books published in monthly batches, with each 
month headed by lead ﬁction and non-ﬁction titles, with various genre category 
titles forming the remainder. Paperbacks were published in A format – ‘pocket’ or 
‘rack-sized’ books. They were often straight reductions of the original hardbacks 
– pages of the hardback edition were, in a pre-digital age, photographically 
reduced to the size of the paperback edition. Printed in large quantities on cheap 
paper, they reached a wider retail market beyond bookshops and were sold in a 
way more similar to that of magazines, mainly through merchandising 
wholesalers which stacked the racks in outlets at monthly intervals.
The respective character of hardback and paperback publishers was very 
diﬀ erent. The hardback publishers inhabited their ﬁne but slowly decaying 
Georgian houses in Bloomsbury, around Bedford Square, and in other high-class 
central London locations. The palatial former reception rooms, with Adam 
ﬁreplaces, hung with chandeliers, were impressive settings for the managing 
director or the editorial director. When Tom Maschler decided to pursue a career 
in publishing in the 1950s, he went to see André Deutsch (1917–2000), who was to 
publish in hardback some of the most important names in post-war ﬁction, 
including John Updike, V. S. Naipaul, Philip Roth and Norman Mailer. When 
Deutsch told him that he had no openings, Maschler responded that the salary 
was not important. ‘At that he asked when I could start. We settled for the 
following Monday’ (page 39).
The editors were very much in control and women were in the majority in the 
publishing workforce. Diana Athill, who also worked with André Deutsch, writes 
in her memoir Stet: ‘All publishing was run by many badly-paid women and a few 
much better-paid men: an imbalance that women were, of course, aware of, but 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
30
which they seemed to take for granted’ (page 56). The production staﬀ , who hired 
the printers to produce the books, and the marketing and sales staﬀ  were 
crammed in smaller ofﬁces in the basement and the attics. The mass-market 
paperback reprinters occupied ofﬁce blocks in cheaper London locations. Theirs 
was a sales driven operation.
The hardback publishers played their traditional role of nurturing new 
writing talent and working closely with authors on manuscripts. Their backlists 
were complete with great and loyal authors, and some enduring money-spinning 
books. Their formidable reputation ensured that new books were reviewed 
(literary editors ignored paperbacks), that the public librarians would automatically 
order sufﬁcient quantities, and that the compliant independent booksellers would 
display and stock their titles. The advent of book clubs supplied another outlet. 
The booksellers complained that the book clubs were undermining their business 
by oﬀ ering their members new hardbacks at discounted prices by mail order. The 
publishers were pleasantly surprised by the paradoxical increased sales through 
bookshops stemming from a book club’s large-scale consumer advertising 
campaigns. However, by the early to mid-1980s, hardback publishers found 
themselves making hardly any proﬁt from selling copies themselves (the copy 
sales business model). They derived their proﬁt and laid oﬀ  risks by making rights 
and co-edition sales to others: to paperback publishers, book clubs, US publishers 
and foreign language publishers (the licensing business model). While the 
hardback publishers employed highly talented editors, they also had editors who 
favoured their pet projects and authors who produced books which few wanted to 
buy.
The false dichotomy between hardback and paperback publishing could not 
survive. The book market was rapidly changing, readers’ expectations were 
altering, competition between publishers to secure bestselling authors was 
intensifying and literary agents were far more adept in extracting maximum 
advance payments for their authors from publishers. Bookshops had steadily 
increased the display space for paperbacks, and publishers such as Penguin had 
provided free paperback shelving for bookshops.
The hardback publishers were used to acquiring the exclusive right to publish 
an author’s work for the full term of copyright in hardback and paperback, even 
though they had no mass-market paperback publishing capability; and similarly to 
acquiring US rights which they in turn licensed to US publishers. The hardback 
publisher would sublicense to a UK paperback publisher – for a ﬁxed period (on 
average eight years) – the right to publish the paperback on which it would pay the 
hardback publisher a royalty of 7.5 per cent on the published price, rising to 10 per 
cent or more after speciﬁed large quantities had been sold. The hardback 
publisher would share the royalties received with the author. The paperback 
publisher would want to acquire its main titles two years ahead of paperback 
publication. The originating publisher would secure at that time a large advance 
payment from the paperback publisher, similarly shared with the author.
Paperback publishers facing escalating advances increased their output of 
original titles, sometimes licensing rights to hardback publishers. Since authors 
derived most of their income from paperback sales (and sometimes US sales), it 
made sense for agents to cut out the hardback publisher’s share of such sales. 
Agents looking to maximize income would license the book separately to an 
Stet (2000) by 
Diana Athill is 
a memoir of 
her ﬁfty years in 
publishing
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
31
independent hardback publisher, a paperback publisher, and a US publisher, 
thereby obtaining advances from each party and full royalty rates for their authors 
(less the agent’s commission). The general publishers which owned both 
hardback and paperback ﬁrms (vertical integration) paid authors full royalty rates 
on each edition and were therefore better positioned to capture the leading 
authors. Paperback and hardback publishers without a hardback or paperback arm 
became increasingly desperate – sometimes they entered into alliances in order to 
bid for the big books jointly.
Another strand leading to the amalgamation of consumer book publishing, 
again reaching back to the late 1970s, was the weakening polarization between
the traditional formats. The mass-market paperback houses, facing increasing 
competition in the industry and higher title output, recorded lower unit sales per 
title. Paperback prices rose and the ownership of paperback houses became more 
concentrated. Furthermore readers’ expectations created a new market for certain 
books and authors to be published in the larger B format – quality or trade 
paperback. Peter Mayer, Chief Executive of Penguin from 1978 to 1996, had 
launched this concept when he was at Avon Books in New York in the 1970s. 
Literary ﬁction and a range of non-ﬁction could be published at higher prices 
in B format; and Mayer applied this idea to more commercial ﬁction, such as
M. M. Kaye’s The Far Pavilions, which was to sell 400,000 copies within six 
months of its publication in paperback in 1979. Such books could be reprints 
from hardbacks, reissues or originals. Both mass-market paperback and hardback 
houses started up trade paperback imprints and some hardback houses ventured 
into the A format ﬁeld, usually with disastrous consequences. Over time, the 
use of the trade paperback (and larger formats) to publish original ﬁction and 
non-ﬁction has grown apace.
The second wave of the feminist movement in the 1960s and the subsequent 
rise of women’s studies courses in the 1970s and 1980s not only created a new 
market for books but also inspired the foundation of women-run, women-centred 
publishing houses whose range and diversity reﬂ ect the multiplicity of female 
experience and writing. Virago was founded in 1973 by Carmen Callil, and later (in 
1995) sold to Little, Brown. Its series of Virago Modern Classics, launched in 1978 
with Frost in May (1933) by Antonia White, was instrumental in the rediscovery of 
a forgotten female tradition. Persephone Books, established in 1999, reprints 
neglected ﬁ ction and non-ﬁ ction by mid-twentieth century (mostly women) 
writers.
Intellectual property rights
The main ﬁnancial assets of a publishing company are its intellectual property 
rights (IPR). These are enshrined in the contracts it holds with authors (negotiated 
directly or via their agents) and with companies to which it has sold rights, such as 
English language and foreign language publishers. The original IPR derives from 
the author – the publisher then adds value. Ultimately the value of the IPR 
depends on consumers buying the product.
By the end of the 1980s and early 1990s, most of the formerly independent 
hardback houses were part of the major publishing corporations, which had the 
capability of publishing and acquiring rights in all formats: mass-market 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
32
paperback, trade paperback and hardback. Their imprints were gathered together 
in modern London ofﬁces. The new owners combed through the old contracts 
entered into by their hardback houses with the paperback publishers in order to 
uncover the titles which had, from other takeovers, fallen into the hands of rival 
paperback imprints and to determine the termination dates of the licences. In due 
course they would claw back the paperback rights to those books for their own 
paperback imprints, much to the consternation of the bereft paperback houses, 
and some authors and agents. Most of Graham Greene’s novels were published 
from the 1920s by the hardback publisher Heinemann and from the 1960s by The 
Bodley Head, and sublicensed in paperback to Penguin. Then Random House, 
having subsequently purchased the hardback publishers, reverted the paperback 
rights from Penguin and reissued his major works under the Vintage Classics 
imprint.
The pressure to control rights internationally prompted US general 
publishers to acquire UK imprints, and vice versa, and both UK and US 
publishers were attractive to the mainland European publishers, especially to the 
German media corporation Bertelsmann, and to the French group Lagardère. 
Once the major consumer book publishers had sister imprints on both sides of 
the Atlantic, the obvious move in the light of growing international sales of ebooks 
was to acquire world English rights in the works of bestselling authors. However 
this is still constrained by the US and UK literary agents, who continue to license 
UK and US editions to imprints in competing ownership.
A change in culture
The hardback general book publishers, which had developed valuable IPR over 
decades, held an increasing rarity value and at the peak of the merger boom 
commanded high prices. As for the staﬀ  of the newly taken-over general publishers, 
the outlook for many was bleak. If not made immediately redundant, they found 
themselves entering the world of corporate publishing. The editors especially had 
worked in a small company culture, where they had enjoyed considerable autonomy 
over the kinds of books they wanted to publish. They carried with them a set of 
values quite often at odds with those of their new employers, which emphasized 
sales and proﬁt and sometimes demanded clean and tidy desks, clear of 
manuscripts and books, in an open plan environment. Some editors blamed the 
accountants for preventing them from doing the books they wanted to publish. It 
was not the accountants per se: the whole culture had changed. The nature of 
consumer book publishing had changed from being product-led to being market-
driven. As Alan Bartram noted at the end of the twentieth century,
the practice of ﬁnancing a potential poor-seller by proﬁts from successful 
books, as a publisher such as Victor Gollancz would do because he, 
personally, believed it deserved publishing even if it cost him money, or as 
university presses considered it their duty to do – behaviour once considered 
normal practice – has almost disappeared. (Bartram, page 9)
Editorial individuality is still present in the large corporations. Some major 
publishing groups have attempted to regain some of the advantages of the smaller 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
33
publisher by retaining or creating individual imprints. It is vital for innovation 
that they can lead the market by introducing new authors, publishing books in 
diﬀ erent formats, and marketing and selling them in diﬀ erent ways. Furthermore, 
while major publishers attract talented staﬀ  from smaller publishers, senior staﬀ  
of major publishers also leave to start up new companies or to reinvigorate smaller 
publishers. In a world of brand authors, changing business models, and digital 
experimentation, publishers are hiring new kinds of staﬀ , sometimes from other 
media industries. They want publishers who are entrepreneurial, can manage 
talent, and develop properties into brands suitable for licensing or direct 
investment across games, ﬁ lm and other media. Francesca Dow, of Penguin 
Children’s, talks of thinking beyond the book: ‘Part of our strategy is to develop 
brands in ways so that we are moving away from being a publisher to an owner 
and investor in new content ... As a very strategic move, we acquired media rights 
in The Snowman – that is part of our strategy to grow in a new way beyond books’ 
(The Bookseller, 11 October 2013).
THE RESHAPING OF RETAIL
While trade or consumer publishing was being restructured, the increased 
availability of ﬁnance in the 1980s also aided the transformation and 
concentration of UK bookselling. Traditionally, UK bookselling had meant the 
major chain WHSmith (which had its roots in station bookstalls and high street 
stationery outlets), small independently owned chains, and a large number of 
independent or small bookshops. But in the 1980s and 1990s, large bookselling 
chains, principally Waterstone’s and Dillons in the UK (Barnes & Noble, Borders 
and Waldenbooks in the USA), brought a new kind of bookselling – large, 
well-stocked bookshops, stocking up to 50,000 titles in the UK, three to four times 
the size of many independents. Amazon began its operations in the USA in 1995 
and in the UK in 1998. The US bookstore chains started to discount bestselling 
hardbacks, as did the UK chains from the late 1990s, thereby reducing sales of 
mass-market paperbacks. As John Thompson writes:
The ﬁ nancial formula that had underpinned the industry in the 1950s and 
1960s was being turned on its head: increasingly it was the frontlist 
hardcover, not the backlist paperback, that was the engine of growth for the 
industry. By the early 2000s, paperback sales, especially in the mass-market 
format, had begun to fall oﬀ , undercut by the decline in the price diﬀ erential 
between hardcover and paperback editions and the widespread availability of 
attractively produced, heavily discounted hardcovers. (page 378)
The independents lost market share. The new chains expanded aggressively and 
argued that they needed higher discounts from publishers and extended credit 
periods (the time to settle invoices). In the USA, the Robinson-Patman Act (1936) 
has prevented producers (for example publishers) favouring particular customers 
since they have to oﬀ er the same wholesale terms to everybody in order to protect 
small merchants.
The ﬁrst 
Waterstone’s 
was opened in 
1982 by Tim 
Waterstone in 
Old Brompton 
Road, London
The first book 
sold by 
Amazon, on 3 
April 1995, was 
Fluid Concepts 
and Creative 
Analogies by 
Douglas 
Hofstadter
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
34
The consumer book publishers beneﬁted from the well-stocked and branded 
bookshops displaying their books, and agreed to better discounts, easier credit and 
the continued right to return unsold books. The power relationship between 
publishers and booksellers, for so long weighted in the publisher’s favour, began 
to tip towards the major retailers, as is common in most consumer goods 
industries. Furthermore by the mid-1990s, the major supermarkets were devoting 
more space to bestselling books and were intent on driving down book prices to 
the consumer, and their costs of supply. The growth of the supermarkets in 
general forced the closure of small shops, including in the UK the confectioners, 
tobacconists and newsagents (CTNs), outlets for mass market paperbacks. The 
paperback wholesale distributors, which had supplied the CTNs and supermarkets 
before the latter switched to direct supply, went bust. The decades either side of 
the new century marked the high point of the physical retailing of books. The 
bookselling chains (to a varying extent) and the supermarkets operated centralized 
buying of books which were scaled out to their branches. The book buyers of such 
‘national accounts’ – numbering several dozen of people in the UK – largely 
determined which books were displayed and bought by the public. Publishers 
reduced the number of their sales representatives who visited booksellers. 
Subsequently the growth in online retailing of print and latterly of ebooks 
reinforced the dominance of Amazon compared to physical book stores.
Another factor impinging on the publishers’ margins, pushing up the 
average discount on sales made to UK customers, was the rise of the trade 
wholesalers supplying the declining and fragmented independent bookshop 
sector. From the early 1980s to the early 1990s, the proportion of a publisher’s 
sales passing through the wholesalers grew from around 10 per cent to over 20 per 
cent, at the expense of direct supply to bookshops. While the chains won discounts 
from the publishers of well above 40 per cent oﬀ  the published price, the small 
independents were stuck with the traditional discounts of 33 to 35 per cent. The 
trade book wholesalers argued they needed at least a 15 per cent margin between 
the price they bought the books from the publisher and the price they sold them to 
a retailer, thus they pressed for a 50 per cent discount or more from the publisher. 
WHSmith and the bookseller chains, meanwhile, ratcheted up the publishers’ 
discounts still further. Overall, from the mid-1980s to the late 1990s, the average 
trade discount given by the consumer publishers to their UK customers increased 
by 10 to 15 per cent.
The major publishers also locked themselves into a battle of paying rocketing 
levels of advances for lead titles in order to keep their share of the limited number 
of such titles available. Consumer expenditure on books peaked in 1993, and by 
the time many of those books with high advances were published, the consumer 
book market was in decline. The return of unsold books from booksellers, a 
long-time feature of consumer book publishing (especially of paperbacks, usually 
pulped), surpassed more than 25 per cent of the publishers’ sales as booksellers 
destocked hardbacks and paperbacks. On some lead titles, the actual sales fell far 
short of the expected number on which the author’s advance against royalties had 
been calculated – the advance was thus unearned. A publisher which may have 
budgeted an author’s royalty rate of between 15 to 20 per cent of the publisher’s 
revenue, may have paid an advance (in eﬀ ect a non-returnable fee) which equated 
to an eﬀ ective royalty rate of 30 per cent of sales income, or more in disastrous 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
35
cases. The consumer book publishers emerged from the recession of the early 
1990s leaner and ﬁtter but with low levels of proﬁtability.
In the immediate aftermath of the collapse of the Net Book Agreement (NBA) 
in 1995, under which publishers set minimum prices for books, consumer 
spending on books bottomed out in the spring of 1996, and then staged a steady 
recovery to a new peak in 1998 – a vintage year for bestselling titles. Heavy 
discounting by retailers of the new, most popular hardback titles became the 
norm. Publishers increased their recommended retail prices above the general 
rate of inﬂation to accommodate the higher discounts given to both retailers and 
the public.
Fixed book prices
Various forms of ﬁxed pricing exist in some mainland European countries, 
including France and Germany. Governments there are supportive of their 
cultural heritage expressed through their indigenous publishing industries 
and are also keen to see the continued existence of physical bookshops. Fixed 
prices are regarded as helpful to smaller and independent bookshops, as well 
as to all bricks-and-mortar stores, which face competition from the lower 
prices of internet retailers. At the beginning of 2012 a law came into force in 
France allowing publishers also to ﬁ x the prices of ebooks.
There are diﬀ ering levels of tax applied to books around Europe and 
eﬀ orts continue to harmonize rates between countries and formats. Under EU 
law ebooks are not eligible for a lower rate of tax and the standard rate must 
be applied, but there is an exception for printed books. This was reﬂ ected in 
the UK in 2013, where the full rate of VAT was applied to ebooks, but print 
books were totally exempt; and in Germany, where the rate of VAT applied to 
ebooks was 19 per cent, and to print books 7 per cent. By basing its European 
headquarters in Luxembourg, Amazon was able to take advantage of the 
country’s low (and controversial) rate of VAT on ebooks (3 per cent).
There are no ﬁ xed prices for books in the UK following the collapse in 
September 1995 of the Net Book Agreement (NBA) – or resale price 
maintenance (RPM). The purpose of the NBA was to create a well-ordered 
book market in which a large number of dedicated booksellers could aﬀ ord to 
stock a wide range of new and backlist titles, and to oﬀ er free customer 
services, sure in the knowledge that they could not be undercut by predatory 
retailers taking the cream of the narrow range of current bestsellers and 
fast-selling backlist titles.
For most of the twentieth century publishers set the retail prices of books 
(the ‘net price’). Retailers were not allowed to sell net books to the public 
below the stated prices, prohibiting the price incentives commonly used for 
other kinds of products. In that virtually all the main consumer book 
publishers were members of their trade organization, the Publishers 
Association (PA), and were voluntary signatories of the NBA, the PA was 
highly successful in enforcing the NBA amongst retailers, and defending it

F  C U S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
36
against critics. The PA regulated the operation of the market in other ways, 
such as negotiating the rules governing the operation of book clubs, which 
were allowed to oﬀ er books at discounted prices to their members by mail 
order. Also libraries, under a special licence, were allowed to purchase books 
at 10 per cent oﬀ  the net price.
Prior to the demise of the NBA, consumer spending on books continued 
to fall, and pro and anti arguments concerning RPM raged amongst 
publishers and booksellers. By the 1990s opponents of the scheme argued 
that price was an important lever for generating sales. Some retailers, such as 
the bookselling chain Dillons and the supermarket chain Asda (owned by 
WalMart), presented themselves in the press as championing the consumer’s 
right to low book prices, by selling books at deeply discounted prices from 
publishers which had abandoned the NBA – these retailers and publishers 
such as Hodder Headline and Reed Consumer Books appeared to be gaining 
a competitive advantage. The pro-NBA publishers and booksellers faced 
expensive and uncertain legal proceedings to defend the NBA in the courts, 
threatened by the government’s Ofﬁce of Fair Trading and the European 
Commission. Then in September 1995, the announcement of a cut price 
promotion by major trade publishers Random House and HarperCollins with 
WHSmith triggered the collapse. With no consensus among publishers and 
booksellers, the NBA passed into UK trade history and was formally ended in 
1997.
Publishing after the NBA
The low company valuations of the consumer book publishers in the 1990s 
were in marked contrast to the boom of the 1980s. While most of the owners 
persevered, Reed decided to sell its consumer imprints in order to concentrate on 
STM and professional publishing, recording a massive write-oﬀ  in the process. 
Nevertheless, newer independent UK publishers, such as Bloomsbury, Fourth 
Estate, Orion and Piatkus grew strongly. Another source of new publishers 
were the book packagers, usually concentrating on illustrated non-ﬁction and 
reference, many of which decided to publish their books in English under 
their own imprints in the UK, and sometimes the US, rather than license them 
to publishers.
By the end of the century, the main consumer publishers had mostly 
recovered their levels of proﬁtability, and the retailer WHSmith paid what was 
considered by some competitors to be a high price for the UK publisher Hodder 
Headline. The commercial logic of a retailer owning a publisher was to come 
under question (the publisher was sold on in 2004 to Hachette), although in 2011 
Amazon began its own trade publishing operation.
It took many years for the full eﬀ ects of the removal of resale price 
maintenance to work through the supply chain. Early gainers were the 
bookselling chains, which grew at the expense of the independents and 
expanded their number of branches. The chains came to compete on price 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
37
and adopted the ‘three for two’ promotional oﬀ ers at the front of their attractive 
and well-stocked stores. Losers in the post-NBA world were the businesses which 
beneﬁted from pricing regulation: the bargain bookshops (a large number had 
to close); the book clubs (which were to lose sales to the online retailers); and 
independent booksellers (who could not compete on price). Subsequently the 
chains came under pressure themselves from the price cuts and expanding 
ranges of the supermarkets (led by Tesco), and from the ultimate range discount 
bookseller, Amazon. Supermarket and internet sales have increased in market 
share in relation to the faltering bookseller chains carrying excess stock and 
expensive retail space. The pressure on margins throughout the supply chain also 
forced the consolidation and diversiﬁ cation of the major book wholesalers and 
library suppliers.
Today readers are able to purchase heavily promoted bestsellers at large 
discounts oﬀ  the publishers’ recommended published prices from a wide range of 
retailers, which compete for consumers’ attention primarily on price. Consumers 
have enjoyed a period of book price deﬂation. As the UK economy enjoyed 
continued growth from 1992 into the new century, publishers experienced a 
period of increasing book sales, albeit made at yet higher discounts to wholesalers 
and retailers.
Legacy practices of the NBA era endure in the world of print. Consumer 
publishers still display the price on the book’s cover, and author royalties are 
usually based on the recommended price, albeit with let-outs for sales at high 
discounts. The arrival of ebooks has brought a new dynamic with the ability 
to change prices at will, both by publishers and retailers, whereas previously 
printed stock had to be restickered in the warehouse. With Amazon leading 
the development of the ebook market, publishers have struggled to maintain 
prices at the levels they consider reasonable whilst attempting to create 
alternative models for the business relationship with intermediaries.
Wholesale and agency models
Consumer publishers use the wholesale pricing method when they trade through 
all kinds of intermediaries, such as retailers, to reach consumers. It lies at the 
heart of their transactional or ‘copy sale’ business model. (The use of the word 
‘wholesale’ in this context is diﬀ erent from ‘wholesaler’ – an intermediary between 
a publisher and a retailer.) Under the wholesale pricing method, the retailer buys 
the book from the publisher at a set price and is free to sell it to a consumer at any 
price. The set price to the retailer is arrived at by deducting the percentage 
discount oﬀ  the recommended retail price which is set by the publisher. The 
percentage discount (referred to as the ‘trade discount’) in the UK is the outcome 
of the negotiation between the publisher and the retailer. The more powerful the 
buying power of the retailer in terms of the quantity of books ordered or its 
market share in relation to other retailers, the higher the discount it can extract 
from the publisher. Thus, for example, if the trade publisher grants a big retailer a 
50 per cent discount and sets the recommended published price of the book at 
£12, the retailer buys it from the publisher at £6, and is free to sell it to the 
consumer at any price and determine its own margin. The retailer might sell it to 
a consumer at £12, or discount it to £6, or even below its cost price in order to 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
38
gain market share, termed predatory pricing. The high trade discounts won by the 
dominant physical retailers and Amazon were transferred to embryonic ebook 
sales and became established.
The alternative agency model for ebooks came to a controversial fore with 
Apple’s launch of the iPad and its iBookstore in 2010. Famously Steve Jobs, CEO 
of Apple, had claimed previously ‘the fact is that people don’t read anymore’ (New 
York Times, 15 January 2008). While Apple had become the dominant music 
retailer and sold other media excluding books, its innovatory and high-priced 
tablet needed ebooks to compete against Amazon’s popular and established 
low-priced Kindle, and others such as the Nook and Sony Reader. At the time, 
Amazon enjoyed almost complete domination of ebook sales in the USA with a 
market share of 90 per cent. To the chagrin of the big trade publishers, their 
hardcover bestsellers, typically priced at say $25.00, were sold by Amazon as 
ebooks to consumers at the heavily discounted price of $9.99. Since Amazon 
probably bought the books from the publishers at around $13–15, it sold ebooks at 
a loss (a negative margin) to maintain its dominant market share. The publishers 
feared that it would only be a matter of time before Amazon pressured them 
further on terms and prices and would control every part of the industry.
Apple in contrast oﬀ ered the major trade publishers the agency model under 
which the publisher sets the price of the ebook to the consumer and appoints the 
retailer which acts as its agent to sell the ebook to the reader. The agent takes a 
sales commission on the sale, in this case 30 per cent. The publisher has a 
contractual relationship with, and hence direct liability to the reader, including 
VAT or other sales tax compliance. Apple supplied the publishers with maximum 
retail price grids for publishers to set the ebook prices of their titles. New releases 
of ebooks were typically set between $13 to $15, from which Apple deducted its 30 
per cent commission. On such indicative ﬁ gures, the publishers and their authors 
received less money per copy sold through the iBookstore than through Amazon, 
but it was argued that short-term pain would lead to long-term gain.
The major publishers in the USA, which published most of the biggest 
authors and titles, were at the time called the ‘Big Six’: Hachette, HarperCollins, 
Macmillan, Penguin, Random House and Simon & Schuster. With the exception 
of Random House (the largest), the other ﬁ ve accepted the agency model. The 
agency contract with Apple included an unusual ‘most favoured nation’ (MFN) 
clause which allowed Apple to sell ebooks at least as cheaply as others. It was 
argued that it was used by the publishers to compel other online retailers, 
including Amazon, to switch to the agency model on similar terms to those agreed 
with Apple. The retailers were told that they might not receive ebooks unless they 
adopted the agency model. Random House by delaying its own decision to 
transfer to agency pricing gained a competitive advantage and escaped being 
targeted by the regulators (the US Department of Justice and the European 
Commission). Consumer groups were angered by the imposed higher prices of 
ebooks that were close to paperback prices. The regulators launched investigations 
in 2011 as to whether there was collusion between Apple and the ﬁ ve publishers to 
conspire to ﬁ x the prices of ebooks thereby limiting price competition on a global 
scale, which might violate regulations that prohibit cartels and restrictive business 
practices. By the end of 2012, the regulators concluded their investigations and 
began to sue Apple and some of the publishers. Apple and the publishers agreed 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
39
to terminate their particular agency contracts. The legal cases were settled with the 
publishers and compensation paid. Some publishers then produced modiﬁ ed 
agency contracts or reverted to the wholesale model.
A CHANGE IN PUBLISHING STRATEGY
From the late 1990s, the major publishers were to reverse their former ‘scatter-
gun’ strategy of publishing as many titles as possible in the hope that one or 
two would be hits. Facing increasing polarization in the market between the 
bestselling titles and the also-rans (the ‘winner takes all’ maxim common in the 
creative industries), they cut their new title output progressively to concentrate on 
books and authors considered marketable, especially those that would ﬁt the 
retailers’ promotional plans. As the UK trade magazine, The Bookseller noted (18 
December 2009), the greatest eﬀ ect of the demise of the NBA ‘was discount 
driven frontlist growth’. The big four publishing groups (Hachette UK, Random 
House, Penguin and HarperCollins), which had the power to acquire bestselling 
authors, to negotiate with national booksellers and pay for book promotions, 
pulled ahead of the other publishers and by 2006 had taken 50 per cent of the UK 
consumer book market.
Few book covers 
have the iconic 
status of album 
covers. One example, 
however, is the 1995 
design for Captain 
Corelli’s Mandolin by 
Louis de Bernières
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
40
The so-called ‘midlist’ authors were casualties, not that publishers admit 
publicly to having a midlist. Writers whose works had been well received within 
the writing community, who were previously supported by publishers over a 
number of books – awaiting their sales breakthrough – could be seen as on their 
way out much earlier and were rejected after only their ﬁrst few books. Some 
moved to smaller and welcoming publishers while others were dropped by their 
agents too.
The major publishers’ other strategies (apart from reducing the advances and 
royalty income of less-favoured authors), included giving greater emphasis to 
brand authors and series. They also entered into ‘licensed’ partnerships with 
television and ﬁlm companies to merchandise their intellectual properties, and 
marketing and sales partnerships with smaller publishers sometimes through 
equity stakes.
Trends in fiction and non-fiction – a US perspective
Edward Nawotka, Founder and Editor-in-Chief of Publishing 
Perspectives
The US market is geographically, demographically, economically and 
culturally vast, and accordingly the subjects covered by general trade ﬁ ction 
and non-ﬁ ction are equally diverse. When you include self-published titles, 
there are easily more than a million books published in the United States a 
year. It is an astonishing ﬁ gure.
The past few years have seen the internet and self-publishing cater to ever 
more niche interests, particularly in genres like romance, paranormal and 
crime. Name your fetish and it will be catered to online. Trends in popular 
ﬁ ction come and go quickly: one year chaste Amish romance novels are all the 
rage, while the next, uber-explicit erotic fairy tales top the bestseller lists. 
Always though, you have the stalwarts: thrillers and detective novels in which 
the lone-wolf hero decides to take matters into their own hands. Likewise, in 
literary ﬁ ction, it is often the same: an individual battling an unacknowledged 
threat, acting counter to the prevailing trends in society.
Why? Americans are, generally speaking, raised to resent or rebel against 
authority. It was the founding principle of the country. Characters at the heart 
of bestselling American ﬁ ction tend to reﬂ ect this attitude. This applies to 
non-ﬁ ction as well as ﬁ ction. A prevailing trend in non-ﬁ ction works is to take 
an idea and ﬂ ip it to reveal heretofore unknown ‘truths’. The ‘counterintuitive 
revelation’ is often at the heart of much general non-ﬁ ction – from sociological 
essayists like Malcolm Gladwell to humourists like David Sedaris to 
conservative political pundits and talking-heads, who reliably clog up the 
bestseller lists. In the US, political pundits are to bestseller lists as celebrity 
tell-alls are to the bestseller lists in the UK and Europe.
Americans are weaned on the idea of ‘individualism’ and, accordingly, 
the literature they produce is largely character-driven. This is why American 
historians tend to shy away from writing long, sweeping general histories that

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
41
summarize the ‘world in a book’ and tend to focus on a series of events 
through the prism of an individual, rather than a family, group or a larger 
movement. Likewise, characters in American books tend to be victims of other 
individuals and not society-at-large. Ironically, despite this individualism, 
Americans do follow the herd when it comes to bestseller lists and you can 
expect two or three ‘must read’ titles to dominate each season.
Finally, it is a common refrain to say that Americans are not interested in 
‘foreign books’. And this is, for the vast general populace of readers, entirely 
true. Why? Because America largely contains a signiﬁ cant percentage of 
people who, though they may have been born abroad, now consider 
themselves as Americans. Look at the number of assimilation narratives 
produced in the US: hundreds of books a year tell the story of several 
generations of an immigrant family where the parents adhere to the values of 
the ‘old country’ and the children live by the rules of their new home. These 
books might be set in New York, Milwaukee, Dallas or San Francisco and 
feature families from India or China, Russia or Brazil. But the one thing they 
have in common is that they are all American books. Unlike in the UK or 
Europe, if you are born abroad and want to become an American – all you 
have to do is call yourself one. Accordingly, the USA (mistakenly) believes it 
has little to learn from the world, since it already contains the world within its 
borders.
Some ﬁrms want to fulﬁl the traditional role of publishing ﬁne literary works, but 
only a few authors and books become part of the perennial backlist alongside 
Austen, Dickens and Orwell. Publishers are opportunistic – they must respond 
fast if they want to capture a well-known author or celebrity, or take advantage of 
current fashions, media events or topical issues on which to hang a book’s 
promotion. Books are ﬁrmly positioned in genres and categories (see Table 2.2, 
page 42), whether crime, fantasy or horror in ﬁction, or home and garden, history, 
or popular science in non-ﬁction. This is reﬂected in the cover design and 
associated marketing. As Claire Squires remarks about literary publishing:
By the turn of the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst centuries, the necessity of 
ﬁnding arrangements for the 100,000+ books produced yearly by the 
UK industry is readily apparent. The proliﬁc and diverse nature of the 
marketplace demands it; the sheer number of individual product lines calls 
out for some sort of taxonomy. (page 71)
A new category may be initiated by smaller companies before being adopted by 
mainstream publishers. If the market then diminishes, the category is often left to 
specialist publishers to pursue. Some publishers make a category their own. 
Harlequin Mills & Boon (later bought by HarperCollins) had over 70 per cent of 
the romantic ﬁction market in the UK in the early part of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, 
and 3 million women regularly read one of their books. ‘Mills & Boon’ even 
entered the Oxford English Dictionary, with the deﬁnition ‘romantic story book’. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
42
The success of the erotic trilogy Fifty Shades of Grey then encouraged other 
publishers to boost their proﬁ le in this market category.
Table 2.2 Top ﬁve book genres for fiction and non-fiction (source: 2009 data from 
Book Facts Online)
Fiction
Non-fiction
1
General popular
Biography
2
Crime/mystery
Cookery/food/drink
3
Adventure/thriller
History
4
General literary
Maps/atlases
5
Fantasy
Travel guides
Table 2.3 Top five book genres for men and women (source: 2009 data from Book 
Facts Online)
Genres bought for Men
Genres bought for Women 
1
Biography
General popular 
2
Adventure/thriller
Biography 
3
History
Crime/mystery 
4
Crime/mystery
Adventure/thriller 
5
Maps/atlases
Cookery/food/drink 
The public libraries aid, but to a heavily diminished extent, the hardback 
publishing of ﬁction and non-ﬁction. Between 2002 and 2012, four authors 
recorded borrowings of over 10 m in the UK: James Patterson, Jacqueline Wilson, 
Danielle Steel, and Josephine Cox. The most borrowed adult ﬁ ction book of the 
decade was The Da Vinci Code by Dan Brown, and the most borrowed children’s 
ﬁ ction title was The Story of Tracy Beaker by Jacqueline Wilson.
THE RISE OF DIGITAL PUBLISHING
There has been a series of overlapping developments which have impacted 
trade publishing in the most recent period. All are part of the rise of digital in 
the area of consumer publishing, with growing sales of ebooks and constant 
experimentation around digital products by both authors and publishers. The 
following are key developments:
 
▪
arrival of the large technology players,
 
▪
the rise of self-publishing,
 
▪
growth of ebooks,
 
▪
digital product development,
 
▪
the rise of social networks and communities.
Arrival of large technology players
The landscape of publishing has changed signiﬁ cantly with the entrants of major 
players including Amazon, Apple, Google and Sony. This kickstarted and then 
accelerated the move towards ebooks with devices, from the Kindle to the iPad, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
43
facilitating a high-quality user experience, and digital content being made widely 
available. Amazon’s strategy of aggressive pricing has opened up the market for 
ebooks, and publishers have encouraged the other players in the market in the 
hopes of easing the internet retailer’s domination. Publishers have had to learn to 
work with the technology companies, encountering diﬀ erences in culture and 
mind-set.
Google began scanning books in December 2004, ﬁ rstly at major university 
libraries in the USA and in Oxford (the Bodleian Library), at the New York Public 
Library, and subsequently at other libraries. By 2013, it was thought that 30 million 
titles had been scanned. Google not only scanned in titles that were out of 
copyright, in the public domain, but also books which were in copyright. Google 
did not ask, in advance, the rights owners of the latter for permission to copy or 
oﬀ er them compensation, and thus invited controversy and legal cases from 
authors and publishers. There were other concerns, such as from the library 
community, that Google might be privatizing access to the world’s knowledge. 
While Google’s original concept became legally mired, the outcome today is that 
readers can search, through Google Books, works in the public domain and view 
them in full, and copyright books can be viewed in selected amounts with the 
agreement of the publishers. Ebooks are also sold through Google Play.
There were further signiﬁ cant consequences arising from Google’s initiative. 
The publishers realized that unless they gave the search engine companies, such 
as Google and Microsoft, access to their content for indexing they and their 
authors would face potential invisibility on the internet. From around 1996, they 
were stimulated into digitizing their books before ebook sales took oﬀ , rather than 
relying on a third party to supply them with digital ﬁ les of their own books. The 
initial dominance and searchability of digitized English language books prompted 
similar initiatives from publishers and governments of other languages, which 
sometimes collaborated with Google.
The rise of self-publishing
Authors have always published themselves, without publishers, but with some 
diﬃ  culty and expense. In the pre-digital world, the so-called vanity publishers, or 
presses, manipulated authors’ often life-long desire to be published by charging 
them large sums for printing (but rarely marketing) their books in considerable 
quantity, typically delivered to their homes, where the stock remained. Authors 
were stigmatized for their vanity – being unable to attract a real publisher to invest 
in their work – and duped by rogue ‘publishers’.
However, from the turn of the century, the availability of print on demand 
(POD) technology enabled new companies, such as Lulu Enterprises, to oﬀ er 
production and distribution platforms for authors to self-publish their own books 
at much lower cost than hitherto. Amazon purchased BookSurge (a POD 
operation) in 2005, and oﬀ ered authors through CreateSpace a similar service. 
Author Solutions was founded in 2007 and SmashWords (an ebook distribution 
company) in 2008. These four author services companies (sometimes referred to 
as ‘subsidy publishers’) came to dominate the US self-publishing market. In the 
USA, Bowker research (prnewswire.com, accessed 24 October 2012) revealed that 
by 2011 ‘the number of self-published books produced annually in the USA has 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
44
nearly tripled, growing 287 per cent since 2006, and now tallies more than 
235,000 print and “e” titles’.
Their supply-side business model is the opposite to the curatorial/risk-
investment model of the trade publishers. It is founded on creating content 
abundance, charging authors a small percentage on sales made through their own 
platform or through other sales channels, and through oﬀ ering authors charged-
for services, such as copy-editing, design and marketing. Critics called it the 
monetization of the slush pile. The authors receive a high percentage of sales 
income on each copy sold compared to receiving a low percentage, expressed as a 
royalty on each copy sold, from an investing trade publisher. Customers are given 
cloud-based production services, an application of technology which is in advance 
of the publishers’ oﬄ  ine production systems. While physical booksellers do not 
stock self-published authors, the advent of ebooks gives authors direct access to 
the reading public. Some kinds of authors are no longer dependent on securing 
the services of a literary agent and a contract from a publisher to reach readers: 
authorship is democratized. They are also free to experiment with new business 
models (looking for a proﬁ t share rather than taking a royalty) or new forms of 
writing including digital story-telling, perhaps in collaboration with other authors.
Most major online retailers oﬀ er authors self-publishing services but their 
sales are restricted to the retailer’s channel. The major trade publishers too oﬀ er 
self-publishing imprints, sometimes in partnership with the author services 
companies. In 2012, Pearson acquired Author Solutions and its technology, by 
which time it had aided 160,000 authors to bring to market 200,000 titles. 
Online writing websites, such as Wattpad, emerged for writers to reach and 
communicate freely with readers. Community sites oﬀ er authors the facility to 
publish fan ﬁ ction (their take on a TV series or a novel) or original web ﬁ ction, 
sometimes in serial form. Authors can use such sites to build a fan base or trial 
out stories. The hugely successful Fifty Shades of Grey by E. L. James ﬁ rst appeared 
as a piece of Twilight fan ﬁ ction.
The self-published authors and the author services companies 
disintermediated literary agents, publishers and physical bookstores from the 
supply chain. They grew their market share against the trade publishers mostly in 
terms of title output more than in sales revenue. The companies oﬀ ered their 
services to other organizations (for example universities and corporates), and 
interestingly to literary agents and publishers, both of which wanted to extend 
their own operations into this fast-growing business of charging authors. The 
authors labelled themselves as independent publishers; not to be confused with 
the many thousands of independent publishers which select authors and invest in 
publishing their works in the usual way.
A small number of indie authors (as they became to be known), especially 
proliﬁ c writers of genre ﬁ ction (for example crime, science ﬁ ction and fantasy, 
romance), topped the US ebook bestselling ﬁ ction charts. They gained triumphant 
media coverage, fuelling the prospect that authors could potentially make far more 
money through self-publishing, rather than through an investing publisher, and 
have total control over the way their books were published. Other indie authors, 
termed hybrid authors, both self-publish some titles and publish other titles 
through the mainstream publishers. Commentators disparagingly referred to the 
incumbent trade houses as ‘legacy publishers’: conjuring an image of corporations 
The Fifty 
Shades of Grey 
trilogy had sold 
over 100m 
copies 
worldwide by 
2014
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
45
locked in their New York glass towers, trapped in analogue mind-sets, and 
clinging to past systems and behaviours through which they had once controlled 
authors and markets. However, over time the traditional publishers consolidated 
their position in the ﬁ ction ebook bestseller lists and earned proﬁ table revenues 
from their higher ebook prices and strength in the international and print book 
markets.
The entrepreneurial indies primarily compete for readers against the 
publishers by using very low pricing strategies, even giving their ebooks away for 
free (the freemium business model with a view to charging subsequently). Some 
established authors took the view that the indies were devaluing writing, that it 
was being commoditized (producing titles that were easily substitutable and hence 
worthless), not dissimilar to the comments made earlier in the age of pulp ﬁ ction.
The author services companies also impact on the ways publishers inform 
authors about sales and pay them. The trade publishers send authors, at say six 
monthly intervals, their royalty statement showing aggregate sales of printed 
books and give themselves a three-month credit period to pay up. Authors wanting 
to know their sales have to contact their publisher’s editor or agent. In contrast, 
the author services companies, such as Amazon, see authors as customers and 
provide them with current sales information and pay them monthly. Authors can 
check their sales in real time and see how their pricing and promotional activity is 
inﬂ uencing sales. In response, some trade publishers, such as Hachette, Simon & 
Schuster and Random House, provide authors with a dashboard to provide 
current sales information and marketing advice, and others are starting to pay 
monthly on their new digital only imprints.
The aim of many new indie authors, however, remains to achieve a contract 
from a publisher. The self-publishing websites and forums form talent pools for 
publishers and agents to spot new writing talent. Furthermore, the communities 
which develop around their writing provide a ready-made audience for the 
publisher to build greater sales success.
A striking example of author self-publishing occurred in 2012, when J. K. 
Rowling launched her revolutionary Pottermore site to sell ebooks of the Harry 
Potter series in many languages and to serve the fan base (the print editions were 
originally published by Bloomsbury in the UK and Scholastic in the USA, with 
Rowling retaining the digital rights). By leveraging the strength of the super 
brand, the online retailers agreed to act merely as shop windows. Readers visiting 
Amazon, for instance, were directed to Pottermore which owned the customer 
relationship and fan base, and the ebook could still appear on the Kindle. The 
retailer receives an introduction or aﬃ  liate fee. Pottermore thereby controlled the 
ebook prices across all channels and Potter readers had the freedom to download 
the ebook into many diﬀ erent kinds of devices of their choice. The Harry Potter 
brand is a prominent example of transmedia publishing: a multi-platform 
property spanning books, ﬁ lms, games, the web and communities.
Growth of ebooks
Most ebooks are little more than replicas of the print edition – so-called vanilla 
ebooks. Printed books are reproduced from a high resolution ﬁ xed page PDF ﬁ le. 
The ﬁ rst generation of ebooks were simply low resolution PDF ﬁ les of the print 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
46
ﬁ les in order to facilitate downloading over the limited bandwidth networks of the 
period. They were exact page replicas, usually read on desktop computers with 
large screens. Reading PDF ﬁ les on small screens of the emerging dedicated 
reading devices was problematic and so new ﬁ le formats were designed to enable 
text to be reﬂ owed on smaller screen sizes. Readers could also customize the font 
and type size. Publishers were faced, and still are, with a multiplicity of ﬁ le 
formats, some of which are proprietary, such as from Amazon and Apple, thereby 
hindering interoperability across ecosystems and increasing publishing costs. The 
ePub ﬁ le format, supported by publishers, is designed as a universal standard.
The sale of ebooks rose steeply after the introduction of Amazon’s Kindle in 
the USA in 2007; and in 2010 in the UK, along with devices and online 
bookstores from other international retailers such as Apple, Kobo, and Sony. 
Barnes & Noble launched its Nook reading devices in 2009 and began to sell 
them in the UK in 2012. The UK initially lagged behind the USA by one to two 
years in the availability of devices and consequent ebook sales.
At the outset, some publishers took the view that ebook publication would 
cannibalize print sales and should occur sometime after the ﬁ rst publication in 
print. But the traditional pattern of hardback to paperback was disrupted by the 
arrival of ebooks, and the new convention was that the ebook should be published 
simultaneously with the ﬁ rst print edition to maximize marketing exposure. 
Sometimes there was digital ﬁ rst publication, and later on digital-only imprints in 
areas such as science ﬁ ction and romance. Consumers expected ebooks to be 
priced very much lower than print editions, while the publishers wanted to hold 
up prices as long as possible. The biggest early shifts in the purchase of ebooks 
occurred in the area of ﬁ ction, and genre ﬁ ction in particular. In 2012, publishers 
were reporting ebook sales of up to 50 per cent of total sales on some individual 
new ﬁ ction titles, and the UK print market for crime alone fell by 25 per cent. 
Some publishers believe that readers who would before have bought the 
paperback edition, published up to 12 months after the hardback edition, now buy 
the ebook edition instead. The migration from print to ebook formats of highly 
illustrated books, despite the rise in the purchase of tablet computers, has been 
slow.
Publishers’ revenue from ebook sales is derived mainly from the copy sales 
business model, enacted through licences with resellers. The use of subscription 
business models by the non-consumer publishers is long established and more 
prevalent. However, third party subscription sites for consumer ebooks that 
mimic the business models of Spotify for music or Netﬂ ix for movies are 
developing worldwide. It is argued that book consumption is closer to that of 
movies than to music tracks because a consumer takes a long time to read each 
book, and the number they can consume each month is limited by time scarcity, 
though a small percentage of so-called ‘power readers’ may consume more than 10 
titles per month.
The Spanish company 24Symbols oﬀ ers readers using smartphones and 
tablets access to titles held in the cloud using a freemium-based model (with 
advertising) or its monthly subscription service. Other companies experimenting 
with subscription services for trade books include Amazon, Oyster and Scribd. 
Publishers license curated aggregations of titles, such as backlist or genres, to the 
subscription companies, with the aim of generating new revenue streams
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
47
without disrupting their normal sales revenues. Payments to publishers may be 
triggered by the usage of their titles. Some of the trade publishers, from 
Bertelsmann to niche publishers, are experimenting with their own subscription 
services. Customers who pay a monthly subscription are given access to a 
collection of titles, usually designed for vertical communities in particular genres. 
In emerging markets, where piracy may be high, subscription services oﬀ ering 
streamed content may be preferable to the pay and download business model.
Table 2.4 Sales from digital – 2011 and 2012 (source: Association of American 
Publishers, Publishers Association)
USA
Proportion of publisher net 
revenues 
UK
Proportion of publisher net 
revenues
2011 
17 %
 8 %
2012
23 %
12 %
Sales of consumer ebooks
$1.5 bn
£216 m
In 2011 Stieg Larsson 
became the first 
author to sell 1 m 
ebooks on Amazon
disrupting their normal sales revenues. 
disrupting 
disrupting 
disrupting 
disrupting their 
disrupting their 
disrupting their 
disrupting their 
The Girl Who
Played with Fire
STIEG LARSSON
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
48
Public libraries
The lending of ebooks through public libraries is a diﬃ  cult issue. Librarians want 
to extend their ebook lending services and retain their purpose of providing 
products and services free to end-users. But publishers fear that unrestricted 
lending would undermine book sales and thus publishers’ and authors’ revenue, 
and that of physical bookstores. UK public libraries tend to lose a demographic of 
borrowers from the late teens through to the child-rearing age. Supporters point to 
the physical importance of the library for book discovery and for stimulating books 
sales. Public libraries are an important place to introduce children to books and 
reading. Nevertheless, UK public library closures accelerated during government 
spending cuts from 2012 onwards; and their expenditure on books had fallen 
previously, in 1995 it was 17 per cent of total expenditure, by 2008 it was just 12 
per cent.
The large US and UK publishers were resistant to ebook lending, and began 
trials limited to selected backlist titles. However, from around 2012, some of the 
main publishers allowed the lending of new books. Ebook lending mimics the 
restrictions of physical book lending, for example, the authentication of the 
borrower, limits on the number of simultaneous borrowers, loan expiry periods, 
and ‘degradation’ through usage of per copy purchased. The purchase price of a 
book to the library may be higher to reﬂ ect multiple usages. The ebook lending 
distributor, OverDrive (USA), became an important intermediary between the 
publishers and the public libraries and school libraries, in the USA and 
internationally. Major wholesalers, such as Baker & Taylor (USA) and Gardners 
(UK) also entered the library supply aggregation market.
Digital product development
The development by Apple of its app store in 2008 and the launch of the iPad in 
2010 opened up an opportunity for publishers to produce, often in collaboration 
with app developers, titles which contained rich media (audio and video) along 
with interactive features, similar to those developed by Dorling Kindersley in 
CD-Rom form over a decade earlier. Publishers’ apps were initially limited to 
Apple’s iOS operating system (a ‘closed’ system) though later some were available 
on Google’s Android system. The development of apps proved very costly, initially 
with six ﬁ gure investments. Touch Press, in partnership with publishers such as 
Faber & Faber, produced some notable titles for adults – Steve Jobs used the Solar 
System app in his launch of the iPad 2 in 2011. However, Apple’s app store is 
populated with large numbers of free apps, marketing apps, apps sold on a 
freemium model, and paid-for apps available at very low prices. It is not a 
conducive place for publishers to charge higher prices for quality products. The 
content of Apple’s store was not open to the search engines and with the discovery 
of apps diﬃ  cult, most publishers scaled back or abandoned the production of 
content app titles for adults, but continued modest developments of story book 
apps for children and young adults, incorporating gaming techniques. Publishers 
increasingly use web-based apps for content delivery and marketing purposes 
across many devices.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
49
Enhanced ebooks are similar to apps in that they include rich media and 
interactive features but can be traded through all book channels to market. The 
HTML format, which renders an ebook through a web browser, and the ePub3 
standard format (itself based on HTML) are designed to enable such features. The 
enhanced ebook equivalents of highly illustrated books, where text, illustrations 
and captions are closely related on ﬁ xed layouts, are at the experimental stage and 
have yet to be proven commercially viable. The iBooks author tool is also being 
used for such developments.
The transition to digital in trade publishing is expected to encounter further 
disruption and innovation. Digital publishing breaks the economic constraints of 
the printed book container, enables faster publication, and updates. In the print 
only era, short stories (typically up to say 20,000 words) were published only in 
collections or anthologies, and their sales were modest. Novels often had to be at 
least 40,000 words, and novellas fell somewhere in between. Newspaper and 
magazine articles were limited in length by their publishers.
Amazon at the start of 2011 launched its Kindle Singles programme and 
kickstarted a new channel for short-form digital ﬁ ction and non-ﬁ ction, published 
at low prices, up to $2.99 or £2.50, to drive impulse purchase. Short-form digital 
publishers and publishing programmes arose; and magazine and newspaper 
organizations conceived the publication as ebooks of long-form journalism. 
Digital shorts are roughly in the range of 5,000 to 30,000 words, or more 
narrowly 10,000 to 15,000 words. Digital publication reduces the publishing cost 
A screenshot from 
The Waste Land app 
from Faber and 
Touch Press 
(released in 2011; 
Seamus Heaney died 
in 2013)
I. The Burial of the Dead 
April is the cruellesl month. breeding 
Lilir.o; oul of the delld land. mixing 
Memory ~nd 
desi~, 
stirring 
Dull roots with spring rain. 
Winler kept US wann. revering 
!'.anh in forgetful snow. feeding 
A little life with dried tubers. 
SUmmtr surprised us, coming """. the Starnberg~~ 
With i shower of rain: we SlOPped in the colonnade. 
And wenl on in sunligh~ 
inlo the Hofgarten. 
And dnnk cofree. and talked for an hour. 
Bin gar keine Russin. stamm' aus Litauen. echl deutsch. 
And whm we weredtildrm. staying al thearclt·duke's, 
My cousin's, he lOOk me out on a sled, 
And I was frightened. He said. Marie . 
Marie. hold on tighL And down we went 
[n the mountains. the:re you feel free, 
I read. much of the night. and go south in the winle:r. 
aus Litauen. echl deutsch. 
aus Litauen. echl deutsch. 
with spring 
with spring 
with spring 
10
the cruellesl month. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
50
The rise and fall of multimedia publishing
In consumer publishing, the ﬁrst wave of new media excitement – the 
publishing of multimedia titles on CD-ROM – occurred in the early to mid-
1990s. At that time there were large numbers of US imports. Analysts pointed 
to the rapid rise in the number of computers with CD-ROM drives being 
purchased by UK households. This would lead, it was argued, to an exponential 
rise in the consumer purchase of suitable content. Some of the major trade 
publishers, such as HarperCollins, Penguin and Reed, and the illustrated book 
reference publisher Dorling Kindersley, established new media divisions. The 
world’s main encyclopedia publishers converted their works on to CD-ROM; 
Microsoft created the encyclopedia Encarta (which eventually closed in 2009), 
localized around the world; multimedia start-ups appeared; and major 
entertainment companies such as Disney exploited their character properties on 
the new medium. But by 1996, most of the UK trade book publishers, with the 
exception of Dorling Kindersley, withdrew from the marketplace bearing large 
losses. No mass market appeared for these products and the publishers could 
not cover their high development costs. The booksellers did not stock the titles 
sufﬁciently and the publishers were left to compete in the computer stores, an 
alien and difﬁcult setting for their business. By the late 1990s, the remainder 
dealers had extensive stocks of lifestyle titles from around the world to sell oﬀ  
for a few pounds per title. The publishing of multimedia titles on disk then 
continued mainly in the educational (home and school), cartographic and 
text-based professional reference ﬁelds.
The failure of multimedia publishing reinforced many publishers’ 
sceptical view of new media publishing and negatively coloured the response 
of senior managers to the news of ebook growth in the USA in the late 1990s. 
If the business model for multimedia publishing on disk was loss-making, 
they argued, what hope would there be for publishing on the internet, a 
generally free medium devaluing the price of information, with few viable 
business models for selling content? This view was conﬁrmed by the internet 
dotcom bubble of the late 1990s, which saw investment pouring into many 
start-up companies that later became worthless. Yet publishers took little or 
no action to future-proof their business for the digital age. Comforted by 
the oft-quoted mantra ‘content is king’, few foresaw that in the next century 
big money would be made from consumers searching for content on the 
internet, especially by Google, a company that would turn its attention to 
book content.

F  C U S
by removing the cost of printing which amounts to say 10 to 15 per cent of the cost 
of publishing the book. Furthermore, it is not constrained by the six to nine 
month marketing and sales lead times of the print supply chain. Writers may 
self-publish their short ﬁ ction or via their publishers. Short ﬁ ction and serial 
release may be used to promote a future novel through generating pre-orders; or 
help readers discover and sample established or new writers. Some news and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
51
magazine publishers entered into partnerships with the book publishers to create 
lists for long-form journalism on topical issues.
At the other extreme, the sheer length of major references works and the 
necessity to update them led in 2012 to Encyclopaedia Britannica announcing that 
it would no longer publish its print editions; Oxford University Press had made a 
similar decision for the Oxford English Dictionary (OED). The online OED is sold 
under licence to libraries on a subscription business model, and licensed to 
corporations to bundle with their hardware and services. In 2013, the Reader’s 
Digest book company in the UK was closed marking the end of its publication of 
highly illustrated reference printed books that had inspired a previous generation 
of publishers, such as at Mitchell Beazley, Octopus and Dorling Kindersley.
Some of the consumer publishers’ output crosses over to education markets: 
school and higher. For example, Bloomsbury and Faber & Faber aggregated their 
drama lists and in 2013 opened a content platform, Drama Online, for higher 
education markets. The inclusion of learning tools and stills, for instance, from 
the Victoria and Albert Museum, mimics Bloomsbury’s Berg Fashion Library 
published online earlier.
The transition from print to digital publishing was acutely felt by the 
publishers of travel guides. The travel guide publishers migrated their content to 
the internet, especially helpful to travellers searching on mobile devices. BBC 
Worldwide bought the guidebook publisher Lonely Planet from the founders in 
2007 and got full control in 2011; it sold it at a loss in 2013, despite having grown a 
signiﬁ cant digital publishing and community operation. In 2012, Wiley divested 
the US travel guide publisher Frommer’s to Google, which previously had 
purchased Zagat, the mainly consumer-rated restaurant and hotel guides. Nine 
months later Google sold the Frommer’s brand back to its founder, Arthur 
Frommer, who recommenced the book publishing. Google, however, retained the 
social media data of the brand’s serious followers, and integrated travel content 
into Google+ Local and other Google services. It was speculated that Google had 
bought Frommer’s primarily for the metadata it oﬀ ered on places around the 
world.
The rise of social networks and communities
The enormous growth of social networks such as Facebook and Twitter, and of 
sharing sites such as Pinterest, creates new opportunities for publishers and 
authors to hold conversations with readers and potential readers. Since the 
retailers do not provide publishers with information on customers, it is imperative 
for publishers to form direct relationships with readers and customers, not least in 
order to understand how they are engaging with the publisher’s products. While 
the conventional review media are still important for publicizing books, all-
important word-of-mouth recommendations are increasingly fostered through the 
use of social platforms and communities.
The rise of subject interest, or vertical, communities, favours niche 
publishers that develop in-depth specialist sites for enthusiasts and which provide 
associated services to authors as part of their brand innovation. Publisher-led 
communities in genre categories help fans discover new and backlist writers, and 
contribute to the development of books and writers. Good examples are the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
52
military history, science ﬁ ction, and MBS (mind, body, spirit) publisher Osprey 
(UK), which has used crowdsourcing to suggest topics on which the community 
would like to see new books commissioned; the enthusiast publisher F+W Media 
(USA), which for each vertical publishes books, magazines and holds events; and 
the MBS publisher and associated events organizer Hay House (USA). The Faber 
Academy (UK) hosts creative writing courses.
MARKET SHARE
If the consolidation of the consumer book publishers in the last quarter of the 
twentieth century was about the vertical restructuring of an archaic industry, the 
current consolidation is about gaining market share in the face of ever more 
powerful retailers and the increasing internationalization of consumer publishing. 
The market shares of the leading publishing groups in 2012 are shown in Table 
2.5 – the top four groups (shortly to be three with the merger of Random House 
and Penguin) had approaching 50 per cent of the market.
Table 2.5 Market shares (percentages) of publishers for consumer sales 2012
(source: Nielsen BookScan)
Publisher
Market share (%)
Random House
14.80
Hachette
12.50
Penguin
11.70 
HarperCollins
7.90 
Pan Macmillan
3.30 
Pearson
2.20 
Simon & Schuster
2.00 
Bloomsbury
2.00 
OUP
1.90 
Scholastic
1.60
The long-time pole position of the Bertelsmann companies in the UK (Random 
House and Transworld, with strengths in ﬁction) came to be matched by the rapid 
growth of the French media group Hachette Livre, owned by Lagardère. Hachette 
had previously acquired Orion, Octopus, Watts and Chambers-Harrap; it then 
bought Hodder Headline from WHSmith. In 2006 it bought the book publishing 
businesses of the US company Time Warner (whose imprints included Little, 
Brown), taking the number one spot in the UK and for the ﬁrst time giving it 
access to the US market. In 2007, Bertelsmann responded with its own purchase 
of BBC Books, which it merged into Ebury.
In a market increasingly dominated by powerful retailers and bestsellers, 
publisher size is crucial, especially in the largest market segment – ﬁction. This is 
one factor behind the merger of Random House and Penguin, alongside the search 
for cost savings in back oﬃ  ce operations including production and distribution. In 
2009, the big four (Hachette, Random House, HarperCollins and Penguin) took 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
53
nearly 90 per cent of the ﬁction market by value, and the top 10 over 95 per cent. 
Non-ﬁction publishing is less concentrated with many smaller players. In the adult 
non-ﬁction market, the same big four took 48 per cent by value and the top 10 
around 58 per cent (Richardson and Taylor, 2nd edition, page 36).
Both Bertelsmann and Hachette adopt a decentralized approach to the 
management of their publishing groups. Literary agents are encouraged to submit 
projects to editors across their imprints, even to the extent that their constituent 
publishing companies may be in direct competition against one another.
There is a notable polarization between the big players and a large number of 
much smaller ﬁrms – in between there is only a small number of medium-sized 
companies. The middle-ranking publishers lack the scale of operation and deep 
backlists of the large players and are sometimes too small to resist the pressures 
from the large retailers for improved terms of trade, at the expense of their 
margins. They also face greater risks in publishing brand-named authors on 
which they depend to give them access to the main retailers. If for example they 
are in competition to buy a potentially huge book, they may be outbid by an 
advance on royalties from a larger publisher. Alternatively if they won the book 
and its sales were disappointing, the failure of their prime investment would have 
severe consequences on their proﬁtability. In contrast, a major publisher could 
aﬀ ord to purchase six potentially huge books, of which the chances are that three 
or four turn out winners. The biggest authors migrate to the largest publishers 
– even those who achieve their early success with a smaller publisher, or start out 
by self-publishing, are likely to be tempted away by larger advances. The smaller 
publishers, which cannot compete against the large corporations in terms of 
advances, concentrate on bringing forward new writers, or those overlooked 
writers who may not have agents or have been rejected by larger publishers. They 
may opt to build a stable of authors who will work for one-oﬀ  fees instead of 
royalties – common in the ﬁeld of highly illustrated books.
Although consumer book publishing is dominated by the existing majors, 
there are other large publishers, including Bloomsbury, Macmillan (owned by 
Holtzbrinck), Simon & Schuster (owned by CBS Corporation), and Oxford 
University Press. Quarto is a sizeable player in the international illustrated book 
ﬁeld. Medium-sized independents include Anova, Atlantic, Canongate (in 
Edinburgh), Faber & Faber, History Press, John Blake, Michael O’Mara, Proﬁ le 
Books, Quadrille, and the art publishers Phaidon, Thames & Hudson and the Tate 
Gallery. There are many smaller specialist publishers producing adult or 
children’s books.
Faced with the power of the mass market retailers, leading independent 
publishers responded in 2005 by forming the Independent Alliance of publishers. 
The Alliance, led and sales managed by Faber & Faber, oﬀ ered more favourable 
terms to independent booksellers, comparable to those received by the chains, and 
has provided better access for the publishers into the major retailers. The Alliance 
subsequently became the ﬁ fth or six largest publisher in the UK home market. In 
2011, Faber & Faber (UK) and Perseus (USA) formed a joint venture, Faber 
Factory, to provide digital publishing services to more than 70 independent 
publishers in the UK, Ireland and the Commonwealth.
The recession associated with the ﬁ nancial crisis of 2007 onwards had an 
impact on consumer spending in many countries, and led to redundancies at 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
54
publishers, tight control on costs, and reduced advances to authors. This latter 
eﬀ ect to some extent levelled the playing ﬁ eld for smaller publishers, priced out of 
the major auctions. As the larger publishers lowered their level of risk, agents 
could see advantages for their authors from being published by smaller, ﬂ eet-
footed companies with an adventurous streak. The recession also led to new 
categories of publishing such as thrift lit alongside interest in serious political and 
economic titles about the causes of the ﬁ nancial crisis. An example of the former 
was the title Cold Meat and How To Disguise It: A history of advice on how to survive 
hard times – a hundred years of belt tightening (2009).
CHILDREN’S AND YOUNG ADULT PUBLISHING
By the late 1970s the outlook for publishers of children’s books, especially those 
producing quality hardbacks, appeared grim in the UK. Many bookshops, other 
than WHSmith, were hardly enthusiastic buyers, public and school libraries were 
cutting back their expenditure, and the birth rate was forecast to fall. In that the 
vitality of children’s publishing creates the book buyers of the future, there were 
serious worries about the demise of book reading, foreshadowing the end of 
publishing itself. Between 1981 and 1990 the population of 5- to 14-year-olds did 
indeed fall by 13 per cent but the inventiveness of authors and illustrators, of 
existing publishers, of new publishers such as Walker Books, and book packagers 
transformed children’s publishing into arguably the most dynamic sector of the 
industry. Retail sales per child rose by nearly three times, and the number of new 
titles doubled to around 6,000. Between 1985 and 1990, the sales of children’s 
publishers rose in real terms by 26 per cent while their adult general publishing 
counterparts achieved growth of only 7 per cent.
The publishers found new ways of reaching the home market via 
supermarkets (often titles appeared under a supermarket’s own brand label), 
toyshops and direct sales – including book clubs and school book fairs. They sold 
international co-editions to US and European publishing partners, enabling 
picture books and highly-illustrated non-ﬁction or information books to be 
published at low and aﬀ ordable prices worldwide. Paperback sales grew 
enormously and in volume terms came to dominate the market. Teenage ﬁction 
lists were established.
The recession of the early 1990s saw a reversal in sales of around 13 per cent 
yet the publishers continued to increase their title output through to 1995 when it 
stabilized at around 8,000 titles. The UK market for children’s books declined 
from 1990 through to 1997, as other new products competed for children’s 
attention and parents’ spending. However, in 1998–99 the market staged a 
substantial recovery. Government policy to give greater emphasis to literacy in 
primary schools was a ﬁllip to some children’s publishers, encouraging school and 
library sales. Some titles became more answerable to the needs of the National 
Curriculum, although this did create a tension between the book as entertainment 
and as a learning aid. It is important to note that the children’s publishers sell 
their books through many diﬀ erent distribution channels beyond booksellers, 
such as direct to schools.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
55
By the end of the twentieth century an explosion in new children’s ﬁction was 
apparent. This was led by J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series, which not only 
rocketed the independent publisher Bloomsbury up the charts for retail sales in the 
UK, but also the books became international bestsellers and widely translated. They 
were attractive to a crossover market – read by children and adults – and stimulated 
consumer interest in children’s books across the board (and interest from ﬁlm 
companies in children’s book properties). In ﬁction, the importance of the branding 
of authors, such as Jacqueline Wilson, Philip Pullman and Francesca Simon, 
strengthened. Publishers were keen to develop series based around the ﬁctional 
characters, which could lead to sales of associated merchandise. In the early years of 
the new century, children’s publishing became a vibrant sector with publishers 
willing to invest in both authors and marketing in search of the next bestseller.
Also notable is the spectacular success of the YA (young adult) category of 
ﬁ ction, spurred on by the success of Harry Potter and then the vampire romance 
Twilight series of books from Stephanie Meyer. Next came dystopian ﬁ ction and 
in 2012, the year the ﬁ lm was released, around 3 m copies of the Hunger Games 
trilogy were sold in the UK – both print and ebook (The Bookseller, 11 January 2013). 
A further ﬁ ction genre developed called New Adult, as described by John Walsh: 
‘NA novels are written about (and often by) 18 to 25-year-olds, charting the lives of 
post-school, university-age friends as they encounter the world of work, oﬃ  ces, 
money, identity, rented ﬂ ats and dates with people they’ve met online’ 
(Independent, 28 July 2013).
Mark Haddon’s The 
Curious Incident of the 
Dog in the Night-Time 
was published in 
separate editions for 
adults (left) and 
children (right)
THE CURIOUS 
INCIDENT 
[F Tl£ DOO 
IN TI£ N 
ME 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
INCIDENT 
INCIDENT 
INCIDENT 
INCIDENT 
children's fiction 
children's 
INCIDENT 
INCIDENT 
tHE
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
children's fiction 
fiction 
children's 
fiction 
children's 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
56
The major children’s publishers include the children’s imprints of Pufﬁn, 
Ladybird and Dorling Kindersley (all in the Penguin group) and of the other adult 
consumer publishers such as Hachette UK, HarperCollins, the Bertelsmann 
companies of Random House and Transworld, Pan Macmillan, Simon & 
Schuster, Bloomsbury, and Oxford University Press. There are other specialist 
children’s publishers, which are not part of adult book publishing groups. The 
magazine and book publisher Egmont (majoring in licensed character publishing) 
is in the top rank of children’s publishing. Others include Scholastic, Templar, 
Usborne and Walker Books. Parragon, which began as a packager, has expanded 
rapidly by publishing books for supermarkets, and extended its reach into high 
street retail by becoming the licensed publishing partner of Disney.
In the present multimedia age there has been a decline in the market for 
picture books and booksellers have reduced their range in this area. Publishers 
have to be more innovative in their pricing and how they combine books with 
digital oﬀ erings. The start-up Nosy Crow grew its sales for young children in both 
print and digital, producing some successful apps in the early days of the iPad. 
Ebook sales of YA titles have become a signiﬁ cant part of the market.
Table 2.6 Carnegie Medal winners 2003 to 2013. The medal is awarded by children’s 
librarians for an outstanding book for children and young people. The date of the 
award was adjusted from 2007 to the year of the award rather than of publication
Year of award
Author
Title
Publisher
2013
Sally Gardner
Maggot Moon
Hot Key Books
2012
Patrick Ness
A Monster Calls
Walker Books
2011
Patrick Ness
Monsters of Men
Walker Books
2010
Neil Gaiman
The Graveyard Book
Bloomsbury
2009 
Siobhan Dowd
Bog Child
David Fickling
2008 
Philip Reeve
Here Lies Arthur
Scholastic
2007
Meg Rosoff
Just in Case
Penguin
2005
Mal Peet
Tamar
Walker Books
2004
Frank Cottrell Boyce
Millions
Macmillan
2003
Jennifer Donnelly
A Gathering Light
Bloomsbury
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The development of modern trade publishing
57
Now read this
Angus Phillips, Turning the Page: The evolution of the book, Routledge, 2014.
John B. Thompson, Merchants of Culture: The publishing business in the 
twenty-ﬁ rst century, 2nd edition, Polity, 2012.
Sources
Diana Athill, Stet, Granta, 2000.
Alan Bartram, Making Books: Design in British publishing since 1945, British 
Library, 1999.
Eric de Bellaigue, British Book Publishing as a Business since the 1960s, British 
Library Publishing, 2004.
Simon Eliot and Jonathan Rose, A Companion to the History of the Book, 
Blackwell, 2007.
Jason Epstein, Book Business: Publishing Past, Present, and Future, Norton, 
2002.
Jeremy Lewis, Penguin Special: The life and times of Allen Lane, Viking, 2005.
Tom Maschler, Publisher, Picador, 2005.
Daniel Menaker, My Mistake: A memoir, Houghton Miﬄ  in, 2013.
Ian Norrie, Mumby’s Publishing and Bookselling in the Twentieth Century, 6th 
edition, Bell & Hyman, 1982.
Paul Richardson and Graham Taylor, PA Guide to the UK Publishing Industry, 
Publishers Association, 3rd edition, 2014.
Claire Squires, Marketing Literature: The making of contemporary writing in 
Britain, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
Iain Stevenson, Book Makers: British Publishing in the Twentieth Century, 
British Library, 2010.
Rayner Unwin, George Allen & Unwin: A remembrancer, Merlin Unwin Books, 
1999.
Web resources
www.carnegiegreenaway.org.uk Carnegie and Kate Greenaway Children’s 
Book Awards.
http://blogs.guardian.co.uk/books/ Guardian blog about books and the book 
trade.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 3
Publishing for educational, academic and 
professional markets
Non-consumer publishing encompasses the educational, academic, STM (scientiﬁc, 
technical and medical), and professional publishing sectors, including the 
publication of learned journals. The major publishers strive to dominate the sectors 
in which they specialize – across the world. The companies producing high-level 
books and information services for professionals (such as in business or law), or 
publishing the premier journals, are highly proﬁtable and strongly cash generative.
These markets are open to disruption from the large technology players, and 
Steve Jobs expressed his aim to crack open the school textbook market: ‘Jobs had 
his sights set on textbooks as the next business he wanted to transform. He 
believed it was an $8 billion a year industry ripe for digital destruction’ (Isaacson, 
Chapter 38). However, publishers have made signiﬁ cant advances themselves in 
terms of the creation of digital materials and the move from product to service. 
Sectors such as journal publishing have been in the advance of digital 
developments, with over 90 per cent of journals now available online. Content has 
been both aggregated into large searchable databases, and disaggregated so that 
individual articles can be purchased. Whilst governments around the world 
continue to experiment with the introduction of digital content in schools, some 
publishers are looking to own the whole value chain in educational and academic 
markets by providing learning, testing and examination services.
Increases in government funding for UK schools in the 1960s and 1970s 
aided the expansion of the educational publishers. The academic publishers 
similarly responded to the growth in higher education in the same period. 
Expansion in student numbers, and the ample funding of UK and US university 
libraries, stimulated the publishing of high-priced academic monographs and 
learned journals.
The British publishers enjoyed their traditional export markets: the USA, 
Commonwealth and northern Europe. The American publishers had a much 
larger home market and so gave little emphasis to exports, the major exception 
being the college textbook publishers. The US government’s Marshall Plan after 
the Second World War, designed to aid the reconstruction of post-war Europe, 
helped the US publishers to export college textbooks, which were sold in the UK at 
very low prices. The publishers opened subsidiaries in the UK and came to 
dominate college textbook adoption markets worldwide, Commonwealth countries 
included, by issuing international editions, not for sale in the US.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
59
In terms of ownership, consolidation has continued apace in the twenty-ﬁrst 
century and European publishers have acquired US publishers. Private equity 
groups have played a signiﬁcant role in reassembling publishing imprints and 
assets, both by purchasing them and selling them on in new forms. A major 
driver for consolidation has been the migration to digital formats and services, 
and the high costs involved in making the transition.
CONSOLIDATION
Pearson, well known for its Longman imprint purchased in 1968, acquired the US 
publisher Addison-Wesley in 1988, and then in 1998 acquired Simon & Schuster’s 
educational operations – including Prentice Hall and Allyn & Bacon – and the US 
Macmillan Publishing from its parent Viacom. It created the world’s largest 
educational (textbook) publisher. Pearson led the way in its purchase of companies 
which oﬀ ered to educational organizations services in assessment, elearning, and 
student recruitment and support. Its many acquisitions included: in 2007, 
Harcourt Assessment from Reed Elsevier, and eCollege, a US provider of 
elearning, enrolment and student support services to higher education; in 2009, 
Wall Street English, a provider of English language training in China; and in 2010, 
a division of Sistema Educacional Brasileiro (SEB), giving it a strong presence in 
sistemas (‘learning systems’) for preschool, primary and secondary schools in 
Brazil.
A signiﬁ cant shake-up of publishers occurred around the turn of the century. 
In 1995 the Macmillan family had sold a majority stake in Macmillan Publishers 
(whose interests included the journal Nature) to the German publisher 
Holtzbrinck. The remaining shares were purchased by Holtzbrinck in 1999. 
Taylor & Francis ﬂoated on the London Stock Exchange in 1998 and shortly after 
more than doubled in size with the acquisition of the Routledge group of 
publishers. It has acquired numerous academic and STM publishers on both sides 
of the Atlantic, enabling it to enjoy both economies of scale and synergies in areas 
such as marketing.
In 1999, the German and family-owned Bertelsmann – primarily a 
consumer-focused media group – bought the German and family-owned STM 
publisher Springer. In turn, in 2003, British private equity bought Springer, and 
the academic and STM publishing operations of the Dutch publisher Kluwer. The 
companies were merged in 2004 and the enlarged Springer became the second 
largest STM publisher behind the Anglo-Dutch leader Elsevier, and the largest 
STM book publisher.
In 2002, a private equity consortium bought the large US educational 
publisher Houghton Mifﬂin, which then in 2006 underwent a reverse takeover by 
the smaller Irish educational software company Riverdeep. In 2007 Reed Elsevier, 
the world’s biggest publisher of information for professional users operating in 
the markets of science, medical and legal, having previously bought the US 
publisher Harcourt in 2001, decided to sell its school educational imprints outside 
of the US (including Heinemann in the UK) to Pearson, while keeping the higher 
education and medical publishing businesses. Likewise the other major 
information and professional publishers decided to concentrate on providing 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
60
digital content and services to professionals, rather than compete in education 
against Pearson. In 2007 the Dutch information and health publisher Wolters 
Kluwer sold its school publishing assets (including Nelson Thornes) to private 
equity, in order to concentrate on its professional businesses. In the same year, 
the Canadian family-owned Thomson Corporation sold Thomson Learning, a 
division focused on higher education (second only to Pearson in the US college 
market), again to private equity, to form Cengage, and bought Reuters. In 2008 
Cengage Learning was combined with the College Division of Houghton Mifﬂin. 
This left McGraw-Hill as the last remaining major US publisher with major 
shares in US school and college markets. Educational markets (school and college) 
have been slower than professional markets to take up digital content and services, 
but there have been signiﬁ cant initiatives undertaken by governments – for 
example in Turkey the aim is to provide every secondary school pupil with their 
own tablet computer (the Fatih project).
Running against the trend of European purchases of US publishers, in 2007 
the family-controlled US publisher John Wiley purchased the family-owned 
Blackwell, based in Oxford, which published books and journals for STM, 
humanities and social science markets. Following the ﬁ nancial crisis beginning in 
2008, major merger and acquisition activity in the industry was subdued until 
2013 when McGraw-Hill sold its Education division to private equity. In a rare 
move by a university press, Oxford University Press purchased in 2013 the UK 
curriculum publisher Nelson Thornes.
The migration to digital formats drives consolidation, not least in the ability 
enabled by size to invest in technology. The big players can aﬀ ord to make the 
necessary large investments in online scientiﬁc journals and accompanying tools 
to aid researchers, and in building ebook collections for libraries. The larger the 
publisher’s content and the greater their control over the intellectual property, the 
greater is the leverage of the aggregation. It is argued by the large publishers that 
it is easier for academic libraries and purchasing consortia to deal with just a few 
publishers and to use their platforms providing online content and services – 
rather than have to negotiate with dozens of publishers and intermediaries.
EDUCATIONAL PUBLISHING
Schools publishing
Educational markets worldwide are subject to the inﬂuence of government, 
politics and regulations at the state, regional and local levels more than any other 
publishing sector. Generally speaking, the greater the amount of content 
prescription and regulatory control, the narrower the range of published material 
and that tends to favour large publishers over smaller publishers. The UK market 
is mainly aﬀ ected by National Curriculum and assessment strategies, the vagaries 
of government expenditure, organizational and funding changes to the state 
school system, performance metrics of schools, teachers and students, and more 
recently the government’s emphasis on vocational training. The main educational 
publishers usually cover schools and further education colleges. Changes in 
demographics over time aﬀ ect market size, and for example the UK saw its birth 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
61
rate at its highest for 40 years in 2013, which will feed through into school 
enrolments.
In comparison to the consumer book publishers, the UK educational 
publishers (sometimes referred to as ‘curriculum publishers’) are less aﬀ ected by 
the powerful retailers since many sales are direct to schools (typically more than 
50 per cent; it can be more than 80 per cent in the case of primary schools). But 
they are impacted by the technology companies, increased use of tablets and of 
free internet content (including supply-side funded Open Educational Resources), 
and teacher-generated content. For example, lesson plans or activities can be easily 
downloaded from the internet. Publishers’ lists of books, learning resources and 
services can take longer to build and their sales, though more steady and generally 
more proﬁtable than in consumer publishing, are subject to periodic downturns. 
Overall, educational content has become progressively localized and therefore less 
exportable to overseas countries than hitherto. However, the major companies 
invest in local publishing and apply their technologies and approaches across their 
international operations.
The ﬁrst overseas subsidiaries of UK companies were opened in the late-
nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries in Australia and Canada, and in the 
1960s the educational and academic houses opened subsidiaries in the newly 
formed African Commonwealth countries and exported large quantities of 
UK-based textbooks. The educational systems there were based on UK curricula or 
examinations.
Go Science! from 
Heinemann features 
an interactive pupil 
book
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
62
The UK Bribery Act, which came into force in 2011, holds UK ﬁ rms 
accountable for bribery, whether committed directly and on their behalf, in the UK 
or overseas. Publishers have to take care how they regulate their international 
businesses in order not to fall foul of this legislation. There have been unfortunate 
incidents and in 2011, Macmillan was
ordered to pay £11.3m for ‘unlawful conduct’ related to its education division 
in East and West Africa. The High Court order was made after the Serious 
Fraud Oﬃ  ce (SFO) began an inquiry last year following a report from the 
World Bank. The report said Macmillan had made ‘bribery payments’ to 
secure a deal to print textbooks in South Sudan.
(bbc.co.uk, accessed 14 September 2013)
This initiated a signiﬁ cant retreat by the publisher from a number of African 
countries. OUP faced similar charges in Kenya and Tanzania, and was ﬁ ned 
nearly £2 million in 2012.
The ﬁrst wave of publisher consolidation occurred during the 1980s when 
UK school pupil rolls declined, and the number of signiﬁcant educational 
publishers decreased from around 30 to 15. Sales volumes fell from 1986 to 1990 
reﬂecting in part the underfunding of UK state schools. Export sales were aﬀ ected 
by the poverty of some Commonwealth countries and a more nationalist approach 
around the world to the school curriculum. By the early 1990s, the top three 
publishers commanded 50 per cent of sales to schools; and the top seven over 75 
per cent. The remaining publishers concentrated in specialist areas or subjects.
Consolidation amongst publishers proceeded more slowly until 2007, when 
Reed Elsevier decided to sell its UK education interests (Harcourt, including 
Heinemann) to Pearson; and Wolters Kluwer decided to divest its educational 
publishing assets (Nelson Thornes and other European publishers) to private 
equity. Then in 2013 the company was sold to Oxford University Press. In 2010 the 
acquisition by HarperCollins of Letts, Lonsdale and Leckie & Leckie took it to third 
position in the schools market. The main players are:
 
▪
Pearson,
 
▪
Oxford University Press (including Nelson Thornes),
 
▪
Collins Education (News Corporation),
 
▪
Hodder Education (Hachette).
There are other signiﬁ cant players such as Cambridge University Press, which 
publishes materials for international qualiﬁ cations, such as the IGCSE 
(International General Certiﬁ cate of Secondary Education) and IB (International 
Baccalaureate); and there are independent publishers such as Rising Stars and 
Jolly Learning concentrating on niche markets. A range of publishers serve 
primary schools and the school library market, including children’s publishers 
such as Scholastic.
In addition to producing products and services for schools, publishers also 
help teachers to use them, for example through holding free seminars. Paid-for 
training courses and consultancy services may also be provided to schools.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
63
Digital content in UK schools
Although the UK educational system was an early adopter of information and 
communication technologies (ICT), the take-up of digital content and services 
has proved difﬁcult and slow (still at only around 5 per cent of publishers’ 
sales in 2012), whilst still ahead of many other countries.
From the early 1990s there were government initiatives to increase the 
use of ICT in schools, including hardware and software provision, teacher 
training and digitally delivered curriculum resources. At the start the market 
was ﬁlled by US imports which were not designed for UK curricula and 
cultural needs. Amongst UK multimedia publishers, many went bust or 
recorded severe losses, and when Pearson purchased Dorling Kindersley, the 
multimedia division there was closed. Granada Learning was acquired by 
private equity in 2006, and subsequently became part of the testing company 
GL Assessment. The curriculum publishers restricted themselves to modest 
experiments, preferring the business model of book publishing. In 2002, the 
government introduced elearning credits (eLCs) which ringfenced funds for 
the purchase by schools of digital content. However, this pump-priming of the 
market did not guarantee future spending and use. School spending on 
hardware did have an impact and by 2009 the average number of interactive 
whiteboards in a school had reached 8.6 in primary schools and 25.2 in 
secondary schools (BESA, 2009). The prevalence and success of interactive 
whiteboards enabled publishers to produce digital resources (online and on 
disk) for that medium which complemented their texts and aided teachers.
Schools have seen the application of technologies and business models 
ﬁ rst developed in higher education, such as the introduction of virtual 
learning environments ( VLEs), testing linked to learning resources, the 
growth of online resources, and the use of subscription sales models. There is 
also signiﬁ cant use of free resources available online, from both publishers 
and other sources, and by 2009 nearly two-thirds of schools were making 
‘signiﬁ cant use of the internet for free downloads of online curriculum 
software or content products’ (BESA, 2009). The ﬁ rst generation of interactive 
textbooks were published for the iPad in 2012. By the end of 2013 there were 
around 260,000 tablets for use by pupils in classrooms across the UK state 
sector, and it was forecast that the number would more than double by 2015 
– with a further increase to 1.8 million by the end of 2020 (BESA, 2013).

F  C U S
Government
The UK market, up to the late part of the twentieth century, used to be characterized 
by little central government intervention and a variety of examination boards setting 
curricula. A diversity of books and ancillary materials were published by a variety of 
publishers. The books were purchased through local education authorities and 
supplied to schools via specialist suppliers, local authority purchasing organizations 
and bookshops. However, the eﬀ ects of the 1988 Education Reform Act were 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
64
profound. The new National Curriculum was far more prescriptive and deﬁned, 
rendering many backlist textbooks (from which publishers earned most of their 
proﬁts) largely redundant. The race was on to produce new materials, especially 
schemes or programmes of study in core subjects, quickly and at great cost. This 
favoured the large publishers. Speed and quality were of the essence as each school 
had to be locked into the publisher’s programme ideally for say three to ﬁve years. 
Slow publishers risked being knocked out, as indeed some were.
In the late 1990s, there were successive changes to the National Curriculum, 
and the examination boards in England were merged down to three: the treatment 
of subjects narrowed further. The boards, which receive a fee per candidate, 
compete vigorously to secure schools’ choice of their syllabus and accreditation 
(secondary schools usually pay a greater sum to the boards than they spend on 
textbooks). In the USA, Pearson took the strategic step of acquiring service 
companies which provided testing and other software for schools, a growth market 
on both sides of the Atlantic. In the UK, the company controversially bought the 
examination board Edexcel in 2003. This was seen by some as creating a conﬂ ict of 
interest for the board, which lends its endorsement to textbooks written by its 
examiners. In 2013, the government regulator Ofqual investigated and approved the 
separation by Pearson of the examination business from its publishing operations.
A further UK government reform was the weakening of the local education 
authorities and the transfer of local management to schools. This enabled state 
schools to order books directly from publishers rather than through their local 
education authorities. Many intermediaries in the former supply chain (specialist 
suppliers, local authority purchasing organizations and bookshops), which were 
receiving discounts of 17–20 per cent from the publishers, were cut out. The 
increasing autonomy of UK state funded schools and the further weakening of 
local education authorities continues to this day. By 2013 around half of secondary 
schools had opted for academy status, independent of local authority control 
(education.gov.uk, accessed 18 September 2013).
Trade education
An important subsector of educational publishing is referred to as ‘trade’ or 
‘consumer’ education. This area embraces study and revision guides aimed at 
students for home study and the parental anxiety market, and self-study 
products, some of which are published online. It is referred to as ‘trade’ since 
historically such product lines were purchased by parents through booksellers 
and not by schools for class use, although they may be used in schools. The 
independent Cumbria-based publisher Coordination Group Publications 
challenges the major publishers in this area. In 2009 Richard Parsons, the 
founder of CGP, was highlighted as one of the top selling authors of the 
previous decade alongside J. K. Rowling, Dan Brown and John Grisham.

F  C U S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
65
ELT publishing
The publishing of English Language Teaching (ELT) course materials engages 
very large investments and a worldwide marketing strength for this predominantly 
export-orientated ﬁeld. The publishers enjoyed strong growth from export sales 
through the 1990s but in 1997 it began to falter. Although the quantity of books 
exported rose, prices fell in sterling terms and the real value of turnover decreased. 
The strength of sterling, the Asian economic crisis, and the problems in Brazil 
and Argentina (important ELT markets) took their toll. Then in the years following 
the ﬁ nancial crash of 2008, publishers experienced diﬃ  culties in traditional 
European markets such as Greece and Spain. The adoption of tablets is helping to 
push digital sales in markets in Asia and the Middle East. The main publishers 
include:
 
▪
Oxford University Press,
 
▪
Pearson,
 
▪
Macmillan Education,
 
▪
Cambridge University Press,
 
▪
Richmond Publishing.
Oxford University Press (OUP) is the largest international ELT publisher (by 
volume) and this part of the business accounts for a signiﬁcant part of its sales 
and proﬁt. It maintains a market leadership in British English (especially in 
Europe) while also publishing in American English. Pearson is the biggest player 
in the American English market. It added the important American English lists of 
Addison-Wesley (in 1988) and Prentice Hall (1998) – thereby leading the markets 
in Latin America and Asia – to its original mainly British English Longman 
imprint. Cambridge University Press (CUP) has built its business without 
acquisition, and beneﬁts from its close association with the University of 
Cambridge Local Examination Syndicate (UCLES), which operates the 
internationally recognized examination English for Speakers of Other Languages 
(ESOL). Macmillan Education developed its ELT business through the purchase of 
Heinemann ELT in 1998. Some overseas ELT publishers have taken advantage of 
UK expertise and have established UK operations, for example Richmond 
Publishing owned by the Spanish publisher Santillana. Founded in 1992, it has a 
strong emphasis on materials for Spanish and Portuguese markets including 
Mexico and Brazil. Other major publishers, such as Cengage, have ELT lists, and 
there are smaller, niche publishers in the UK, and also packagers which oﬀ er 
editorial, design and production services to the major players – often their former 
employers.
From the standpoint of the major players, ELT publishing is a distinct ﬁeld of 
publishing needing its own publishing operations, typically based in the UK and 
the US to produce British and American English materials; plus other publishing 
centres, such as those in Spain, the Far East, Latin America and Eastern Europe, 
to commission or adapt the courses to national or regional markets; and 
marketing sales ofﬁces elsewhere. In some countries, ministries of education have 
to approve the courses. Part of the strategic importance of ELT is that as a growing 
market worldwide it provides the publisher with a local or regional foothold in 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
66
non-English areas of the world, through the opening of local companies or 
marketing ofﬁces, or through the acquisition of local publishers. Although the 
major publishers dominate the international provision of course materials – with 
high market shares in some countries – they have faced increasing competition 
from indigenous local publishers (which in many European countries are the 
national market leaders in schools); private language school chains with 
publishing operations; newer entrants and online providers.
The convention that children learn their native language and subsequently 
learn English as a foreign language (EFL) or second language is challenged 
in some countries where children learn their local language and English 
simultaneously. English is being taught from primary school in many countries, 
oﬀ ering signiﬁ cant new opportunities to the international players and local 
companies.
OVERVIEW OF ACADEMIC, STM AND PROFESSIONAL 
PUBLISHING
The internationalization of academic, STM and professional book publishing 
occurred earlier than in consumer book publishing, and is far more extensive. 
High-level books and journals in English, especially in STM, have an international 
currency throughout the world. Such publishers do not have to contend with 
literary agents’ retention of territorial and other rights: they invariably acquire all 
rights in authors’ works, including electronic rights worldwide. The journal and 
reference publishers were the ﬁ rst to embark on the transition from print to 
digital publishing in the last century. As in the area of educational publishing, the 
larger players have looked to move away from the supply of discrete products 
towards the provision of services and solutions.
The fortunes of academic publishers and the kinds of books and other 
products they produce are inextricably linked to institutional spending on research 
worldwide, especially in relation to library budgets in the developed world, to the 
numbers and wealth of full-time and part-time students (an important factor in 
the UK), and to the behaviour of librarians, researchers, teachers and students.
Professional publishing in the areas of law or ﬁnance has traditionally been 
highly proﬁtable. The trend has been towards online content and services and, for 
example, Lexis-Nexis, part of Reed Elsevier, oﬀ ers access ‘across the globe ... to 
billions of searchable documents from more than 45,000 legal, news and 
business sources’ (lexisnexis.com, accessed 15 September 2013).
Major publishers dominate these ﬁelds on a world-wide scale. The market 
sectors are diverse in respect of the character of the publishing operations. Two 
giant publishers occupy either end of the spectrum. Pearson Education (part 
of the UK listed company Pearson) is the world’s leading higher education 
publisher, primarily focused on teaching and learning (textbook publishing with 
technology support). Elsevier (part of the Anglo-Dutch listed company Reed 
Elsevier) is the world’s leading STM publisher, with a focus on scientiﬁc journals 
and the supply of information to health and pharma markets, with associated 
book businesses, including some textbook, academic and professional book 
publishing.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
67
Some leading publishers are quite diverse in their discipline span and the 
character of their operations. The operations of Wiley-Blackwell, another leading 
STM publisher with important journals, include the area of humanities and social 
sciences (HSS) and textbook, academic and professional/trade book publishing. 
Springer, which embraces the former Kluwer academic publishing businesses, 
majors on STM journals and books. Wolters Kluwer oﬀ ers information and 
services to professionals in the areas of law, taxation, ﬁ nance and healthcare.
The global STM market is led by four big players:
 
▪
Elsevier,
 
▪
Wolters Kluwer,
 
▪
John Wiley,
 
▪
Springer.
Other important academic publishers in the UK are Macmillan Science and 
Education (which includes Palgrave and the Nature Publishing Group) and the US 
privately owned SAGE Publications (which began as a social science publisher but 
has since diversiﬁed). Taylor & Francis (part of Informa, and including the 
imprints of Routledge, CRC Press, and Garland) has a broad spread of journal and 
book publishing and a large book title output. Big US players with some UK 
commissioning are represented by McGraw-Hill (which includes the Open 
University Press, previously the subject of a management buy-out from the 
university), and Cengage Learning. Smaller UK companies include Ashgate, 
Bloomsbury Academic (as part of its diversiﬁ cation from trade into academic), 
Edward Elgar, Emerald, Jessica Kingsley, Pluto, I.B. Tauris, Zed Books and other 
specialists, such as the professional publisher Kogan Page, and start-ups such as 
Rowman & Littleﬁ eld International.
The university presses are signiﬁcant book and journal publishers. Oxford 
University Press, which publishes more than 6,000 titles per year, is by far the 
largest university press in the world and competes alongside the leading private-
sector publishers. It supports ﬁ nancially the university whereas most university 
presses, especially in the US, are supported by their universities. OUP spans most 
academic disciplines at the higher level of academic and scholarly publishing, and 
includes textbook, reference and journal publishing. Sometimes described as the 
800-pound gorilla of the world of university presses, it has an annual turnover 
(including trade, reference, educational and ELT publishing) which exceeds the 
combined turnover of the UK and US university presses – and more than three 
times the size of the other leading university press, Cambridge University Press, 
which has a similar spread of activities. The other UK university presses operate 
on a very much smaller scale and are far more specialist, and include the presses 
of Edinburgh, Liverpool, Manchester and Nottingham. The Policy Press is based 
at the University of Bristol. The US university presses are also represented in the 
UK, notably Yale and Princeton, which have local commissioning operations. 
Other US publishers may have UK marketing and sales ofﬁces to import their 
books, usually into Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA or EMA).
All publishers specialize in publishing books or journals in particular academic 
disciplines or groups of allied disciplines. Not even the largest would claim to 
publish in all disciplines. Their output can be divided into three broad categories:
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
68
 
▪
textbooks,
 
▪
HSS, STM and professional publishing,
 
▪
journals.
TEXTBOOKS
UK teaching diﬀ ers from US practices. However, the US core textbook model best 
exempliﬁed by Pearson, McGraw-Hill, Cengage Learning, Wiley (and Elsevier in 
health science) is instructive and oﬀ ers pointers as to the way publishing is 
changing. This model is applied to the arguably more deﬁned and quantiﬁable 
subjects: mainly the hard sciences, mathematics, psychology, business and 
economics. The very high cost of the model limits it to a very small number of 
major existing titles and new titles with high sales forecasts, mainly at the ﬁrst and 
second year levels. Such subjects are international. The publisher’s aim is to create 
scalable learning and teaching solutions worldwide.
In the US, textbook publishers analyse and synthesize curriculum needs 
across the continent, and create printed textbooks of up to 1,000 pages with high 
design values and special learning features. The US professors adopt one book per 
course, from which they, or their instructors, usually teach chapter by chapter. In 
view of the large class sizes and the high value of adoptions generated from sales 
to students, US core textbook publishing became a very large and competitive 
business, a market estimated at more than $7 bn. The publishers invest millions 
of dollars in such texts, priced highly in the US market but cheaper overseas. The 
worldwide annual revenue from some of these bestselling titles may dwarf the 
annual turnover of some medium-sized UK consumer book publishers.
The publishers became engaged in a virtual arms race. In order to secure 
adoptions of their books they competed to oﬀ er the instructors additional and free 
supplementary material to help them teach the course, such as an instructor’s 
guide. This material started out in the late twentieth century as a marketing device 
to persuade the instructor to use the publisher’s book. It grew in scale and 
complexity. As part of these supplements, the publishers built test banks of 
thousands of multiple choice questions to support their big texts. The delivery of 
the supplementary packages has gone through every development of technology: 
print, video tape to disk, overhead projection to PowerPoint. With the advent of 
online delivery and connectivity, the supplements were renamed ‘resources’ or 
‘bonus content’ and from around the turn of the century they came to embrace 
publisher technology support.
Textbook publishers have moved beyond their provision of teaching content 
to the supply of services, especially in assessment and personalized learning. For 
example, by building on their archives of question test banks, they have developed 
assessment software, held on their servers. It enables instructors to set and 
customize assessments for their students. These are marked automatically and 
downloaded into their students’ gradebooks. It saves time for the instructor and 
lowers the university’s cost of delivering teaching. The assessment software has 
become more sophisticated and has developed beyond simplistic multiple choice. 
It is sensitive to the students’ responses and oﬀ ers them help (for example links to 
the pertinent section in the ebook of the textbook, sometimes enhanced with 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
69
animations and video) and at the top end automated tutorial support. McGraw-
Hill led initially in the application of adaptive learning technologies to college 
products. Publishers claim that their online packages aid student performance 
and retention.
Institutions use a virtual learning environment (VLE) or learning 
management system (LMS), such as Blackboard or the open source Moodle. Some 
publishers oﬀ er institutions their own VLEs, providing a distribution channel for 
online content and services. Publishers are taking their services further in the area 
of analytics. For example, in 2013 Pearson acquired Learning Analytics, a platform 
which helps teachers understand better how their students are learning:
by allowing faculty to ask questions and view feedback in realtime in a 
graphical representation of their students’ comprehension of the material, 
Pearson is adding an important new service layer for in-class feedback and 
communication. Pearson’s mission at this point is to become a service 
provider of customized tools and learning packages for teachers and for the 
changing proﬁ le of today’s student in higher education. (techcrunch.com, 
accessed 15 September 2013)
A long-term problem facing the US college textbook publishers, to a far more 
limited extent aﬀ ecting the UK, has been the used book market. A high proportion 
of US students typically invest in the purchase of the textbook and then sell it at 
the end of their course, aﬀ ecting the income of publishers and their authors. For 
instance, the adoption sales of a book on campus may fall 10 per cent after one 
year, 50 per cent in year 2 and 75 per cent in year 3. To counter this trend, 
publishers have issued new editions at more frequent intervals, say after 3 years, 
sometimes irritating the instructors, who are forced to check the extent of the 
changes, and the students who complain about high new book prices. In eﬀ ect the 
US used book market, which may account for nearly a third of sales, increases the 
price of new books as the high cost of developing such texts is spread over shorter 
sales lives and lower quantities. Furthermore from around 2006/07, textbook 
rental through third-party companies such as Chegg and BookRenter, and 
through campus bookstores, grew quickly, placing more pressure on the 
publishers’ margins. In the USA, rental companies buy a printed book, rent it at a 
lower cost repeatedly, and do not recompense the publisher and author. Such 
unlicensed renting is prohibited in the UK where copyright legislation diﬀ ers. In 
2012 Amazon – which may have around 30 per cent of US textbook sales, 
overtaking sales through campus bookstores – launched its own printed textbook 
rental oﬀ er. Previously in 2011, it had opened a Kindle store for renting textbooks 
licensed from publishers. Whilst the revenue from printed textbook sales 
remained ﬂ at, the publishers looked to increase their revenue from the licensing 
of associated digital resources and services.
Another big issue for the US college textbook publishers is the re-importation 
of the foreign editions of their printed texts by third party arbitrage traders who 
take advantage of the price diﬀ erential between high US prices and the lower 
prices set by the publishers in Europe, Asia and Australia. In 2013, the US 
Supreme Court ruled in favour of the trader in the Kirtsaeng vs. John Wiley case. 
Such parallel importation aﬀ ects all kinds of publishing and has occurred for 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
70
decades in the print world wherever signiﬁ cant price diﬀ erentials exist between 
nation states. By contrast publishers are more able to control digital content 
through the use of site licences with institutions, and can rely on contract law for 
protection rather than trying to detect abuses of copyright.
Although some of the online resources from publishers are freely available 
on companion websites for marketing purposes, the rich material is restricted to 
password or unique pin code access. The instructor is initially given time limited 
access to review the book’s adoption potential. Once adopted, the instructor is 
given access to their area, and each student is supplied with a pin code on 
purchase of the book, giving them access to their area on the publisher’s server, 
plus the ebook (sometimes enhanced). The business model of bundling print and 
ebook editions of the same book is slow to be applied outside this speciﬁ c context. 
Alternatively etextbooks, without print, may be sold to keep, or at a lower price for 
the duration of the semester. The publishers, for so long separated from students 
by intermediaries (for example campus bookstores), can now make the direct link 
with them and derive rich data from how the students use the content. Students 
may be oﬀ ered access to additional content and services beyond the textbook itself. 
Publishers are trying to make the transition from the free supply of online content 
and services (on condition of textbook adoption) to licensing premium content 
and services.
An example of a 
higher education 
textbook from 
Palgrave Macmillan pSYCHOLOGY
condition of textbook adoption) to 
licensin premium 
adoption) 
adoption) 
adoption) 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
71
In the UK the teaching tradition diﬀ ers, and lecturers are far less likely to adopt 
only one book for a course, or even if they do, to teach from it chapter by chapter. 
The blockbuster textbooks may be criticized as being too long, exhaustive and 
expensive, and UK-originated books are cheaper. However, the US-originated 
core texts are still used extensively. Texts in management studies and the social 
sciences are usually versioned or localized in the UK for the European or EMEA 
market, and by other publishing centres elsewhere, not least to deter importation 
into the USA.
UK-originated publishing largely avoids competing directly against the US 
core textbooks, but none the less is extensive in title output. The major texts 
developed in the UK also deploy online resources and assessment. Covering a 
variety of subjects, they take account of the diﬀ erent approaches of UK academia, 
and extend up through the undergraduate levels to the very specialist graduate 
courses. Although rarely ﬁnding a signiﬁcant US market, some UK-originated 
textbooks are highly exportable elsewhere. There is innovation and enormous 
diversity in UK teaching that ﬁnds expression through publishers.
The uptake of custom publishing and of associated technology, which was 
pioneered in the USA, enables instructors to tailor a publisher’s textbooks for 
their speciﬁc teaching. It is growing in the UK and mainland Europe. Academics 
can view the database of the publisher’s content and pick and mix the content for 
their course, include their own material and have their name on the cover or 
digital edition. The physical book is digitally printed and sold to students via 
bookstores, or directly to the university and supplied to students as part of their 
course tuition fee. Website material may also be customized.
While students may complain about the high cost of textbooks, their 
purchase cost is a fraction of the cost of the tuition fees, which have been 
increasing at a rapid rate. There is a small but growing trend for universities to 
purchase texts (print and ebook) at bulk discounts directly from publishers, the 
cost of which is embedded in the fee. Student purchases of etextbooks have not 
grown fast, despite the publication of interactive texts for Apple and Android 
devices. However, CourseSmart, founded in the USA in 2007 by the main college 
textbooks publishers (Cengage Learning, Macmillan, McGraw-Hill, Pearson and 
Wiley) initially oﬀ ered an etext inspection service to academics for choosing texts. 
It has since developed into the world’s largest library of etextbooks and digital 
resources from many publishers which are available to students to rent, to use 
online and oﬄ  ine, under licence rather than through ownership. Its international 
operation was opened in the UK in 2012 (where a partnership with Blackwell’s 
was established) and extended to Europe, and then to the Middle East and Africa. 
Data analytics generated from student online use of textbooks can help teachers 
monitor their work and publishers the eﬀ ectiveness of their products. Ingram’s 
VitalSource – with its own ebook software and platform – purchased CourseSmart 
in 2014. Other companies producing complex etextbooks or platforms for 
publishers include Aptara and Inkling.
Supply funded Open Educational Resources (OER), available for free on the 
internet under Creative Commons licences (see Chapter 5), were pioneered by 
MIT in 2002. Subsequently many universities (including The Open University in 
the UK) and other agencies invested millions in producing OER, either funded by 
philanthropy or endowments, or indirectly by tuition fees or taxpayers. OER are 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
72
seen as disruptive to the business model of universities generally but not 
necessarily to individual courses or institutions. MIT content was available for 
free, but MIT certiﬁ cation and participation inside its premium branded 
ecosystem remained paramount. Publishers, too, initially feared that OER would 
disrupt their textbook business. However, OER while beneﬁ ting many informal 
learners worldwide have had little impact on campus teaching thus far. OER 
producers lack the publishers’ market and sales knowledge of formal education, 
and the marketing and sales systems of the publishers and distributors driven by 
sales and proﬁ t targets. The diﬃ  culty of discovering suitable quality assured OER 
content (partly caused by the lack of standardized metadata) prompted Pearson in 
2013 to oﬀ er a service blending both OER and paid for content and services.
More recently, massive open online courses (MOOCs), pioneered by premier 
US universities and backed by venture capitalists, have captured the disruptive 
imagination of competitive university administrations. Universities may use the 
freemium business model on both MOOCs and OER. MOOCs provide another 
channel through which publishers may market and sell their content. A 
prominent example of a MOOC start-up is the San Francisco company Coursera, 
‘an education company that partners with the top universities and organizations 
in the world to oﬀ er courses online for anyone to take, for free’ (coursera.org, 
accessed 15 September 2013).
At a more fundamental level, coursepacks developed by teachers themselves 
have and continue to pose a challenge to textbook publishing. Photocopied packs (or 
equivalent electronic copies) contain chapters from books, journal articles, and other 
content. Some publishers partner with AcademicPub which provides digital and 
print custom books of such material for students. Via Google students have access 
to a range of free information, and via their university online library an increasing 
range of HSS and STM books (not designated by publishers as ‘textbooks’), journal 
articles, and reference material licensed by publishers. The former barriers 
presented to students wanting to access diﬀ erent kinds of printed products are 
breaking down in the digital era. The continuing challenge for publishers is to 
aggregate an ever greater range of content into a must-have service.
ACADEMIC AND PROFESSIONAL BOOKS
This title embraces all kinds of books used in academic institutions for teaching 
and research, and by practitioners in the workplace. These include edited volumes, 
reference works, handbooks, conference proceedings, and academic monographs 
(original research) published in hardback and as ebooks at high prices and 
destined for the libraries mainly in the UK and US, and in other research centres.
Books with some trade sale may be categorized as academic/trade. Some 
titles are adopted for teaching – from a publisher’s standpoint becoming 
‘accidental textbooks’ and bought by students. For many of the smaller academic 
publishers, including most university presses, printed book sales to libraries and 
individuals are still likely to account for the great majority of sales revenue. 
However, ebook sales have increased through etailers (mainly Amazon), and 
through licences to libraries (via specialist intermediaries, or sold directly). Some 
publishers are experimenting with the quick publication of short ebooks.
The term 
MOOC 
(Massive Open 
Online Course) 
was coined in 
2008 by Dave 
Cormier and 
Bryan 
Alexander
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
73
Monographs – peer-reviewed original research in book form – have for a long 
time been the corner-stone of commercial academic publishing and of the 
university presses briefed to disseminate works of scholarship. Since the 1980s, 
their economic viability has been questioned and their demise often predicted. 
Monograph publication remains especially important to HSS academics for 
tenure and career progression in the same way that article publication in a 
prestigious journal is to scientists. Although the supply-side research output has 
increased worldwide, paid-for institutional demand in the West has declined. 
Library cutbacks and changing purchasing behaviour, such as the switching of 
printed book budgets to the subscription of journals and other electronic 
resources, the greater use of inter-library lending and the growth of library 
consortia, have progressively reduced print sales quantities. For example, sales of 
monographs have fallen to very low numbers, from say 1,200 copies in the 1980s 
down to 200–300 copies by 2012. Some of the commercial academic publishers 
have now abandoned monograph publishing. However, the remaining publishers 
(for example OUP, CUP and other university presses, Palgrave and Taylor & 
Francis, and some of the STM publishers) have maintained their publication by 
reducing the costs of production (including author royalties, sometimes to zero) 
and increasing title output. The advent of digital printing and the advent of ebook 
collections for libraries (such as the pioneering initiatives of OUP, Springer, 
Taylor & Francis) have aided the continuance of the publication of highly 
specialist titles. While scholars mostly access journal articles from libraries, they 
make signiﬁ cant purchases of books for personal use, and this is facilitated 
further with the availability of ebooks.
Supply-side funded open access (OA) business models, which developed in 
STM journal publishing, are starting to spread to HSS publishing. Under an OA 
licence the digital text may be available for free whilst the print or ebook still has 
to be bought (an example of freemium marketing). Bloomsbury Academic makes 
some titles available through this route: ‘Selected research publications are 
published on open content licences, meaning that the full text is available online 
for free in html format. These titles are also available to buy as pbooks and ebooks’ 
(bloomsbury.com, accessed 18 September 2013). One aspect of the push to OA in 
the UK is that researchers are mandated by their university or funders to deposit 
their doctoral theses in digital repositories from which they are freely available 
under a Creative Commons licence, called green OA. Such mandates, apart from 
impinging on the rights of authors in respect of their control over copyright, also 
mean that they have to signiﬁ cantly develop and change their work to attract a 
publisher to invest in and publish a monograph based on their research. The OA 
publication of professionally produced monographs is sometimes funded by 
universities and other agencies as part of their primary objective to maximize the 
dissemination of research. In response commercial publishers came out with an 
oﬀ er to produce OA monographs, and for example in 2013 the charge for 
publication of a monograph with Palgrave was £11,000 (palgrave.com, accessed 15 
September 2013).
In comparison to the consumer book publishers, the HSS and STM 
publishers have developed a far greater range of demand-side business models for 
their digital products. In addition to print sales made via booksellers and other 
intermediaries, and to an increasing extent direct from publishers’ websites, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
74
ebook sales to libraries are of growing importance. The greater the amount of 
content oﬀ ered in terms of aggregation (through titles) and of linked data, the 
greater the digital opportunity and business value.
The site licence business model, applied to licensing online content to 
universities and other organizations, is fundamental and many other business 
models stem from it. Site licences were originally applied, for example, to digital 
reference works and electronic journals used in libraries’ local area networks 
(prior to the widespread use of the internet) – and more recently to ebooks. The 
licences were ﬁ rst conﬁ ned to geographical locations, such as a university campus, 
then to multiple sites and extended to an organization’s entire online community, 
such as the staﬀ  and students of a university even when oﬀ  campus. The 
university is responsible for the authentication of its members and the security of 
its network, and thus provides controlled access to the publisher’s licensed 
content. It is a form of digital rights management (DRM). Another important and 
related feature of a site licence is the way in which tiered pricing may be applied to 
the licensing of content. For example, a US publisher may categorize institutions, 
such as between (rich) premier research universities and (poor) teaching 
community colleges. In the UK, universities are graded into community size 
bands – the larger the community, the more they pay and vice versa. The terms 
applying to such site licences are among many negotiated between publishers and 
library consortia. In the UK, Jisc provides a central role in negotiations with 
publishers, and facilitates the use of digital resources and services. Throughout 
the world, libraries join consortia in order to negotiate savings and other beneﬁ ts 
from suppliers, but they also buy books independently.
Publishers supply ebooks (in PDF or reﬂ owable ePub formats) to academic 
aggregators, which in turn oﬀ er platform-based services to academic libraries. 
Such companies include EBSCO/NetLibrary; ebrary/EBL (part of the archive 
publisher ProQuest); MyiLibrary (Ingram); Dawsonera (Bertrams) and Gardners. 
The wholesale and library supply market (print and ebook) has consolidated 
nationally and worldwide in order to derive beneﬁ ts of scale. Wholesale operations 
that once specialized in diﬀ erent print market sectors are merging. The one time 
wholesalers, facing a declining market of physical retailers, are transforming 
themselves into digital servicing and distribution companies supplying other 
intermediaries and products directly to end-users.
The content aggregators oﬀ er libraries numerous business models that 
include ‘perpetual access’ to an ebook (like a printed book purchase); subscription 
(an ongoing sale); multiple view access; rental; pay per view; and collections of 
ebooks from multiple publishers. Collections are typically deﬁ ned by subject and 
time of publication, and contain monographs, conference proceedings, and edited 
volumes, but usually exclude textbooks. Collections oﬀ er libraries the ability to 
access large numbers of titles at a discounted price and generate usage even of 
older titles. Such bundles of content are like the big deals oﬀ ered much earlier by 
the journal publishers. Although these once proved popular with librarians and 
their users, their high cost and lack of ﬂ exibility made institutions more cautious 
when oﬀ ered ebook bundles (which may contain a range of little-used titles). More 
recently patron-driven acquisition (PDA), or in the US, user-driven acquisition, is 
growing. Under this model, the library selects the range of books to be viewed, 
and usage parameters trigger purchase, thus the library purchases only the books 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
75
used. It is an example of freemium marketing, the upselling from the consumer 
to the institution: the consumer samples the product and uses the book for free, 
but the library pays. The aggregators, dependent on securing titles from 
publishers, use additional DRM constraints to allay their fears of misuse or loss of 
sales, such as limiting the number of concurrent users viewing a book, or 
restricting copy and pasting. Such restrictions irritate users and librarians, and the 
high prices of some ebooks have reawakened interest at some libraries in holding 
print copies.
There are also specialist aggregators that operate subscription models, either 
through site licences to universities and corporates, or directly to individuals. They 
include Safari Books (operated by O’Reilly Media) for technical and computing 
books; and Books24/7 (operated by Skillsoft, a cloud based training company) for 
business, technical and engineering content. The major publishers owning 
extensive book aggregations have their own platforms and use similar models to 
the aggregators. Their platforms were originally developed for journals and 
databases but subsequently they added ebooks during and after the ﬁ rst decade of 
the century. The larger publishers may oﬀ er their platforms and services to 
smaller publishers. A publisher’s platform oﬀ ers it far more customer data than 
that supplied by aggregators, and the freedom to control its own business models. 
For instance, the major publisher Springer abandoned the use of restrictive DRM 
measures on the use of its ebooks before other majors. The cost of developing 
platforms used to be prohibitive for smaller publishers: now platform vendors 
enable them to operate aﬀ ordably their own customized platforms to sell content 
directly.
JOURNALS
The publishing of refereed or peer-reviewed learned journals (or serials), sold 
mainly on the subscription/site licence business models, to libraries and 
corporates, is a major adjunct to book publishing. In 2012 there were around 
28,000 active peer-reviewed journals, publishing upwards of 1.8 m articles (Ware 
and Mabe, page 5). In STM publishing, the revenues will far outweigh the 
publishers’ subject-related book operations. Historically, the higher net proﬁt of 
journal publishing (up to 30 per cent) has in eﬀ ect cross-subsidized book 
publishing operations, which earned lower proﬁts (say 10–15 per cent). The major 
international journal publishers are Elsevier, Springer, Wiley-Blackwell, and 
Taylor & Francis. These publishers combined account for 6,000 to 7,000 journals 
(Campbell et al., page 149). Other signiﬁ cant publishers include Wolters Kluwer, 
SAGE, Macmillan, and the university presses of Oxford and Cambridge. Half of 
all journals are owned or controlled by learned societies. They may have their 
journals produced and marketed for them under contract by the publishers, or 
they may publish the titles themselves. Prominent amongst those pursuing the 
latter approach are, in the USA, the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the 
American Institute of Physics (AIP), and in the UK, the Institute of Physics (IOP) 
and the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC). For many societies, journal publishing 
has traditionally kept them aﬂoat ﬁ nancially.
STM journal publishing is big business around the world.
Robert Maxwell 
(1923–91) 
made a fortune 
in publishing 
from learned 
journals 
through his 
Pergamon 
Press, which he 
later sold to 
Elsevier. After 
his death, 
having fallen 
overboard from 
his yacht, his 
company 
Maxwell 
Communi- 
cations was 
found to have 
substantial 
debts
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
76
The annual revenues generated from English-language STM journal 
publishing are estimated at about $9.4 billion in 2011 ... within a broader 
STM information publishing market worth some $23.5 billion. About 52% of 
global STM revenues (including non-journal STM products) come from the 
USA, 32% from Europe/Middle East, 12% from Asia/Paciﬁ c and 4% from the 
rest of the world. (Ware and Mabe, page 5)
Science journal publishing reaches back to the publication in 1665 of both Le 
Journal des sçavans in France and the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London. For the past two centuries, the number of articles published each year 
and the number of journals have grown by about 3 and 3.5 per cent respectively, 
along with a similar annual rise in the number of researchers. The USA accounts 
for 21 per cent of the global output of research papers, followed by China (10 per 
cent), the UK (7 per cent), Japan (6 per cent), Germany (6 per cent), and France (4 
per cent). The reading patterns of researchers are changing: they are reading more 
(on average 270 articles per year), and that is increasingly driven by search rather 
than through browsing a publisher’s website (Ware and Mabe, pages 5–6). While 
the journal is the container, the article is the primary object transmitted, via the 
institution, to the users. The PDF remains an important format for articles but 
there is experimentation around the form of display of HTML versions with value 
added. For example, articles are enriched with supplementary datasets and extra 
functionality to produce graphs or tables.
Broadly speaking a journal’s academic editor, or editor-in-chief, backed up by 
an academic editorial board, with input from the publisher, steers the policy, 
direction and focus of the journal, which is usually aimed at a well-deﬁ ned 
community of researchers. Peer review prior to publication is central to quality 
control and the selection of articles, readership impact and the branding status of 
journals across all subjects. The brand value of journals is reﬂected by their 
perceived or measured rank in a hierarchy. There are many ways journals are 
measured to indicate their impact and quality. In science especially, the journal 
impact factor (IF) – a measure of the average citations to a particular journal over 
the previous 2–3 years – is of great signiﬁ cance (published annually by Thomson 
Reuters). The impact factor of a journal is calculated using this formula:
2013 Impact factor = Citations in 2013 to articles in the journal from 2011 and 2012
Number of ‘citable items’ in the journal in 2011 and 2012
It should be appreciated that diﬀ erent disciplines use citations in diﬀ erent ways. 
Some of the highest-rated journals are published by societies and not-for-proﬁ t 
publishers, not by commercial publishers. Nevertheless, the strength and value of 
a commercial publisher’s business are expressed by the number of leading 
journals it has created over long periods. Since researchers’ career prospects and 
funding opportunities are often evaluated on the basis of their publication record, 
they try to be published in the highest-ranked journals in their subject they can 
attain. Moreover, researchers make a qualitative evaluation of the journals to 
which they submit their work.
There are many forms of peer review (see chapter 2 of Campbell et al.). To 
summarize the traditional method: the journal editor determines which of the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
77
papers received will be checked for plagiarism (for example through CrossCheck), 
will be editorially rejected or selected for peer review, and selects the reviewers 
who assess it. The editor, who also takes into account research novelty and likely 
impact, assesses the reviews and sends them with recommendations to the author 
for revision. The revised paper is either rejected or accepted. The article is 
contracted with the author, produced, published (called the version of record that 
is citable) and archived. This peer review process is complex and expensive to 
manage, even though reviewers work for free. The highest ranked journals have 
the highest rejection rates (up to and sometimes above 90 per cent) and incur the 
highest peer review management costs for the publisher, which usually pays for 
the costs of the editorial oﬃ  ce. Peer review is pressured by the increasing receipt 
of articles, worldwide, and faster publication times demanded by authors: 
timeliness of publication diﬀ ers across disciplines.
Journals beneﬁ t from network eﬀ ects or positive externalities, a business 
model on which social media companies are founded. The value of the product or 
service increases the more it is used, creating a positive feedback loop, a virtuous 
cycle. For example, the greater the visibility and usage of a journal within its 
research community, the higher are its citations and IF, and the greater the receipt 
of better and available papers, which in turn further increases the IF, visibility and 
readership.
The market imbalance between the ever-increasing supply of articles versus 
declining library budgets in proportion to total university expenditure, culminated 
in the serials crisis from the late 1980s to the early 1990s (though some would 
argue that it is perpetual). The prices for journals were increasing as print 
circulations fell due to subscription cancellations – in turn caused by the 
universities coming under increasing ﬁ nancial pressure to reduce costs. It created 
a negative feedback loop that pushed up publishing costs, increasing prices 
further. Moreover, the leading journals containing the best research are not 
substitutable, and are in eﬀ ect mini monopolies that command high prices – their 
demand is price inelastic (see Chapter 10). The crisis overlapped with the initial 
development of electronic journals and led to the development of the big deal 
business model, whereby publishers oﬀ ered bundles of journal titles in electronic 
format to library consortia and other major customers at discounts oﬀ  the 
catalogue prices. The model gathered momentum from the mid to late 1990s 
onwards and although initially welcomed by academia – researchers gained access 
to far more content – it later came under ﬁ erce criticism from libraries locked into 
ﬁ xed-term agreements and facing fast-rising prices. In response they formed 
consortia to negotiate the terms of the deals, giving them greater bargaining 
power, and began to resist some of the harsher clauses of contracts (such as 
non-disclosure to third parties of the ﬁ nancial terms).
As the big deals absorbed a higher proportion of their budgets, the libraries 
had to reduce purchases of HSS book titles. The major publishers, wielding their 
must-have premier journals bundled up with aggregations of lesser journals, and 
with their international marketing strength, captured greater visibility for their 
product, furthering network eﬀ ects. These companies accrued a range of beneﬁ ts 
from purchasing the operations of smaller journal publishers. They could strip 
out costs, add more value into their journal packages and databases, and increase 
their revenues and market share (and shareholder value).
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
78
Learned societies do collaborate to aggregate their content and create their own 
big deals – for example, the ALPSP Learned Journals Collection made available 
through the subscription agent SWETS. Some self-publishing societies outsource 
their publishing by entering into contracts with publishers which undertake the 
production, marketing, sales and distribution on their behalf while they retain their 
editorial independence. There is a migration of society publishing under such 
contracts to the large university presses and to the commercial publishers that oﬀ er 
them lower in-house costs, more visibility and often higher income.
Journal publishers, especially in STM, have been at the forefront in applying 
new technologies to digital publishing and the provision of services, either free or 
sold on subscription. Innovations and investments are made largely by the major 
commercial publishers, and the larger not-for-proﬁ t publishers, for example, the 
main learned societies, and OUP and CUP. They have not waited for the large 
technology players to impose their solutions on them. From the mid- to late-
1990s, the publishers also developed web-based manuscript submission and 
peer-review management systems.
Of wider signiﬁ cance to the publishing industry as a whole, the journal 
publishers pioneered in the 1990s digital ﬁ rst production systems: a central 
concept of which is structured content. It involves tagging the textual elements 
(such as the article title, author, aﬃ  liation, abstract, keywords, headings) enabling 
the ﬁ le to be output to multiple ﬁ le formats. Digital workﬂ ows reduce costs and 
speed publication. Articles can be released when ready rather than waiting for a 
complete issue to be paginated and published. Journals contain increasing 
amounts of rich metadata. The addition of the semantic metadata to articles to 
reveal meaning that computers can understand aids search within databases or 
through web browsers. The inclusion of data sets alongside journal articles 
facilitates data mining – the investigation of patterns across large volumes of data. 
Virtually all journals are published in electronic formats (mainly PDF, HTML and 
increasingly other screen reﬂ owable formats). Nevertheless, print distribution is 
still signiﬁ cant, more so in in HSS than in STM, although a large amount of 
printing has been shifted from the producer to the user.
The major publishers developed their own content delivery platforms. For 
instance, in 1997 Elsevier launched the ﬁrst large-scale platform, or full-text 
scientiﬁ c database, ScienceDirect, which by 2013 included 2,500 peer-reviewed 
journals and nearly 20,000 books (sciencedirect.com, accessed 18 September 
2013), making available the works of its authors to more than 16 million 
researchers. Publishers compete on the usability of their platforms, such as 
reliability, speed, and ease of use, search and linkage to other data. However, the 
strength – and overall brand – of the platform is based on the brand value of the 
individual journals and books, and the size of aggregation. The major publishers 
are large enough to deal directly with the institutional librarians or purchasing 
consortia (some at state or nation state level), through which the institution’s 
subscriptions to journals and ebook collections are negotiated. Publishers without 
their own platforms use third-parties for distribution such as HighWire (Stanford 
University), Metapress and Ingenta (Publishing Technology). The US aggregators 
of journals and content databases, such as EBSCO and ProQuest, provide library 
access to the output of publishers. The subscription agents are developing their 
businesses in many directions.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
79
In the print-only era, the publishing of journals and books were distinct 
operations, with diﬀ erent systems, channels to market and business models. This 
was reﬂ ected in a publisher’s internal organization into book and journal silos for 
its staﬀ  and systems. In the transition to the digital era, the readers (researchers, 
practitioners, teachers and students) increasingly want to access and use content 
across former boundaries, and across a range of devices including smartphones 
and tablets. The channels to market are converging as are the business models. 
The publishers are reorganizing their systems and staﬀ  to reﬂ ect the convergence. 
Researchers also need to demonstrate that their ﬁ ndings are reaching a wider 
audience, so for example journal articles may be connected up to their presence 
on social media. Publishers are aiming to occupy more of the value chain within 
the ﬁ eld of scholarly communication, and this lay behind Elsevier’s acquisition 
in 2013 of the start-up Mendeley: ‘founded in 2007 by three PhD students [it] 
provides academics with a desktop and web program that lets them manage and 
share research papers via the cloud. It works by extracting the metadata from 
journal article PDFs and connects users to those with similar interests ... It also 
provides tools to annotate documents, create citations and bibliographies’ (wired.
com, 9 April 2013).
Journal publishing beneﬁ ts from many standards developed through 
collaboration among the publishers and with the research community. For example, 
CrossRef (launched 2000) enables readers to link from article references or 
citations to the cited article. COUNTER (launched 2002) facilitates the recording 
and reporting on the usage of online content (journals, books, databases) which 
helps librarians, publishers and intermediaries to operate more eﬃ  ciently.
The journal publishers use a variety of business models: mainly institutional 
subscription and site licence; personal subscription (declining); pay per view 
(article downloads to readers whose institution does not subscribe to the journal); 
and engage with and sell through online aggregators and subscription agents. 
Some printed journals attract advertising revenue (for example in health sciences). 
What publishers cannot ignore are business models based around open access.
Open access
The advent of the internet gave rise to electronic journals and to the concept of 
open access (OA): the free and unrestricted online access to peer-reviewed 
research articles in journals, made available under Creative Commons licences. 
OA was in contrast to the paid for and restricted content, or toll access (TA), 
provided by the publishers of the time. The OA movement reﬂ ects an overall 
societal trend towards free access, such as open content and data, and OERs and 
MOOCs. OA and TA publishing is often presented in the media as a conﬂ icting 
dichotomy which is too simplistic. They are both forms of publishing that overlap 
and coexist. There are many forms of OA publishing and many forms of TA 
publishing. Governments are wishing to extend and speed up OA publishing: 
most recently as proposed in the UK by the Finch Report (2012).
From a business standpoint, however, there is fundamental diﬀ erence. OA 
publishing is predominately supply-side funded (for example, currently by a small 
number of very large governmental research funding agencies, major foundations 
and universities) whereas TA publishing is predominately demand-side funded by 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
80
a larger number of market purchasers worldwide (for example, by university 
libraries, corporates and individuals).
OA publishing has grown considerably over the last decade from a low base, 
and in 2013 the Directory of Open Access Journals listed approaching 10,000 titles 
(doaj.org, accessed 18 September 2013). Some former subscription journals have 
switched to OA entirely, while others incorporate a mix of OA and TA models 
(hybrid). After initial opposition, the publishers quickly adapted to the new 
business model, and for instance Springer purchased the pioneering OA 
publisher BioMed Central in 2008. There is a shift from closed to open content. 
Furthermore there are degrees of openness in respect of user and author rights. 
There is also a growth in mandates made by institutions, funding agencies and 
governments on researchers to make their work available in OA in diﬀ erent ways. 
OA publishing has become increasingly complex.
Open access publishers adopt many business models to ﬁ nance their 
operations. For example, universities may totally subsidize their own publishing 
through research groups or libraries (usually small scale and especially prevalent 
in HSS); research funders may ﬁ nance publishing operations; or universities and 
OA publishers may form membership organizations to lower and share the cost of 
publication. However, most OA journals published by commercial and not-for-
proﬁ t publishers and societies charge a fee to authors (an article processing, or 
publishing, charge, APC) after peer review and acceptance. It is called gold OA or 
the ‘author pays’ model. The author’s university or the research funder normally 
pays the charge, say £1,000 to £2,000, and this is the model recommended by the 
Finch Report. Through the payment of APCs, the entire journal can be fully OA. 
In 2012–13 the UK health and biosciences research funder the Wellcome Trust 
paid publishers $6.5 m in APCs. Elsevier netted 25 per cent and the top ﬁ ve 
publishers 63 per cent (scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org, accessed 21 March 2014).
Hybrid OA is used on many subscription journals: some articles are made OA 
immediately on publication provided the APC is paid, whilst other articles 
remain behind a paywall. The green OA route is when an article is deposited on 
publication to a disciplinary or institutional repository. The publisher’s concern 
here is that if the article is made freely available too soon, libraries would cancel 
their subscription to the relevant journal. Alternatively, authors may choose to 
publish in a delayed access OA journal, without charge, and deposit their accepted 
manuscript of the article in a disciplinary or institutional repository, after an 
embargo period set by the publisher or mandated by the research f under. The 
embargo periods vary by subject and journal – say 12–24 months – and STM 
journals usually have shorter embargos than HSS titles. Overall OA publishing 
has been driven by the interests of the health and biosciences. In STM areas 
author teams publish numerous articles and have access to large-scale research 
funding, whereas lone HSS researchers have far less direct access to publication 
funding. Since the main research universities have the highest output of articles, 
they are exposed to the greatest costs under the gold OA model while continuing 
to subscribe to substantial journal collections.
Gold OA publishing favours the large publishers over smaller publishers, 
such as the societies, and may aid further industry concentration. Supply-side 
funded publishing businesses are focused primarily on servicing authors (and in 
this context their funders) rather than the market; and the creation of abundance 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
81
over content selectivity. There are two main trends in the development of journal 
publishing, both encouraged by OA: the arrival of mega journals, and the concept 
of cascade publishing.
In 2006, the not-for-proﬁ t US Public Library of Science (PLoS) launched 
the ﬁ rst gold OA mega journal PLOS ONE. In contrast to the highly selective 
subscription journals designed to serve small vertical communities, PLOS ONE 
publishes very large numbers of articles of scientiﬁ c and medical research 
submitted from that broad horizontal community. The traditional role of the 
editor-in-chief to steer and curate for a vertical community is redundant in this 
context. To speed publication and reduce iterations, it adopts a light peer-review 
process prior to publication by concentrating on scientiﬁ c rigour, rather than on 
novelty and impact that is left to be assessed post-publication. The mega journal 
concept was emulated subsequently by other publishers, which have also 
developed the cascade concept. If rejected by a premier journal (with a high 
rejection rate), an article may be automatically submitted for publication to a 
lower-ranked journal (with a lower rejection rate) within the same stable of titles, 
and the peer review process is not repeated leading to cost savings and faster 
publication for the author.
Such models ensure eﬃ  ciencies within the ecosystem of journal publishing 
and enable lower APCs to be charged. Some start-up journals will waive charges 
altogether. The danger of the supply-side business models is that they diminish 
quality and allow predatory publishers to take advantage of academics seeking a 
home for their article, with echoes of the vanity press in consumer publishing. 
The trend towards gold OA has disappointed those advocates of green open 
access who view their ideal of content freely available to all as now tainted by 
compromise. The debates over OA range across business models, the costs and 
who pays, and sustainability issues; author and user rights, and the licences under 
which content is made available (for example the Creative Commons Attribution 
License, CC-BY); increased state control on research (via funding agencies) and 
the eﬀ ect on academic freedoms to research and publish; and emerging 
inequalities between disciplines and individuals. The debates have overshadowed 
other ways to make research hidden behind paywalls available more widely, for 
instance through extending licences to public libraries.
Overarching the OA debates are the impact of ever-changing technologies 
on research, the increased focus on user experience, and the ways in which 
research and data can be linked and communicated, all of which provide many 
opportunities for publishers.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Publishing for educational, academic and professional markets
82
Sources
Eric de Bellaigue, ‘British Publishing 1970–2000: How deregulation and 
access to capital changed the rules’, Logos, 17:3, 2006.
BESA, ICT in Schools, 2009.
BESA, Tablets and Apps in Schools, May 2013.
Robert Campbell, Ed Pentz and Ian Borthwick (eds), Academic and Professional 
Publishing, Chandos, 2012.
Bill Cope and Angus Phillips, The Future of the Academic Journal, 2nd edition, 
Chandos, 2014.
Finch Report: Working Group on Expanding Access to Published Research 
Findings, Accessibility, Sustainability, Excellence: how to expand access to 
research publications, 2012.
Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs, Little, Brown, 2011.
Michael A. Mabe, ‘Scholarly Publishing’, European Review, 17, 2009.
Sally Morris, Ed Barnas, Douglas LaFrenier and Margaret Reich, The 
Handbook of Journal Publishing, CUP, 2013.
Ian Rowlands, David Nicholas, Peter Williams, Paul Huntington, Maggie 
Fieldhouse, Barrie Gunter, Richard Withey, Hamid R. Jamali, Tom 
Dobrowolski, Carol Tenopir, ‘The Google Generation: The information 
behaviour of the researcher of the future’, Aslib Proceedings, 60: 4, 2008.
John B. Thompson, Books in the Digital Age, Polity Press, 2005.
Mark Ware and Michael Mabe, The STM Report, 3rd edition, International 
Association of Scientiﬁ c, Technical and Medical Publishers, 2012.
Web resources
http://blog.alpsp.org Blog of Association of Learned & Professional Society 
Publishers.
www.creativecommons.org Details the licences under which OA content can 
be published.
www.doaj.org Directory of Open Access Journals.
www.scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org Blog established in 2008 by the Society for 
Scholarly Publishing.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 4
The characteristics of the main 
publishing sectors
The previous two chapters have traced the development of the book publishing 
industry across its various sectors. Themes shared across publishing sectors 
include the growth of digital publishing, experimentation around business 
models, changes in publishing processes, and the search for new talent, 
sometimes from outside the industry.
All kinds of publishers can be described as serving niche markets. Attaining a 
critical mass in a particular ﬁeld, right down to a list of books on the narrowest 
subject area, is vital to publishers of every size. It allows the employment of 
editors who understand and have contact with authors and associates in a 
particular ﬁeld, and who can shape projects for their intended markets. A 
respected list attracts authors. Furthermore, a list of books needs to generate 
sufﬁcient turnover to allow eﬀ ective marketing and selling, which in turn feeds 
new publishing.
Although common themes can be identiﬁed, there remain diﬀ erences in the 
ways books are published for diﬀ erent markets. Publishers specialize in reaching 
particular markets, and each market has a separate dynamic and key drivers. The 
skills of their staﬀ , the activities they perform and the structure of the business are 
aligned accordingly.
UK PUBLISHING
Table 4.1, using ﬁgures from the Publishers Association, gives the scale of the UK 
publishing industry in 2012 based on companies’ sales. In addition to the sales of 
£2.9 bn of physical books, there were invoiced sales of over £400 m of digital 
products (up from £163 m in 2010), giving a combined total of £3.3 bn. Digital 
sales were 12 per cent of total revenues. The size of the domestic physical market 
was estimated at £3.1 bn in terms of end-purchaser prices, showing a modest 
increase of 0.2 per cent on the previous year. There were around 2,115 book 
publishers registered for VAT (compared to 2,300 in 2006), plus thousands 
more individuals and organizations publishing a narrow range of titles. The 
(unadjusted) number of titles published in the UK in 2012 was 170,267. Books in 
the UK are zero rated for VAT alongside newspapers, magazines published at 
regular intervals (more than once a year), and printed music. VAT is charged on 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
84
digital products such as ebooks, online content and CD-ROMs, as they are 
classiﬁ ed as supplies of services.
Table 4.1 UK publishers’ sales in 2012 (source: Publishers Association)
Home
Export
Digital sales
Total
Volume of books sold (m)
416
270
Sales (£m)
1,721
1,211
411
3,343
Table 4.2 Number of titles published in the UK 2003 to 2012 (source: Nielsen 
BookData)
Year
Number of titles and new editions
2003
131,271
2004
124,027
2005
110,925
2006
115,522 
2007
119,465
2008
129,057
2009
157,039
2010
151,969
2011
189,979
2012
170,267
CONSUMER PUBLISHING
The consumer or trade publishers are the most visible part of the industry. Their 
titles are displayed prominently in high street bookshops and other outlets, receive 
considerable mass-media coverage and are aimed mainly at the indeﬁnable 
‘general reader’, and sometimes at the enthusiast or specialist reader. They form 
the mainstay of public libraries, and in some cases penetrate academic markets. 
In 2012 consumer sales in the UK market totalled £2.1 bn and 269 m books 
(publishers.org.uk). That is an average selling price (not cover price) of £7.81 per 
copy (compared to £7.56 in 2006). There were no published ﬁ gures for sales of 
ebooks, although bestseller information became available from 2013. The Bookseller 
estimated that the ebook market in June 2013 was worth £17.6 m, 19 per cent of 
the overall book market.
Most publishers are in London, giving them ready access to authors, agents, 
other publishers, social venues, journalists and producers of the mass media, and 
other inﬂuential people who decisively aﬀ ect the life of the nation. The remaining 
publishers are spread around the country, with concentrations in Oxford and 
Edinburgh, and tend to be more specialized.
Consumer book publishing is the high-risk end of the business: book 
failures are frequent but the rewards from ‘bestsellers’ – some of which are quite 
unexpected – can be great. The potential readers are varied, spread thinly through 
the population, expensive to reach, difﬁcult to identify, and have tastes and 
interests that can be described generally but are not easily matched to a particular 
book. Publishers bet to a great extent on their judgement of public taste and 
interests – notoriously unpredictable.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
85
Sometimes the publication of a book creates its own market. And the authors 
whose work arouses growing interest can develop a personal readership, thereby 
creating their own markets – perhaps attaining a ‘brand name’ following, 
especially in ﬁction. Publishers compete ﬁercely for their books. Few other 
consumer goods industries market products with such a short sales life. Generally 
speaking for a book to ﬂourish, it is vital for the publisher to secure advance or 
subscription orders from booksellers before publication and for the response to 
the book to be good in the opening few weeks post-publication. The peak sales of 
most new books occur well within a year of publication. Most adult hardback 
ﬁction and paperback titles are dead within three months or just weeks, while 
paperback ﬁction written by famous authors may endure for long periods. 
Compared to the non-consumer book publishers, the trade publishers earn a 
higher proportion of their revenues from their frontlist publishing. With the 
increasing focus on the lead titles that are part of bookseller promotions and 
which receive supermarket and etailer exposure, frontlist revenues are increasing 
in proportion to backlist revenues. Some publishers’ lists are very frontlist 
weighted, while others keep strong backlists alive from their new book 
programme and by relaunching old books in new covers, reissuing them in 
diﬀ erent sizes, bindings and as ebooks, or with revisions or new introductions. An 
energetically promoted backlist provides retailers with staple and more predictable 
stock, should earn good proﬁts for the publisher, and keeps authors’ works alive.
Many readers mistakenly believe that the large price diﬀ erential between 
hardbacks and paperbacks is due to the extra cost of binding a book in hardback; it 
is also argued that ebooks should be cheap since there are no costs of physical 
production. There are cost diﬀ erences between editions but the price diﬀ erentials 
tend to reﬂect how publishers traditionally sought to maximize the revenue from a 
title by segmenting the market through diﬀ erent formats and price points. 
Furthermore some titles of minority appeal would not recover their investment if 
ﬁrst published at lower price ranges meant for books with higher sales potential.
With ebooks in the mix it is harder for publishers to tread the well-worn 
sequential path of hardback, trade paperback, and then mass-market paperback. A 
ﬁction title might still be launched ﬁrst in hardback at a high price to satisfy eager 
readers, but there is a market expectation that a lower-priced ebook is available. 
Over time it has become harder to sell many categories of book in hardback, and 
some titles may be published ﬁ rst as a paperback or ebook original. In 2012 ﬁ ction 
sales (invoiced to the publisher) totalled £674 m, with £346 m of home and £156 
m of export sales, and digital revenues of £172 m – 26 per cent (Publishers 
Association). The average invoiced value of a physical ﬁ ction title was £3.03 (£2.69 
in 2008).
The key characteristics of consumer publishing are as follows:
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
86
High risk
Discoverability
Consumer
publishing
Rights
sales
Agents
High
discounts
Brand authors
Marketing
and
communities
Self-
publishing
High risk
The business is high risk since it is diﬃ  cult to forecast the sales potential of new 
books, and large sums may have to be paid out to authors for advances. The cash 
return, however, can also be large. The major publishing groups can aﬀ ord to 
gamble on a variety of new projects.
Agents
Publishers are squeezed to a far greater extent by agents (on behalf of their 
authors), who look to negotiate higher royalty rates and advances, compared to 
non-consumer publishers. The major trade houses may pay out say 30 per cent of 
their sales revenue to authors (more than twice the percentage paid out by 
non-consumer publishers). Agents restrict rights granted to publishers to exploit 
the work in all forms of media, languages and territories.
Brand authors
Consumer publishers give greater emphasis to top authors in terms of advances, 
promotional expenditure, sales eﬀ ort and high-proﬁle publication dates – author 
brands help to sell books.
Self-publishing
Self-published ebook authors erode the market share of publishers but can 
provide a source of new talent.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
87
Discoverability
Publishers depend to a great extent on retail exposure to aid book discovery 
and sell their books, and on gift buying for adult and children’s books (the 
pre-Christmas period is of immense importance). The main customers and 
channels to market for physical books are diverse, including internet retailers, the 
bookselling chains, supermarkets, independent bookshops and other specialist 
stores, wholesalers, and direct distribution channels. Rising sales of ebooks and 
the growth in online retailing (dominated by Amazon) have disrupted the 
business model of sales through physical stores, and raised the issue of how 
readers discover books in the online environment.
Marketing and communities
Publicity in the media makes a signiﬁ cant diﬀ erence to visibility and sales, along 
with social media marketing. Paid for promotional eﬀ orts will boost a book’s 
proﬁle in the retail trade and amongst consumers. A large promotional spend is 
often necessary to secure large orders from key retailers. Publishers are shifting to 
direct to consumer (D2C) marketing, and investing in online vertical communities 
and the provision of services.
Audio publishing
Nicholas Jones, Managing Director, Strathmore Publishing
The UK audiobook market has been recently transformed by technology, 
speciﬁcally the arrival of downloads in the consumer market. In previous 
decades, the majority of sales were as physical product on CD or cassette, and 
therefore in an abridged form; today the vast majority of audio listening is on 
MP3 players, and particularly mobile phones. Almost everyone has the 
technology to play an audiobook in their pocket, and the ease of adding new 
titles to a personal library, by download over fast internet connections, has 
transformed the way in which the medium is regarded. Most books are 
recorded in full since physical media no longer constrains the running time. 
Most of the major general publishing companies run an audio list: Penguin 
Random House, the Hachette Group, HarperCollins, Pan Macmillan and 
Canongate Faber are all signiﬁcant players. Naxos deserves mention as an 
independent audio publisher for the retail market that acquires rights from 
diverse sources. 
Most audiobook publishers are increasing their output as a direct result of 
the transfer from physical product to download, with consequently less 
inventory needed but lower revenue per sale. Some companies which previously 
marketed only to public libraries welcomed the opportunity to reach a more 
general market: Isis, Oakhill, and in particular W. F. Howes. The expansion of 
lists is also a result of the sudden demise of AudioGO, a company set up in 2010 
to take over the ‘privatized’ BBC Audiobooks list, once the largest UK audio 

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
88
publisher. On its closure, the rights held by AudioGO reverted to the book 
publishers and became available for purchase; some were acquired by Audible, 
which was founded in the US in 1997, came to the UK in 2006 and became a 
wholly owned Amazon company in 2008. It increasingly publishes its own 
material and holds an almost unassailable position as retailer, with a share of 
up to 90 per cent of the UK download market and 60 per cent in the US. 
All publishers welcomed the opportunity to place their recordings on the 
Audible website, seeing it as additional income in a world where the majority of 
listening was being done from physical media. But the ‘long tail’ eﬀect means 
that whereas audio listeners had perhaps only 3,000 readily available titles to 
choose from ten years ago, they now have over 100,000, and this has reduced 
sales of some individual titles to unsustainable levels. The market has thus 
become self-competitive. The cost of entry into the medium has fallen – home 
studios can produce recordings as good as some of those done in dedicated 
studios – and this has led to a sharp reduction in the prices paid by publishers 
for recordings. At the same time, however, competition has increased the price 
paid for audio rights. Literary agents, who might previously have bundled the 
audio rights in with the volume rights, now see them as a valuable separate 
commodity. As with ebooks, the result of all this disruptive change is a 
burgeoning in the sheer number of titles (some self-published), but at the 
expense of consistent quality and discoverability.
A best estimate of sales is that the market is about £100 million at retail in 
the UK, and about $1 billion in the US. The market is growing in volume terms 
substantially; the tumbling prices of recordings means that the value is static or 
growing slowly. The UK internet research group Audiencenet reported for Q2 
2013 that 4 per cent of the general UK population over the age of 15 listened to 
audiobooks, a customer base of at least 2 million. The Publishers Association 
reported sales up by a third in 2012, with 48 per cent of audio consumed on 
mobile devices. From ﬁgures collected by the RNIB (Royal National Institute of 
Blind People), in 2012 nearly half (49 per cent) of the top 1,000 selling titles 
were available in unabridged audio form, up from 13 per cent in 2010. In the US 
the Wall Street Journal described as an example of the new audio customers a 
25-year-old Boston software engineer who read at most two printed books a 
year but will now get through up to a dozen on audio (5 August 2013). According 
to the Audiobook Publishers Association, US output increased from 4,602 
new titles in 2009 to 13,255 in 2012. Download sales there grew by 29 per cent 
in 2012.
In book publishing, job opportunities in audio lie in deciding what to 
publish and acquiring the rights, with perhaps some involvement in the casting 
of readers. Departments are small, often one or two people (some come from a 
rights background though most are from editorial); sales and publicity functions 
are usually shared with the book departments. Production and recording are 
almost always outsourced to specialist studios. The larger audio-only companies 
have the full range of functions, and employ some full-time producers.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
89
High discounts
Publishers are squeezed by the large retailers ratcheting up the discounts granted 
to them. The discounts granted to the book trade, essential to gain exposure in the 
shops, can reach over 60 per cent of the recommended price of a book in the UK, 
at least 10 to 20 per cent higher than those granted by the non-consumer 
publishers. Trade publishers suﬀ er from high returns of unsold books from 
physical retailers and wholesalers.
Rights sales
There is usually greater scope in consumer publishing to sell rights in the author’s 
work to other ﬁrms (for example in translation), and to set up co-edition deals with 
overseas publishers.
CHILDREN’S AND YOUNG ADULT PUBLISHING
Children’s books recorded £318 m of sales in 2012, made up of £233 m home 
and £77 m export sales of physical books, and £8 m of digital sales (Publishers 
Association). The top 10 publishers took around 75 per cent of the domestic 
market, and overall children’s and YA books took around 30 per cent of the 
consumer market (Nielsen Bookscan). Children’s books are published by the 
specialist children’s divisions of the major consumer book publishers (for example 
Penguin Random House and HarperCollins) and independent publishers (for 
example Usborne and Walker Books). The vitality of children’s publishing creates 
the book buyers of the future. The text and illustrations of children’s books must 
excite, and appeal to, children of diﬀ erent age groups, and at diﬀ erent levels of 
reading skill and comprehension. They must also appeal to adults in the supply 
chain (the major non-book and book retailers) and to adults who buy or inﬂuence 
choice (parents, relations, librarians and teachers). Many titles are in full colour 
yet have to be published at low prices, and these often need co-edition partners in 
the USA, in Europe and elsewhere in order to attain economies in printing.
The books are usually aimed at age bands reﬂecting the development of 
reading skill. The bibliographic information supplied by publishers to the book 
trade is formalized through the Book Industry Communication (BIC) Children’s 
Book Marketing Categories standard which denotes amongst other things, the 
title’s intended age range (bic.org.uk). These are divided up as follows:
A 
0 to 5
B 
5 to 7
C 
7 to 9
D  9 to 11
E 
12 upwards
The 0–5 age group from babies to toddlers may be described as the parent 
pointing stage. Included here are the so-called ‘novelty books’ (which extend 
above the age group), a category of ever-widening inventiveness, such as board 
books and bath books (introducing page turning), colouring and activity books, 
The Horrid 
Henry stories 
by Francesca 
Simon are 
popular with 
the age group 5 
to 9
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
90
question and answer books, pop-ups; and the lower end of picture books. Books 
for the very young need to be durable and often use cloth, plastic or hardback 
binding. The production departments of children’s publishers are particularly 
concerned with product safety. The apps produced for this age group include 
reading experiences and games.
The 5–7 age group may be described as the starting to read, as well as reading 
to children stage. Picture books ﬁgure prominently. These books, invariably in full 
colour, tend to be 32 pages long, display strong narrative and may include just a 
few words up to possibly several thousand. They may be created by an illustrator 
or writer (or one controlling mind), and often need co-edition partners. The next 
stage of young ﬁ ction may have from 2,000 to 7,500 words of text, and may be 
published in paperback in smaller formats; these titles are designed for children 
reading their ﬁrst whole novels. There are major series produced by many of the 
main trade publishers as well as reading schemes by the educational publishers. 
Moving up, and through, the 9–12 age group, longer length novels of up to 35,000 
words come into play as well as the more recent mass-market genre series. Above 
11–12, there are the teenage or young adult ﬁction titles. Much middle and young 
adult ﬁction is published straight into paperback and ebook. Non-ﬁction, 
sometimes highly illustrated, spans the age groups as do home learning series, 
reference titles (for example dictionaries), anthologies and character books (some 
of which are tie-ins to ﬁlms).
Middle grade 
novels are 
aimed at the 
age group 
8 to 12
The seventh volume 
in the Harry Potter 
series, Harry Potter 
and the Deathly 
Hallows, was 
published in 2007 POTTER
POTTER
ofwhich are tie-ins to films). 
ofwhich are tie-ins to films). 
dictionaries), anthologies 
dictionaries), 
dictionaries), 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
91
Children’s books (but not Harry Potter) receive less window or promotional space 
in general bookshops; and children’s publishers of quality books earn a higher 
proportion from backlist sales. The children’s and young adult (YA) market is subject 
to crazes for particular authors and series (from Twilight to the Hunger Games), 
which can be prompted by word of mouth or ﬁ lm releases. Anthony Horowitz said in 
2013 that his ‘success, and that of at least half-a-dozen other children’s ﬁ ction writers, 
rests entirely on J. K. Rowling. We just happened to be around at the right time’ 
(Guardian, 14 September 2013). There are also international inﬂ uences with, for 
example, manga becoming mainstream in the UK. Whilst the penetration of ebooks 
across the whole of children’s publishing was initially low (around 3 per cent in 
2012), there are higher ﬁ gures for young adult titles. The Hunger Games trilogy sold 
over 1 m ebooks in 2012 in the UK, around one-third of the total sales.
Some teenage ﬁction has aroused controversy for its adult content. For 
example, when Doing It by Melvin Burgess was published in the children’s 
imprint Pufﬁn in 2003, the children’s laureate Anne Fine attacked the decision:
When Harry 
Potter and the 
Deathly 
Hallows was 
published on 
21 July 2007, it 
sold 2.6 m 
copies in the 
UK on that day 
alone
Some character 
brands have an 
international reach: 
the Turkish edition of 
Horrid Henry and the 
Abominable 
Snowman
FRANCESCA SIMON 
FELAKET HENRY VE 
KAR ADAMI YETi 
illu.t, •• ,on 
Tony Ross 
)) 
•• nm. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
92
All of the publishers who have touched this novel should be deeply ashamed 
of themselves. Astonishingly, they are almost all female. It’s time they sat 
round a table, took a good long look at themselves and decided that it was an 
indefensible decision to take this book on. They should pulp their own copies 
now. (Guardian, 29 March 2003)
Reference publishing
Reference works (spanning words, pictures, numbers and maps) are sold by 
all kinds of publisher from consumer book to professional. Although some 
are ephemeral, reference publishing is usually for the long-term backlist. As 
consumers now search for their information online and on the go, usually 
from free resources such as Wikipedia or Google Maps, publishers have 
increasingly focused on institutional markets. The Encyclopaedia Britannica 
printed its ﬁ nal physical edition in 2012 and is now creating products and 
services for the schools market.
Major works can take years to compile and can involve investments 
of millions. The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography was published in 
2004, both in an online edition and 60 print volumes. Formed in 1992 as a 
research project of Oxford University, the Dictionary was funded by a £3.5 m 
subvention from the British Academy and by £22 m from OUP. Reference 
publishing relies heavily on the application of new technologies, to aid both 
product development and the publishing of a family of products in diﬀ erent 
media. The Oxford English Dictionary could never have been revised as a 
complete entity without computerization. Dictionary lexicographers (and 
in bilingual works, translators) no longer have to rely on the manual 
identiﬁcation and retrieval of words in primary sources. Typically they use 
electronic text corpora holding a vast range of primary and diverse sources 
from which evidence of word meaning and sentence contextual meaning can 
be retrieved, manipulated and to an increasing extent analysed electronically. 
Once the main dictionary database has been built and coded, spin-oﬀ  shorter 
or special purpose dictionaries can be subsequently published.
The publishers of online databases, such as in law and business, try 
continually to enhance their services by expanding the content and the degree 
of functionality, for example by improving their web interfaces and analytical 
research tools for users. LexisNexis, owned by Reed Elsevier, pioneered online 
information in the area of law and taxation, and its services are now used by 
the top law and accountancy ﬁ rms, many universities, and local and central 
government departments.

F  C U S
The reference 
work Who’s 
Who is 
available both 
in print and 
online. It has 
been published 
annually by A & 
C Black since 
1849
Echoing developments in adult publishing, children’s publishers have little time 
to build authors slowly. The focus is on promotable ﬁrst-time authors, established 
adult authors or celebrities writing for children, and media tie-ins. Author 
branding and the development of branded series are notable features of children’s 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
93
publishing. As in adult publishing, the gender diﬀ erentiation of books for male 
and female markets is evident, in part inﬂuenced by consumer advertising of 
other products to children.
Children’s publishing in the UK continues to push out the frontiers of book 
availability into a wide range of retail outlets, including grocery stores, toy-shops 
and garden centres, reached via the wholesalers. Such retailers, and some of the 
book clubs, tend to concentrate on books for the younger age groups. 
Internationally, the Bologna Book Fair held in the spring is the world’s meeting-
place of children’s publishing. The UK publishers and packagers have long 
dominated the international trade in the selling of overseas co-edition rights and, 
like their adult counterparts, they import far fewer.
NON-CONSUMER PUBLISHING
The educational, academic, STM and professional book publishers have a number 
of advantages by comparison to ﬁrms operating in consumer markets:
 
▪
Their markets are more deﬁned into vertical communities.
 
▪
Their authors and advisers are largely drawn from the same peer groups as 
their customers.
 
▪
Customers can be reached and engaged through their place of work.
 
▪
Backlist sales, especially if textbook and reference, account for a major 
proportion of their business.
 
▪
Institutional and business purchasers are far more amenable to buying 
digital formats.
 
▪
Subscription and site licence business models are more prevalent.
EDUCATION
Schools publishing
The total value of school book sales in 2012 was £290 m, comprising £172 m of 
home and £105 m of export physical sales, and digital sales of £13 m (Publishers 
Association). Educational publishers provide materials for schools: chieﬂy 
textbooks bought in multiple copies, supported by ancillary printed materials and 
digital media for class use or for teachers, published individually or as a series (for 
example representing a progressive course of study). Publishers concentrate on 
the big subject areas. The main publishers are located mainly outside London.
The key characteristics of schools publishing are set out below:
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
94
Long term
Role of
government
Schools
publishing
Direct
supply
Defined
curriculum
Trade
education
Market research
Other markets
Product
development
Long term
Compared with consumer book publishing, educational publishing is for the long 
term. Publishers derive most of their sales revenue from established backlist 
books. Schools can ill aﬀ ord to dump adopted texts frequently. New books are 
published in the hope that they will be reprinted and revised in following years, 
but in practice they may fail. Curriculum publishing calls for a large amount of 
working capital – the liquid assets of a company – invested over a long time. The 
development costs of digital resources are also very high.
Deﬁned curriculum
The books are market-speciﬁc (they are precisely tailored to the National 
Curriculum, examinations, academic levels and age groups). While to some extent 
the broad content is predetermined, curriculum publishers and their external 
advisers and authors give great attention to the pedagogy, and also cater for more 
conservative teachers. They help raise the quality of teaching. Links have been 
developed between publishers and the examination boards, for example Pearson 
with Edexcel, and Nelson Thornes with AQA.
Market research
Understanding the market is vital to the creation of a new textbook course for 
schools. Primary research may include sending out questionnaires to teachers or 
the use of focus groups.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
95
Product development
Many books are highly illustrated, printed in colour, and involve a publisher in 
much development work. Yet they must be published at low prices and the cost of 
developing associated digital materials can be high. Whilst there is a slow uptake 
of etextbooks, the use of digital resources or of software for interactive 
whiteboards is growing – to aid homework and exam revision, or to enliven 
lessons – along with the provision of services to aid the professional development 
of teachers. The Dynamic Learning online platform from Hodder Education, 
which enables access to a variety of multimedia content, was used by around half 
of UK secondary schools in 2012; also popular is Kerboodle from Nelson Thornes. 
Some schools are experimenting with tablets for all pupils.
Role of government
Publishing is dependent on demographics and school budgets, and inﬂ uenced by 
government policies. The latest education minister can have a big impact on the 
curriculum and how schools are run.
Other markets
Some educational publishers produce books for further education (especially for 
vocational qualiﬁcations) and reference (for home or school library use). In 2012 
export accounted for 37 per cent of the sales of school books. Primary school titles 
in the areas of reading schemes and literacy have an international market. 
UK-orientated textbooks at secondary level have reduced export potential (other 
than to the international schools) but there is increasing scope to develop 
materials for local markets. Lis Tribe of Hodder Education said, ‘Most of [our] 
exported products are designed for speciﬁ c overseas curricula, and are diﬀ erent 
from books sold domestically. However, for some books there is a link between 
the domestic and export markets. For example, books supplied abroad in response 
to aid-funded tenders will typically be those also sold in domestic markets’ (PwC, 
page 17).
Trade education
With the increased concentration on testing of pupils, there is a healthy trade 
market for self-study and revision books, sold through bookshops or directly to the 
more aﬄ  uent parents and pupils. Personalized online learning materials are at 
the leading edge. Teachers can inﬂuence this parental anxiety market through 
their recommendations, and there is a growing market for home tuition from 
specialist companies, often delivered over the internet.
Direct supply
New and backlist titles are promoted directly to teachers and by publishers’ sales 
consultants in schools and at exhibitions. Teachers scrutinize products before 
adopting them. Textbooks are mainly supplied directly to schools, or via 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
96
booksellers, specialist school contractors and local authority direct purchasing 
organizations, and may be stocked by booksellers for parental purchase. The direct 
supply route to schools provides valuable marketing information to publishers.
ELT publishing
Around 600,000 people come to the UK each year to learn English (englishuk.
com, accessed 25 September 2013). However, the publishing of English language 
teaching (ELT) or English as a foreign language (EFL) course materials is export-
orientated. In 2012 sales of ELT books were £186 m with £173 m of export and 
£11 m of home sales of physical books, and £2 m of digital sales.
The traditional main markets have been in Southern Europe (Spain, France, 
Italy, Greece, Turkey), Eastern Europe, Japan, the Far East and South East Asia 
(China, Taiwan, Korea, Thailand), Latin America (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico) 
and the Middle East. The ELT publishers have set up companies, opened ofﬁces or 
acquired publishers in such areas, or have copublishing links with local 
publishers, or local marketing arrangements. Kevin Taylor of Cambridge 
University Press said in 2012:
Our growth markets are India, South Africa and Australia, where there has 
been substantial public and private investment encouraging ELT over recent 
years. Through the ELT division, we are able to leverage sales for a number of 
diﬀ erent product and service lines. The copyright regime of the countries in 
question is a very important factor in our expansion plans. (PwC, page 17)
The mixed media ELT courses are major investments and may be orientated or 
versioned to regional cultural distinctiveness and are sometimes produced for 
ministries. Digital coursebooks may be supplied alongside print, together with the 
provision of an online environment to support face-to-face tuition. The courses 
serving primary, secondary and adult sectors are backed up with supplementary 
materials (such as reading books, dictionaries and grammars) with a broad 
international appeal. They are sold to the private language schools (PLS), from 
primary to adult, primary and secondary state schools, and sometimes to 
universities. In the UK there are specialist booksellers that supply the local and 
export markets.
Whereas previously UK publishers could rely on the same course to sell well 
around the world, there are now separate needs for diﬀ erent markets, which raise 
the costs of product development. The big change has been the growth of the state 
school market – for example in Italy, Spain, Argentina and Eastern Europe – 
which has probably overtaken the PLS market. A state syllabus has its own 
demands, speciﬁc to the country, and oﬀ ers an opportunity for local publishers to 
enter the market. Some countries, such as Argentina, may insist on using locally 
produced materials. A key competence in ELT publishing is the ability to network 
with local schools and educational authorities.
One estimate 
is that the 
number of 
learners of 
English 
worldwide 
could reach
2 bn
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
97
HSS, STM AND PROFESSIONAL PUBLISHING
The terms ‘academic’ or ‘professional’ publishing are used loosely and 
interchangeably. Academic books tend to be associated with the humanities and 
social sciences (HSS). Research monographs of primary research are described 
as ‘academic’ and are vital to career progression. Professional books usually 
have an applied focus to aid practitioners directly in their work, for example 
schoolteachers, health care workers, engineers, architects, managers, and those 
working in law and ﬁnance. STM, reference and information books usually fall 
into the professional book publishing area. Some academic/professional titles 
may be designed for vocational or continuing professional development courses 
and be adopted. Their pricing level varies widely, depending on the target 
audience’s ability to pay and whether they are purchased by the individual or the 
employer. Sales of academic and professional books totalled £1.1 bn in the UK in 
2012, with £414 m of home and £479 m of export sales of physical books, and 
digital sales of £175 m (Publishers Association). The average invoiced price was 
£15.40 (£12.45 in 2008).
The business models are subject to change. Institutions may want to buy 
directly from publishers, for example to provide content as part of the tuition fee 
for a university degree. Dealing direct with customers, and avoiding going 
through intermediaries, helps to underpin a higher level of proﬁ tability by 
comparison to consumer publishing. The publisher’s brand role of quality 
assurance and accuracy in the supply of information is supplemented by the direct 
provision of services and tools to end-users. A key added value is to provide users 
with access tools to the content they need quickly, and in a form they want, at the 
point they need it in their workﬂow, be they researchers or lawyers in their ofﬁces, 
or medical practitioners on the move. A good example is the delivery of 
information to mobile devices.
Not even the largest publisher could claim to be equally strong in all 
disciplines, or even those in science alone. Publishers concentrate on particular 
subjects, and vary in the emphasis given to diﬀ erent categories of book. The books 
for professional or practitioner use which have a wider market beyond teaching 
institutions tend to be those in the applied sciences for researchers or practitioners 
in industry and government agencies; and those serving professional sectors (for 
example law, medicine, management, accounting, ﬁnance, architecture). Such 
high-priced titles are bought by the wealthy (ofﬁces, commercial libraries and 
individuals). Special sales channels include booksellers, aggregators or training 
companies serving corporations, agencies and individuals; dedicated business, 
computer and medical book distributors and aggregators reaching end-users 
directly; conference and exhibition organizers; and companies which take bulk 
orders of titles as promotional items.
The legal and ﬁnancial publishers, especially, traditionally used loose-leaf 
publishing for some of their reference titles. The purchaser, having bought the 
initial volume, received updated pages. Such publishers, as well as those 
producing books for business, sell a high proportion of their materials directly to 
end-users, not via booksellers. Sometimes, reference products (including 
directories, sometimes dependent on advertising revenue) are written in-house. 
Publishers have migrated their businesses to digital information services, and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
98
their products are usually licensed directly to libraries and businesses on 
subscription or by use of a site licence. Key abilities of such publishers are to 
identify information needs and the way that information is used in the workplace, 
and to translate that knowledge into the creation of products, tools and services 
using the appropriate media and technologies.
Figures from the Publishers Association show that Europe and North 
America accounted for 53 per cent of export sales in 2012 (compared to 57 per cent 
in 2008), followed by 18 per cent in East and South Asia (17 per cent in 2008) and 
15 per cent in North Africa and the Middle East (14 per cent in 2008). For many 
publishers, mainland Europe is the single most important market with the 
Scandinavian and Benelux countries featuring as signiﬁcant markets for English 
language textbook adoptions, and for professional lists. Southern Europe, for 
example Spain and Italy, is a market for high-level professional texts; 
undergraduate texts exist in translation or are published locally. The sale of 
translation rights to Eastern Europe and more recently to China and Korea, for 
example, has grown.
High-level textbooks, HSS, STM and professional titles are sold to the USA, 
the largest and richest market, via a sister company. A UK ﬁrm without a US 
presence may develop a copublishing link with a US ﬁrm, or license rights to a 
variety of publishers, or sell directly through importers. Sales to less developed 
countries tend to be dependent on aid agency funding. Publishers may on their 
own account arrange for special low-priced editions of some of their textbooks 
to be published in less developed countries, either through their own local 
companies or through sublicensing editions to local publishers. At the 
minimum, such editions have diﬀ erent covers in order to reduce the 
possibility of their penetrating developed markets through conventional and 
internet traders.
HSS and STM publishers are mostly outside central London with a high 
concentration in Oxford, and their output includes major textbooks (often the 
preserve of the larger publishers); higher-level textbooks for more advanced 
students through to graduate; edited volumes of reprinted or commissioned 
articles for students or academics; research monographs; books for professional 
use; reference titles (mostly online) and learned journals (print and online). These 
broad categories are not clear cut (for example high-level ‘textbooks’ may 
incorporate original research).
Textbooks
There is no commonly accepted deﬁnition of what constitutes a ‘textbook’. Indeed 
there are plenty of examples of books of diﬀ erent kinds that are never written or 
intended as textbooks but which subsequently become adopted by lecturers for 
teaching and are bought by their students (such as this book ﬁ rst published in 
1988). However, from a publishing standpoint, a higher education or ‘college’ 
textbook is commissioned, designed, timed and priced at the outset to meet 
teaching and learning needs in a deﬁned area and at a particular level, and is 
marketed to lecturers with the intention that they adopt the book for use on a 
course, resulting in the purchase of multiple copies by students.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
99
There are many factors aﬀ ecting textbook purchasing in the UK, including 
student use of the internet, competing ﬁnancial demands, the rise in published 
prices above the rate of inﬂation, changing behaviours about the sharing of books, 
and the rise of the used book market. Broadly speaking textbooks are published in 
paperback, though some for professional training (for example medicine, law) 
may be hardback. The high-level supplementary texts occasionally have a short 
high-priced print run for libraries, issued simultaneously with the paperback. 
Conversely, textbooks, printed in larger quantities, may become established 
and are reprinted for annual student intakes and revised through new editions 
when appropriate. Competitors constantly attack the market share of successful 
books. Many of the campus bookshops are owned by the bookselling chains. 
Nevertheless, academic and professional publishers have been more successful 
than the consumer book publishers in resisting booksellers’ demands for higher 
discounts, and in containing author royalty rates and advances.
Publishers promote (and sometimes sell directly) their books to lecturers, 
researchers and practitioners (mainly by mail, email and telephone) and 
compared with consumer book publishers usually have smaller sales forces 
calling on a limited range of booksellers, and sometimes campuses, or 
attending exhibitions. However, some ﬁrms publish titles of wider general 
interest and of bookshop appeal in which case booksellers may be granted higher 
‘trade’ discounts. These include more titles in the humanities, especially history, 
than the social sciences, some technical books (for example on computing) and 
medical works (for example personal health) supplied through specialist 
wholesalers.
Other titles, sometimes referred to as ‘supplementary texts’, may include the 
author’s original research or commissioned edited collections. These can be 
priced for student and individual academic purchase, and can be published 
economically in small quantities – from around 1,500 copies in paperback. 
Paradoxically, if an author’s primary research were to appear in a textbook it could 
seriously damage saleability through being seen as idiosyncratic or too advanced. 
The highly saleable textbooks usually reﬂect a mainstream view of current 
teaching and assessment. Other kinds of books, such as edited collections and 
anthologies, may be bought by students and academics. Some publishers continue 
the practice of publishing dual paperback and hardback editions. Their new books 
are issued in paperback for personal purchase, and simultaneously as a short-run 
hardback, say 150 copies, priced at around three times the paperback price, for sale 
to academic libraries worldwide.
The ﬁ gure below shows the key characteristics of textbook publishing:
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
100
Long term
International
market
Textbook
publishing
Adoption
sales
High
investment
New
edition
programme
Market research
Service
Market levels
Long term
Initiating and developing a textbook list requires planning and sufﬁcient attention 
to product development. Textbooks require development editors to control the 
authoring, schedule and budget.
High investment
Some textbook projects require high levels of investment, and there are growing 
demands to fund digital content and services.
Market research
Just as in educational publishing, a major investment in a new textbook requires 
comprehensive research into the market and competition.
Market levels
There will be diﬀ erent levels in the market, from ﬁrst-year undergraduate through 
to graduate. Introductory texts may have a larger potential sale but will encounter 
ﬁercer competition.
International market
For some subjects there may be a large international market. For example, a 
business textbook may be used around the world, and some business schools in 
non-English-speaking countries may teach in English. Successful textbooks may 
be localized in diﬀ erent markets. For example, Kotler et al.’s Principles of Marketing 
is available in a European edition. The adaptation of textbooks for particular 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
101
regions of the world aids local sales and inhibits their exportation to other 
higher-priced regions.
Service
Whilst there has been a slow uptake of e-texts, the publishers producing major 
textbooks for subjects with high student intakes adopt US practices, such as a 
periodically updated companion website carrying data, activities, banks of test 
questions, website links, and lecturers’ guides. Used by over 11 m students 
each year, Pearson’s MyLab is a ‘collection of online homework, tutorial, and 
assessment products ... [it] reacts to how students are actually performing, oﬀ ering 
data-driven guidance that helps them better absorb course material and 
understand diﬃ  cult concepts’ (pearsonmylabandmastering.com, accessed 25 
September 2013). The large publishers oﬀ er lecturers the ability to customize 
– personalize – the book’s content to meet their speciﬁc teaching needs (assuming 
sufﬁcient numbers of students). The publisher creates a unique product for the 
particular institution.
New edition programme
In order to ensure that texts are up to date, and also to minimize lost sales from 
the used book market, textbooks regularly go into new editions.
Adoption sales
The successful sale of a textbook involves persuading the lecturer to adopt it, the 
bookseller to stock it and the student to buy it. Most revenue is derived from copy 
sales, though rental of ebooks is growing.
HSS, STM and professional specialist titles
Specialist titles, including research monographs, are usually high-priced and 
published mainly for libraries and individual researchers and practitioners. They 
are printed in small quantities and will be available as ebooks. The trend is 
towards issuing titles primarily as ebooks, with print orders supplied by short-run 
digital printing. Publishing books with very low sales forecasts is not risk free 
– the proﬁt may come from the sale of the last 50 copies. Individual titles or 
collections of ebook titles are sold directly by publishers to libraries, or via 
aggregators, using a variety of models based on the site licence. The models 
include perpetual access, PDA (patron-driven acquisition), short-term loans under 
rental agreements, pay per view, and subscription. The sale of ebook collections to 
libraries comes ever closer to the usage and business models of journals.
JOURNAL PUBLISHING
If sales to UK publishers of books total over £3 bn, a further contribution of £1.8 
bn comes from journals publishing. Worldwide it is a huge business with sales of 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
102
several billion dollars just in the area of STM publishing. The content of learned 
journals, as distinct from magazines, is not predetermined (commissioned or 
written in-house), and contributors submit papers of original research to an 
academic editor-in-chief for refereeing and inclusion. Refereed journal articles are 
a primary information source and serve the research community. The publishing 
system sorts and assesses the research outputs, and aggregates content in the 
form of brands – the journal title. It provides quality assurance, visibility and 
usability. Generally speaking, learned journals are not dependent on advertising 
for their viability; their revenue is mainly derived from subscriptions, and to a 
growing extent through various forms of open access (OA) publishing models. 
Some publishers produce journals for professional use that are supported by 
advertising.
Journals are published by not-for-proﬁt societies and research institutes (a 
few of which run substantial journal and book publishing operations), and by 
divisions of academic and STM publishers including the university presses, 
and especially in OA by a variety of subsidized publishing operations, usually 
university and research agencies. The commercial journal publishers initiate 
journals, or produce and market journals for societies and others under contract. 
The provision of such services to societies can be a signiﬁcant proportion of some 
publishers’ business.
Virtually all journals are available electronically though print is maintained 
for subscription journals. Researchers, students and industry practitioners mostly 
access journal articles online away from the library. Librarians are able to check 
the value for money of a subscription from user statistics on articles downloaded. 
Many authors assign the copyright in their article to the journal publisher or 
society. Authors and referees are not paid, but academic journal editors may be 
paid – some only expenses, some handsomely. However, the cost of funding the 
academic editorial oﬃ  ce is considerable. The higher the rejection rate, the higher 
the cost.
There are more STM journals than in other academic areas. Titles are 
promoted by mail and at academic conferences, and sold mainly through 
institutional subscriptions (and those made with consortia), via site licences with 
academic libraries worldwide (either directly from the publisher’s platform or 
through intermediaries) and to a far lesser extent to individuals. Journals of 
applied science, management, economics and law also sell to industrial and 
commercial libraries. Members of societies may receive a journal free as part of 
their membership fee, or at a reduced rate. Other income arises from pay per view 
article downloads, advertisements, inserts and reprints (especially in STM). The 
income from the licensing of back ﬁ les to institutions and consortia can be 
signiﬁ cant on long-established journals. The big deal business model (the 
bundling of content) has become a dominant method of sales. Mailing lists and 
journals can be used to advertise and sell the publisher’s books. There is cross-
fertilization of contacts and ideas between book and journal publishers. There is a 
convergence in reader usage of book, reference and journal articles via platforms. 
Journal publishing, unlike book publishing, does not require such a complex 
network of overseas agents. The discounts granted to intermediary subscription 
agents are very low. The credit risk is also low and there is not the exposure to 
returns to be found in book publishing.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
103
The impact of OA is felt in a number of ways, including the use of delayed 
OA (articles are freely available after an initial embargo period), the deposit of 
articles in disciplinary or institutional repositories on publication (green OA), and 
the rise of gold OA – whereby authors (or mainly their funders) pay APCs (article 
processing charges) to have their articles made OA immediately on publication. In 
2011, on their publication around 12 per cent of all articles were OA, and by six 
months after publication 17 per cent (Cope and Phillips). Some subscription 
journals allowing paid for OA are called hybrid journals. Subscription only 
journals take a long time to break even – up to ﬁ ve or seven years for some STM 
journals – and may involve enormous investment. By contrast, journals using the 
gold OA model can generate income more quickly, provided they attract a 
suﬃ  cient supply of publishable articles. New journals can also be bundled into 
existing packages to help them gather momentum.
The key characteristics of journal publishing are set out below:
Long term
Profitability
Journal
publishing
Service
Brand
Innovation
Career
advancement
Open
access
Library
budgets
Long term
Journals, especially if subscription, take a long time to establish. Once a journal is 
established, the sales pattern is more predictable than books, the demand for 
capital lower (as are staﬀ  overheads), and the value of sales per employee is 
higher.
Brand
Long-established and successful journals, such as Nature, become high-proﬁ le 
brands, attracting the best submissions from authors. They are essential 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
104
purchases in their relevant communities and the curated aggregation beneﬁ ts 
from network eﬀ ects.
Career advancement
Publication in high-ranking journals can establish or enhance the academic 
standing of authors – counting towards their personal and institutional research 
funding and their promotion prospects.
Library budgets
Subscription sales are dependent on library budgets in universities, other 
institutions and corporations. The tendency for publishers to oﬀ er the ‘big deal’ – 
large collections of journals bundled together – has been attractive to libraries 
after better value. But some librarians have expressed concern about being tied 
into longer-term contracts, inﬂ exibility in choice of titles and the price increases 
applied by publishers.
Profitability
Whereas book publishers operate a business model based on the sales of 
individual copies, journal publishers have the advantage that annual subscriptions 
are received in advance of production. Many titles may be bundled up together to 
form a collection of titles. The proﬁt margins in journals publishing are generally 
higher than in book publishing, and the business generates cash for its owners.
Open access
The open access movement argues that access to journal articles should be free to 
the end-user. There are a number of OA models in existence, from ‘author pays’ 
to the institutional repository.
Innovation
There are many examples of innovation, some of which reach the other sectors of 
publishing, from aggregation to the breaking down of content into small chunks. 
The arrival of OA has prompted a search for eﬃ  ciencies in the peer review system. 
Mega journals are not limited by size and will accept articles according to quality 
standards around the methodology; cascade models allow articles rejected by 
top-quality journals to be referred to lower-ranked journals within the same stable.
Service
Journal publishing has been at the forefront of online publishing. The large 
players have invested huge sums in online platforms, enabling them to sell direct 
to their customers, usability design, and in back ﬁ le conversion of long-established 
journals. The migration to digital has meant the transition from a physical product 
industry to a digital service. Journal publishers constantly strive to improve the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The characteristics of the main publishing sectors
105
service they oﬀ er their customers – including access, search facilities, usability 
and product range.
Now read this
Frania Hall, The Business of Digital Publishing: An introduction to the digital book 
and journal industries, Routledge, 2013.
Paul Richardson and Graham Taylor, PA Guide to the UK Publishing Industry, 
3rd edition, Publishers Association, 2014.
Sources
Bill Cope and Angus Phillips (eds), The Future of the Academic Journal, 2nd 
edi tion, Chandos, 2014.
David Graddol, English Next, British Council, 2007.
Outsell, Open Access: Market size, share, forecast, and trends, 31 January 2013.
Publishers Association, PA Statistics Yearbook, 2012.
PwC, An Economic Analysis of Education Exceptions in Copyright, a report 
prepared for the Copyright Licensing Agency, March 2012.
John B. Thompson, Books in the Digital Age, Polity Press, 2005.
Web resources
www.publishers.org.uk Publishers Association.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 5
Creating and protecting value in 
publishing
The aim of a book publisher is to publish and sell at a proﬁt. Even a not-for-proﬁt 
publisher will want to at least break even, covering their costs, unless they receive 
a subsidy from their parent organization. A publisher might previously have 
cross-subsidized less popular titles from the proﬁts of its top sellers. That 
approach has largely been abandoned although the high-risk element of consumer 
publishing does mean that bestsellers compensate for titles with poor sales. Of 
course a book may acquire value as a collectable object or a great literary work to 
be admired and studied by future generations, but this chapter will concentrate on 
the creation of monetary value by publishers as commercial enterprises. How 
publishers add value is of interest to both authors and readers in an age when 
self-publishing is quick and inexpensive, and consumers expect digital content to 
be available at lower prices than physical products.
VALUE CHAIN
Taking the raw material – the author’s text – the publisher aims to add sufﬁcient 
value so that it sells the ﬁnal product at a higher value than the costs that have 
been incurred. A number of activities are undertaken in order to take the author’s 
text and make it available as an attractive product that consumers will want to buy. 
These activities are shown below (Cope and Phillips, page 48). Each of the 
publishing functions is described in more detail in the relevant chapter.
Intellectual
property
Editorial
Design and
production
Marketing
Sales
Storage
Order
processing
Distribution
The publishing value chain
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
107
Once a book is acquired from an author, it has to be edited, designed, produced, 
marketed to the book trade and readers, and sold to bookshops or the end-
purchaser. Once the book has been produced, it has to be stored in print form or 
the digital ﬁ le made available through key intermediaries, orders are taken from 
retailers or consumers, and the book is then dispatched from the warehouse, 
downloaded on to a device, or made available through a cloud service. Publishers 
can choose which elements of the value chain they undertake themselves, and 
which are outsourced to third parties. For example, while commissioning new 
titles is usually done in-house, copy-editing and proofreading are typically carried 
out by freelance editors or by suppliers which provide an entire production 
service. The key elements of the value chain are the acquisition of intellectual 
property, editorial, design and production, marketing, and sales, and most 
publishers will control these functions directly. Publishers can look to combine 
stages of the value chain and, for example, editorial, design and production may 
be combined into one function, and the post of production editor is increasingly 
common.
Publishers seek to gain competitive advantage in the market, and this is done 
through acquisition and control of the best intellectual property. Having the best 
possible people in the commissioning roles will be the key to many publishers’ 
success. There is also value to be found in other parts of the value chain. For 
example, a larger publisher will be able to negotiate from a stronger position with 
printers and paper suppliers, and with key retailers and wholesalers. ‘In the 
experience of two independent trade publishers, on absorption into large groups 
they found their print bills reduced by more than 25%’ (de Bellaigue, page 192). 
Some publishers like Dorling Kindersley build up expertise in the area of design. 
Everyman’s Library, owned by Random House, oﬀ ers editions of literary classics 
in hardback editions with high production values that contrast with a cheap 
paperback or free ebook. Giving away high discounts to the bookshop chains 
has the aim of ensuring that a publisher’s stock is widely available, and should 
increase sales, but it also squeezes a publisher’s proﬁt margins. Selling direct, 
rather than through intermediaries, enables a publisher to keep more of the 
product’s ﬁnal value. There are economies of scale in production if co-edition 
orders can be added to the print run. Using digital printing to produce smaller 
quantities, or selling ebooks, may minimize or eradicate investment in stock. 
Smaller publishers often beneﬁt from speed to market – commissioning and 
publishing faster than larger rivals.
There is less competitive advantage to be found for a publisher in the physical 
distribution of books, since the levels of service are now high across the industry. 
Nevertheless a larger publisher beneﬁts from economies of scale in distribution 
in such areas as investment in IT systems, the size of orders, negotiation over 
carriage costs with shippers, and the collection of money from customers. In 
electronic distribution the larger publisher beneﬁts from the greater aggregation 
of its intellectual property, and can spread the costs of their digital platform over a 
larger range of content.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
108
Adding value
Publishers add value to an author’s work in a variety of ways – these reﬂect both 
creativity and business acumen. Embedded throughout the book, they are 
summarized in the ﬁgure below.
Brand
Product
development
User
experience
Supply chain
management
Visibility and
market reach
Copyright
defence
Business
model
Brand
By lending its brand or imprint, the publisher is making a statement about the 
value of an author’s work – it is worth publication by an investor, in this case the 
publisher. Emphasis has been placed on the role of the publisher as the curator of 
excellent content: the brand (or imprint) adds value and endorsement. In trade 
publishing the payment of an advance (risk capital) gives the author the time and 
resources to research and write. The ﬂ avour or character of an imprint is 
understood by authors and authors’ agents, informed sections of the media, trade 
buyers in the supply chain in the UK and overseas, and by other media companies 
and overseas publishers.
Most consumer book publishers run imprints that are called trade brands, 
recognizable by the trade but not by consumers; they also oﬀ er the service of 
developing and managing an author’s brand. However, publishers serving 
vertical communities (D2C) develop consumer brands which are recognizable 
by readers.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
109
In non-consumer book publishing, an imprint’s status is recognized by 
associated peer groups (for example teachers) and those in the supply chain, 
including institutional (such as librarians) and corporate purchasers. Major 
textbook brands oﬀ er authors a platform to show their approach to teaching is 
better than existing texts, and the advantage of online support services. Highly 
rated academic and professional publishing brands oﬀ er authors peer group 
recognition worldwide and personal career advancement.
The value of selection and curation by publishers was highlighted by the 
discovery in 2013 that ebook retailers were selling ‘pornographic e-books featuring 
incest, rape and bestiality on their sites ... Self-published e-books have grown 
massively in popularity along with the growth in digital e-readers and tablet 
computers, but retailers have been struggling to ﬁ lter explicit content that 
breaches their website guidelines’ (bbc.co.uk, 14 October 2013).
Product development
The publisher invests its staﬀ  resources and technological infrastructure to 
produce, market and sell the book on the author’s behalf. Their knowledge and 
judgement of current markets and future trends adds value to those authors who 
are commissioned and selected by the publisher. Authors are helped through the 
creative development of the proposal to match market and user needs, including 
ﬁlling gaps in the market (also of course imitating the competition) and realizing 
opportunities, and through the provision of other guidance and advice. Editorial 
expertise helps writers craft their work, from advice on structure through to 
line-by-line editing. The value of editorial intervention is reﬂ ected in the purchase 
of stylistic and other editing by some self-published authors.
User experience
Another creative expertise of the publisher is to design and present the author’s 
work to best eﬀ ect in a saleable printed book: length, size, format, usability, ﬁtness 
for purpose, quality and accuracy of content, feel and look (design and production 
values), especially the cover to sell it. A hardback art book, for example, will be 
produced to a very high standard and sold at a high price. An inexpensive 
paperback or ebook will be produced with lower production values. The publisher 
organizes and manages the workﬂow to deliver the book. Digital distribution 
breaks the link between the contents and the physical packaging – for example 
facilitating the download of a book chapter or journal article. Because readers 
access digital content through a variety of distribution channels and devices, 
attention is given to the user experience (UX) of the product and service in their 
personal context. Brett Sandusky writes that the scope of UX covers
everything from the ﬁ rst sparks of ideation, guiding product development 
teams in their endeavors, to marketing practice, through post-launch 
development, customer service and how end users interact with a company. 
In short, UX covers a broad range of internal and external curated 
interactions that collectively have the objective of producing and maintaining 
a usable product for end users. (McGuire and O’Leary, page 178)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
110
Supply chain management
The publisher orchestrates the production of the book or journal through the 
procurement and management of a range of external services from individuals 
– freelance editors, designers – and companies – typesetters, printers, paper 
suppliers, technology companies. The outsourcing and procurement of services 
extends to marketing, sales and distribution worldwide. Furthermore the 
publisher manages the sales channels to market. From a publisher’s perspective, 
authors are critical suppliers and their ‘management’ is arguably the most vexing.
Visibility and market reach
The publisher sets the time of publication of the author’s work in order to 
maximize sales. It may be related to a speciﬁc marketing and sales opportunity or 
need, to the publication of the publisher’s other books, to competitors’ publishing 
schedules, or be subject to the demands of the retailers. The realization of 
connecting a readership to a book and consequent sales depends largely on the 
eﬀ ectiveness of the publisher to promote and publicize the work in a variety of 
formats to create an audience, to sell it through the numerous channels to market 
(home and export, including sales of rights), to distribute it, and to collect the 
money and to account to the author.
Tim O’Reilly argues that the publisher must oﬀ er more visibility and sales 
than the author can get on their own. Speciﬁ cally, he said that ‘your job as a 
publisher is to do things for authors that they can’t do for themselves: things that 
require special expertise; that require scale; that are expensive, that require 
marketplace leverage; things that are boring and time-consuming.’ (TOC).
Copyright defence
By way of the author contract, the publisher acquires from the author an exclusive 
licence to exploit the intellectual property rights in the author’s work. The 
publisher’s responsibility and expertise are to exploit the rights granted to the 
fullest in print and electronic forms (and when available to license others to do 
so), and to protect the author’s rights against infringement by others using 
technical and legal means. The latter is highly important in an age of ﬁ le-sharing 
and book piracy.
BUSINESS MODEL
Ultimately a publisher has to operate a proﬁtable business model that delivers 
sufﬁcient return to enable the publication of authors’ works, and oﬀ ers to authors 
remuneration in terms of readership, money and status. Changing patterns of 
authorship, readership and distribution mean that there are a multitude of 
business models and constant experimentation. Content may be sold as discrete 
products, bundled into a service sold on subscription, or given free to users to 
encourage sales of higher value products. Authors may earn a royalty or a share of 
the proﬁ ts from a title.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
111
The potential ﬁnancial worth of the author’s work is assessed by the 
publisher at the outset. The publisher envisages in advance the product package, 
its price, the potential demand over a time period and the projected sales income, 
balanced against the estimated costs of production and the payments to the 
author, resulting in the publisher’s forecast proﬁt. The publisher takes the risk 
decision based on multiple factors as to whether to invest in the author’s work or 
not. When the publisher issues the contract to the author, it confers ﬁnancial 
value on the author’s work.
Impact of the internet
The internet oﬀ ers publishers opportunities for value creation. It has speeded up 
communication and encouraged a global market in design, typesetting and print, 
which has led to lower costs. There is also a global market of readers to be reached 
with digital content, and this is an opportunity in particular for English language 
publishers of many types of book, from educational books to trade ﬁ ction. The 
challenge for publishers is to become direct consumer businesses, rather than 
simply reaching their markets through intermediaries. As ebooks have become 
popular, some publishers have been able to save on the costs of distributing the 
physical book and have established a direct relationship with their readers. The 
internet provides a means of marketing books – both promoting them and 
identifying individual consumers. Value can be created through making brands 
work directly with book readers, through building communities around content, 
and from involving readers in the creation of content (for example suggesting 
ideas of new titles). Digital tools such as those used for social networking facilitate 
the creation of this digital capital (Phillips, 2014, page 93).
Brand
Co-creation
of value
Community
Digital
capital
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
112
Providers of digital content can also create extra value by adding the element of 
service. Electronic services can be created using a wide range of content, oﬀ ering 
users on demand, up-to-date and searchable content (including pictures, video 
and animation) from a range of diﬀ erent sources. Such services may be highly 
proﬁtable once established, but the initial costs can be signiﬁcant.
The internet also oﬀ ers a new set of issues. First, there is a vast range of 
information for free. This has impacted on reference book publishing, for 
example. Can consumers see the value of publishers’ products when there are free 
sources of ‘good enough’ information on the web? The coming of Web 2.0 has 
highlighted the mechanisms available for user-generated content (UGC), such as 
blogs and wikis. Stephen Fry has described Web 2.0 as
an idea in people’s heads rather than a reality . . . It’s an idea that the 
reciprocity between the user and the provider is what’s emphasized . . . 
People can upload as well as download. (videojug.com, accessed 21 August 
2007)
In a relatively short space of time, Wikipedia has come to dominate online 
searches for information. Founded in 2001, users can write entries and edit the 
content. In 2013 the English Wikipedia contained over 2.5 bn words. By 
comparison the 32-volume print set of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (2007) had 44 
m words. As James Surowiecki comments: ‘The enormous gains for consumers in 
the digital age often come at the expense of workers. Wikipedia is great for 
readers. It’s awful for the people who make encyclopedias’ (New Yorker, 25 
November 2013). User-generated content also covers social networking sites 
(Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr), video (YouTube) and images (Instagram, Flickr, 
Pinterest). Wattpad and Scribd have developed large communities around writing 
and reading.
It becomes difﬁcult to price digital products if there is an expectation that 
content on the internet should be free. As Andrew Keen writes, ‘the more self-
created content that gets dumped onto the internet, the harder it becomes to 
distinguish the good from the bad – and to make money on any of it’ (Keen, page 
31). Publishers have developed good business models for online services sold to an 
institutional market of companies and libraries, and have developed strong brands, 
but how do you sell to consumers reluctant to pay for content? If the advertising 
market is buoyant, this can provide one model. Publishers can also create additional 
revenue streams by encouraging click-throughs to companies selling related 
products – they then receive a percentage on the products’ sales. A further issue is 
how to price ebooks when consumers expect digital content to be cheaper.
If there is a strong market for a particular author, what is to stop the author 
themselves capturing the market? For example, the wine writer Jancis Robinson 
runs her own subscription site, oﬀ ering nearly 10,000 articles, over 80,000 
tasting notes, a member’s forum and exclusive access to The Oxford Companion to 
Wine (jancisrobinson.com). In 2012 J. K. Rowling launched her own Pottermore 
site to sell ebooks of the Harry Potter books and create an online experience with 
games and other content (pottermore.com). Publishers need to identify clearly the 
service they can oﬀ er to brand authors, from editorial work through to running 
their websites or ﬁ nancing promotional apps.
Dale Dougherty 
of O’Reilly 
Media coined 
the term
Web 2.0 
– popularized 
by Tim O’Reilly
In 2013 
Wikipedia 
contained 
around 4 m 
articles
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
113
Digital products: how to read the map
Henry Volans, Head of Faber Digital
Pressure on the publishing industry is causing the focus of innovation to 
shift from single products to entire business models (subscription, direct-to-
consumer, custom services). Both matter. Hit products drive publishing, and 
others will learn to build better products if publishers themselves do not.
One problem is that digital products – anything beyond the conventional 
ebook, such as mobile and tablet apps, websites, and the maligned ‘enhanced’ 
ebook – form a hard category to pin down. Devices change all the time in the 
relentless march to update and upgrade. So do operating systems, browsers and 
ﬁ le standards. Then there is the industry debate, which sees fashions come and 
go with the seasons. New formats are celebrated or written oﬀ  with vigour.
Behind all this, though, is a steadily maturing expertise and focus. The 
best digital publishing is brilliant. Unlike print publishing, it is the result of 
approaches that vary hugely between companies. It is valuable to learn to read 
this activity on the edge of the publishing comfort zone.
A good start is to think about motive: what was the driving force behind a 
project? Was it straightforwardly commercial? What would the proﬁ t-and-loss 
estimate have looked like? Although some apps have an element of the lottery 
about them as they hunt for consumer success, others are more gently 
eﬀ ective. At Faber we had ten years of print publishing experience behind The 
Animator’s Survival Kit to allow an accurate understanding of its market. 
Knowing that it would support a premium price (initially £24.49), appeal to a 
deﬁ ned audience (professional animators worldwide) and suit the iPad form 
(ﬁ nger-scrubbable video) led to a performance on the iTunes App Store in line 
with our forecast.

EP E R T
RICHARD WILLIAMS 
ANIMATOR:S SURVIVAL KIT" 
71IEKfT 
FABER 
DIGITAL 
71IEKfT 
71IEKfT 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
114
Another good motive is to take on the right kind of risk – the kind that 
breaks new ground. Is a publisher making meaningful partnerships with the 
games industry? Releasing something that makes TV producers envious? 
Co-branding intelligently with the world outside? Or just gaining competitive 
advantage through more imaginative publishing in the round? Despite 
common talk of risk-taking, experimentation and overcoming the fear of 
failure, digital projects that take on a big risk for a good reason are rarer than 
they should be.
This caution can be a factor in less successful digital products, in which 
minimizing the risk also stiﬂ es the potential upside. Projects whose primary 
aim is to protect existing business can usually be recognized as such. Much 
fresher and more interesting are projects that have identiﬁ ed a genuine 
consumer need and which harness the right digital platform to meet it. Put 
another way, the best digital products do not ﬂ atter their makers: they 
challenge them to compete with the digital world outside: other industries; 
start-ups; self-publishers. Those who respond to this challenge and build a 
better digital book are as likely to help reshape the industry as those who seek 
to dream up a new channel for products that already exist.
There are other issues connected to online publication. Transferring print brands 
to the internet is not straightforward, which has led some publishers to create new 
brands for the Web. One example is the EFL teacher’s resource onestopenglish 
operated by Macmillan (onestopenglish.com). Many publishers do not control the 
full rights to their books, and this can hinder the transfer of illustrations, for 
example, into digital products and services.
In the world of the printed book, authors and publishers devote a great deal 
of thought and eﬀ ort to the creation of a physical entity – the bound volume which 
is sold as a complete package of information. Readers usually have to buy the 
entire book, even if they only want part of it. In the digital world, the focus has 
shifted. As John Thompson writes, publishers have increasingly realized that it is 
the ‘content, and the control of the copyrights that governed what they could do 
with the content, which was in some respects their key assets, not the books 
themselves’ (Thompson, 2005, page 9). Innovation in style and content is 
encouraged by digital publishing, from the use of multimedia to new ways of 
structuring texts. The world of digital content and search unravels the content 
packaged in printed books. Content may be purchased at diﬀ erent levels of 
granularity, and consumers may wish to purchase by the chapter or even in 
smaller chunks such as by the page or illustration. Alongside the fear that 
consumers will cherry pick the best chapters and sales of the complete work will 
be cannibalized, there are the potential beneﬁts for publishers – additional 
purchases may come from those who are not considering buying the whole book. 
The implications of the digital world for the control of intellectual property are 
discussed in detail later in the chapter.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
115
Risk
In the traditional business model for book publishing – where transactions are 
based around the physical copy – there are issues around risk, the power of 
retailers to ask for high discounts, and the fact that returns of unsold books can 
take some months to materialize. There are diﬀ erent risk levels according to the 
publishing sector, and for example consumer publishing is riskier than academic 
publishing. Paying a large advance to a celebrity whose star may not be shining so 
brightly when the book is published is a risky venture. The investment in a large 
print run or a highly illustrated work bears the associated risk that the book will 
simply not sell. In order to secure the book’s availability in the shops, cash will 
need to be spent on promotion and high discounts will have to be given to 
retailers. Money is paid out and only recouped some weeks after publication – 
retailers will demand a period of grace (the credit period) before they have to pay 
for the stock. By contrast journals publishing has a more secure and proﬁtable 
model. Subscribers pay money up front to receive a journal, and the evidence is 
that the market is largely price inelastic – demand for a premium brand title does 
not drop signiﬁcantly if prices are raised.
Booksellers have sought a higher share of the value created for trade books, 
asking for higher discounts oﬀ  the recommended price. But at the same time 
price competition has lowered the prices paid for books by consumers. With books 
sold at up to 50 per cent discount, proﬁt margins have either been squeezed or 
have disappeared. Just as publishers try to capture more value by selling direct, 
retailers have been investigating their own publishing operations. The US 
bookstore Barnes & Noble has done this for a number of years, joined by Amazon 
from 2009 with a series of imprints.
The sale of ebooks lowers the risk from holding printed stock, and on the 
face of it margins should be higher without the physical cost of production. But 
publishers struggled to keep prices as high as they would like when the dominant 
player in the market, Amazon, was driving the market with competitive pricing. 
Authors also expect a higher rate of return, and consumers expect that digital 
products should be cheaper.
New business models abound and, for example, in the UK the publisher 
Unbound was set up in 2011 around the crowdfunding of new projects. Authors 
appeal directly to their readers to secure the necessary ﬁ nancial support to go 
ahead and write and produce their books. ‘Unbound puts the power of publishing 
in the hands of authors and readers. Authors pitch their book ideas directly to 
you. If you back a project before it reaches its funding target, you get your name 
printed in the back of every copy and immediate behind-the-scenes access to the 
author’s shed’ (unbound.co.uk, accessed 26 June 2013).
Financial performance
From a ﬁnancial viewpoint, a publisher strives to increase the rate of return on the 
company’s capital, and to improve the proﬁt margin to ﬁnance expansion and pay 
a dividend to the owners. The management aims to:
 
▪
Maximize the income and minimize the production costs.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
116
 
▪
Contain royalty rates while keeping competitive. In consumer book 
publishing it is important to monitor the amount of money and level of risk 
tied up in authors’ advances.
 
▪
Control stock levels by selling a high proportion of the print stock on 
publication or soon after, and storing only adequate stock of backlist titles. 
Digital printing has changed the management of the backlist.
 
▪
Monitor pricing on a regular basis and for key titles almost on a real-time 
basis for ebooks.
 
▪
Re-price backlist titles regularly in line with current prices and exchange 
rates.
 
▪
Exercise tight control over the ﬁrm’s overheads (for example, staﬀ  and ofﬁce 
costs) while maintaining eﬀ ective management. If proﬁts fall, overheads have 
to be reduced and output increased.
 
▪
Take all available credit from suppliers, whether paying printers after a 
certain period or deferring royalty payments to authors.
 
▪
Keep discounts as low as possible and minimize returns while maintaining 
stock levels in retail outlets.
 
▪
Collect debts quickly from customers.
 
▪
Obtain the best terms from capital providers such as banks.
 
▪
Invest in innovation including the establishment of communities around 
content, new digital products and services, and experimentation around 
business models.
 
▪
Invest in ﬁxed assets (such as IT systems) only if a favourable return can be 
shown in comparison with subcontracting or leasing. In the longer term the 
company will look to minimize any investment in the warehousing of 
physical products.
 
▪
Sell oﬀ  underused or underperforming assets, whether buildings or 
publishing lists.
 
▪
Buy complementary (or competing) businesses at home and abroad.
 
▪
Forecast regularly the cashﬂow (the ﬂow of money payments to, from, or 
within the ﬁrm) over time; even a proﬁtable publisher can exceed its 
borrowing requirement before proﬁts are earned and run the risk of going 
bust.
One key aspect is the compilation of a ﬁnancial plan showing a proﬁt target for 
the medium term (say three years). It is built up partly from the historic costs of 
running the business and from forecasts – the estimated costs of producing the 
new titles and the revenue from estimated sales of new and backlist titles made 
through various channels at home and abroad. Departmental managers will 
prepare budgets for carrying out their activities. Actual performance can be 
compared with the plan at monthly intervals, and with the performance of the 
previous year; and the plan itself is updated. Some publishers compile rolling 
plans for up to ﬁve years ahead. The annual proﬁt and loss statement of a 
publisher reveals the ﬁ nancial performance of the business as a whole. This will 
diﬀ er according to the publisher and the publishing sector. The following ﬁgures 
give an impression.
The total sales revenue is the sum of money the publisher receives from 
home and export sales after discounts have been deducted from the recommended 
It is estimated 
that there are 
over 130 m 
titles in print 
around the 
world
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
117
prices. Taking the revenue as 100 per cent and subtracting from that the 
production costs of the books (around 20 per cent, plus or minus 5 per cent) plus 
the write-oﬀ  of stock unsold (2–10 per cent) and the cost of royalties (10–15 per 
cent), leaves the publisher with a gross margin of 50 to 60 per cent. High sales of 
ebooks for a title will reduce the physical cost of production but such sales attract 
VAT in the UK at a similar level (20 per cent); also the market rate for royalties is 
25 per cent to the author. There continue to be editorial and design costs whatever 
the format. A consumer book publisher may suﬀ er from the write-oﬀ  of 
unrecoverable authors’ advances, but it may beneﬁt from greater rights sales 
income. From the gross margin, the publisher’s overhead costs are deducted, and 
will roughly total 30–50 per cent (see Table 5.1). When deducted from the gross 
margin, this leaves the publisher with a net or operating proﬁt (before interest 
charges on borrowing and tax are deducted) of 9–12 per cent (compare the 
accounts shown for Bloomsbury in Table 5.2). After interest and tax, a dividend 
may be paid to shareholders and the remaining proﬁt re-invested in the business.
Table 5.1 Average overheads of publishers
Overhead costs
Proportion of sales revenue (%)
Editorial
5–7
Production and design
2–4
Marketing and sales staff
5–10
Advertising and promotion
3–6
Order processing and distribution
8–12
General and administrative expenses
7–12
Table 5.2 Bloomsbury Publishing accounts to 28 February 2013
£000
Proportion of sales revenue 
(%)
Revenue
98,479
Cost of sales
41,242
41.8
Gross profit
57,237
58.1
Marketing and distribution costs
12,733
12.9
Administrative expenses and other costs
34,748
35.2
Operating profit
9,756
9.9
Valuing a company
The worth of a publisher can be measured in terms of its physical assets – 
buildings and stock – but more importantly by the intellectual property it controls. 
Valuations of publishing companies – how much they are bought and sold for 
– tend to be based on the revenues of the companies and the sector in which they 
operate. This is partly because the balance sheets of companies, which show their 
assets, can be difﬁcult to interpret. Debts owing to the company may include 
advance payments to authors which will never be earned out, and the value of 
stock may be inﬂated by books in the warehouse that will never be sold. Hidden 
liabilities could include an overseas distributor having the right to return tens of 
thousands of books for credit. Companies with interests in legal, STM and digital 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
118
Selling and valuing publishing assets
William Mitchell, Partner, Bertoli Mitchell LLP
Why are publishing assets sold? Possible triggers for sale include: retirement; 
or the business requires access to investment and/or skills from a larger 
organization, for example when a ‘legacy’ content business is converting to 
the digital landscape; or, in the case of large publishing organizations, when a 
strategic review has determined that parts of its publishing portfolio no longer 
ﬁ t with the areas in which it, as an organization, wishes to plant its ﬂ ag in the 
long term.
How are publishing businesses sold? Most successful publishing sales are 
achieved through a discreet competitive process. An information memorandum 
(IM) is the bedrock of an eﬀ ective competitive sale process, and must map the 
intellectual property rights being sold in detail, especially historical sales and 
margin data by product, likewise the status of the forward programme. The IM 
is distributed to interested parties who have signed non-disclosure agreements 
and who are set an ‘oﬀ ers date’ by which to submit oﬀ ers in writing. All 
prospective buyers must be marched to the same deadlines.
When, after negotiations, a preferred bidder emerges, that party may 
be granted an exclusivity period in which to complete its investigations and 
ﬁ nalize contracts. From start to ﬁ nish the sale process will typically take four 
to six months, or more. The process will often be run on behalf of the seller 
by a specialist advisory ﬁ rm like Bertoli Mitchell LLP. Of course, not all 
publishing businesses are saleable and at any given point many will be worth 
more to hold than to sell.
How are publishing assets valued? The short, and ultimate answer is: ‘by 
the buyer’. Publishing assets are only worth what the market will pay for 
them. So there is no science of valuation or such, although there are classic 
drivers of value, and there is a consensus on normal valuation ranges.
The principal driver of value is strategic ﬁ t. Buyers will pay a premium 
price for assets which ﬁ t exactly with their own strategic priorities, be they 
subject priorities (for example medicine), or capability priorities (for example 
educational assessment software), or be they geographical priorities (for 
example increased market penetration in BRIC geographies).
Intrinsic drivers of value at the level of publishing sectors include: quality 
and reliability of revenue streams, patterns of cash ﬂ ow, typical proﬁ tability, 
market growth potential. Valuations at the level of individual companies will 
vary according, inter alia, to market position, scale (larger businesses 
command higher multiples), revenue mix, forward pipeline and ownership 
of intellectual property.
The drivers referred to above are reﬂ ected in the diﬀ erent ‘sales 
multiples’ paid for assets in diﬀ erent publishing sectors – the sales multiple 
being what buyers have typically paid to buy a pound (£) of sales in companies 
they have purchased (e.g. £1.5 m paid for a company with £1 m sales 
represents a sales multiple of 1.5). Typical ranges by sectors are: consumer 
publishing 0.5 to 1 × sales; educational and academic publishing 1 to 3 × sales; 
professional publishing 2 to 5 × sales.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
119
publishing are likely to be bought for a higher multiple of sales than consumer 
companies. This reﬂects the varying degree of control over intellectual property 
– higher in legal and STM publishing with, for example, the easier acquisition of 
world and subsidiary rights – and the lower levels of risk. There tend also to be 
higher levels of proﬁtability.
Publishers create value through innovation, coming up with new ideas and 
variations on existing titles. Larger publishers strive to maintain innovation with the 
maintenance of small imprints with their own distinctive proﬁle. Smaller publishers 
may be more likely to try out new authors and formats. Innovation is encouraged by 
the system of copyright, which creates value in intellectual property and provides a 
mechanism to protect that value. Reﬂected in a company’s value are the intangible 
assets, such as their publishing licences and goodwill. Goodwill is the term for those 
elements which contribute to the company’s competitive advantage, including its 
brand, publishing relationships and employees. It is given a monetary value if the 
company is taken over when there is an opportunity to value the worth of the 
company over and above the net assets shown on the balance sheet. The goodwill 
then appears on the balance sheet of the acquiring company. The publisher’s 
licences and brand will be protected by intellectual property rights.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND PROTECTING VALUE
The intellectual property (IP) owned or controlled by a publisher includes its 
copyrights and licences. The publisher may own some copyrights outright, for 
example in the case of reference works, or have acquired licences from their 
authors. Other IP may be brands which could be registered as trademarks. 
Trademarks can cover words, logos, or pictures used as identiﬁers for goods and 
services, and must be renewed every 10 years in order for them to stay in force. 
Examples of trademarks are Penguin and the Penguin logo, Beatrix Potter 
characters such as Peter Rabbit, and Apple’s iBook.
Copyright
It is important to examine on what basis publishers control their intellectual 
property. Book publishing today rests on copyright. In general terms, this is a 
form of protection, giving authors and other creative artists legal ownership of 
their work – that is, it establishes their work as their personal, exclusive property; 
and because it is their property they have the absolute right to sell or license it 
to others. It is these exclusive rights that make an author’s works attractive to 
publishers. What the publisher wants from authors is the sole, exclusive right to 
publish their work and sell it as widely as possible. Without copyright protection, 
authors would not be able to grant this exclusive right and could not demand 
payment for their eﬀ orts; and publishers would not risk issuing a book which, 
if successful, could be instantly copied or plundered by competitors. Copyright 
stimulates innovation in a market economy, protects the author’s reputation and 
is the common foundation for publishing and the other cultural industries.
For copyright to subsist in a literary work (one which is written, spoken or 
sung) it must be ‘original’. Some eﬀ ort, skill or judgement needs to have been 
Although 
copyrights 
need not be 
registered in 
the UK, 
trademarks 
need to be 
protected by 
registration
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
120
exercised to attract copyright protection, and it must be recorded in writing or 
otherwise. Copyright exists in the concrete form of expression, the arrangement 
of the words, and protection in the UK endures for the author’s life plus 70 years 
from the year end of the author’s death. After that period the work enters the 
public domain. If, for example, an author died on 11 January 1928, their work came 
out of copyright on 31 December 1998. This is the case with the novelist Thomas 
Hardy. The previous period of protection was 50 years and under that system the 
works of Hardy had already come into the public domain at the end of 1978. 
When, in 1995, following an EU directive, the period in the UK was increased to 
70 years, Hardy came brieﬂy back into copyright until the end of 1998 and 
publishers of new editions of his work had to pay royalties to his estate. Publishers 
compete ﬁercely on the pricing of public domain classics, such as Jane Austen, on 
which no royalties need be paid, and face competition from ebooks which are free 
to download. The term of copyright in the European Union and the USA is also 
70 years. In France there is a special 30-year extension to this term for authors 
considered to have died for their country – ‘mort pour la France’: such writers 
include Irène Némirovsky (1903–42) and Antoine de Saint-Exupéry (1900–44).
Works created by employees in working hours – and covered, as a further 
safeguard, by their terms and conditions of service – are the copyright of the 
employer. Publishers who commission freelance editors, technical illustrators, 
indexers and developers ensure that copyright is assigned in writing to the 
publisher through an agreement. The publisher’s typographical layout of the page 
is the copyright of the publisher and that lasts for 25 years from publication. 
Copyright in an index belongs to the compiler, unless assigned to the publisher; 
copyright in a translation belongs to the translator. Copyright exists in 
compilations, such as databases, provided that there is an adequate degree of 
originality in the selection and arrangement of the information.
Moral rights
Under the 1988 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, authors were given additional 
statutory rights, called moral rights. Deriving from the practice in mainland 
Europe, and in particular the droit moral in France, they are as follows:
Paternity
First, there is the moral right of paternity, which gives the author the right to be 
credited as the author of the work. This must be asserted by the author before it 
can be enforced. Often this can be seen on the title verso of a book – the reverse of 
the title page: ‘The right of Giles Clark and Angus Phillips to be identiﬁed as the 
Authors of this Work has been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.’
Integrity
Second is the right of integrity, which is the author’s right to be protected from 
editorial distortion of the work. An author who argues that such distortion has 
occurred may be asked to give proof of ﬁ nancial loss, and as Mira T. Sundara 
There is no 
copyright in 
ideas, or in the 
title of a work
The moral right 
of paternity 
must be 
asserted by the 
author
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
121
Rajan says, ‘The case of an author whose artistic integrity is damaged, but whose 
work actually sells better because of intervention – for example, the addition of 
erotic scenes to bring excitement to a ﬁ lm adaptation of a novel – might have little 
hope of success’ (page 35).
False attribution
Third is the right to prevent false attribution, which prevents an author from 
being credited with something that they did not write.
Privacy
A ﬁnal right gives privacy to individuals in the case of photographs they have 
commissioned, perhaps for a wedding, from a photographer who owns the 
copyright.
Moral rights are likely to grow in importance in an era of digital publication, 
which frequently involves substantial adaptation of the work of authors and 
illustrators. Manipulation of authors’ works is relatively straightforward, 
increasing the risk of non-attribution and of plagiarism. Moral rights can be 
waived by an author, and if a publisher owns the copyright in a book, it will 
probably want to ensure that such a waiver is contained in the contract. The moral 
rights of paternity and integrity have the same duration as copyright; the right to 
prevent false attribution lasts for life plus 20 years.
Copyright or licence?
Should a publisher be content to negotiate a licence with an author, or should it 
take outright the copyright? Theoretically the latter will give it more control over 
the work. Some journal publishers, for example, still take the copyright in all the 
articles that they publish. But increasingly book publishers regard a licence as 
giving them the necessary protection that they require. The licence is a grant by 
the author of the rights to publish and sell a work, and also the right to stop others 
from copying the work. If a licence is in place which grants the publisher all the 
necessary rights, there is usually no need to request that the copyright is assigned 
by the author. Hugh Jones and Christopher Benson write:
a sole and exclusive publishing licence, drafted in wide terms if necessary 
(including a very robust clause allowing the publisher to take legal action if 
necessary), will probably meet most publishers’ needs. It has been likened by 
a number of commentators to taking a lease of a house rather than buying 
the freehold – a long lease for all practical purposes will probably be just as 
valuable. (Jones and Benson, page 76)
The civil law protects copyright holders in the UK, and cases can be brought by 
them or the exclusive licence holder against individuals or institutions who copy 
texts without the necessary permission. Under a set of international treaties and 
conventions, UK copyright works are also protected around the world. These 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
122
include the Berne Convention, which dates from 1886, and the WIPO Copyright 
Treaty signed in 1996. Under the Universal Copyright Convention (1952), all 
copies of a book should carry a copyright notice, and again on the title verso you 
will ﬁnd the standard wording – © Giles Clark and Angus Phillips 2014. The 
date given is the year of publication, and a new edition attracts a new date in the 
copyright line. Copyright can be held jointly, as is the case with the present book.
Permissions
An author seeking to quote from a work by another author should seek permission 
from the publisher of the work, which usually holds the anthology and quotation 
rights on behalf of the author. It is not necessary to ask for permission if the 
quotation is used for ‘criticism or review’, allowable as ‘fair dealing’ under the 1988 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act. The Society of Authors and The Publishers 
Association have stated that they would usually regard as ‘fair dealing’ the use of:
 
▪
a single extract of up to 400 words,
 
▪
a series of extracts (of which none exceeds 300 words) to a total of 800 words 
from a prose work, or
 
▪
a series of extracts to a total of 40 lines from a poem, provided that this did 
not exceed a quarter of the poem.
The words must be quoted in the context of ‘criticism or review’ (societyofauthors.
net, accessed 26 June 2013).
In order to use an illustration contained in another book, permission should 
be sought from the publisher or original source of the illustration (this could be a 
library or gallery). Obtaining permission to use material from websites is fraught 
with difﬁculty, since there may not be a satisfactory paper trail to prove who owns 
the original copyright.
Digital rights management
Digitization has reduced the costs of copying and distribution to next to nothing. Yet 
the production of ideas and information by authors and publishers is expensive in 
time and money. Publishers earn their living from selling ideas and information 
and make eﬀ orts to protect it from illicit copying. They are fearful that their work 
will escape into the wild on the internet from which they receive no payment. The 
technical means of controlling usage is broadly referred to as digital rights 
management (DRM), and it ‘might be deﬁ ned as a set of standards and technologies 
that allow digital content to be distributed whilst also being protected, managed and 
tracked by content providers’ (Owen, 6th edition, page 334).
The software for DRM is problematic. DRM systems are frequently broken 
into by hackers – not least because of the weakness that each time a proprietary 
system gives someone a locked item, a secret hidden key is provided to unlock it. 
Hackers around the world work on discovering such secrets – they may then 
publish them on the internet for others to access the content. DRM can also be 
sidestepped by a user scanning a printed book and posting it for free on the 
internet. The most common forms of DRM for ebooks are those from Amazon, 
Apple and Adobe.
The copyright 
symbol © is 
required under 
the Universal 
Copyright 
Convention
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
123
When a reader buys a printed book, under the ‘ﬁrst sale doctrine’ there are 
few restrictions on its further uses.
If you read a book, that act is not regulated by copyright law. If you resell a 
book, that act is not regulated . . . If you sleep on the book or use it to hold up 
a lamp or let your puppy chew it up, those acts are not regulated by copyright 
law, because those acts do not make a copy. (Lessig, page 141)
There can, however, be restrictions on the use of an ebook – the reader usually 
buys the book under a licence. By accessing the book over the internet, a copy is 
made and copyright law comes into the picture. There may be controls on the 
number of times the book can be read, whether it can be printed out, or on its 
transfer to other devices. Since the use by consumers of digital materials is 
deﬁned by a licence, it may be sufﬁcient in some cases for publishers to take the 
risk that they are sufﬁciently honest and trustworthy not to abuse their rights. 
Social DRM, employed for example by the Pottermore website, simply ensures 
that ebooks when sold are watermarked rather than subject to strict control. 
The watermarking allows users to be traced if they post up the books on pirate 
websites, and also for irresponsible fans to be named and shamed by fellow users. 
Academic publishers license materials to universities, under site licences via 
their libraries. The user group is clearly deﬁned – staﬀ  and students using their 
institution’s IP address, or users authenticated oﬀ -campus through the use of a 
password system. Authentication reassures publishers that any points of leakage 
outside the user group may be identiﬁed and halted, and helps universities to 
limit their liability in the case of defamation, obscenity or copyright infringement.
Future of copyright
Without the copyright regime, publishers would be unable to prevent works being 
copied at will. Books would be photocopied, printed and sold, or passed around in 
digital form for free, without a return for the copyright holder and their licensee. 
Publishers are naturally anxious about any threats to the stability of the copyright 
regime. They can see what has happened in the music industry, for example, and 
the tendency for music to be downloaded and shared for free, and have become 
concerned that a change in public attitudes could lead to a similar situation. Will 
consumers develop a similar attitude to the sharing of content, and how will 
authors and publishers receive a fair return?
Major digitization projects are carried out by commercial publishers, 
libraries, or technology companies such as Google. The latter has digitized 
out-of-copyright works in the collections of major institutions including the New 
York Public Library and the Bodleian Library in Oxford. Google Print has also 
digitized books in print from a variety of publishers, enabling searches within the 
titles. Links then oﬀ er ways of purchasing either the printed book or online access.
There are also authors who would like to see their work – text or pictures – 
more widely disseminated and feel that the present system of copyright does not 
adequately meet their needs. Self-publishing is relatively straightforward and the 
author may be looking to garner a wide readership rather than attempt to make 
their fortune. Founded in 2001, Creative Commons is an initiative to enable 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
124
authors to oﬀ er their work on diﬀ erent terms to the usual publisher’s licence. 
‘Every license helps creators — we call them licensors if they use our tools — 
retain copyright while allowing others to copy, distribute, and make some uses of 
their work — at least non-commercially’ (creativecommons.org, accessed 26 June 
2013). For example, a photographer may choose to publish their work with a 
Creative Commons licence that enables others to copy, distribute or display the 
photographs, provided that the work is attributed to them. The objective is for 
more people to have the opportunity to view their work.
The issue of an orphan work (a copyrighted work for which the owner cannot 
be traced and therefore contacted) came to prominence during Google’s scanning 
of library books in the mid-1990s. An orphan work may have gone out of print but 
may still be in copyright. The problem of being unable to trace copyright holders 
hinders creativity, for example when an author wants to seek permission from 
a third party to use their text or illustrations in a new work but who faces an 
arduous detective trail in trying to ﬁ nd the owner. Google proposed to establish a 
‘rights registry’ to expedite and automate the permission process. More recently, 
governments in North America and Europe are focusing on the issue which 
becomes progressively more important for all of the creative industries in a digital 
world. There is a volume of text or images available on the web for which the 
ownership and rights are uncertain or unknown, and this creates an explosive 
growth in new digital orphans.
Published by the 
Friday Project under 
a Creative Commons 
licence, Blood, Sweat 
and Tea by Tom 
Reynolds was given 
away free online and 
as an ebook. It went 
on to sell 300,000 
print copies and 
inspired the TV 
series Sirens
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
125
In the area of journals publishing, the open access movement has gathered pace, 
which argues that publicly funded research, notably in the area of science and 
medicine, should be freely available. All mainstream publishers now oﬀ er an open 
access option for authors. If the author, their institution or, more usually, the 
research body that funded the research, provides payment, the article will be freely 
available from ﬁrst publication. Open access has also stimulated self-archiving. 
Journal publishers will usually allow an author to self-archive the preprint of an 
article on their homepage – the preprint is the unpublished version of the article 
before it is refereed – and sometimes the ﬁnal accepted version (after peer review) 
in their institutional repository. Yet even open content models rely upon the 
retention of copyright. The initial decision to release open content licences is 
made by the copyright holder.
Digital publishing has added considerable uncertainty as to who controls 
intellectual property and its ﬁ nancial returns. It is in the interest of a large 
technology player such as Google that as much content as possible is freely 
available – their business model is built primarily around the sale of ads. For 
publishers the key is to build a direct relationship with their end-users, so that 
they are not solely reliant on intermediaries such as Amazon for their sales 
income. Fearful of piracy, they are reluctant to relinquish DRM controls but at the 
same time they do need to ensure that content is readily available through 
legitimate channels, and that ownership is clearly identiﬁ able to potential 
licensees.
An institutional 
repository is a 
digital 
collection of 
research 
papers by 
members of an 
institution
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating and protecting value in publishing
126
Sources
Eric de Bellaigue, British Book Publishing as a Business since the 1960s, British 
Library Publishing, 2004.
Michael Bhaskar, The Content Machine: Towards a theory of publishing from the 
printing press to the digital network, Anthem Press, 2013. 
Bill Cope and Angus Phillips (eds), The Future of the Book in the Digital Age, 
Chandos, 2006.
Hugh Jones and Christopher Benson, Publishing Law, 4th edition, Routledge, 
2011.
Andrew Keen, The Cult of the Amateur, Nicholas Brealey, 2007.
Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture, Penguin, 2004.
Hugh McGuire and Brian O’Leary (eds), Book: A futurist’s manifesto, O’Reilly 
Media, 2012.
Nicholas Negroponte, Being Digital, Hodder and Stoughton, 1995.
Tim O’Reilly, ‘What is Web 2.0?’, 30 September 2005, www.oreillynet.com, 
accessed 28 June 2013.
Tim O’Reilly, ‘The Future of Digital Distribution and Ebook Marketing’, Tools 
of Change (TOC), 2010.
Lynette Owen, Selling Rights, 7th edition, Routledge, 2014.
Angus Phillips, ‘Does the Book Have a Future?’, in Simon Eliot and Jonathan 
Rose (eds), A Companion to the History of the Book, Blackwell, 2007.
Angus Phillips, Turning the Page: The evolution of the book, Routledge, 2014.
Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and sustaining superior 
performance, Free Press, 1985.
Michael E. Porter, ‘Strategy and the Internet’, Harvard Business Review, March 
2001, pages 63–78.
Mira T. Sundara Rajan, Moral Rights, OUP, 2011.
Simon Stokes, Digital Copyright: Law and practice, Hart Publishing, 2013.
John B. Thompson, Books in the Digital Age, Polity Press, 2005.
John B. Thompson, Merchants of Culture, Polity Press, 2012.
Web resources
www.copyrighthub.co.uk Copyright Hub - information about copyright in the 
UK.
www.creativecommons.org Creative Commons.
www.ipo.gov.uk UK Intellectual Property Oﬃ  ce.
www.jisc.ac.uk Jisc – the website provides a brieﬁ ng paper on open access.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 6
The author
Authors have diﬀ erent motivations for writing, according to the type of book and 
the individual. Writers of poetry and ﬁction may be driven to write by an inner 
force – they just have to write. Academics have to be published in order to advance 
their career. Professional authors may earn their living from their books, and 
writing is what they do. The now various routes for self-publishing add a diﬀ erent 
dimension to authorship, and anyone can post an ebook on Amazon in the hopes 
of gaining a wide audience, and perhaps attract the interest of a publisher.
The reality for many authors is that the ﬁnancial returns are low. A survey 
published in 2007 by the Authors’ Licensing and Collecting Society revealed that 
the average earnings for authors in the UK were £16,531 and the median (or 
typical) earnings were only £4,000. For those who are successful, the rewards can 
be very high – the top 10 per cent of authors earned more than 50 per cent of the 
total income earned by authors – but only 20 per cent of those surveyed earned all 
their income from writing.
Authors such as Dan Brown are highly organized in their approach. In his 
witness statement for the 2006 case in the High Court regarding The Da Vinci 
Code, he said:
Writing is a discipline, much like playing a musical instrument; it requires 
constant practice and honing of skills. For this reason, I write seven days a 
week. So, my routine begins at around 4 am every morning, when there are 
no distractions. By making writing my ﬁrst order of business every day, I am 
giving it enormous symbolic importance in my life, which helps keep me 
motivated. If I’m not at my desk by sunrise, I feel like I’m missing my most 
productive hours. In addition to starting early, I keep an antique hour glass 
on my desk and every hour break brieﬂy to do push-ups, sit-ups, and some 
quick stretches. I ﬁnd this helps keep the blood (and ideas) ﬂowing. (The 
Bookseller, 31 March 2006)
The Da Vinci Code sold around 40 million copies in its ﬁrst year, and has made 
Dan Brown a fortune. Yet for many authors, the income earned is of secondary 
importance, and the pleasure of seeing their work published is a reward in itself. 
There is no shortage of authors who would like to be published, and in fact there 
is an oversupply. How then do authors set about getting published? The 
The novelist 
Jeanette 
Winterson says 
about writing: 
‘It is what I’m 
for’
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
128
traditional method was to send your manuscript to a number of publishers, and 
hope that it caught the eye of the relevant editor.
After all, J. K. Rowling was rejected by a number of publishers before being 
picked up by Bloomsbury. What is known as the slush pile is a system seldom 
operated by publishers anymore, and trade publishers will rely on agents to supply 
them with proposals. Authors look to be signed up by an agent ﬁrst and many 
publishers do not accept unsolicited material. Agents can receive hundreds of 
submissions each month and the chances of being taken on are slim, but 
ﬁrst-time authors are still discovered through this route. In recent years agents 
have relied more on personal contacts and recommendations, and many are also 
closed to receiving unsolicited typescripts. The slush pile has been moved online, 
with authors posting their work on community sites for writers such as Wattpad. 
There they can engage directly with readers and gain feedback:
Wattpad is the world’s largest community for discovering and sharing stories. 
It’s a new form of entertainment connecting readers and writers through 
storytelling, and best of all, it’s entirely free. With thousands of new stories 
added every day, an incredibly active community of readers, and the ability to 
read on your computer, phone, or tablet, Wattpad is the only place that oﬀ ers 
a truly social, and entirely mobile reading experience. (wattpad.com, accessed 
29 June 2013)
The 17-year-old UK novelist Beth Reekles posted her novel The Kissing Booth on 
Wattpad, chapter by chapter, and started to gauge her popularity when she posted 
a cliﬀ hanger, which led to hundreds of emails from readers.
‘When I 
finished my 
first novel, I 
put it into a 
brown 
envelope and 
sent it to 
Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson. Now, 
I don’t imagine 
they’d even 
look at it.’ 
Margaret 
Drabble 
(Guardian, 6 
November 
2013)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
129
In between homework assignments, Beth Reekles wrote a novel, The Kissing 
Booth, which centers on a never-been-kissed teenager who comes face-to-face 
with her secret crush while running a kissing booth for her school carnival. 
She posted the novel on self-publishing Web site Wattpad, and it caught the 
attention of Lauren Buckland, senior editor at Random House Children’s 
Publishing UK. (Publishers Weekly, 9 April 2013)
The book was taken on by Random House and published (ﬁ rst as an ebook) in 
2012.
When celebrities or sports stars come to write their memoirs, they may 
require the services of ghost writers to turn their words or thoughts into a 
polished book. Sometimes the writer will remain anonymous, but since such a 
working relationship has become quite usual their name may even appear on the 
title page. Most academic theses that are sent direct to editors are unpublishable 
as they stand, but a fraction can be turned into monographs. It is very unlikely 
that an unsolicited textbook manuscript would have the right structure to be 
commercial, but occasionally unsolicited ideas can be developed. In areas such 
as non-ﬁction and textbook publishing, publishers will want to see a proposal 
from the author as the ﬁrst stage. This is an outline of the proposed book, which 
sets out the content and gives the publisher a sense of the book’s commercial 
potential. The advantage of this system is that the author need not take the risk 
of writing the whole book until they have a contract in place.
Book proposal
The following are the main elements of a book proposal.
Title
This must be eye-catching and can be crucial to the book’s success.
Introduction
A summary of the idea for the book and its likely market.
Contents
An outline of the structure of the book, ﬂeshed out to show what each chapter will 
cover.
Readership and market
Who will buy the book and what is the market? The danger here is to rely on the 
mythical general reader, and avoid the difﬁcult task of saying who is likely to need, 
or be interested, in the title. (An equivalent danger is trying to reach too many 
markets with one book.) For a book on canoes, will it help someone paddle one, or 
build one? What is the readership for a business textbook – ﬁrst-year 
undergraduate or graduate students?
Donna Tartt 
says, ‘The 
immediacy of 
discovery, 
that’s what’s 
interesting to 
me. Every book 
is a different 
country’ 
(Sunday Times, 
13 October 
2013)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
130
Competition
Successful authors know the market for which they are writing – not just the 
readership but also competing titles. How will the book diﬀ er and improve upon 
the titles presently available? Existing titles on the same subject may not be a 
disadvantage, since they can help prove there is a market. Indirect competition 
could include content on the web, not just published titles.
Marketing ideas
How can the book be marketed? Ideas can include forthcoming events or 
anniversaries, hooks to arouse media interest, public appearances and connections 
with inﬂuential people.
Author details
Required are biographical details of the author with relevant information such as 
previous publications. For non-ﬁction books it is important for the author to prove 
their credentials as an expert in the subject area of the book. Publishers may be 
interested in whether the author is promotable to the media, for example in the 
case of a ﬁrst-time novelist. An author can also display a talent for self-promotion, 
and they are often expected to have their own website, blog, or Twitter account. 
This is the cause of some disillusion to the writer Jonathan Franzen, who said:
what happens to the people who became writers because yakking and 
tweeting and bragging felt to them like intolerably shallow forms of social 
engagement? What happens to the people who want to communicate in 
depth, individual to individual, in the quiet and permanence of the printed 
word, and who were shaped by their love of writers who wrote when 
publication still assured some kind of quality control and literary reputations 
were more than a matter of self-promotional decibel levels? (Guardian, 13 
September 2013)
Additional material may also be attached, such as sample sections or chapters. 
There should be no spelling or grammatical mistakes in the sample material.
Once completed by the author, the proposal is sent to the relevant in-house 
editor. An agent may also invest a lot of time in rewriting the proposal to raise its 
chances of success. If there is interest from the publisher, suggestions for changes 
may be made before the proposal is circulated to key decision-makers in sales and 
marketing. The ﬁnal decision on a proposal is taken at an editorial meeting 
attended by the relevant staﬀ .
STARTING OUT AND SELF-PUBLISHING
It is tough for authors to get their work published. It is common for authors to 
begin their published career with smaller publishing houses, which may be less 
conservative in their approach to commissioning titles. The difﬁculty for smaller 
Author to 
Consumer 
(A2C) 
marketing is 
growing in 
importance
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
131
houses is that they may not have the funds to keep authors who have become 
successful.
There are trends in publishing which may aﬀ ect what types of books 
publishers would like to acquire. In 2012 the top categories amongst the 
bestsellers were romance and sagas (boosted by the huge success of the Fifty 
Shades of Grey trilogy) followed by children’s ﬁ ction, young adult ﬁ ction and 
crime. Arthur Klebanoﬀ  comments that the ‘commercial prospects for writers of 
non-ﬁ ction are heavily inﬂ uenced by choice of subject matter and sometimes by 
ﬁ ckle public response to subject matter’ (page 91). Sales of ebooks have been 
dominated by genre ﬁ ction, and digital-only imprints have concentrated on areas 
such as sci-ﬁ , fantasy, crime and romance. Liate Stehlik, a publisher at 
HarperCollins in New York, said that ebooks are the optimal format
for people who want to read a lot of books, quickly and frequently. Digital 
has replaced the paperback, certainly the paperback originals. I think the 
audience that gravitated to ebooks ﬁ rst really was that voracious reader, 
reading for entertainment, reading multiple books in a month across 
multiple genres. (Wired, 26 June 2013)
First-time novelists can be oﬀ ered a two- or three-book deal, which ensures that they 
are already signed up should their ﬁrst book prove to be a winner. The advance paid 
can also be set against all of the books. If an author does hit the big time straight 
away, this can prove to be a mixed blessing, increasing the pressure on them to 
deliver another bestseller. Also it is possible they are trapped in their agreement 
with a smaller publisher, unable to accept the higher terms being oﬀ ered to move 
publisher. A midlist author with several modestly successful titles in print in turn 
runs the risk that they are dropped by their agent or publisher in favour of new 
authors, perhaps seen as more ‘promotable’ (viewed by some to mean young and 
good looking). Francesca Simon describes how it took some time before her Horrid 
Henry children’s books became successful: ‘It wasn’t until Horrid Henry’s Nits was 
published, three years on, that the books started to attract attention. Nowadays, if 
authors haven’t got noticed after two books, they are cast adrift. So had I begun it 10 
years later, Horrid Henry would never have had a chance’ (Guardian, 17 June 2013).
Publishers may look to pick up titles that have originated in blogs or from 
the large number of creative writing courses that are now available. Blogs oﬀ er 
publishers market testing as to which writers can attract and keep an audience. 
Christian Lander started a blog, ‘Stuﬀ  White People Like’, in 2008 and within 
three months he had a book deal with Random House. His blog satirizes the 
interest of left-leaning, city-dwelling white folk (stuﬀ whitepeoplelike.com). The 
blurb for the book categorizes them as follows: ‘They love nothing better than 
sipping free-trade gourmet coﬀ ee, leaﬁ ng through the Sunday New York Times, 
and listening to David Sedaris on NPR [National Public Radio] (ideally all at the 
same time). Apple products, indie music, food co-ops, and vintage T-shirts make 
them weak in the knees.’
Creative writing courses have proliferated in the USA and the UK and 
famously Ian McEwan was the ﬁrst writer on the MA course at the University of 
East Anglia, run by Malcolm Bradbury and Angus Wilson. Marina Lewycka’s ﬁrst 
novel, A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian (2005), was picked up by an agent 
George R.R. 
Martin 
originally 
conceived A 
Song of Ice and 
Fire as a trilogy: 
‘At the time, in 
the mid-
nineties, 
fantasy was 
dominated by 
trilogies’
In 2010 there 
were around 
150 m blogs 
worldwide
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
132
when she joined the course at Shefﬁeld Hallam University, and was published in 
2005 when she was 58. The poet and novelist Andrew Motion is Professor of 
Creative Writing at Royal Holloway, University of London:
There was a time when creative writing courses were seen on a par with 
athletes taking steroids, as if it somehow gave them an unfair advantage. 
There was this idea that creative writing was something that had to take place 
in a garret. But aspiring dancers go to the Royal Ballet School, and actors to 
Rada – why should writing be any diﬀ erent? (Guardian, 10 May 2011)
New consultancies have developed in the UK oﬀ ering writers’ services. For a fee, 
the company oﬀ ers to give the author an assessment of their manuscript, both 
the writing and the likely market, and editorial services including rewriting of 
proposals or full works. Publishers have also developed a range of services 
including creative writing workshops and self-publishing operations. Novelists 
such as S. J. Watson and Rachel Joyce are alumni of the Faber Academy, which 
oﬀ ers courses for aspiring writers.
Self-publishing has left behind any stigma of vanity publishing – it is 
inexpensive on the web and cheap in print form. It can take place directly by the 
author or through a specialized company oﬀ ering a service. Ambitious authors can 
take to sites such as Kickstarter to crowdfund a multimedia writing project. As well 
as posting work on community sites, writers can publish their book as an ebook on 
Amazon or other platform such as Smashwords. Starting from the Word ﬁ le, an 
author can make their book available in a very short space of time. Patrick Barkham 
wrote that ‘It has never been easier to publish your own book. Traditional publishers 
may take a year to turn your manuscript into print on a page but you can get your 
own ebook on sale around the world in about four minutes’ (Guardian, 6 June 
2012). A self-published author typically receives a 70 per cent share on ebook sales, 
whereas through a publisher would receive 25 per cent. However, self-publishing 
authors have to bear at their risk and expense all the costs, such as editing, cover 
design, marketing and project management. The chances of bestsellerdom remain 
slim: most self-published authors sell fewer than 100 or 150 copies (New York Times, 
15 August 2012). But the success stories are there. In 2012 ﬁ fteen of the top one 
hundred bestselling Kindle titles in the UK were self-published, twelve self-
published authors sold more than 100,000 copies, and ﬁ fty authors earned at least 
£50,000 from their self-published books (Forbes, 14 January 2013).
The internet has enabled many kinds of self-publishing. For example, in the 
area of fan ﬁction – new works written by fans of original ﬁction – there are now 
hundreds of thousands of stories available online based on the characters from the 
Harry Potter books. For print publishing, the growth of print on demand using 
digital printing means that print runs can be as low as a few or single copies. 
Companies such as CreateSpace (owned by Amazon), AuthorHouse (owned by 
Penguin) and Lulu oﬀ er authors a low-cost route to publication. Only when a book 
is ordered from Lulu’s website is it then printed and sent to the purchaser. The 
company was founded by the digital entrepreneur, Bob Young, who saw the need 
for a way to help authors publish niche items such as poetry or technical manuals. 
However, self-published authors usually ﬁ nd that booksellers will not stock their 
print titles.
In 2011 over 
235,000 titles 
were self-
published in 
the USA
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
133
AGENTS
Literary agents, now called authors’ agents (reﬂecting the broad range of writers they 
represent), are mostly located in London or New York, giving them close proximity 
to their main customers: ﬁction and non-ﬁction editors, mainly in adult but also in 
children’s book publishers and other media industries. Their business is selling and 
licensing rights to a variety of media (not just book publishers) at home and abroad 
on behalf of their client authors with whom they have a contract on each book for 
the full term of copyright. Agents receive a commission on authors’ earnings, 
typically 15 per cent on earnings from home sales but rising to 20 per cent on deals 
made abroad. The commission on ﬁlm and TV deals tends to be from 15 to 20 per 
cent. The prevalence, power and inﬂuence of agents are very much a feature of the 
Anglo-American media worlds. In mainland Europe and elsewhere there are still 
few agents, although the numbers are growing. There are also ‘sub-agents’ of 
English language agents or publishers – not of local authors – who may earn half 
of the 20 per cent commission received by the UK agent. Some Anglo-American 
agents sell directly into foreign language markets. There are also literary scouts, who 
tip oﬀ  agents and publishers about new authors – or established authors in other 
territories – in return for a fee. Scouts are sometimes described as the ‘black ops’ of 
the book business (Publishing Perspectives, 13 February 2012).
Agents operate in an increasingly polarized market in which a small number 
of top-selling authors secure advances against royalties of more than £100,000, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
134
compared to the majority of authors receiving advances below £10,000. An agent 
may spend equal amounts of time on both types of author, but with a very 
diﬀ erent ﬁnancial return. For example, if an agent secures an advance of £6,000 
and charges 15 per cent commission, their share is just £900.
Agents represent many of the established professional writers: those who 
derive much of their income from writing. While some agents are prepared to 
review unsolicited manuscripts from aspiring novelists for which they may charge 
a reading fee, others discourage this practice and take on new clients only on 
personal recommendations from credited sources, such as media contacts and 
their other clients. Agents manage lists of authors and taking on a new writer 
may mean dropping an established client. Rarely is it worthwhile for an agent to 
represent academics unless their work appeals to a wide readership. Authors can 
make multiple submissions – to several agents at once – but this method should 
be used with caution. Andrew Lownie oﬀ ers this advice:
Agents understand that authors need to make multiple submissions to 
agencies but dislike ‘beauty parades’. It is not ﬂ attering nor encouraging to 
be told one is simply one of a hundred approaches. Time is limited and if 
one suspects the author may go elsewhere then one simply says no at the 
beginning. Keep quiet about multiple submissions and only send a few at a 
time so one can adapt the submission in the light of responses. 
(andrewlownie.co.uk, accessed 29 June 2013)
Once an agent has taken on an author, it is their job to pitch the book to the right 
editor in the most suitable publishing house. The literary publishing house 
Jonathan Cape was rarely oﬀ ered more commercial books, and in his memoir 
Publisher, Tom Maschler recalls being sent the manuscript for Not a Penny More, 
Not a Penny Less by the literary agent Deborah Owen. The author, unknown at the 
time, was Jeﬀ rey Archer.
She did not actually say it was a ﬁ rst submission but, in the manner of certain 
agents content to mislead, this was the implication. The aspect of Archer’s 
book which especially intrigued me was that he himself had been involved in 
a con and had lost a great deal of money, both his own and others’. And now 
he had written a thriller about a man similar to himself, and furthermore was 
doing so in order to earn a large sum so that the money could be repaid . . . I 
found the conceit intriguing, and although the style was indiﬀ erent, decided 
to oﬀ er a contract. I must admit I was motivated, in part, by the feeling that 
Jeﬀ rey was so obviously ambitious that he would be likely to succeed in 
almost anything to which he put his mind. (page 200)
An agent manages a writer’s career primarily from a commercial viewpoint, 
for example by placing the author’s work with the right publisher or fuelling 
competition between publishers (on major books by holding auctions); 
negotiating deals to secure the best terms; by submitting their own contracts 
to licensors weighted in the authors’ favour; checking or querying both 
publishers’ advance payments against royalties, and royalty statements, and 
chasing debts.
In 2012 Neil 
Gaiman signed 
a five-book deal 
to write 
children’s 
books for 
HarperCollins
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
135
The example of the author–publisher contract summarized in Chapter 8, and 
weighted in the publisher’s favour, shows the author granting various world rights 
to the publisher. Because most authors are unable to market the rights in their 
work worldwide they mainly allow publishers to do so on their behalf. But an 
agent representing an author may limit the rights granted to a publisher, and their 
territorial extent, and license the rights retained on behalf of the author to other 
ﬁrms at home and abroad. They do this both to maximize the author’s income but 
also in order to ensure a range of advocates for the author’s work. For instance, 
the UK publisher’s licence may apply to the English language only, and the 
territory (the countries) in which it has the exclusive right to publish (for example 
the Commonwealth and Europe) are listed, as well as those from which it could be 
excluded (for example the USA, including/excluding Canada). An agent could 
then license the book in the English language to a US publisher directly. A UK 
publisher, within its exclusive territory, could for instance be granted the following 
rights: the right to publish in hardback, paperback and ebook; and to license to 
others – book club, reprints, second and subsequent serial (for example extracts 
appearing in newspapers after the book’s publication), quotation and anthology, 
mechanical and reproduction, broadcast reading rights, etc. An agent would then 
retain, for example, foreign language translation, ﬁrst serial rights (extracts 
appearing before book publication thereby giving a newspaper a scoop), stage/
radio/television/ﬁlm dramatization, games, merchandising, audio and other 
electronic rights.
However, there is no clear-cut division of rights or territories covered – each 
book diﬀ ers. A publisher which has the idea for the book and contributes much 
editorial and design eﬀ ort, or which is investing a large amount, for instance in 
a new writer on a two-book deal, has a strong case for acquiring wide territorial 
and language rights and the sharing of other rights. Publishers and packagers 
producing highly illustrated books for the international market need world rights 
in all languages. A wider set of rights is needed in order to recoup the initial high 
costs of these books. Book packagers and some highly illustrated book publishers 
often try to acquire the copyright outright from authors, enabling subsequent 
repackaging and recycling of authors’ material without further payment or author 
contract.
UK agents retaining rights may sell them directly to US publishers or 
mainland European publishers, or use overseas agents with whom they have 
arrangements. Conversely, UK agents may represent well-known American 
authors on behalf of US agents, and sometimes US publishers. Agents also sell 
rights to a range of media, such as to ﬁ lm, TV and game companies. The selling of 
rights from a publisher’s viewpoint is described in Chapter 12; an agent’s work is 
similar except that an agent solely represents the author.
An additional dimension of agents’ work falls under an editorial heading. For 
instance, agents send out synopses and manuscripts for external review, comment 
on manuscripts and advise authors on what they might write and the media they 
might write for, and develop ideas with them. Agents might be asked by 
publishers to supply authors; or they might initiate projects themselves for sale to 
publishers. In such ways, some agents increasingly take on roles which were once 
the province of publishers’ editors. They can reﬂect trade realities back to authors, 
and arbitrate on arguments between their authors and publishers. They may help 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
136
an author evaluate the publisher’s marketing plan and oﬀ er support during the 
book’s marketing, such as on the development of the cover. A further role may be 
to manage the author’s backlist, which could include moving titles between 
publishers or negotiating ebook deals on older titles, or helping them to self-
publish ebooks through a scheme such as White Glove from Amazon.
Agents provide a degree of continuity in the face of changing personnel 
amongst publishers and editors. However, some authors decide to change agents 
or are poached by them. This famously happened when Martin Amis changed 
agents to Andrew Wylie, known as the ‘Jackal’, when selling the rights in his novel 
The Information (1995). The former agent may continue to receive commission on 
contracts which they negotiated. The long-established agencies manage the 
literary estates of classic authors whose work remains in copyright.
Agents usually specialize in particular genres, such as adult ﬁction or 
non-ﬁction, or children’s books. Some agents operate from home as single-person 
companies but the trend in recent years has been for agencies to get larger in 
order to meet the needs of authors with interests across a range of media, 
including public speaking appearances. They may be in competition against other 
kinds of agents who represent celebrities and sports stars. There are medium-
sized agencies consisting of several agents plus assistants, and major agencies 
such as Curtis Brown and AP Watt. A large agency has a range of agents, each of 
whom specializes in broad areas of books or the selling of particular rights, 
though each agent usually looks after a particular primary group of authors. A 
specialism is ﬁlm and TV rights, which involves selecting books for screen 
adaptation, and submitting them to producers. Some of their assistants show 
sufﬁcient aptitude to develop their own list of authors, and new agents come from 
rights and editorial staﬀ  of the publishers. The larger agencies usually have 
agencies on both sides of the Atlantic, and good connections in Hollywood. There 
are also agencies which specialize in selling particular rights, such as translation, 
or ﬁlm and television, on behalf of publishers and authors’ agents. Sometimes a 
package of talent (book, star and director) is oﬀ ered to a ﬁlm studio.
Agents may fear disintermediation in an age of self-publishing, and this has 
led many to broaden their oﬀ er. They have followed publishers into the area of 
creative writing courses (for example Curtis Brown Creative), and some agents 
oﬀ er authors assistance or advice on digital marketing and self-publishing. 
Diversiﬁ cation has led some into ﬁ lm production or to co-invest in new digital 
projects. More controversially, others have established their own publishing 
imprints, leading to questions about a possible conﬂ ict of interest – can their 
advice to authors remain independent?
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author
137
Now read this
Chapter 7, Commissioning.
Carole Blake, From Pitch to Publication, Pan, 1999.
Sources
ALCS, What are words worth?, March 2007.
Alison Baverstock, The Naked Author: A guide to self-publishing, A&C Black, 
2011.
Julia Bell (ed.), The Creative Writing Coursebook, Macmillan, 2001.
Alexander Gordon Smith, Writing Bestselling Children’s Books, Inﬁ nite Ideas, 
2007.
Arthur M. Klebanoﬀ , The Agent, Texere, 2002.
Mandy Little, ‘Agenting Now’, Logos, 22:2, 2011.
Tom Maschler, Publisher, Picador, 2005.
Rachael Stock, The Insider’s Guide to Getting Your Book Published, 2nd edition, 
Trotman, 2011.
Published annually, the following guides contain useful information about 
publishers and literary agents:
UK
The Writers’ and Artists’ Yearbook, A&C Black.
USA
Children’s Writer and Illustrator’s Market, Writer’s Digest.
Guide to Literary Agents, Writer’s Digest.
Writer’s Market, Writer’s Digest.
Web resources
www.agentsassoc.co.uk Association of Authors’ Agents.
www.andrewlownie.co.uk/ﬁ fteen_tips Useful tips on approaching agents, 
from Andrew Lownie.
www.authonomy.co.uk Writing community from HarperCollins.
www.bookcountry.com Writing community owned by Penguin.
www.fanﬁ ction.net Thousands of examples of fan ﬁ ction, from Harry Potter to 
The Lord of the Rings.
www.freakonomics.com/blog/ An example of an author blog – for 
Freakonomics by Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner.
www.jeanettewinterson.com This includes a Flash movie proﬁ ling her books.
www.publishingcrawl.com Blog from authors and industry professionals.
www.scbwi.org Society of Children’s Book Writers and Illustrators.
www.societyofauthors.net Society of Authors.
www.writersandartists.co.uk ‘The insider guide to the media’.
www.writersguild.org.uk The Writers’ Guild of Great Britain.
www.youwriteon.com Peer review website sponsored by the Arts Council 
(UK).
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 7
Commissioning
The commissioning editor in a publishing house is responsible for coming up 
with marketable ideas and matching them to good authors. Working for the 
editorial director or publisher, who manages the editorial team, the editor is a key 
player in the publishing process. The more senior commissioning editors will take 
a strategic view of their list or imprint – called list-building – while junior editors 
may commission within a set brief.
Most editors remain unseen to readers, although the best editors across all 
types of publishing become known and respected by author communities in their 
particular ﬁ elds. The role of editors, especially in consumer book publishing, has 
been impacted over generations by changes in the publishing environment. After 
the Second World War, editors had to adapt to the rise of authors’ agents, and 
during the 1960s and 1970s to the impact of corporate accountants instilling 
ﬁ nancial controls. The rise of the bookselling chains in the 1980s and 1990s 
aﬀ ected the types of books published and increased the power of sales and 
marketing over publishing decisions. The transition to digital publishing is having 
an enormous impact on editors across all ﬁ elds of publishing: whether it is how 
they connect with authors and readers – for example, they may use social media to 
promote a book long before publication – or in the opportunities presented to 
publish books in a variety of formats. Digital publication also opens up an 
international audience, and editors need to be aware of what will work 
commercially around the world.
EDITORIAL COMMISSIONING
In consumer books, editors may cover diﬀ erent ﬁction genres or non-ﬁ ction areas, 
or specialize in hardback, paperback or digital lists, or children’s/YA books. In 
educational, academic and STM houses, an editor may concentrate on several 
subjects, spanning a variety of academic levels and markets, or on product types, 
such as journals or textbooks. The style and identity of each list are the outcome of 
the editor’s attitudes and eﬀ ort.
A publisher depends on its editors to provide a sufﬁcient ﬂow of publishable 
projects to maintain the planned level of activity, for example 15 to 30 new books 
annually per editor, sometimes far fewer or three times more (depending on the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
139
market sector). Editors are assessed on the revenue they bring in or the overall 
proﬁt, or contribution, of their books. They are seen by some publishers as 
business managers. Publishers have electronic systems in which editors record 
their output in terms of titles commissioned and forecast revenue. Editors out of 
tune with senior management regarding the character of the books, or who fail to 
produce a proﬁt, leave voluntarily or are ﬁred. The job is high risk and exposed, 
especially in consumer publishing.
With some exceptions, such as in the area of ﬁction, editors do not assess 
titles for publication on their thorough reading of complete manuscripts. Most 
books (including some ﬁction) are commissioned from authors on the basis of a 
proposal or specimen material, or are bought from agents. Editors generally do 
not edit the author’s work in detail – that is done by freelancers or junior in-house 
staﬀ . However, the senior editors may structurally edit by giving authors 
substantive criticisms and suggestions to help them produce their best work and 
to shape it for the intended market.
A distinction can be made between books acquired from agents or 
authors, where the idea often comes from the author, and those books that are 
commissioned from scratch by the editor. In the case of the latter books, the idea 
comes from the editor, who then goes in search of a suitable author. In textbook 
publishing, for example, this is the typical process for commissioning.
List-building
Publishing lists have their own identity and even within the larger groups there 
has been a conscious decision to keep separate imprints, each with their own 
distinctive ﬂavour. In consumer publishing, imprints assist the trade to make 
sense of the large number of new and existing titles. Lists may be built around 
ﬁ ction genres and authors (in ﬁction, for example), subjects (the Yellow Jersey list 
of sports books), brands (for example the Teach Yourself and For Dummies titles 
span a large range of subjects), or design character (text only or highly illustrated). 
A set of titles that presents a deﬁ ned genre or subject to a speciﬁ c audience will 
have a greater value than one which simply aggregates disparate titles. Successful 
lists attract both authors and readers, and marketing a list is often more cost-
eﬀ ective with cross-marketing opportunities between titles. Lists are assets which 
can be bought and sold between publishers. List-builders may be asked to create a 
new imprint from scratch – reﬂecting changes in the market or strategic ambition 
– or to expand and strengthen an existing list. They will be on the look-out for new 
authors and projects, bearing in mind their list’s identity, and focus, future 
direction and changing boundaries.
A programme of new editions is important in non-ﬁction and essential in 
textbook publishing, in order to refresh the list and keep titles up-to-date. 
Rebranding the list in new covers can also achieve this. A strategic view includes 
planning digital developments, for example in the areas of travel or textbook 
publishing.
Yellow Jersey 
Press, an 
imprint of 
Random 
House, was 
founded in 
1998 by Rachel 
Cugnoni: ‘Then 
followed the 
two most 
terrifying years 
of my life. I’d 
never 
commissioned 
a book before, 
let alone edited 
one, but 
somehow or 
other it was 
successful, and 
hallelujah’
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
140
Editorial contacts and market research
Good personal contacts are paramount for commissioning. An editor’s in-house 
contacts are the members of senior management who accept or veto projects; the 
people who produce the books; and those who market and sell them. But more 
signiﬁcant are the editor’s external contacts. Prime sources of new books are the 
ﬁrm’s previously published authors – they often have new ideas, or editors suggest 
ideas to them which are developed jointly.
Consumer books
In consumer book publishing, editors try to establish a mutual trust with authors 
and their agents (often over lunch). Agents may send ﬁction manuscripts or 
non-ﬁction proposals to selected editors one at a time, or sometimes conduct 
auctions amongst several publishers on highly saleable titles. Conversely an editor 
may contact an agent if they are pursuing one of their stable of authors, or have 
an idea and want the agent to ﬁnd an author. Fiction editors may ﬁnd new talent 
by spotting people who can write well, not necessarily ﬁction. They may be 
journalists or writers who are being published poorly or in an uncommercial 
medium, or who have generated a following for their blog. Editors may look to 
pick up authors from community sites or from the pool of self-published authors 
– the writers come already market tested. Celebrity authors may have to be wooed, 
sometimes in an unusual fashion:
In the summer of 2010, the Oscar-winning actress and writer Emma 
Thompson received an intriguing package in the post. Inside was a small 
cardboard box with a half-eaten radish leaf and a letter from Peter Rabbit. The 
letter said Thompson’s ‘certain mischievous twinkle’ in her eye made her the 
perfect person to write another adventure for the rabbit – a sequel to Beatrix 
Potter’s beloved children’s story. (Daily Telegraph, 5 September 2012)
Non-ﬁction editors develop contacts in a variety of ﬁelds, constantly keep an ear to 
the ground, notice people’s enthusiasms, or review the media or blogosphere for 
topical subjects. They try to predict trends or events which will be in the public’s 
interest, monitor successful book categories and authors by understanding what 
makes them good and why are they selling, and either avoid the competition, 
imitate it, or attempt to ﬁnd unﬁlled niches by developing a new twist. They write 
speculatively to those who have the potential to capture the public’s imagination 
– as do agents. They could be an up-and-coming celebrity or sports star, or an 
academic with a talent for popularization. Editors interested in television and ﬁlm 
tie-ins keep abreast of new productions and monitor audience ratings.
Editors forge links with other ﬁrms from whom they might buy or sell to, for 
example at the Frankfurt Book Fair or, in the case of highly illustrated books, with 
packagers. UK editors are in contact with US editors and rights sales managers 
in order to gather market intelligence on new projects. Children’s book editors 
have contact with agents, packagers, teachers and librarians, and if producing 
illustrated colour books know US and foreign language publishers with whom 
they might trade.
Nielsen 
BookScan 
provides the 
publishers with 
sales data on 
their own and 
competitors’ 
titles
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
141
Working with authors
Simon Winder, Publishing Director at Penguin Press
Working with authors is a delicate and complex business. There is a constant 
need for the editor to balance between the needs of the business and the 
sensibilities of the author. Sometimes these are simply not reconcilable – there 
are deadlines to be met, jacket designs to be approved, ruthless decisions about 
acceptable length, costs and schedule. But it is too easy for the editor to slip into 
the role of an incompetent sort of slave-driver. Somehow corporate timetables 
and demands have to be balanced with a much more delicate and private world.
Authors who are driven along will, at a point invisible to the editor, 
suddenly realize that their relationship with their publisher is no longer 
enjoyable and, however regretfully, will simply run away, moving on to a fresh 
publisher. An author sometimes spends years working on a project, often in 
considerable isolation: the smallest thing can take on a huge importance, 
whether it is a speciﬁ c phrase or a way of laying out the page or placing an 
image. The tension between an editor and an author is inevitable, but editors 
must not ever lose sight of the fact that one of the reasons they are being paid 
by their employer is to act as a reliable and truthful conduit for an author’s 
feelings. If, for example, an author really hates a jacket design, the editor 
has to balance corporate needs (the deadline approaches, the art director is 
adamant) with an imperative to be the author’s advocate. If an important 
manuscript is really not ready, then the editor has to act accordingly and break 
the bad news to colleagues and as early as possible.
All departments in publishing have important relationships which are 
outside the oﬃ  ce and which are largely invisible to those they work with – 
Production with printers, Publicity with literary editors, Design with freelancers. 
For the editor those invisible relationships are with agents and their authors, and 
in the end those relationships are based around trust, reliability and availability. 
Other editors are always prowling around and each has nightmares about that 
party or dinner, to which they are not invited, at which a competitor successfully 
turns an agent’s or author’s head. A lot can be done to head this oﬀ  just by 
remembering to keep in touch – even if a manuscript is not due to deliver for 
another three years, it is really easy with a short email or an occasional lunch or 
drink to remind a writer, who may be having a terrible time battling with an 
intractable script, that you are to hand and can be talked to, shouted at, cried 
over pretty much any time day or night. This thoughtfulness can feel like an 
intolerable burden, as it sits to one side from the day-to-day rain of emails and 
oﬃ  ce deadlines and is invisible to colleagues, but for some writers it can be a 
real life-line – they have someone to talk to and a real incentive to hit often very 
diﬃ  cult targets – any worthwhile book is a triumph of exertion and focus. If the 
editor has done a good job at this stage in the process, then the editor is also 
much more likely to be believed and trusted by the author when the ﬁ nal, tricky 
stages of deadlines, blurbs, jackets and so on march into view, making these a 
lot less grim, and making the slave-driver editor a thing of the past.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
142
Non-consumer publishing
The educational, academic, STM and professional book editors publish for more 
deﬁned markets about which more statistical information is available. This 
includes student enrolments, and the numbers of researchers or professionals 
working in speciﬁc ﬁelds. These editors, apart from reading school and college 
syllabuses, and the relevant journals, are engaged in direct market research and 
product development, especially in textbook publishing.
Quantitative research can include:
 
▪
student numbers,
 
▪
number of courses in a subject,
 
▪
sales ﬁgures of similar titles, and
 
▪
market share of the leading titles and publishers (indicated by data from 
Amazon).
Qualitative research covers:
 
▪
trends in the subject area,
 
▪
analysis of competing titles – their extent, features, authors, strengths and 
weaknesses,
 
▪
questionnaire results on products used and future needs,
 
▪
focus group data – from students, teachers or librarians, and
 
▪
visiting schools or universities.
The academic and STM publishers may retain for each discipline exclusive advisers 
who direct new writers to their publishers. They could be senior academics or 
professionals with worldwide contacts. Expert general or series editors may be 
employed by publishers, especially in non-consumer sectors. Their task is to help 
editors develop and edit the books, and they usually receive a small royalty.
It is vital for editors to understand the current and future market on the 
ground. Educational editors see local education subject advisers, inspectors, 
examiners and lecturers on teacher training courses; school heads, and teachers 
using the materials in the classroom; and attend conferences. They need to 
understand forthcoming changes to the curriculum (and the opportunities they 
oﬀ er), and the trajectory within subjects stimulated by the views of the latest 
education minister. ELT editors, in addition to using UK contacts, will travel 
abroad and visit ministries and institutes of education, private language schools, 
ofﬁces of the British Council, and local publishers and distributors to meet key 
contacts and decision-makers. College textbook editors spend several days a week 
visiting universities and will meet teaching staﬀ  in order to discover subject 
trends, ﬁnd out their views on the books currently available, and ﬂush out ideas 
and contacts they have and to sell the ﬁrm’s books. Academic editors may forge 
links with institutions, societies and industry organizations for which they could 
publish or distribute books or journals. They will visit academic conferences to 
network and become known amongst the relevant academic communities. 
Organizations and societies issue publishers with invitations to tender to publish 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
143
their materials (such as journals), and competing editors will submit bids on 
behalf of their companies. When large US sales are anticipated, editors shape the 
material in conjunction with their US counterparts and visit their sister 
companies. All editors receive in-house feedback from the marketing and sales 
departments.
The editor in educational publishing
Brenda Stones, Author, editor and lecturer on educational publishing
What is special about educational publishing?
Because both the content and the size of market are ﬁxed, UK educational 
publishing is ﬁercely competitive, and the areas in which publishers can 
compete are often less to do with the products and more to do with the 
services oﬀ ered to the customer. The content is prescribed by the National 
Curriculum and exam syllabuses, with little opportunity for diﬀ erent 
interpretations. The size of the market is ﬁxed in terms of the number of 
students in a year group or for a particular subject or syllabus, and of the 
funding delivered to schools by the government. So the only opportunities for 
expanding the market are, for example, in export territories and from parental 
spending. The publisher usually sells directly to teachers, rather than through 
the intermediary of bookshops or distributors, and this gives the opportunity 
for direct contact with the purchasers.
What are the key tasks of the educational editor?
The editor has to research their markets thoroughly, in order to gain 
familiarity with the curriculum and anticipate its future changes. They have 
to study their competitors – their market shares, and how their products 
compete – and their audience, meaning both the teachers who make the 
purchasing decisions and the students who are the ultimate consumers. Each 
editor has to make a forward plan of print or digital products to be published 
in a range of subjects and levels, to meet the revenue targets expected by the 
company. With the choice of technology platforms, in particular, the editor 
has to be sure that suﬃ  cient revenue is being generated by single-copy digital 
resources, by comparison with the multi-copy print-based sales. Appropriate 
authors or author teams are then commissioned to write materials to the 
editor’s speciﬁcation, and the editor maintains communication on progress 
throughout the development of the project.
Additional tasks include brieﬁng the design of the products, so that they 
are easy to teach from, easy to read, and appealing to teachers and students. 
There is always hands-on editing in educational publishing, to ensure that the 
text covers the curriculum requirements, is factually accurate, and is at an 
appropriate language level for the particular students. The editor writes 
promotional copy and briefs the promotion and sales staﬀ  on the beneﬁts of 

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
144
the new publications. Finally the editor monitors the sales of their educational 
list against targets for revenue, proﬁtability and market share.
What experience and skills do educational editors need?
 
▪
Teaching experience, especially if this involved writing teaching 
materials,
 
▪
the ability to write and edit to diﬀ erent language levels,
 
▪
a sense of accuracy and eye for detail,
 
▪
numeracy, and the ability to interpret numerical data,
 
▪
familiarity with technologies and how they are used in the classroom,
 
▪
visual awareness, and the ability to organize visual information,
 
▪
sympathy for children and their interests at diﬀ erent ages,
 
▪
a deep interest in the importance of education and how children learn.
The decision to publish
Many factors inﬂuence an editor’s decision to pursue a new project.
Suitability for list
A title has to ﬁt the style and aims of the list it will join, so that it is compatible 
with the ﬁrm’s particular marketing systems and its sales channels to market. 
Taking on a book in a new subject area has implications for marketing and sales, 
not just editorial. Editors assessing new titles are also concerned with the list’s 
overall balance, direction and degree of innovation.
Content
The editor’s judgement of the quality and appropriateness of the content is aided 
by others. Fiction editors may use junior editors, or external readers, to supply plot 
synopses or to oﬀ er ﬁrst or second opinions. Non-ﬁction editors may ask specialist 
external readers to comment on specialist titles. Other publishers rely heavily on 
experts – teachers, academics, professionals – sometimes worldwide to comment 
on material. All these external readers are paid small fees and remain mostly 
anonymous to the author. The management of the peer review process is critically 
important in academic and journals publishing.
Author assessment
This covers the author’s qualiﬁcations, writing ability, motivation and time 
available to write the book, public standing, reliability to deliver on time, 
responsiveness to suggestions and connectivity with the intended audience. 
Whether the author is ‘promotable’ is a key question for some types of consumer 
books. This can be interpreted as – is the author personable? – although the more 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
145
cynical will say it is also a question about age and looks. There is also a growing 
expectation that an author has developed a social media presence – an author with 
75,000 followers on Twitter will be attractive to a publisher.
Unique sales proposition (USP)
What will make this book diﬀ erent from others (its competitive advantage), or 
what makes it special – the quality of the author, a new treatment of the subject, 
or some diﬀ erentiation by price or format? What are the special marketing 
opportunities through which the book could be promoted? This could be a tie-in 
with a TV series, taking advantage of a special sporting event for a sports 
autobiography, or the author’s status and celebrity.
Market
Understanding the main audience for which the book is intended, who would 
buy it, and the possible take-up at home and overseas. The sales records for the 
author’s previous books or those of similar books may be used as a guide, along 
with market research regarding interest level and trends. Sometimes the rights 
sales potential is assessed, such as likely translation and co-edition sales. This is 
most relevant to trade titles. The likely international market is important now that 
an ebook can reach all parts of the globe before any print distribution.
Competition
The title’s features and beneﬁts compared with competing titles are evaluated. 
This is important for textbooks and reference titles, and for a variety of non-
ﬁction. The strengths of competing titles should be acknowledged, not just their 
weaknesses. Consideration should also be given to indirect competition, such as 
content freely available on the internet.
Frontlist/backlist potential
Is the book expected to have a short life on the frontlist, or does it have the 
potential to ‘backlist’ for a long period? If the former, the commercial opportunity 
needs to be sizeable.
Packaging and price
What is the best combination of packaging and price for the project? This covers 
word length, illustration content, size, binding style (if print) and production 
quality, the likely cost and the price ranges within which it could be sold in 
diﬀ erent physical and digital formats. Digital ﬁ rst could be considered for books 
which should reach the market quickly; digital only might suit a short text or a 
journalistic approach.
The USP 
deﬁnes what 
makes a book 
stand out from 
competing 
titles
New titles are 
the frontlist; 
established 
titles the 
backlist
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
146
Investment and return
How much time and money needs to be expended on acquiring the book, such as 
the size of advance expected by the agent, and on developing and marketing it 
through to publication, in relation to its expected earnings and proﬁtability? 
Would its earning power justify its place on the list? Sometimes a project may be 
too small in scale to be worth pursuing. Alternatively it may be worth investing in 
a new market where the number of readers is likely to grow.
Risk and innovation
What are the external factors at play aﬀ ecting the risk investment, such as the 
timing of publication in relation to the optimum time to publish, the link to 
topical events and their perceived popularity, and the actions of competitors? What 
is the downside if the expectations are not realized? To what extent is the project 
experimental in terms of taking on a new author, or publishing in a new area or 
format (print or digital), or price? Without taking risks and innovating, the 
publisher is overtaken by competitors.
Approval process
Some ideas are rejected by the editor, especially after unfavourable reports. Some 
authors are asked to resubmit in the light of the editor’s suggestions. If an editor 
wants to take forward a project, they cannot oﬀ er a contract without the agreement 
of senior management. Editors sound out and lobby senior colleagues, such as the 
marketing and sales managers, over possible prices and sales forecasts, and the 
production manager over production costs. For a major investment, such as a 
large advance, the ﬁnance director will be consulted. The editor prepares a 
publishing proposal form, which covers the scope of the book, its format, its 
market and competition, readers’ reports, publication date, and the reasons for 
publication. A costing or ﬁnancial statement sets out the expected sales revenue, 
the costs of producing the book and the proposed royalties to the author, in order 
to show the hoped-for proﬁt margin – provided the book sells out. For standard 
formats there may be a set of production scales that feeds into the costing form. 
Diﬀ erent combinations of prices and sales forecasts, and of production costs and 
royalties may be tried – they will reveal diﬀ ering margins.
Many publishers hold formal editorial meetings at which the senior 
management hear editors’ proposals – a lot are accepted, but some are referred 
back or rejected. Editors have to be prepared to defend their proposal and 
demonstrate their wholehearted commitment. Tom Maschler writes: ‘To publish 
well the publisher must be passionate about the book for its own sake. . . . Once 
the choice is made the task begins. It is to transmit one’s conviction ﬁrst within 
the publishing house and then to the outside world’ (page 282).
If given the green light, the editor negotiates the contract with the author or 
agent (see the next chapter), agrees or invents the book’s title, and on 
commissioned books ensures that the author appreciates what is expected (for 
example content, length, deadline). Titling is an important skill. In a crowded 
book market, unusual titles can attract attention, for example that for the novel
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
147
Salmon Fishing in the Yemen (2007) by Paul Torday, or The Hundred-Year-Old Man 
Who Climbed Out of the Window and Disappeared by Jonas Jonasson (English 
edition, 2012). Stephen Hawking’s 1988 popular science bestseller was originally 
going to be called From the Big Bang to Black Holes: A Short History of Time until 
‘his editor at Bantam, Peter Guzzardi, turned it round and changed “Short” to 
“Brief”. It was a moment of inspiration that surely helped Hawking amass record 
sales’ (Guardian, 14 September 2013). Internet searches drive the need for clear 
and explanatory titles for specialist titles. Sometimes the book ‘does exactly what it 
says on the tin’, such as Andrew Marr’s A History of the World (2012). Some titles 
work at more than one level: the footballer Frank Lampard’s autobiography was 
called Totally Frank (2006); and Steven Norris, the former Conservative transport 
minister, used the title Changing Trains (1996).
When signing up a new ﬁction writer, the editor may decide on a two- or 
three-book deal – if the ﬁrst novel is a hit, the author is already safely under 
contract for the second novel. There may be an optimum publication date which 
would maximize sales. The book may be topical or need to be published for the 
Christmas market. In the case of textbooks, bound copies will be needed for 
inspection by teachers in time for the details to be added to the relevant reading 
lists – ideally they should be published by March to May at the latest.
The Bookseller’s 
Diagram Prize 
is awarded 
each year to the 
oddest title for 
a book. Past 
winners include 
Bombproof your 
Horse, How to 
Avoid Huge 
Ships, The Joy of 
Chickens, and 
The Joy of Sex: 
Pocket edition
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
148
NEW TITLE COSTING
Successful publishing is founded on contracting good books that sell, and each 
new book is a business in its own right contributing to the business as a whole. 
The decision to publish is the crux of the whole enterprise. If mistakes are made 
here, all eﬀ orts of management to control overheads will come to nothing. Books 
which fail to achieve their target sales and proﬁtability must be counterbalanced 
by equal proﬁts from other books which exceed their target.
We said earlier that in order to gain approval for a project, editors must 
prepare a costing – a proﬁt and loss form – to prove the book’s proﬁtability. There 
are varying degrees of sophistication in this process, and electronic templates are 
now in widespread use. What is important, however, is to understand the 
principles behind a new title costing. The editor is not simply ﬁnding out a cost 
for the book, but comparing revenue and costs to maximize proﬁtability, while 
working within the price constraints of the market and the formats chosen.
Net sales revenue
The publisher’s net sales revenue (NSR) – also called the net receipts – is the sum 
of money the publisher receives after the trade discounts have been deducted. For 
example, a book with a recommended price of £20.00 may be sold to bookshops 
by the publisher at an average discount of 50 per cent. The bookshop will pay the 
publisher £10.00 for the book, and this is the net sales revenue for one copy.
Price: 
£20.00
Average discount: 
50 per cent
Net sales revenue: 
£10.00
In order to calculate the total revenue for a book, a sales forecast needs to be 
made. If a book is overpriced, few copies will be sold and the total revenue will be 
low. If a book is priced too low, the opportunity will be missed to maximize the 
income for a title. The art is to price the book competitively within the market, 
thereby maximizing sales and the total revenue. There is a more detailed 
discussion of pricing in Chapter 10.
The sales forecast is related to a time period. Publishers print stock sufﬁcient 
for a limited period only (six to 12 months, or for mass-market paperbacks only a 
few months) in order to minimize the cash outlay, costs of storage and the risk of 
overprinting. The planned life of a hardback may only be one sales season before 
the book goes into paperback – it will simply stop selling when the paperback 
appears. Judging the print run is a difﬁcult art. Keeping the run low may lead to 
lost sales if a title is selling fast; raising the run may lead to overstocks which 
cannot be sold. The latter approach runs the higher risk. Ebooks oﬀ er a ﬂ exible 
option for satisfying the market, and when in 2013 the author of the recently 
published The Cuckoo’s Calling, Robert Galbraith, was unmasked as J. K. Rowling, 
the immediate spike in sales was of the ebook (only a few thousand print copies 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
149
had been manufactured). A US bookstore owner said: ‘People who can’t get it as 
a book are going to run and get it as an ebook. By the time the [print] books are 
back, two weeks from now, most people are going to have read it on some device’ 
(New York Times, 16 July 2013).
While each book is sold at many discounts, according to the customer and 
sales channel, an average discount can be derived by working out the likely orders 
from diﬀ erent types of customer or territory. Estimates may be gathered from 
the sales departments or overseas branches. The ways in which an international 
publisher trades within the constituent parts of its group vary and depend upon in 
which territory it is advantageous to declare proﬁts for taxation and shareholder 
beneﬁt. For instance, by transfer pricing they may sell internally a UK-originated 
book to their sister US ﬁrm at a very high discount thereby increasing the proﬁt in 
the US.
Costs
The costs of producing a book usually come under two headings. The ﬁxed costs 
are incurred before the printing presses roll and do not change whatever the 
quantity of books ordered. They may include:
 
▪
sums paid to external readers, translators, or contributors,
 
▪
legal fees – for example, if the book needs to be read for libel,
 
▪
permission fees for the use of third-party copyright material (text and 
illustrations), unless paid for by the author,
 
▪
payments to freelance copy-editors, proofreaders, illustrators, and designers 
(for both text and the cover),
 
▪
indexing, if not done by the author, although this charge may be put against 
the author’s royalties, and
 
▪
payments to suppliers for typesetting, ﬁ le conversion, origination of 
illustrations, prooﬁng, corrections.
The variable costs occur after the presses start to roll and depend on the quantity 
of books ordered. They include the costs of printing and binding, and the paper 
consumed. The quantity ordered would be the sales estimate plus an allowance for 
copies wasted or gratis copies given away, for example for review purposes. The 
total production costs are the sum of the ﬁxed costs and the variable costs. Ebooks 
incur little by way of direct variable costs, and the cost of a digital copy approaches 
zero, but there are still the ﬁ xed costs to be covered (and any relevant sales tax 
to be paid). Publishers may regard the income from ebook sales as additional 
revenue, or try and work out what share of ﬁ xed costs should be borne by the 
digital edition.
The average cost of producing each print copy, the unit cost, is calculated 
by dividing the total costs by the print quantity. The unit cost diminishes with 
increasing print quantities, falling rapidly on short printings of between, say, 500 
to 2,500 copies and then more slowly. The rapid decline in unit cost results from 
the ﬁxed costs being spread over larger quantities. Although the per copy cost of 
producing the book becomes progressively lower with increasing quantities, the 
total cost still increases. Therein lies the danger for editors preparing a costing. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
150
The temptation is to reduce the unit cost by increasing the print quantity – but if 
the books are not sold the publisher has sunk an even greater amount of cash into 
the book’s production.
The author’s royalties are calculated by applying the diﬀ erent royalty rates to 
the sales forecasts for home and export markets. A costing prepared before a 
contract has been signed with the author will show suggested royalty rates for the 
title. The royalty may be based on the book’s price or on the net sales revenue – 
the sums actually received by the publisher. To carry on with the earlier example:
Recommended price: 
£20.00
Average discount: 
50 per cent
Net sales revenue: 
£10.00
If the royalty is 10 per cent of the published price, the author would receive 10 per 
cent of £20.00: £2.00 on each copy sold. If the royalty is 10 per cent of the net 
sales revenue, the author would receive 10 per cent of £10.00: £1.00 on each copy 
sold. A publisher looking to reduce their costs would work with royalties based on 
the net sales revenue. The author may not necessarily agree with this approach or 
even understand the diﬀ erence between the two methods of calculating royalty 
payments. A good agent would push hard for the best deal.
Gross and net proﬁt
The gross proﬁt is what is left after the unit cost and royalty have been deducted 
from the net sales revenue.
Net sales revenue: 
£10.00
Unit cost:
£4.00
Royalty to the author (10 per cent of NSR):
£1.00
Gross proﬁt: 
£5.00
Gross margin: 
50 per cent
The gross margin is the percentage of the net sales revenue that forms the gross 
proﬁt. In the above example, the gross proﬁt forms 50 per cent of the revenue 
(this calculation for all products gives the gross proﬁ t in the company accounts in 
Chapter 5, page 117). The management may say to their editors, ‘We want to see 
each publishing proposal attaining a minimum gross margin of 55 to 60 per cent’. 
That percentage represents the sum of money the publisher would have left after 
the production costs and royalties have been deducted from the NSR, provided 
all the copies were sold. The sum would, in theory, be sufﬁcient to recover the 
overheads and expenses and to provide a net proﬁt. The publisher’s overall net 
proﬁt is the sum left after all the costs of running the business have been 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
151
deducted (again see the company accounts). Overheads for a publisher would 
include the costs of salaries, marketing and sales, warehouse and fulﬁlment, 
online platforms, general administration, ofﬁce space, heating, lighting and other 
items such as bank interest and bad debt.
The editor strives to balance the income and costs so that the desired gross 
proﬁt is attained. This is called value engineering. If the gross proﬁt is too low, the 
production costs could be trimmed (fewer pages, fewer illustrations, cheaper 
paper) or the author’s proposed royalties reduced. Conversely the price and/or 
sales estimate could be increased. But while the publisher worries about costs and 
margins, the end-user is concerned with price and perceived value, and does not 
care about the costs, the number printed or the author’s eﬀ ort. Reducing the 
production values on a book, for example by using cheaper paper or fewer colours 
for the cover, may harm the book’s sales. It will depend on the type of publishing 
and the expectations of the market – which are high in some markets like art or 
cookery books. For an editor publishing a book with a limited market, there 
remains the fatal temptation to imagine a non-existent larger market and to 
increase the print-run in order to lower the unit cost.
When the publisher takes the ﬁnal decision on ﬁxing the price and print 
quantity, the ﬁxed costs have already been incurred and cannot be changed. On 
account of the uncertainties of estimating demand, a prudent publisher favours a 
higher price and a lower quantity rather than a lower price and a higher quantity. 
If the actual demand for the book is less than expected, a price on the high side 
may still return a proﬁt, whereas too low a price could lead to substantial loss. 
The great dangers are underestimating costs, overestimating demand, and 
underpricing. This leads not only to a loss on the individual book, but also can 
wipe out the proﬁt on others. Successful books can always be reprinted, but at a 
price and quantity which again are chosen to avoid loss. Ebook editions can soak 
up surplus demand, and their prices can be adjusted almost in real time. If a book 
is likely to be added to the backlist, there may be an argument for accepting a 
lower than usual gross margin on the ﬁrst printing, on the grounds that a reprint 
will have a much healthier margin. The ﬁrst printing of a school textbook may 
attain no proﬁt, but the hoped-for second and subsequent printings should move 
it into proﬁtability. Also hardbacks can perhaps tolerate a lower gross margin, 
since the ebook or follow-on paperback will not have the production ﬁxed costs to 
bear. A quirky trade title with no certainty of making the backlist, such as The Book 
of Bunny Suicides or Fifty Sheds of Grey, has to make its money straight away.
Other factors aﬀ ecting the pre-publication decision concern the level of 
investment at risk, for example very high authors’ advances or a large investment 
in a major textbook, and its duration. Several combinations of price and sales 
forecast print run may be tried out, including ‘worst case scenarios’, and the 
break-even may be calculated. A project’s break-even point is the minimum 
quantity that must be sold to cover the production costs and the author’s advance 
or royalty. Also included might be a proportion of the company’s overheads. On 
some proposals, if the break-even is considered attainable, that may inspire 
sufﬁcient conﬁdence to go ahead. Some publishers calculate a project’s cashﬂow 
and the interest incurred over time. From the outset to after publication, the 
publisher usually endures a net loss before the income surpasses the outlay. The 
estimated income is derived from the sales forecasts broken down over time (for 
In the late 
1990s Dorling 
Kindersley 
printed 13 m 
copies of its 
Star Wars titles 
– sales only 
reached around 
3 m
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
152
example, monthly, quarterly and yearly). Possible rights sales income, other than 
that from co-edition deals, usually does not enter into the early costings and thus 
can be regarded as extra proﬁt. However, it may be included, especially when 
needed to justify paying the author a large advance.
Some publishers stop their calculations at the gross proﬁt line while others 
continue and deduct direct overheads expressed as overall percentages (for 
example for editorial and marketing or sales and distribution) to reach the net 
proﬁt. The way in which overheads are apportioned, either as actual sums or 
percentages, varies (see the indicative percentages in Chapter 5, page 117). To 
continue with our example:
Net sales revenue: 
£10.00
Unit cost:
£4.00
Royalty to the author: 
£1.00
Gross proﬁt: 
£5.00
Gross margin: 
50 per cent
Editorial and marketing overheads (15%):
£1.50
Sales, platform and distribution overheads (15%): £1.50
Net proﬁt (Gross proﬁt less overheads): 
£2.00
Net proﬁt margin (as percentage of NSR):
20 per cent
The problems with the method as outlined above are that titles are allocated 
overheads in proportion to expected revenue (which may not accord with reality). 
It also focuses attention on a desired percentage rather than money – for example 
a title with a 25 per cent gross margin may yet deliver much more cash than one 
with a 55 per cent gross margin. It is important therefore to look at the total sums 
involved, and not just concentrate on the percentages. A costing should also 
include a column showing the totals received and paid out: revenue, costs and 
royalties.
Recommended price: 
£20.00
Average discount: 
50 per cent
Net sales revenue: 
£10.00
Unit cost:
£4.00
Royalty to the author:
£1.00
Gross proﬁt: 
£5.00
Gross margin:
50 per cent
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
153
Total number of copies required: 
10,000
Copies sold: 
9,500
Total NSR:
£95,000
Total production costs:
£40,000
Royalties due to the author:
£9,500
Gross proﬁt:
£45,500
In the above example, the royalties are calculated on the sales, but in order to 
secure the book a much larger advance might have to be paid to the author. This 
sum is paid even if the book’s sales are disappointing. If the advance paid to the 
author against royalties was £15,000, the overall cash surplus would be reduced by 
£5,500. A costing should allow provision for copies given away free or gratis, and 
for returns from booksellers, and so should not assume that all copies are sold. 
A fuller costing would show income from the ebook or paperback edition and 
projected rights income. Preparing a separate costing for an ebook is possible 
since they are mostly sold on the same wholesale model as for print (a discount is 
given against the recommended price), and there is broad agreement that royalties 
are paid on the net sales revenue. But the calculation is complicated by the 
payment of VAT and the question of what costs to apply – the marginal cost of an 
ebook is close to zero.
Mark-up method
An alternative costing approach is the mark-up method. This traditional and 
simple method is severely criticized but can be used as a ready-reckoner. The unit 
cost is derived from dividing the quantity of books to be ordered or expected to be 
sold into the total production costs. This is then multiplied by a factor (say 5–8 for 
a trade title) to arrive at the published price. The accounts department calculate for 
editors the factors pertaining to diﬀ erent kinds of books (for example consumer or 
academic) with diﬀ erent royalty rates and discounts. Provided the copies sell out, 
the factor accommodates the ﬁrm’s costs and proﬁt. But if the published price is 
thought too high, the editor is tempted to increase the sales forecast print run to 
lower the unit cost in order to arrive, by multiplication, at a reasonable price. 
Conversely, the publisher may print the number it believes it can sell but ﬁxes the 
price too high to absorb that number. Unless careful the publisher ends up with 
unsold copies or loss-makers. The method, based on a predetermined level of 
activity, disregards the fact that costs do not act alike as output increases or 
decreases. It encourages rigid pricing and conceals assumptions. Worse, it focuses 
attention on the unit cost and away from the market and price elasticities.
The method can be used in reverse. The gross retail value (price multiplied by 
sales estimate) is divided by the factor to arrive at the desired unit cost. The book’s 
speciﬁcation could then be adjusted to match.
The use of a mark-up factor often occurs when consumer book publishers buy 
books from packagers. A mark-up factor (say 6 to 7) is applied to the packager’s 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
154
all-in, royalty-inclusive, price per copy to arrive at a published price. If the publisher 
is translating and resetting a title, the mark-up factor could be 5 or 6.
CASE STUDY: INSIDE BOOK PUBLISHING
New books, or new editions, are costed at the time of signature of the contract 
with the author. Publishers rarely show their conﬁdential costing of a book to 
authors. But Routledge, part of Taylor & Francis (T&F), provides here their 
estimate for this book. The costing was compiled by the development editor of the 
Media and Cultural Studies list. Prepared in advance of the authors’ handover of 
the manuscript to the publisher, it is revised during the course of production to 
take account of the inevitable changes to the book’s speciﬁcation and sales 
prospects.
The estimate is reproduced here in three parts (there are other costing 
spreadsheets lying behind these ﬁgures):
 
▪
product speciﬁcation of the paperback edition,
 
▪
estimated production costs for the paperback edition, and
 
▪
income and expenditure showing the book’s estimated gross and net proﬁt 
across all editions.
The estimate is for a new edition of a textbook, the sales history of which stretches 
back 26 years. It is, however, costed as a new book with the advantage that the 
likely demand can be informed from its recent past history. Six years after the 
publication of the fourth edition, annual paperback sales are around 450 copies. 
An active used book market for previous editions is all too evident on the internet. 
Its medium is classiﬁed as a ‘printed product’, based on a copy sales business 
model. The various other ways it may be licensed, for example, in translation, are 
not shown. It has been translated into German (second edition), Vietnamese 
(third edition), Romanian, Chinese Simpliﬁ ed and Korean (fourth edition). For 
the ﬁ fth edition, the publisher required the authors to write chapter abstracts to 
encourage sales of individual chapters.
The book is published simultaneously in three editions: paperback, hardback 
and ebook, each of which is allocated an ISBN. The plan is to print 1,600 copies of 
the paperback edition to meet the sales expectation over the ﬁrst 18 months, and to 
reprint 1,000 copies to meet demand from 18–36 months. The calculation is thus 
three years, typical for a textbook adopted annually on courses. The paperback and 
ebook editions are priced at £25.99 in the UK, and at $46.95 in the US – a parity 
dollar price on the exchange rate at the time of estimate (£1: $1.60). The hardback 
edition is priced at £80 in the UK and $130 in the US, and the 70 copies to be 
printed are destined for libraries (mainly academic) in the ﬁrst 18 months.
The estimate starts by locating the product within the organization, part of 
the international group of T&F. It summarizes the book’s paperback speciﬁcation 
– for brevity details of the hardback edition have been deleted here. The ‘extent’ is 
stated at 360 pages (fourth edition 320 pages). The production method is digital 
from a PDF ﬁ le (the fourth edition was litho printed). The format (or page size) is 
pinched crown quarto; the interior (the text) is printed in one colour (black) on
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
155
Preliminary estimate 
INSIDE BOOK PUBLISHING ED5 
ISBN: 97B·0·415·53717·9 
Extent: 360 
Production project/Product 
Publisher: 
Division: 
Medium: 
Version: 
Binding style: 
MStype: 
Copy-editing level: 
Pages Roman/Arabie: 
Production method: 
Binding Method: 
Format: 
Interior colours: 
Print file format: 
Typesetting difficulty: 
Font: 
Typesetting format: 
Binding 
Finishing 
New design 
Matt laminate 
Sections 
Paper 
Colours 
quality 
TEXT 
Matt 
1 colour 
Blade 90 
"m 
Illustrations 
Colours 
Positioning only 
1 colour 
Redraw (line) 
1 colour 
life cycle calculation 
Humanities 
Media & Cultural Studies 
Printed Product 
Paperback 
limp 
Disk 
Simple 
360 
Digital 
Notch 
Pinched Crown Quarto 
1 colour 
PO' 
Medium 
Scala 
MSWord 
Paper quality 
Colours eKterior 
240 gsm l ·sided 
CMYK 
Bleed 
Paper 
weight 
No 
90g
~ 
Qty 
Tables 
50 
B/w lO 
Colour: 
Difficulty: Basic 
Colours interior 
FQrmulal 
Math.: 
Chem.: 
Difficulty: 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
156
Paperback edition 
Cost element 
1" print ing 
2nd prin ting 
Curr ency : GBP 
1,600
 1,000 
F 
Author/series editor fee 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Contr ibu tors' fee 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Subsidies and grants 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Illu st rat ions permissions 
383.23 
0.00 
F 
Lega l fees 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Translation fees 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
TeKt permissions 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Cover desi gn 
350.00 
350.00 
0.00 
F 
Illu st ration fee 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Add itional design fee 
150.00 
150.00 
0.00 
F 
Copy-editing 
862.28 
862.28 
0.00 
F 
Proofread ing 
424.24 
424.24 
0.00 
F 
In-hous e 
365.60 
365.60 
0.00 
F 
Typesett ing 
1,398.80 
1,398.80 
0.00 
F 
Typesett ing corrections 
248.34 
248.34 
0.00 
F 
Proof sets 
86.23 
86.23 
0.00 
F 
Tables 
47.90 
47.90 
0.00 
F 
Relabelling a/w 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Redraw line a/w 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Redraw maps 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Art ist drawing s 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
A/w positionin g 
95.81 
95.81 
0.00 
F 
Retouch a/w 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
A/w origination 
0.00 
0.00 
F 
Scan lin e 
0.00 
0.00 
V 
Print and Paper 
1.55 
2,474.01 
1,886.22 
F 
Other manufacturing contingen cy 
479.04 
479.04 
100.00 
Prod. Costs total fixed 
4,891.47 
100.00 
Prod. costs (total) variable 
2,474.01 
1,886.22 
Prod. costs (total) 
7,365.48 
1,986.22 
Prod. costs fixed per unit 
3.06 
0.10 
Prod. costs vari able per unit 
1.55 
1.88 
Production costs per unit 
4.61 
1.98 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
157
Hardback 
Paperback 
a Book 
Version Typa 
ISBN 
1978-0-41^52716-2 
976<M 15-53 717-9 
" 976-1-315-7 7 776-4 
Project Mo. 
93266 
93388 
93268 
Prod. ProJectNo. 
Handouef gosling - Irisido Sock Publishing So 
Calc No. 
1225731 
225732 
225733 
Price UKE Price USt 
IC80 00 
IS130 00 
E25 99 
346 95 
£25.99 
S46 9S 
3-year sales projection 
Oty 
£ 
%$aie 
701 
3,1451 
1000% 
2600 
41,360 
BO 03% 
300 
5.068 
1000% 
2,970 
49,573 
10000% 
33.241 
67.1 
e 
%»mo 
9,664 
19.90% 
3.989 
6 05% 
2,479 
5.00% 
16.332 
32.95% 
£ 
%sate 
5.453 
11 00%' 
15.000 
30 26% 
20.-153 
41.26% 
E 
%mIB 
I 12.788 I 
25.80%| 
%sala 
I 
34.76%! 
%sale 
1S6 20%1 
£ 
%sale 
11 233 1 
'6506%| 
E 
%sale 
1.899 1 
11.00% 
1.899 I 
1100% 
C 
1.990 
n.53% 
1.260 
7.41% 
863 
5 00% 
4,1331 
23.94% 
13,132 
761% 
10000% 
17.2651' 
i.oco I 
loco 
17,265 
100 00% 
%sale 
E 
Qly 
2nd Printtna Sales (18-36 months} 
10.00% 
70 00% 
20.00% 
100 00% 
62-2% 
%sale 
24 37% 
6 39% 
5 00% 
37 76% 
£ 
7.874 
2.709 
1.615 
12.199 
32.306 
20.109 
_£ 
3.145 r 
24.094 " 
5.068 " 
Qty. 
701 
1,600 " 
300 " 
1.970 
Hardback 
Paperback 
eBook 
Total 
IGROSS PROFIT 
DIRECT VARIABLE COSTS 
3-YEAR SALES PROJECTION 
1st Printing Sales (18 months) 
Manuteciunne 
Royally 
Conlingency 
Total 
OVERHEADS 
Distribution 
Allocated Cosls 
Total 
NET PROFIT/CONTRIBUT1CL 
RETURN ON INVESTMENT 
_£ 
3.554 
15.000 
18.5S4 
%s«lt 
11 00% 
46 43% 
57.43% 
4.ai%| 
%salo 
5 06%] 
_E 
1 555 | 
7.5% P6 
Initial foy«lly wte 
7.5% KB 
Premium Text 
%s«lt 
%s«lt 
%sale 
% 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
158
90 gsm paper. The binding (or cover) is a new design, printed in CMYK (four 
colours) on a heavier paper of 240 gsm, with a matt laminated ﬁnish. The binding 
method is notch – the spine folds are glued together but not cut oﬀ . The numbers 
of illustrations and tables are estimated. An assessment is made of the amount of 
work required – copy-editing level is classiﬁed as ‘simple’ – or of the difﬁculty in 
typesetting (medium). The automated costing system applies the current costs of 
T&F suppliers to the speciﬁcation.
Costing
Lying behind the estimated ﬁgures is a mass of actual cost information built up by 
a publisher producing more than 1,600 new books per year in the UK alone. The 
page extent is an important factor in determining costs and for some production 
categories, the publisher would have worked out a set per page cost. Following the 
product speciﬁcation is a table of estimated production costs for the paperback 
edition, stated in GBP (Great Britain Pounds). Each row has the preﬁx F (ﬁxed 
costs which do not depend on the quantity produced) or V (variable costs which 
change with the quantity produced). The costs given for the F rows are set against 
the ﬁrst printing of 1,600 paperback copies, and are not carried over to the second 
printing, the straight reprint of 1,000 copies. The variable costs of print and paper 
relate to the quantities of the ﬁrst and second printings. The ﬁxed costs represent 
66 per cent of the total production cost of producing 1,600 paperback copies. The 
impact of setting the ﬁxed costs against the ﬁrst printing becomes very evident in 
the totalled production costs:
 
▪
£7,365 for the ﬁrst printing of 1,600 paperback copies – unit cost of £4.61,
 
▪
£1,986 for the second printing of 1,000 copies – unit cost of £1.98.
The estimates above are called direct costs in that the publisher can identify the 
labour related to the production of this book, payable to external suppliers. For 
under £5,000 the publisher can produce this book economically up to and 
including the source ﬁ le from which it is printed or published as an ebook.
Sales
We now turn to the all important forecast of sales over the ﬁrst 18 months, broken 
down by territory, as follows:
Table 7.1 Sales forecast for Inside Book Publishing, fifth edition
Hardback
Paperback
Ebook
UK
15
1,000
US
15
100
Rest of world
30
300
Frees
10
200
Total
70
1,600
300
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
159
Export of the hardback represents 75 per cent of sales, while that of the paperback 
28 per cent. The paperback UK sales forecast is 1,000 copies, up from 700 copies 
for the previous edition. Frees are copies given to the authors and contributors, 
and for review. Teachers considering adopting the book for student purchase may 
now receive an e-inspection copy instead of a printed copy. The sales of the ebook 
edition are growing and are estimated at 300 copies.
The copy sales forecasts are converted to sales revenue in the section headed 
‘3-year sales projection: ﬁrst printing sales (18 months)’. The hardback edition (70 
copies printed; 60 to sell) is forecast to deliver a net sales revenue (NSR) of £3,145 
(or 10 per cent of the total NSR £32,308). The paperback edition (1,600 copies 
printed; 1,400 to sell) is forecast to deliver a NSR of £24,094 (or 70 per cent of the 
total NSR). The ebook edition (300 copies to sell) is forecast to deliver a NSR of 
£5,068 (or 20 per cent of the total NSR).
How has the publisher arrived at these NSR ﬁgures? The system, using the 
sales forecasts, has deducted the average book trade discounts from the local 
published price in the given territories. Overall the average discount granted to 
resellers for the paperback and ebook editions is around 35 per cent: the publisher 
receives around £17 (or 65 per cent) per copy for these editions priced at a 
recommended published price of £25.99. Since the authors’ royalty (initially set 
at 7.5 per cent) is based on the publisher’s net receipts, the lower the discount 
granted by the publisher to resellers, the greater the sum they receive, as does the 
publisher. Larger publishers, such as T&F, have stronger leverage with resellers 
than smaller publishers.
The revenue from the hardback edition accounts for 10 per cent of sales, 
an apparently disproportionate amount in view of a sale of just 60 copies. The 
argument here is that the libraries buy one copy at triple the price in a more 
durable binding for multiple and free use by readers. There is also an element of 
cross-subsidy. If there were no hardback edition, the price of the paperback (sold 
mainly to students) would increase. The hardback is printed once only and is 
intended to sell out within 18 months.
Gross proﬁt
Beneath the total NSR of £32,308 from the ﬁ rst printing is the gross proﬁt line. 
The gross proﬁt is calculated by ﬁrst summing the direct ﬁ xed and variable costs 
paid out to suppliers and shown here under manufacturing (the total production 
costs of both the hardback and paperback editions: £7,874) and the authors’ 
royalty of £2,709 (calculated by applying the authors’ royalty percentage to the 
publisher’s net receipts). A contingency budget of £1,615 is included for stock 
write-oﬀ , such as books too damaged to dispatch again after returning unsold 
from booksellers. These direct variable costs totalling £12,199 are deducted 
from the total NSR of £32,308, to give the gross proﬁt of £20,109, which when 
expressed as a percentage of the NSR, gives a gross margin of 62.2 per cent:
£20,109
£32,308 = 62.2 per cent
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
160
The gross proﬁt on the second printing of 1,000 paperback copies for the period 
18–36 months, reﬂecting the expected decline in the rate of sales, is £13,132. 
However, when expressed as a percentage of NSR, the gross margin jumps to 76.1 
per cent because the ﬁxed costs of developing the book were only applied to the 
ﬁrst printing sales period. On the three-year view, the gross proﬁt totals £33,241, 
which at 67.1 per cent achieves the gross margin target of 60 per cent or more so 
often set to editors by their senior management.
Contribution
To reach the net proﬁt or contribution (the so-called bottom line), the publisher’s 
overheads have to be deducted. These are sometimes referred to as indirect costs 
because they cannot easily be attributed directly to the individual book. The 
overheads of operating diﬀ erent areas in the company are aggregated and 
expressed as overall percentages. These percentages are applied to the NSR and 
then deducted from the NSR. Publishers treat overheads in diﬀ erent ways. In this 
particular example, T&F applies two areas of overheads to the title:
 
▪
distribution at 11 per cent of NSR, and
 
▪
allocated costs at 46.43 per cent of NSR.
Distribution includes storage, order fulﬁlment and shipping costs (Taylor & 
Francis outsources its distribution to third parties around the world). The allocated 
costs or overheads cover all the other internal costs of running the business and 
are related to the type of product published. The distribution costs are incurred for 
as long as the book remains in print. But the allocated costs are set against the 
ﬁrst printing only and once again are not carried over to subsequent printings of a 
book, which may never occur. In reality, much of the staﬀ  time devoted to 
developing and marketing the book occurs in the 12-month period before and 
around publication.
The net proﬁ t/contribution line shown here is calculated by deducting the 
overheads from the gross proﬁt. Thus on the ﬁrst printing, the total overheads – 
set at 57.43 per cent on sales of £32,308 – work out at £18,554, which when 
deducted from the gross proﬁt of £20,109, leaves a contribution or net proﬁt of 
£1,555. When expressed as a percentage of NSR this gives:
£1,555
£32,308 = 4.81 per cent
The publisher’s net proﬁt from the ﬁrst printing is below the amount paid out in 
royalties to the authors. If sales of the book struggle to attain the ﬁrst printing 
estimate, the publisher would incur a potential loss or at best record a very low 
level of proﬁtability. But on the second sales period printing, the contribution rises 
dramatically to £11,233 and leaps to 65.06 per cent. On the three-year view, it is 
estimated that the contribution would be £12,788: a 25.8 per cent net proﬁt. If the 
sales forecast is cautious, not least to avoid tying up too much cash in stock and 
storage, and sales exceed expectations, the net proﬁt would nudge up further and 
be attained earlier.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
161
Return on investment
There is another percentage measure to assess the book. The return on 
investment (ROI) line in the estimate shows the ratio of money gained, expressed 
as a percentage, on the publisher’s investment in the book for the ﬁrst and second 
printings over the given time periods, and over the three-year view. For instance, if 
a publisher invested £10,000 in a book and got back £15,000 in revenue, the ROI 
would be 50 per cent. This is calculated by expressing the proﬁt of £5,000 as a 
percentage of the investment:
£5,000
£10,000 = 50 per cent
For Inside Book Publishing, on the ﬁrst printing sales period, the publisher’s 
investment is the direct variable costs of £12,199 and the overheads of £18,554. 
These total £30,753. The NSR is £32,308 from which is deducted the total costs of 
£30,753 leaving a net proﬁt of £1,555. Expressing £1,555 as a percentage of the 
investment of £30,753 gives the ROI of 5.06 per cent:
£1,555
£30,753 = 5.06 per cent
However, on the three-year view, the ROI is 34.76 per cent:
£12,788
£36,785 = 34.76 per cent
which exceeds the ROI target set at 30 per cent, sufﬁcient to cover all the 
overheads of the publisher and to provide a reasonable proﬁt.
Market effects on costing
A publisher’s costing software has to be periodically updated in response to 
changes in publishing methods and markets. For example, on the fourth edition 
of this book, costed in 2007/08, the editor needed to make it an even working of 
10 × 32-page printed sections in order to enable economic printing by litho. This 
edition is produced on a digital press and its planned extent of 360 pages does not 
need to be so deﬁ ned by the multiples pertaining to litho presses. Moreover, while 
the costing gives the set print quantities, in reality the publisher may digitally 
print smaller or larger quantities according to actual demand.
Since the fourth edition in 2008, there have been even more signiﬁ cant 
changes in the market. The print estimate for the hardback edition has fallen from 
100 copies (fourth edition) to 70 copies (ﬁ fth edition) reﬂ ecting changes in library 
acquisition. For the ﬁ fth edition, an ebook is included in the costing from the 
outset. The fourth edition had no planned ebook edition, though the ebook was 
issued soon after publication.
T&F is maintaining the value of the work by pricing the paperback and ebook 
editions at the same price. Furthermore, some libraries, instead of purchasing the 
hardback, will buy the ebook at the  institutional price – the same as the hardback 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
162
Commissioning
No editor can simply sit back and expect marketable ideas and authors to ﬂow 
in. Editors need to be creative in that they encourage and develop received 
ideas – or initiate ideas themselves and match them to authors. Inevitably 
these lead to false trails, so editors have to be agile enough to hunt the 
front-runners, ruthless enough to weed out the wrong projects, and tough 
enough to withstand their exposed position within the publishing house. 
Editors need a knowledge of production methods (limitations and costs), 
digital opportunities, and contracts, and the skill to negotiate with authors, 
agents and others. As the book’s champion, the editor must display infectious 
enthusiasm and superb persuasive skills. An editor’s strength in marketing 
the book, in-house and externally, is imperative, and today extends to creating 
an audience for a book ahead of publication through the use of social media.
Publishing is a business, and it is vital that editors have ﬁnancial 
acumen. Proﬁtable publishing also depends on a perception of trends in 
markets and timing. Good editors pre-empt competitors – in textbook 
publishing the lead time can easily be three years. In specialist ﬁelds the work 
involves asking experts the right questions and being able to talk to them 
intelligently. The skill lies in choosing the right advisers and readers. The 
consumer book editors, who face great difﬁculty in ascertaining market needs, 
base their judgements on a combination of experience of what sells, having 
a ﬁnger on the pulse, and intuition. Backing one’s own hunches takes 
considerable audacity and conﬁdence, and the stakes can be high. Without a 
reasonable hit rate, they run the risk of losing their job.
Fundamental to book and author selection is the editor’s ability to assess 
the quality of the proposal and of the author’s writing and purpose. This 
critical faculty is underpinned by skills in speed reading and sampling 
sections of writing. Most editors will be able to assess a manuscript from the 
ﬁrst few pages, and this skill develops with experience. Editors should be able 
to contribute to structural improvements, and in specialist areas appear to the 
author not merely as a cipher for expert readers’ comments.
Authors are engaged in long spells of isolation when writing with little 
else to draw on but experience, knowledge and imagination. In their books 
rest their hopes and dreams. In their eyes the editor is exclusive to them; to 
the editor an author is one of many. Authors expect editors to represent their 
interests in-house, to get things done and so judge editors on their level of 
clout. Conversely editors must represent the best interests of the publisher to 
authors – at times a ﬁne juggling act. Good editors persuade authors to write, 
often plead with them to deliver, and foster author loyalty to the house. 
Authors need encouragement, reassurance and praise – that, and the editor’s 
diplomacy, are vital. Those authors who rely on their books for income (unlike 
teachers, or academics) centre their whole life around their writing. To some, 
an editor becomes inseparable from their private lives.

S

I L L S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
163
edition – which allows multiple users simultaneous access to the content. 
Although readers are switching from print to ebook, the sale of the printed 
editions is still forecast to deliver most of the revenue, and as such the print 
editions carry most of the costs in publishing the work. The ebook edition has no 
printing or physical distribution cost thus its gross margin will be higher than on 
the print editions. There are, however, costs in ebook distribution, such as that of 
maintaining the T&F platform, but these are not shown currently. The costing 
methodology for the sixth edition will look diﬀ erent again.
SUCCESS AND FAILURE
Generally speaking, publishers make very little net proﬁt from their new book 
publishing programme over the ﬁrst year. Their proﬁts stem from the titles 
that continue to sell strongly. That said, a Christmas bestseller can still make a 
large sum of money, as can a title timed to coincide with a sporting event or 
anniversary. If a book continues to sell and the publisher has recovered all its 
development and marketing costs from the ﬁrst printing, the gross margin and 
net proﬁ t increase dramatically. With the advent of digital printing and ebooks, 
publishers are able to lower their level of risk around stock. They can keep an 
extensive list of titles in print and respond to demand without incurring 
signiﬁ cant warehousing costs.
A vigorous and proﬁtable publisher is in a strong position to publish books 
which, it is estimated at the outset, will not show a proﬁt; indeed there may be 
good publishing reasons for doing so. A book could be published for prestige 
purposes. A ﬁction publisher may believe in a novelist’s long-term ultimate 
success, or want the author’s next, more desirable book. A textbook publisher may 
want to enter a new area and undercut competitors. A university press may be 
obliged to publish a great scholarly work – sometimes supported by a subsidy or 
grant.
Publishing is a high margin business and can be immensely proﬁtable, but 
for many publishers those proﬁts prove to be a mirage. Some authors fail to 
deliver their manuscripts or submit unacceptable material. Publishers have 
forecast budgets and if a proposed book is not published, the estimated 
contribution needs to be recouped from elsewhere. It is relatively easier for a 
consumer book publisher to ﬁll its list more quickly, for example by buying from 
agents or from another company abroad, than a school textbook publisher. 
However, the consumer publishers, which pay signiﬁcant sums on signature 
of contract, will ﬁnd the advances impossible to recover if the level of sales is 
disappointing. All the decisions regarding the quality of a book, its market, price 
and sales potential are based on advance subjective judgements. Amongst the new 
books there inevitably lurk those that will fail to recover their production costs or 
the author’s advance, let alone make a contribution to overheads.
With the 
growth of 
digital printing, 
small numbers 
can be 
reprinted much 
more easily 
and this model 
has spread 
across all 
sectors of book 
publishing
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Commissioning
164
Now read this
Gill Davies, Book Commissioning and Acquisition, 2nd edition, Routledge, 
2004.
Sources
Diana Athill, Stet, Granta, 2000.
Eric de Bellaigue, British Book Publishing as a Business since the 1960s, British 
Library Publishing, 2004.
Ros Jay, The White Ladder Diaries, White Ladder Press, 2004.
Tom Maschler, Publisher, Picador, 2005.
Daniel Menaker, My Mistake, Houghton Miﬄ  in Harcourt, 2013.
Angus Phillips, Mark Saunders, Sue Pandit and Deshini Chetty, ‘The Nature 
of the Relationship between Authors and Editors’, Publishing Research 
Quarterly, 21:2 (Summer 2005).
Christopher Potter, ‘Evolving into Something’, Publishing Research Quarterly, 
16:1 (2000), pages 20–5.
‘Refreshing that Vintage Appeal’, interview with Rachel Cugnoni, The 
Bookseller, 24 May 2007.
Thomas Woll, Publishing for Proﬁ t, 4th edition, Chicago Review Press, 2010.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 8
The author contract and editorial 
development
Once the costing for a new title has been agreed and the book receives the green 
light, a contract is drawn up with the author. This chapter examines the author 
contract and the editor’s continuing role in shaping and developing the project.
AUTHOR CONTRACT
Each publisher – as the buyer of rights from an author – draws up its own 
contract, also called the agreement. The contract diﬀ ers according to the book and 
the author, but most publishers operate with standard contracts. Commissioning 
editors negotiate contracts with authors or their agents, and can then adjust the 
standard contract to ﬁt the ﬁnal terms agreed. The publisher is usually in a 
position to weight the contract in their favour. Some authors sign the contract that 
is oﬀ ered; others, or their agents or lawyers, will try to improve the royalty rates 
and advance oﬀ ered, or ask for changes to particular clauses, which may have to 
be reviewed by the publisher’s legal department or outsourced to a contract 
specialist. Alternatively the agent will present their own contract to the editor.
The contract formally deﬁnes the relationship between author and publisher. 
Today’s publishing contract can be a lengthy document as the publisher seeks to 
secure as many rights as possible, and the obligations of both parties are set out in 
detail. The full acquisition of rights will prevent problems that may occur whether 
in selling a book around the world or its exploitation as a digital product. It will 
also maximize the income from licensing a range of rights to third parties. 
Although it is unlikely that a book will be turned into merchandized goods such as 
tea towels and duvet covers, it did happen with Edith Holden’s The Country Diary 
of an Edwardian Lady and Flora Thompson’s Lark Rise to Candleford – many years 
after they were ﬁrst written or published.
A contract is usually a legal document signed by both parties – the author and 
the representative of the publisher. The requirements seen as important for an 
enforceable contract (Jones and Benson, page 64) are:
 
▪
a clear agreement,
 
▪
an intention to be legally bound by it, and
 
▪
some valuable consideration to seal the bargain.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
166
The first page of the signed contract for this edition of Inside Book Publishing
(1) 
Giles Clark and AnlUS Phillips (the 'Author', which indudes the Autllor's executors, 
administrators, successors and assignees, as may be appropriate) of 
Giles Clark 
of 
00' 
Angus Phillips 
of 
00' 
(2) 
Informa UK LimIted trading as ROIlttedce ('the Publlshers'), whk:h includes the 
Publishers' successors In business, of 
2 Park Square 
Millon Pan: 
Ablnsdon 
Oxon 
OX144RN 
1 
Author's abU.alions 
1.1 
The Autllor asrees to write, compile or edit, a work provisionally titled 
Inside Book Publlshln" 5'" edition 
(the 'Worl(). 
1.2 
The Author will deliver to the Publishers by 20110 May 2013 (the 'Due Dale'): 
(a) the complete typescript of the Work in Microsoft Word format or another 
recognlsably sene ric format such as Rich Telrt Formatting (RTF) whIch will be no 
longer than 120,000 words (including the references, bibliosraphy, figures, 
Illustrations and index), and will be prepared according 10 the Publishers' Guide for 
Authors as amended from time to time; 
The firs t page of the signed contract fo r this edition of Imide Book P"blishing 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
167
If these requirements are in place, a verbal agreement may be enough to form a 
contract. This was highlighted by the case of Malcolm vs. OUP (1991), when an 
editor oﬀ ered assurances over the telephone to the author that they would publish 
his book. The book was later turned down by the publisher, but in court it was 
revealed that the author was tape recording the conversations. The court ruled in 
favour of the author, who was awarded signiﬁcant compensation. Since that case, 
editors have been cautious about giving verbal agreement to publish, and most 
companies have tightened up their procedures so that deals are subject to a ﬁnal 
written contract. It is rare, however, for disputes between the author and their 
publisher to reach court, and there is little case law in existence.
Main elements of the contract
The following are the items covered in a typical contract between the author and 
the publisher. Of main interest to the author will be the level of the royalty and 
any advance. Other clauses open to argument or negotiation include any option 
on the author’s next work, royalties for new editions (should they be increased?), 
payment for illustrations (does the author or publisher bear the cost?), and the 
number of free copies for the author.
Preamble
The date, names of the parties (their assigns and successors in business) to the 
contract, and the title of the ‘Work’ (the book’s provisional title) are stated.
Author’s grant
The author usually grants to the publisher the sole and exclusive licence and 
right to publish the book (the ‘Work’) in volume form (print and electronic), in all 
languages, for the full term of copyright (author’s life plus 70 years), throughout 
the world. By granting a licence, the author retains ownership of the copyright. 
Sometimes authors, such as contributors to multi-authored books or to highly 
illustrated general books, assign their copyright, thereby passing ownership and 
all control to the publisher. The grant of electronic rights may include ‘the right to 
publish or license the publication of the Work in all formats now known or later 
invented’, or other similar phrase, to cover the publisher against future 
technological developments.
Author’s warranty
The author warrants that they control the rights granted, that the work is original 
(not plagiarism), does not contain defamatory, libellous or unlawful matter; and 
will indemnify the publisher for any loss or damages.
Competing works
The author agrees not to write a directly competing work for another publisher.
A verbal 
agreement can 
be sufﬁcient to 
form a contract
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
168
Typescript
The contract will detail the length of the typescript (preferably in words not 
pages), the delivery date and form (typically double spaced, in Microsoft Word, 
and electronically). It will also cover the author’s responsibility for supplying 
illustrations and the index, and for obtaining and paying for third-party copyright 
material (unless otherwise agreed). The publisher reserves the right not to publish 
if the delivered manuscript is overdue or does not conform to a previously agreed 
brief.
Corrections
The author is constrained from making extensive corrections to the proofs – other 
than those attributable to the publisher or printer – and is charged if author’s 
corrections exceed a speciﬁed percentage (say 15 per cent) of the cost of 
typesetting. The author must return proofs within a certain period, usually two to 
three weeks.
Publication
The publisher solely controls the publication – production, design, publicity, price, 
methods and conditions of sale. In practice authors may be consulted on matters 
such as the cover design. The author is given a number of free or gratis copies 
(typically six) and may purchase more at a discount.
Payments to the author
On the publisher’s own editions, the author is normally paid a royalty expressed 
either as a percentage of an edition’s recommended published price on all copies 
sold; or as a percentage of the publisher’s net receipts: the sum of money received 
by the publisher after discounts have been deducted. The author’s earnings are 
thus proportional to price (or net receipts) and sales. Royalty rates are quoted for 
each of the publisher’s own-produced editions: hardback; paperback (generally 
lower); sales made in the traditional home market (the UK and Ireland), and in 
export markets. Export rates are usually lower to take account of the higher 
discounts involved. Royalty rates on the publisher’s own digital editions are also 
given.
A scale of royalties rising by steps of 2 to 2.5 per cent when certain quantities 
have been sold may be included, especially on home market sales. Royalty rates on 
the published price can range from 5 to 15 per cent (many authors never surpass 
the lower base rates). If an author has reached a higher rate on a scale (whether 
based on the published price or net receipts), and a new edition is produced, the 
royalty reverts to the base rate. When the book is remaindered (surplus stock is 
sold oﬀ  cheaply), no royalties may be paid. Other provisos where lower royalties 
apply are stated. If royalties are based on the published price, for example, the rate 
applied may be reduced or based on net receipts if the publisher sells the book to a 
large retail chain at a high discount of say 52.5 per cent or above. A lower royalty 
rate may also apply to small reprints.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
169
Subsidiary rights
The contract lists further rights granted to the publisher, which it could license to 
other ﬁrms, and the percentages payable (from 50 up to 90 per cent) to the author 
on the publisher’s net receipts from the sales of those subsidiary rights. If the 
publisher is granted, for example, US and translation rights, the ﬁrms to which 
these rights could be licensed may print their own editions and pay royalties to the 
publisher to be shared with the author. However, the publisher may print bulk 
quantities, for example for a co-edition partner. The publisher sells such copies at 
a high discount (up to 80 per cent) and the author’s royalty may be based on the 
actual sums received (a common rate is 10 per cent). There are many other rights 
such as serial and extract rights; dramatization rights on stage, ﬁlm, television and 
radio; broadcast reading rights; audiobook; quotation and anthology; large print; 
digest condensation; mechanical reproduction rights (for example on CD); and 
digital publishing rights, including games. There is a fuller discussion of rights in 
Chapter 12.
Accounting
The publisher’s accounting period to the author is usually six months for general 
books and a year for educational and academic books, with settlement up to three 
to four months after. Consumer book publishers normally withhold a proportion 
of royalties payable in an accounting period as a reserve against subsequent 
returns of unsold books from retailers.
Revisions and new editions
The author agrees to revise the book when requested or to permit others to do so 
at the author’s expense.
Reversion
The rights may revert to the author if on request the publisher fails to keep the 
work in print. The reversion of rights has become more complicated – print on 
demand and the ebook mean that a book need never go out of print. Many agents 
would insert a clause to ensure that the level of sale should be the determinant of 
whether rights can be reverted. For example, a novelist may wish to revert the 
rights for their older books from the publisher in order to self-publish. By contrast 
many academic authors are only too pleased to have their works available 
indeﬁnitely through a respected publisher.
Arbitration
Arbitration may be necessary in the case of a dispute between the author and the 
publisher.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
170
Option
The author may give the publisher the right of ﬁrst refusal on their next book.
Moral rights
These are covered in Chapter 5, page 120.
Advance
An advance, if paid, is set against the author’s future royalties. It is important to 
note that the advance has to be earned out before the author receives further 
payments for the book. Most authors receive either a small advance – up to 
£10,000 for a two-book deal in the case of a ﬁrst-time novelist – or none at all. Big 
advances tend to make the headlines in the trade and sometimes the national 
press, for example when Lena Dunham accepted an oﬀ er of $3.5m in 2010 for 
her debut book: ‘The publisher is presumably shelling out mega bucks because 
Dunham, thanks to Girls (the TV show she writes and directs), has become an 
emissary from Generation Z, polarising and transﬁ xing in equal measure with 
her painfully acute observations of twentysomething behaviour.’ (Guardian, 10 
December 2012.) Advance payments may be staged, with separate payments on 
signature of the contract, delivery of an acceptable manuscript, and on publication.
In 1996 Random House in New York sued Joan Collins in an attempt to 
retrieve an advance paid to her of $1.3 m for two novels. It alleged that the 
manuscripts she delivered were unpublishable. The star of Dynasty won the case 
since the original contract only said that the manuscript should be ‘complete’ not 
satisfactory.
Signatures of the parties
The author and the nominated representative of the publisher will sign at least 
two copies of the agreement, and one copy will be kept by the author. The 
signature of the contract is the trigger for allocating an ISBN to the title, and the 
editor’s dispatch to the author of the author questionnaire for marketing purposes.
Electronic rights
The publisher’s ‘volume rights’ or ‘primary rights’ encompass print and 
electronic. Some of the far-sighted educational, academic and STM book 
publishers included electronic rights in their contracts with authors during the 
1990s, even in the 1980s. By the twenty-ﬁ rst century many of the main publishers 
had secured electronic rights from authors on tens of thousands of old contracts 
which had made no previous provision. The learned journal publishers are also 
free to publish electronically since contributing authors often assign their rights to 
the publisher, or society. Similarly, many of the book packagers and highly 
illustrated publishers own the copyright in the texts they publish, and in the 
commissioned artwork and photography, through assignments.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
171
It is generally accepted by authors and agents that trade publishers should 
hold the electronic rights in new and backlist titles, especially since the proportion 
of ebook sales on some titles can be very high. The royalties paid on ebook sales 
range from the rate payable on the printed book up to the industry norm for trade 
books of 25 per cent of net receipts.
This issue of who owns electronic rights in backlist titles was highlighted in 
the USA by the case of Random House, Inc. vs. Rosetta Books (2001), in which it 
was ruled that the publisher did not automatically hold ebook rights, even if it 
was granted the right to publish a work in book form, and if the rights were not 
speciﬁcally granted in the contract they were retained by the author. The inclusion 
of third-party material – text extracts and photographs – in many books across 
most sectors of publishing is sometimes an impediment to the epublishing of the 
backlist and of new books. The rights holders, both printed book publishers and 
picture agencies, can be resistant to granting electronic rights or charge exorbitant 
fees – in eﬀ ect a refusal.
Impact of agents
Where the author has an agent, the contract used may be provided by the agent 
weighted in their client’s favour. The agent’s contract typically is shorter than 
one from a publisher, reﬂecting the more limited grant of rights by the author. 
So-called boilerplate agreements – standard contracts – are used with the leading 
publishers, avoiding wrangles over the wording of standard clauses. Agents may 
opt to withhold many of the subsidiary rights (to them they are not subsidiary), 
such as serial and translation, preferring either to sell the rights themselves or to 
negotiate if the publisher proposes a deal later. The decision may also be taken to 
divide up the English language territories, selling UK and US rights separately. 
For sought-after books this can yield a higher income for the author.
The death of territoriality?
Traditionally, the UK and US publishers (especially consumer) were in separate 
ownership and divided the world English book market between them. For books 
published on both sides of the Atlantic, the UK and US publishers sought 
exclusive market areas (closed markets) from which the other’s competing 
editions of the same book are excluded. The US publisher’s exclusive territory was 
essentially the USA; the UK publisher’s the Commonwealth, Ireland and South 
Africa and a few others. The remaining areas were then non-exclusive to either 
– called the open market, such as mainland Europe – where UK and US editions 
of the same book are in direct competition. Canadian rights were exclusively 
retained by UK publishers on their own originated books, and by US publishers 
on theirs. For some books this broad division persists and can aﬀ ect the way 
agents and packagers grant rights to publishers, and how publishers trade books 
between themselves. For example, the two separate arms of a large consumer 
publisher, in London and New York, may bid separately for the same title, since 
the rights have been divided up by the agent. A UK publisher that holds world 
rights can either sell its own edition into the USA through its related US ﬁrm, or 
license the rights to a US publisher, in which case the US publisher’s exclusive, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
172
non-exclusive, and excluded territories would be negotiated. Conversely a 
UK publisher may buy a US-originated book from a US publisher or author 
represented by an agent, and its rights and territories would also be carefully 
deﬁned.
This traditional territorial split in English language publishing of exclusive, 
non-exclusive (open market) and excluded territories is threatened by actions of 
governments, consumer pressure groups and internet traders. For example, 
Singapore legislated itself into the open market in the mid-1980s. In 1991 
Australia required local publication to occur within 30 days of ﬁrst publication 
anywhere in the world, if the local edition is to preserve its exclusivity. This 
measure was designed to encourage domestic publishing and boost the earnings 
of local authors. In 1998 New Zealand declared itself an open market. Meanwhile 
the availability of books from online booksellers is breaking down the inﬂ uence of 
territoriality, with competing international editions visible to consumers.
The major college textbook and academic publishers holding world rights 
face the problem of maintaining diﬀ erential prices across territories. Third-party 
traders may look to transfer products from low-priced territories, such as parts of 
Asia, to high-priced territories, such as the USA. A case before the US Supreme 
Court in 2013, Kirtsaeng vs. John Wiley, tested the principle of whether cheaper 
international editions could be brought by third parties into higher value markets. 
A student imported hundreds of textbooks, bought by his family in Thailand, and 
resold them in the United States, and it was ruled that the ﬁ rst sale doctrine (see 
Chapter 5, page 123) should take precedence over the publisher’s wish to keep 
markets separate. Such arbitrage trading is a feature of printed books; for ebooks, 
sold under a licence, territorial and payment restrictions may limit the ability of 
consumers to shop around.
The advent in 1993 of the EU single market principle of free movement of 
goods is in conﬂict with the traditional UK/US publishers’ contracts whereby the 
UK is an exclusive territory and mainland Europe is open. The greatest fear of UK 
publishers is that the UK itself might potentially become ﬂooded with cheaper US 
editions imported from mainland Europe, negating the UK publishers’ exclusive 
contractual and territorial rights. Such ‘parallel’ importation is unlikely to occur 
from direct breaches of contracts by US publishers, but instead at the hands of 
third-party traders in the USA or mainland Europe.
UK publishers argue that the European Union and additional countries 
joining it should be treated as a single market and that it should be the exclusive 
territory of UK publishers, in the same way as the US uniﬁed market is treated. 
Projects originated in the UK tend to be sold by agents with exclusive rights in 
Europe; and UK publishers may oﬀ er Canadian rights to US publishers in 
exchange for exclusivity in Europe.
The development of internet bookselling in the late 1990s enabled UK 
consumers to purchase books relatively easily from US-based booksellers. The 
major internet booksellers in the UK have agreed to list only the UK edition, based 
on territorial rights information from the bibliographic database supplied by 
Nielsen BookData. One answer to the thorny issue of territorial rights is for the 
publisher to acquire world rights from the author. This is easier to do in some 
sectors of publishing, such as educational and academic. Most of the major UK 
and US consumer book publishers are in common ownership and aim to be 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
173
strong enough to acquire exclusive world English language rights in authors’ 
works. This enables them to overcome legislative difﬁculties anywhere in the 
world and ameliorates any ‘buying around’ practices of third-party traders. 
However, the authors’ agents still believe that they can secure better oﬀ ers from 
diﬀ erent international publishers by dividing exclusive territorial rights amongst 
competing publishers.
In 2011 Richard Charkin, executive director of Bloomsbury, was reported as 
saying that ‘the publisher had moved to a global alignment and now tried to buy 
world English rights in all cases, adding that the ability provided by digital to 
publish globally meant territorial restrictions based on countries were “obsolete”’ 
(The Bookseller, 22 June 2011). The collapse of territorial rights is not a foregone 
conclusion given the opposition from many agents. Furthermore if territoriality is 
in the interests of the US media corporations, the US government would defend 
its continuance. The major power blocks of the USA and European Union also 
have to grapple with the related issue of the potential loss of tax revenues from 
oﬀ shore internet traders escaping the conventional tax nets. On the internet, the 
consumers’ choice of bookseller is aﬀ ected by the cost of shipping a physical 
book and the timing. The growing importance of ebooks, often available 
instantaneously at a lower price, changes the equation and the consumer will 
also be choosing on format and device.
Apart from price diﬀ erentials between competing editions (which are 
inﬂuenced by £–$ exchange rates with the Euro and other currencies), there is 
also an issue around the date of release of diﬀ erent editions of the same title. US 
and UK consumer book publishers deploy the strategy of maximizing earnings 
through the sequential publication of a particular book in diﬀ erent formats and 
prices. For example, ﬁrst publication would be in a higher priced hardback, 
followed by a trade paperback and a smaller-format, mass-market paperback 
edition. In export markets, especially the growing mainland European market, 
UK and US publishers will aim to pre-empt the other’s competing edition in 
paperback while maintaining their home markets for a period exclusively in 
hardback. Hence UK export editions of paperbacks are available earlier on 
mainland Europe than in the UK, and can be bought on the air-side of UK 
airports. Mainland European paperback importers may hedge their bets by 
simultaneously ordering their stock from both US and UK publishers to ensure 
they receive stock from whichever is the earliest. Importers also compare the 
prices of competing editions, and scout around for bargain-priced editions. 
Ebooks can quickly penetrate markets across Europe and their low prices impact 
on the sale of print and local translations.
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Once a book has been commissioned from an author and the contract has been 
signed, it needs to be monitored while it is being written, and planning begins for 
the editing, design and production stages that are interlinked with the book’s 
marketing. Books need diﬀ ering levels of care and attention during their 
development. Commissioning editors may await the completed text of a novel or 
biography. Some authors would like editors to read chapter drafts while the 
In the UK 
printed books 
do not attract 
VAT, whereas 
digital products 
are classified 
as a service 
and are subject 
to the tax
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
174
writing is in progress. For textbook and reference projects especially, attention 
will be paid to word length, any co-ordination necessary if there are a number of 
contributors, and the use of templates during the writing process, which can help 
with the tagging vital for digital editions. Authors may deliver the complete 
manuscript on time or later, an inherent trait of many authors. The non-deliverer 
may have their contract cancelled. The delivered manuscript is checked for length, 
completeness and quality – and for any sensitivities around libel or third party 
content. It may be returned for revision, or accepted and passed on for production. 
The author may be reminded to complete the author’s questionnaire which is 
used for marketing purposes.
Commissioning editors brief and liaise with junior editors, designers, 
production, promotion and sales staﬀ . Editors may write the blurb for the cover and 
catalogue entry, and may seek endorsements from experts or opinion formers. The 
copy may also be used as the basis for the book’s AI – advance information sheet 
– which is needed six to nine months ahead of publication. Although editors have 
no managerial control over other departments, they endeavour to ensure their 
books receive due attention. Commissioning editors may present their books to the 
publisher’s sales force at the regular sales conferences.
Some editors, especially those involved with complex and highly illustrated 
books, or major textbook projects involving digital resources, get very involved 
in the product research and development stages. Commissioning editors may 
undertake development work themselves, or hand on the work to junior editors, 
whose job titles could be Editor, Development Editor, Production Editor, Assistant 
Editor, or Editorial Assistant. Those working across print and electronic products 
are sometimes called Content Managers or Editors, and the word digital is now 
added to some traditional job titles. The editor maintains contact with the author 
so as to plan backwards from the proposed publication date, trying to ensure that 
the manuscript is delivered in good time to make smooth progress through the 
production process. A development editor in textbook publishing carries out 
survey research in association with the marketing department, organizes the 
external review of drafts, and helps shape the project with the authorial team from 
conception to completion.
At the page-proof stage, the book’s price is ﬁxed across formats, as well as the 
number of physical copies to be printed and bound. The number printed may 
diﬀ er from that envisaged at the outset, and changes may have been made to the 
format and pricing. This could reﬂect feedback from major retailers, changes in 
the market, or a new view on ebook sales or the best way to publish the book. 
Editors may also make decisions on reprints and have to manage stock for their 
lists. In some larger companies this work is handled by sales and inventory 
control specialists.
Particular times of year can be good for the publication of trade books, and 
the publisher has to make sure the book appears at the time of the relevant 
sporting event, anniversary (for the subject of a biography), or the relevant season 
(Christmas for cookery, spring for gardening titles). Publicity opportunities such 
as media exposure or festivals (for example Valentine’s Day) may inﬂuence 
the date of publication. The new year, and its associated resolutions, oﬀ ers 
opportunities for publishers of health and personal improvement titles; beach 
reads are out for the summer months. Hardbacks tend to get the most media 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
175
coverage in the spring (when many of the literary festivals take place) and autumn 
(in the run-up to Christmas). Apps may appear after Christmas when consumers 
have just acquired new tablets or other devices. New college textbooks should 
appear early enough in the adoption cycle (in the spring) so that lecturers can view 
them ahead of preparing their reading lists.
Illustrations can add value and this continues to be reviewed during product 
development. Are illustrations necessary to aid the explanation in the text – for 
example in a school textbook? Are they essential in a particular market – art 
publishing or cookery? Can you charge more if there are many illustrations – 
will you sell more copies? A balance needs to be struck between the cost of 
illustrations and their likely added value.
Editorial project management
Planning tasks as part of the product development process include:
 
▪
a schedule for the editing, design and production stages,
 
▪
the necessary clearance for permissions for both text and illustrations,
 
▪
a brief for the text and cover design,
 
▪
copy written for the cover, and
 
▪
a budget.
Schedule
This is preferably drawn up in advance of the delivery of the typescript from the 
author. A copy-editor can be booked in advance, and the design and production 
stages can be planned around the proposed publication date. Schedules can be 
more or less complicated, and can be done using software or simply a single sheet
June to December 
Picture research/clearance of permissions
January 
Delivery of the typescript
Copy-editing (six weeks)
Cover and marketing copy written
March
Handover of typescript/illustrations to design department
Cover proofs
April
Typesetting
May 
First page proofs (three weeks for checking)
Index preparation
June
Revised proofs and index proofs (one week for checking)
Passed for press
July
Advance copies from the printer
Copies into warehouse (six weeks before publication)
September
Publication (print and ebook)
The New Year is 
a good time to 
publish self- 
improvement 
titles
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
176
of A4. There may be a standard set of weeks allowed for diﬀ erent stages, but there 
is no formula set in stone. If a competing title is to be beaten to market, or if 
revenue is required within a particular ﬁnancial year, the schedule may be severely 
shortened. If this was done with every title, however, there would be the risk that 
quality would suﬀ er and there would be tremendous pressure on the staﬀ  
involved. A sample schedule is shown on the previous page.
Permissions
Permission may need to be sought for the use of text and illustrations in the 
book. Longer quotations not covered by fair usage will need to be cleared, and for 
anthologies of poetry or prose some detective work may be required to track down 
the relevant copyright holders. A freelancer may take on the work of clearing 
permissions for an anthology. Usually the ﬁrst approach is to the originating 
publisher, who may control subsidiary rights. Occasionally you will see a line in a 
book saying that ‘every eﬀ ort has been made to contact the copyright holder’, and 
the extract will appear without permission having been granted. The publisher has 
made a risk assessment before going ahead.
Under the contract the author may have to clear and pay for the permissions, 
and the publisher may request copies of relevant correspondence. The 
publisher may still have to undertake picture research or brief a researcher, 
putting the cost of the permissions against the author’s royalty. If the publisher
is responsible for obtaining copyright permission, the editor or researcher
writes to the copyright holders. Each illustration or table is labelled and
compared against the accompanying text and caption. Caption and source 
copy are prepared.
Drawn illustrations are prepared from copies of those previously published, if 
suitably amended, or from the author’s original line work, roughs or ideas. They 
are edited for sense and consistency before being passed to the designer or 
illustrator. The desired position of the illustrations is indicated in the text.
Design brief
Standard forms or memos may be used to brief the cover and page designers. The 
cover designer will be briefed on the market for the book and its contents. For the 
page design, the brief may be to follow the design of another title (copy enclosed) or 
to create something new and distinctive. A sample chapter or two enables the design 
to be started on before the book’s delivery. For key titles, sample spreads may be 
needed to help sell rights or to assist the author in writing to the correct length.
A design brief may contain the following elements, and separate 
consideration may need to be given to digital products:
 
▪
the market for the book – in the case of ﬁction, age and sex,
 
▪
the content – synopsis or contents list,
 
▪
some text elements – with sample text (to show content, heading structure) and 
illustrations,
 
▪
single or double column format – double column format can accommodate 
smaller type and is often used for reference works,
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
177
Blurb writing
The blurb is the copy, describing a book’s content, printed on the back cover 
of a paperback or displayed in an ebook. It remains highly important as an 
inﬂ uence on the purchase of print books (along with an arresting front cover), 
and it may well be used as the basis for the description on sites such as 
Amazon. There it is perhaps less important now that potential purchasers can 
read customer reviews and assess the star ratings given to a book.
No blurb should be longer than 120 words – for ﬁction probably no more 
than 100 – and all must be:
 
▪
impactful,
 
▪
intriguing,
 
▪
relevant, and
 
▪
short.
Paperbacks often make generous use of review quotes, and many new books 
appear with specially solicited quotes from opinion-formers. Non-ﬁction 
blurbs need to be concise but complete – in other words, answer all the 
questions you would want to ask a salesperson if you were buying the product 
in a shop. Bullet points can help put across the key beneﬁts of the book; 
jargon should be avoided, and time taken to choose the right word. Short 
sentences can be highly eﬀ ective.
Fiction blurbs are more emotional: you must think yourself into the 
story. Try to engage potential readers with the ﬁrst few sentences. The ﬁrst 
line in the blurb for Anne Tyler’s The Accidental Tourist shows how to draw 
you in: ‘How does a man addicted to routine – a man who ﬂosses his teeth 
before love-making – cope with the chaos of everyday life?’ A shoutline on the 
front cover can give the story in a nutshell, as with ‘Twenty Years, Two People’ 
for One Day by David Nicholls, or make use of tried and tested angles: ‘Now a 
compelling ﬁ lm starring ...’; ‘The no. 1 international bestseller’; or ‘By the 
award-winning author of ...’

F  C U S
 
▪
the style of the running heads – chapter heads are more informative than simply 
the book title, and
 
▪
a similar title – if the book is to follow that more or less closely in style.
Cover copy
The cover is needed well in advance of the printed book for promotion and sales 
purposes, and is an important part of the metadata which helps sell the book online. 
Cover copy (for example title, author, blurb and ISBN) may be prepared before the 
book’s delivery by the author. Blurb writing is an important skill. In the case of 
ﬁction, it must grip the potential reader without giving away too much of the plot. 
Review quotes or advance puﬀ s from prominent names may be used. Editors may 
Short 
sentences can 
be highly 
effective in a 
blurb
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
178
ask sales or marketing to review the blurb copy for important titles, and the copy 
should also be written with an eye to online searches by potential customers.
Budget
The title costing will have estimates for the ﬁrst costs of the book, including 
editorial and design work, and permission costs. The budget may be reviewed in 
the light of real costs or any change in the book’s speciﬁcation – page extent, 
number and type of illustrations.
Editorial
Crucial editorial skills include the ability to get on with authors and close 
colleagues, and to communicate well with those in other parts of the company. 
Agreeing changes with authors and getting them to return proofs on time 
takes tact, self-conﬁdence, persuasion, tenacity and negotiation. Editing 
manuscripts and proofreading demand a meticulous eye for detail, a retentive 
memory, sustained concentration, patience, commonsense detective work and 
an ability to check one’s own and others’ work consistently. Authors often 
have great loyalty to both commissioning and more junior editors, and this 
loyalty binds them to the company.
Copy-editing and proofreading skills can to some extent be learnt from 
books, but added to that must be an editor’s sound grasp of grammar and 
spelling, and preparedness to look things up. Editors should be able to place 
themselves in the reader’s mind whatever subject knowledge they themselves 
hold. Good copy-editors and proofreaders are prized and valued.
The enhancement of an author’s work involves not only a knowledge 
of current stylistic conventions and language, but also judgement on the 
desirability and extent of their application, recognizing when it is necessary or 
unnecessary to make changes. Breaking the rules for eﬀ ect is not restricted to 
ﬁction. Appreciating the intangible quality of the author’s voice can be 
important, especially in children’s books.
Although an editor needs an enormous capacity to soak up detail, the 
ability to examine the text’s overall sense is equally important. Visual 
awareness is valuable, especially in highly illustrated adult and children’s 
publishing and packaging, and low-level textbook publishing. Knowledge 
and understanding of production processes and ways of minimizing costs 
at all stages are essential, as is clear marking of the text for structure. An 
understanding of publishing software is also important as the range of 
editorial duties expands.
A publisher’s ofﬁce is hardly conducive to concentration. Editors dealing 
with many books (all at diﬀ erent stages) are pressed by production to meet 
deadlines, and are constantly interrupted by colleagues wanting instant 
information. Good editors are unﬂappable, they set priorities, manage time 
efﬁciently, juggle projects, switch quickly from one activity to another, and 
expect crises.

S

I L L S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
179
Editorial work
Although a commissioning editor or junior editor may copy-edit manuscripts in 
detail, this work is usually done by freelance copy-editors. There are also packagers 
and oﬀ shore companies which undertake the entire editorial and production 
process (including project management) up to the delivery of the digital ﬁles ready 
for manufacturing and digital publication, although the publisher still retains 
direct control of the cover.
Junior editors supervise the progress of books from manuscripts to bound 
copies, working closely with the production/design department, and giving 
information to marketing and sales people. They may copy-edit manuscripts and 
organize illustrations themselves; they may edit manuscripts for overall clarity and 
pass them to freelance copy-editors for the detailed work. They subsequently send 
proofs to authors and to freelance proofreaders, collate corrections and generally 
oversee the book’s production from an editorial standpoint. Some book and 
journal publishers employ production editors, who are also responsible for the 
design and production stages, and the management of suppliers. The production 
department may organize freelance editing and proofreading. In illustrated book 
publishers and packagers, editors work alongside designers to create the book 
spread by spread.
In ﬁrms where job demarcations are drawn not too tightly, and where 
junior editors work speciﬁcally for sympathetic commissioning editors, there is 
sometimes also the opportunity to gain commissioning experience, usually 
without responsibility. This may depend on the size of the company. A common 
job role is that of editorial assistant, whose work ranges from administrative 
support to editorial work under supervision, such as proofreading, collating 
corrections, ﬁnding pictures for the text, applying for the clearance of third-party 
copyright material, and handling reprints. In consumer book publishing, junior 
editorial staﬀ  may write reports on new book proposals. In textbook publishing, 
development editors may look after the commissioning of new editions.
Copy-editing
The aim of the copy-editor, who may be the only person other than the author who 
reads the book before publication, is to ensure that the text and illustrations are 
clear, correct and consistent for both the printer and the ultimate readers. ‘Good 
copy-editing is invisible: it aims to present the book the author would have written 
if he or she had had more time or experience – not, as some new copy-editors 
think, their own improved version’ (Butcher et al., page 32).
The copy-editor is also usually expected to look out for passages that may be 
libellous:
Any statement in a book or journal or newspaper, or any other published 
matter (an advertisement, e-mail or website, blog, message board for 
example), runs the risk of being defamatory if it contains an untrue allegation 
or imputation which disparages the reputation of another. (Jones and 
Benson, page 168)
The novelist 
Iris Murdoch 
(1919–99) 
refused to have 
her work 
edited, even 
resisting 
changes to her 
punctuation
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
180
In the case of an unauthorized biography of a leading celebrity, a read by a lawyer 
may be required alongside evidence from the author to back up any controversial 
claims. Investigative reporting and publishing were given a boost in 2007 with the 
case of Graeme McLagan’s book Bent Coppers (2003), ‘The inside story of Scotland 
Yard’s battle against police corruption’. The UK court of appeal decided that the 
author had acted responsibly when writing and researching the book. ‘The court 
upheld the so-called “Reynolds defence” of qualiﬁed privilege, under which 
journalists can claim the right to publish material in the public interest even if 
they cannot prove its accuracy or it turns out to be untrue’ (Guardian, 11 October 
2007). This was the ﬁrst time the Reynolds defence had been applied to a book.
The copy-editor, who is briefed on the nature and market of the book, ﬁrst 
needs to check that all the manuscript items handed over are indeed present and 
that they have been clearly labelled and numbered by the author. The author is 
asked for any outstanding items, otherwise the book will be held up.
The work of copy-editing falls into three related processes:
 
▪
consistency,
 
▪
substantive editing, and
 
▪
structural mark-up.
House style
R. M. Ritter, Author of The Oxford Style Manual
In its broadest sense, ‘house style’ is the way a publisher or printer typically 
produces its work: it encompasses every aspect of how a publication is 
presented, including its spelling, grammar, punctuation, typography, 
hyphenation, references, and layout. This deﬁnition can extend beyond print 
to such physical features as uniform bindings, paper, format, or dust jackets, 
and even speciﬁc colours and presentation of logos or colophons. In practical 
terms, the purpose of house style is to establish guidelines for everyone 
involved in creating a publication to follow, in order to ensure accuracy and 
consistency. Nowadays it is usually imposed by a publisher’s copy-editors and 
proofreaders as part of the editing process.
While the vast majority of these guidelines are unremarkable – good 
grammar, standard spelling, sensible punctuation – people who are not 
involved in producing texts (and some who are) tend to think of house style as 
concentrating on those elements that are either contentious or arbitrary. For 
example,
“She said she liked the colors ‘red, white and blue.’”
is nearly identical to
‘She said she liked the colours “red, white, and blue”.’

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
181
and the minor diﬀ erences in spelling, punctuation, and quotation marks do 
not aﬀ ect its meaning. So why go to all the trouble to impose such seemingly 
whimsical alterations?
Since the birth of printing, printers recognized that authors are 
notoriously inconsistent. This is hardly surprising: when writing we are 
concerned for the most part with what we are saying, not how we are saying it, 
or what it looks like thereafter. And a text of any length is likely to have 
variations in style that are inconsequential to the writer, who is concentrating 
on substance over style. Nevertheless, readers do pick up on irregularities, 
though they might not be looking for them. Even if such variations do not 
actually muddle the sense, they can diminish the ease or pleasure of reading; 
and if there are enough of them, they can actually cast doubt on the quality or 
reliability of the writer or publisher.
One might think the most sensible course is simply to mirror a writer’s 
preferred usage, and iron out the diﬀ erences. Unfortunately, such a task is 
time-consuming, expensive, and inexact, since it is by no means certain that a 
writer’s usage on page 1 will reﬂect the style that carries through – barring 
lapses – to the end. To do this accurately would require compiling a list of all 
style preferences as they crop up, deciding which are most common, and then 
starting over to impose them properly – a process that would need to begin
afresh for each work. So, to avoid the eﬀ ort of reinventing the wheel with each 
text, publishers impose their own styles, which are familiar to them, to ensure 
that consistency is followed from the very ﬁrst.
These days, publishers rely on style guides that are considered to reﬂect 
established standards in their own countries or, in the case of academic work, 
their own disciplines or ﬁelds. They might disagree with those guides in some 
respects: variations are often listed on a publisher’s website. If a work is to be 
published quickly, or is to be collected with similar works, or is non-ﬁction, 
a publisher’s house style is more likely to be imposed unilaterally during 
editing. In the case of ﬁction or larger works, publishers tend to seek authors’ 
preferences, and establish a happy medium.
Consistency
The most basic task is to ensure that the author’s text is consistent in such 
matters as spelling, hyphenation, capitalization, agreement of verbs and subjects, 
beginning and ending of quotation marks and parentheses, and many other 
points sometimes included in the ﬁrm’s editorial house style. The house style may 
be based on a particular reference work, for example The Oxford Style Manual, or 
may have been developed internally. In the USA most editors use The Chicago 
Manual of Style. One advantage of following a house style is that proofreaders and 
other staﬀ  working on the text will have a set policy to help resolve problems later 
on in the production process.
Working on-screen, the editor can use tools such as the search facility to help 
with the enforcement of consistency in spelling and hyphenation. There are also 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
182
software programs used by freelancers and at typesetters; and publishers may 
provide macros to editors that will help incorporate basic elements of house style. 
The danger is that some words, such as in quotations or references, are also 
changed by mistake. The editor must check the accuracy and relationship of parts 
of the text to others, such as in-text cross-references to illustrations, captions, 
chapters and notes; the matching of headings on the contents page to those in the 
text; and of citations to the reference list. The arrangement and preparation of 
pages about which authors may be unsure (for example the preliminary pages) are 
also the editor’s concern. Each new book presents its own problems in the detailed 
handling of stylistic points, and decisions have to be made in regard to alternative 
ways of applying the rules.
Substantive editing
While some publishers restrict copy-editing to work on consistency, others expect 
editors to engage in the second parallel editorial process, which may be termed 
substantive or content editing. This calls for clear perception of the author’s intent 
and sometimes restraint from the copy-editor. Where appropriate, attention is 
paid to discordant notes, such as obscure, incoherent, misleading or ambiguous 
sentences, or non sequiturs in factual passages; unintentional use of mixed 
metaphors or of repetition; unusual punctuation in sentence construction; 
paragraphing; and over or under use of headings. Furthermore, errors of fact, 
and inconsistencies, omissions, contradictions and illogicality in the argument 
or plot may be found. Substantive editing may entail the rewriting of sentences, 
reorganization, or suggesting other ways to present material. It is important, 
however, not to annoy the author by making unnecessary changes.
Editors look out for abbreviations and terms unfamiliar to readers. The 
avoidance of parochialisms or culturally speciﬁc UK examples is especially 
important in books aimed for overseas markets. Books can be edited in British 
English, American English or even mid-Atlantic English. The avoidance of oﬀ ensive 
– for example, sexist or racist – language or values and of corresponding stereotypes 
are issues which confront editors, designers and illustrators, particularly those in 
educational and children’s publishing. These staﬀ  also try to ensure that the level of 
language and the illustrations are appropriate for the intended age group.
Structural mark-up
The parallel editorial process carried out, whether the second substantive form is 
done or not, is to indicate to the designer or typesetter the structural elements of the 
text. Items so tagged or coded include the heading hierarchy (chapter headings, 
section and sub-section headings) and other elements (long quotations, lists, notes, 
captions, tables). The following shows Extensible Markup Language (XML) tagging 
for a chapter opening. Each opening tag must be completed with a closing tag.
<ch>40 Does the Book Have a Future?<chx>
<au>Angus Phillips<aux>
<epig>Old media don’t die; they just have to grow old gracefully. (Douglas 
Adams 2001)<epigx>
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
183
A sample page from a typescript showing marks and tags inserted by the copy-editor
<number>2 
<1lt!e>Slow books 
<rhr>Slow books 
<rhl>Slow books 
<text> Just as the prospects for books look limited without authors, the same applies 
without readers. Paul Auster says, 'If you write a story or a poem, you hope there will be a 
reader:! although of course there are a good many titles read by very few people. There is 
a received wisdom that reading is good in itself, and offers personal and social benefits 
beyond those for the e<:onomy of having an educated and literate population. If studies 
show that readership of books is in decline, does this matter? What is at stake here? Are 
there other ways of learning and developing our intelligence, and how can we expe<:t books 
to compete with the range of other media which compete for our attention? 
Surveys suggest a fall in reading over time, in many countries, and this chapter will 
examine the evidence and the reasons put forward. These include the loss of time to read, 
in an often frenetic world of competing demands, and declining interest amongst newer 
generations. Is the reading of books being replaced by other forms of reading, for 
~ee,g,.
blogs 
and websites? The science of reading tells us what is happening inside our 
brains, and suggests that the pace of reading is faster with some digital devices. 
<head1 >Decline in reading 
<text>The statistics regarding reading have to be trea ted with some caution. There is no 
satisfactory set of data over a long period, and -.<ertainly..!l2.!l!:. which can provide 
A sample page from a typescript showing marXs and tags inserted by the copy.editor 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
184
Text that is structurally tagged is platform independent and can be published in 
diﬀ erent formats (ebook, online) or readily licensed to third parties. A further 
impetus on publishers (especially educational ﬁrms) to make books available in 
structured, digital formats is the Disability Discrimination Act (1995). There is 
demand from the reading impaired (not just the visually impaired) and their 
institutions. Text in digital form can be adjusted by the user in size, style and 
colour contrasts. Functionality includes the ability to have the text read out loud 
using a screen reader, or the provision of extra navigational information – such as 
whether a line is a heading or a short sentence. Publishers can also produce audio 
ﬁles for download.
Working method
Individuals diﬀ er in their approach to copy-editing. A common method involves 
the editor quickly looking through the manuscript to gain a measure of the author 
and the book. Ideally, decisions regarding the handling of stylistic points (for 
example spelling, hyphenation, capitalization, terminology) are taken at the 
outset. A style sheet is developed to aid consistency and memory, and helps the 
proofreading, which will be done by a separate freelancer.
To a varying extent, house style editing and substantive editing conﬂict, in that 
concentration on one may lead to neglect of the other. Good editors may go through 
the copy several times at diﬀ erent speeds, focusing attention at various levels, 
moving back and forth during each examination. Editors may work on hard copy – 
a typical example is shown opposite – or on screen (using software tools), or both.
Skilled on-screen copy-editors, making good use of their computer’s tools 
such as ﬁnd and replace and macros, can work quickly and efﬁciently; and if 
they are able to present the typesetter with fully corrected and coded ﬁles that 
can be simply passed through the typesetting system and run out as pages, 
there can be genuine savings in the schedule. (Butcher et al., page 15)
During each examination editors make alterations on matters – especially those 
of house style – they believe to be right and defensible, but even so authors may 
disagree. Queries to the author are marked on the copy in the electronic ﬁle using 
track changes, listed separately or scanned to make a portable document format 
(PDF) ﬁle. Those that aﬀ ect the design or production of the book are addressed to 
the design or production department.
If the author is contacted by telephone, email or in writing, editors need to be 
particularly tactful, explaining the kind of editing that has been done – perhaps by 
mentioning representative samples – raising matters needing assistance, and 
reaching agreement on matters of concern. Best practice is that the edited copy 
is returned to the author for checking (although some publishers are reluctant 
to do so if a large amount of tagging is visible), as this reduces costly and time-
consuming changes at proof stage. Sometimes a meeting is held with the author 
– or the editor or lead author in the case of a multi-author work. By adopting the 
reader’s viewpoint, and suggesting solutions, the editor sets out to persuade the 
author to make necessary changes. If the text has been edited on-screen, the edited 
copy may form an early proof.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
185
A sample page from a typescript copy-edited by hand
~impulse 
is a shon signal comprising a single \'alue followed by ze~. 
The nature of the filterij) 
response, called the impu/5e respolIStili 
e filter. The simplest fonn offilter is 
called a {,nite fmpulse ReSponse(l~filter, 
in which ' taps' are taken from successive samples, 
which are then multiplied by a coefficient (a multipl icative ,f ac
t or~nd 
the R':sults aR': added 
together to ~ ~e OUtput of the filtet". Tlli s is called 'finit1bccause there are a fixed number of 
taPSFt~ller, 
by contrast, allows feedback bet-;.een the output and the input. which can 
create some long-lasting results, including growth of decay over time. This is particularly useful 
for effeclS such as reverberation, Where tbe impulse, response of a physical space may be 
recorded by. for example. firing a gun or bursting a balloon, the JlR filter may be used to model 
the !arne digitally_ However. II R fillers are often unstable and somewhat inaccurate. owing to the 
complexity of theiroperation/and can easily produce fenlback and OIher such unwanted results. 
~ 
Thi
~ makes digital reverberation one of the mOSt difficult things to achieve SUrfUlly, and the 
range of commercially available solutions can be quite variable in quality. 
Creative uses of such filters include! interpolation, in which sounds of two 
apparently fused togeth~over 
ti mel and eonvolutiOli. which combines twO soun
~le
s ,an input 
~ 
and an impulse 
ntultiplying their spectra together to produce a new sound file. 
Frequencies that are 
sound fi les will tend to be reinforced and resonate together, 
,~ 
The filter will try 10 m~tc
h bin eonlent across Ihe tWO speclrOilfl. Where Ihere is a matCh. Ihe data 
"', 
is preserved. WheR': there is no match. il is discarded (or, strictly, multiplied by,). Among OIher 
things. this enables the application oflhe reverberant propenies of resonance to FFT Twindowli 
over time "'1d'u~ 
superimposition of the rev('rberam characteristics of One sound upon 
anOlhero 
Where digital filters find the most direct parallel with analogue equipment is i.",
!~~ 
,~~!
~~~ 
EQ, 
L 
or EqUiliftion. Both analogue and digital EQ are designed to make the final recorded sound 
equat to the original source, by correcting inadequacies of both equipment and the recording 
environmenl Ho .... ever. it can also be a highly creative tool when used skilfully . EQ adjUStS the 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the 
month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
the cruellesl month. 
103
particularly 
particularly 
particularly 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
186
Prelims and end-matter
The editor usually drafts the preliminary material – ‘prelims’ or ‘front matter’ 
– the ﬁrst few pages of the book. These include the pages giving the book title 
and author, the name of the publishing house, the copyright notice, and the 
International Standard Book Number (ISBN) – a unique number identifying 
the book. Other pages are the contents page, list of illustrations and 
acknowledgements – for advice and support to the author, or for copyright 
material used. The author writes a Preface; a third party provides a Foreword. The 
cataloguing in publication (CIP) data (supplied by the British Library and Library 
of Congress) has to be applied for.
The usual order of the prelim pages is as follows, with variations according to 
the book. A right-hand facing page is called a recto; a left-hand facing page a verso. 
Recto pages are visually more important, but the advent of ebooks has diminished 
the impact of such distinctions.
 
▪
Half-title page (recto) – the main title without the subtitle and author’s name.
 
▪
Half-title verso – often blank, or a list of the author’s previous works.
 
▪
Title page (recto) – full title and author’s name, with the publisher’s imprint.
 
▪
Title verso – copyright page with the publication history and ISBN.
The other prelim pages follow. These include the dedication, acknowledgements, 
preface, contents page and the list of illustrations. The prelim pages are paginated 
using roman numbers, switching to Arabic numerals for the introduction or the 
ﬁrst chapter. The advantage of this system is that changes can be made to the 
prelims at proof stage without aﬀ ecting the main pagination (which could have 
knock-on eﬀ ects for the index). If pages need to be saved to achieve a set extent, 
the prelim pages can be adjusted. The pages at the end of the book, or ‘end 
matter’, can include appendices, notes, bibliography and the index.
Proofreading
Most unillustrated books, or those with only a few illustrations which are easily 
placed, go straight to page proofs following copy-editing. The typesetter arranges 
the page breaks, inserts any illustrations, and returns proofs of pages numbered 
as they will ﬁnally appear. Proofs are usually sent as PDF ﬁles by email. Proofs are 
normally read by the author and publisher (most commonly by a freelancer). They 
can be checked against copy (compared to the original), which is more expensive, 
or simply read by eye for obvious errors. The corrections and improvements are 
collated by the editor and inserted using standard symbols – proof marks are set 
by the British Standards Institution – on one master set in paper form (the 
marked set) or marked electronically in the PDF. Correction marks have 
traditionally been colour-coded (red for typesetter’s errors, blue or black for 
author’s and publisher’s) so that costs can be apportioned, but this practice is not 
always followed. Publishers are likely to charge authors for excessive corrections. 
The marked set or ﬁle is returned to the typesetter for correction, and second page 
or revised page proofs are produced to check the author’s and proofreader’s 
corrections have been correctly implemented. Books with many illustrations 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
187
integrated with the text may follow a diﬀ erent path. The designer may supply a 
page layout to the typesetter or work on the pages themselves. A sequence of page 
proofs is checked by the author and publisher.
Most manuscripts arrive on disk or by email, and there is no necessity to have 
them rekeyed. This minimizes errors at proof and if the copy-editor works on 
screen a high-quality version of the text is passed to the typesetter. In some 
companies production editors or designers prepare the digital ﬁle from which the 
book is published.
Index
Serious non-ﬁction books should have reliable indexes that anticipate readers’ 
needs and expectations. The author is often responsible for index preparation and 
the cost, and either compiles it themselves or is supplied with a freelance indexer, 
found by the editor, sometimes from the Society of Indexers. Typesetters can 
prepare simple indexes using standard software. Indexes are prepared from a page 
proof and have to be edited and typeset at great speed because the publication date 
is close. The professional indexers have usually passed their Society’s course 
exams, use specialist indexing software, and may wish to retain copyright. The 
index may be missed out of ebook editions given the complexity of ﬂ owable text 
without ﬁ xed pagination, and the availability of a search function.
‘Should not the 
Society of 
Indexers be 
known as 
Indexers, 
Society of, 
The?’, from the 
play Bookends 
by Keith 
Waterhouse, 
1990
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The author contract and editorial development
188
Now read this
Judith Butcher, Caroline Drake and Maureen Leach, Copy-Editing: The 
Cambridge handbook for editors, copy-editors and proofreaders, 4th edition, 
2006.
Hugh Jones and Christopher Benson, Publishing Law, 4th edition, Routledge, 
2011.
Sources
Rick Gekoski, ‘The Importance of Good Editing’, Guardian, 14 June 2012.
Barbara Horn, Editorial Project Management, Horn Editorial Books, 2006.
Barbara Horn, Copy-editing, Horn Editorial Books and Publishing Training 
Centre, 2008.
Blake Morrison, ‘Black Day for the Blue Pencil’, Observer, 6 August 2005.
The Chicago Manual of Style, 16th edition, University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Lynette Owen (ed.), Clark’s Publishing Agreements: A book of precedents, 9th 
edition, Bloomsbury, 2013.
New Oxford Style Manual, 2012.
Katharine Rushton, ‘A Time to Publish’, The Bookseller, 29 June 2007.
Web resources
www.bsigroup.com The British Standards Institution maintains the standard 
proofreading marks and symbols.
www.indexers.org.uk Society of Indexers.
www.nuj.org.uk National Union of Journalists; see its Freelance Directory.
www.sfep.org.uk Society for Editors and Proofreaders.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 9
Design and production
Alongside the work of the editor in product development, the contributions from 
the design and production staﬀ  are equally critical. Good design sells books – 
whether it is the cover of a novel attracting an impulse buyer in a shop, or the 
eﬀ ective use of typography and illustrations in a school textbook. Some publishers, 
especially in the highly illustrated book and art book markets, are actively 
design-led. Their design standards are used as a marketing and sales tool 
internationally. In the transition to digital publishing, production managers make 
crucial decisions about quality which aﬀ ect how a book is perceived in a market of 
multiple p and e formats. Through eﬀ ective purchasing of services from 
freelancers, trade suppliers and project management companies, they ensure 
that work is kept to budget and schedule.
Authors primarily want publishers to market and distribute their books 
eﬀ ectively, but they also want publishers to produce them eﬃ  ciently and 
attractively. Some new competitors to the more established companies oﬀ er speed 
to market and more ﬂ exible operations. Author service companies will bring 
books to market in a matter of a few weeks, whilst digital only publishers and 
distributors are free of print-ﬁ rst production systems. They can oﬀ er authors 
faster publication and are less constrained by the economics and physical 
restrictions of print.
The previous boundaries in the design and production process have been 
broken down so that authors, editors and designers are much more involved in 
producing the ﬁnal text. On highly illustrated books, designers, not typesetters, 
may produce the ﬁnal ﬁle for the printer; at the same time the increasing 
sophistication of pagination software reduces the need to employ designers to 
hand craft the layout of illustrated texts. The requirements of digital publishing 
mean that the ﬁle of a book will be rendered to several outputs: print and digital 
formats. There is now an imperative to hold a properly archived version of a book 
so that it can be published across formats and repurposed as necessary. Publishers 
making the transition to digital publishing are re-engineering the workﬂow and 
that is one of their biggest challenges.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
190
Text
Illustrations
Multimedia
Editorial
Design
Production
Archive
Online
Outputs
Inputs
Digital workflow
Print
Ebook
DVD/CD-
ROM
Re-engineering the workflow
Publishers are changing, and have changed, the work and system processes of 
publishing content in order to move from a print only world to a mixed print and 
digital world. The growing use of XML is an important part of the transition, and 
in the previous chapter structural mark-up was introduced – the tagging that aids 
the searching and linking of content. STM, professional, and reference publishers 
were early adopters, but trade and educational publishers are catching up. Within 
each sector, publishers vary in the extent to which they have changed the 
workﬂ ow.
At ﬁ rst, publishers adopted the least disruptive approach. The publisher’s 
typesetter produced the XML ﬁ le after the printed book was printed. As that could 
delay ebook publication, progressive eﬀ orts were made to introduce structural 
tagging earlier and earlier. For example, the typesetter may produce the tagged
ﬁ le from an application such as InDesign, or before that from the copy-edited 
manuscript. In an ‘XML ﬁ rst’ workﬂ ow the content is tagged in Word by the 
copy-editor – or even the author – and then exported to XML. Underlying the XML 
approach is the drive towards greater standardization in the production process in 
order to lower costs and quicken lead times, to publish in various formats through 
diﬀ erent channels to market, and to future-proof the business. Publishers are 
moving from a ‘cottage industry approach’, where the production of each book 
diﬀ ers, to scalable production approaches and systems. This is not to say that 
handcrafted books do not have importance in some markets, and building value 
into print products is one response to the rise of digital.
The publisher’s suppliers have kept in step with the moves towards 
standardization and modernization of the workﬂ ow. Whilst publishers in the 
period after the Second World War used printers which oﬀ ered a complete service 
from re-keying and typesetting of manuscripts through to printing and binding, 
by the last quarter of the twentieth century, publishers’ production managers 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
191
found it cheaper and more ﬂ exible to use specialist typesetters to produce the ﬁ lm 
of the ﬁ nished book, which they then sent to a printer for printing and binding.
UK publishers also used overseas printers in continental Europe and the Far 
East which oﬀ ered lower prices, especially for the manufacture of colour books. The 
UK printers facing a static, if not declining market, consolidated, or became part of 
pan-European groups (such as CPI), and more recently added digital services (such 
as St Ives, which owns the book printer Clays). Some, however, went bust in the face 
of continued downward pressure on manufacturing prices, the internationalization 
of the publishing and retailing industries, and new technologies. They had to 
contend with new competitors from diﬀ erent sectors exploiting digital printing 
technologies which enabled short-run printing or print on demand (POD). 
Lightning Source created by the US wholesaler Ingram pioneered POD in the late 
1990s, and Amazon acquired the POD printer BookSurge in 2005. Printers were 
forced to diversify by oﬀ ering supply chain management and distribution services 
(including direct delivery to intermediaries and end-users), to supplement their 
conventional practice of delivering stock to publishers’ warehouses. Advances in 
digital printing allowed publishers to reduce their printed book inventory and switch 
part of their backlist to just-in-time fulﬁ lment of orders. Printing for local markets 
now saves shipping and environmental costs. Distributors serving publishers are 
aligning themselves with digital printers, and the growth in self-publishing oﬀ ers 
digital printers new business.
The pre-press supplier market evolved too from the 1980s. Typesetters made 
greater use of computers for the pre-press production processes of printed books, 
and this led to a dramatic fall in the cost of typesetting per page. As digital 
publishing developed at the turn of the century, the typesetters, mostly based 
overseas, adapted and consolidated. New ﬁ rms arose oﬀ ering publishing solutions 
and they made large investments in technology to process content and data. Some 
of the largest, for example global companies such as SPi Global, Aptara and 
Techset, employ large and well-educated workforces in oﬀ shore locations, such 
as India and the Philippines. From the late 1990s they digitized the printed back 
issues of journals into fully coded and thus searchable content. The digitization of 
saleable journal back issues is nearly complete; by comparison the backlists of 
many book publishers have yet to be digitized in a systematic way, and the 
concentration has been on ﬁ le conversion to ebook formats. In any case trade 
publishers have less control over their IP, which is often agented and includes 
third-party content such as illustrations.
The academic publishers in particular have looked to strip out costs from 
their organization through outsourcing to service providers, which now oﬀ er 
a range of higher value services, including copy-editing and proofreading, 
permission clearance, technical drawing, design, outputs to all formats, project 
management, and the development of enhanced ebooks. The client base of these 
companies is broadening out from the academic and professional publishers to 
include educational and trade houses. There are also specialist companies to 
supply content management systems within which workﬂ ow is managed and 
content is stored – examples are Librios in the UK, and RSI in the USA; and 
others which focus on the development of e-learning solutions and digital 
textbooks, such as Hurix in India, and Inkling in the USA. In the area of apps, 
digital directors within publishing houses will usually work with third-party 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
192
developers, either in a partnership which shares the ﬁ nancial risk – and any proﬁ t 
– or by commissioning the project against a budget. Such multimedia projects will 
typically use a team approach, involving the author alongside a software developer, 
designer and producer. Examples of app developers in the UK include Touch 
Press (also a publisher) and Inkle.
The major trends of the adoption of a digital workﬂ ow, the output to a range 
of formats, standardization in processes, outsourcing to service providers (rather 
than to freelance copy-editors and designers), and the use of digital printing to 
manage the backlist of printed books, are having a major impact on the 
production departments of publishers. Some of the tasks (and job roles) of the 
print-only world are eliminated. On the other hand, the management of pre-press 
services, an awareness of constantly changing technologies, sound project 
management skills, and expertise in print buying remain vitally important.
DESIGN
With regard to the text design, the basis of the book designer’s job is visual 
planning. They operate within technical, cost and time constraints, and take into 
account the views of the editor, and the production and sales departments. Their 
task is to transform and enhance the author’s raw material, text and illustrations. 
The printed book should have aesthetical appeal and meet the practical needs of 
its users – whether for leisure, information or education. The drawing element of 
the job, if any, usually extends to providing blueprints or rough visuals for others 
(technical illustrators, artists, typesetters, image originators or printers) to execute. 
Design work can vary greatly according to the nature of the content.
The use of freelancers or agencies to design books or websites is widespread. 
They are commonly commissioned by editors, production staﬀ , or in-house 
designers. Small publishers, without in-house staﬀ , may ask a good printer to help 
with the design; and in some large ﬁrms issuing relatively straightforward books, 
editors or production controllers may design the books while commissioning the 
covers from freelance designers. Many titles – for example ﬁction, lightly 
illustrated non-ﬁction, academic and professional books – follow pre-set 
typographic templates.
In-house staﬀ  tend to be employed by medium to large houses, designing 
covers or more complex illustrated books (from illustrated adult and children’s 
non-ﬁction to textbooks), and by the more established book packagers. They will 
work in a design or production department, reporting directly to the manager. 
The design manager, responsible for the overall brand of all the ﬁrm’s books, is 
concerned with the deployment of in-house and external services, budgets, 
scheduling and administration. Senior designers may co-ordinate the work of 
junior designers; there may be design assistants; and some in-house designers 
specialize in particular lists. The design of book covers for most kinds of books, 
other than the most utilitarian, requires speciﬁc design attention which is carried 
out by in-house cover designers, or freelancers under the supervision of the art 
director. For the production of complex digital and print products, multi-
disciplinary teams may be set up, consisting of editors, designers, interactive 
media designers, developers and project managers.
Touch Press 
sold more than 
250,000 
downloads of 
its app The 
Elements
The cover 
design is 
usually carried 
out separately 
from the text 
design
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
193
The preparation of artwork is mainly outsourced, and some publishers and 
packagers employ illustrators and designers on short-term contracts. Photography 
is normally commissioned. The design of promotional material may be the 
responsibility of in-house designers in marketing, or freelance designers or 
agencies commissioned by that department.
Design brief
The point at which a designer is ﬁrst involved with a new book varies. It may 
occur before or after the author has completed the manuscript, the designer 
receiving either an edited or unedited copy. By then the book’s overall parameters 
(for example format, extent, illustrations, binding, paper) have been planned. In 
some ﬁrms, editors personally brief designers while in others design meetings are 
organized, attended by the production team and sometimes the sales staﬀ . The 
outcome may be a production speciﬁcation, a budget and the schedule. It is vital 
for the designer to be given a clear brief by the editor at the outset. A designer may 
be able to suggest alternative ideas to save money or to improve sales potential. 
Assuming the book is not part of a ﬁxed format series or that a pre-existing design 
cannot be adapted to suit it, the designer’s opening tasks are to prepare the type 
speciﬁcation and page layout which are supplementary to the book’s overall 
production speciﬁcation.
Type speciﬁcation and page layout
The type speciﬁcation sets out how the main text elements should be typeset in 
respect of typefaces, sizes, page depth, and line lengths, and of the positioning and 
spacing of the elements. The elements include:
 
▪
body text,
 
▪
headings – the hierarchy of chapter heads and subheadings,
 
▪
displayed quotations – broken oﬀ  from the main text,
 
▪
tables,
 
▪
captions for illustrations,
 
▪
running heads at the top of the page, and
 
▪
page numbers.
The page layout is a graphic representation of the printed page – invariably of two 
facing pages. Layouts are based on a grid – the underlying framework within 
which text and illustrations are placed on the page.
A grid is the graphic design equivalent of a building’s foundations. As we 
read from left to right and top to bottom, a grid is generally a series of vertical 
and horizontal lines. The vertical lines will relate to the column widths, while 
the horizontal will be determined by the space that a line of type occupies. 
(Roberts and Thrift, page 18)
Layout and typographic style considerably aﬀ ect the readers’ perception of a book. 
The two are interdependent and should, if well designed, allow the author’s work
The main text 
of this book is 
typeset in
Scala and is 
unjustiﬁed (it 
has no ﬁxed 
margin on the 
right-hand 
side); the 
boxed panels 
are in Scala 
Sans
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
194
to be presented consistently and ﬂexibly, taking into account the content, aims, 
character, market and technical and cost constraints of the book. Book typography 
has four main functions (Mitchell and Wightman):
 
▪
readability – the text should be comfortable to read,
 
▪
organization – the structure of the text should be clearly communicated,
 
▪
navigation – information in the book should be easy to ﬁnd, and
 
▪
consistency – the overall eﬀ ect is to create a uniﬁed whole.
Factors that should be taken into account are the ﬁtting of the author’s manuscript 
into the desired extent; the ability of certain typefaces to cope with mathematics or 
foreign languages, or to ease reading by early or poor-sighted readers; and the 
typefaces available from a supplier. The designer presents one or more designs in 
the form of mock-ups to the editorial and production staﬀ  for their comments and 
approval – usually specimen pages are produced.
There are a variety of typefaces commonly used in books, ranging from 
traditional faces, such as Bembo, Garamond, or Times New Roman, to sans serif 
fonts (without the ﬁnishing strokes at the ends of letters) including Frutiger, 
Helvetica and Univers.
Typographic mark-up
Once the complete manuscript is edited, the designer may carry out the 
typographic mark-up, that is the addition of typesetting instructions to the 
manuscript or disk. Some instructions, such as the mark-up of the heading 
hierarchy and use of italic or bold within the text, may have been marked in 
copy-editing. The copy-editor may also have implemented a system of coding to 
mark the diﬀ erent text elements. The designer checks, for instance, the editor’s
A double-page 
spread from the 
Rapid reading 
programme from 
Heinemann
Typefaces 
popular for 
blogs and web 
pages are Arial, 
Georgia and 
Verdana
II" .. ond \Iley 'on owoy. They didn't >lop 
to to .. ~ 
Of ft~t.."1 
or ony\l1ing 
"";Ih them, Th~ 
_re the h><ky 0 ..... 
Othrr I"'opt.. looked up ond thooght 
thol V ........ ", ...,. too for _oy 10 be 
Othrr I"'opt.. looked up ond thooght 
thol V 
", 
too for _oy 10 be 
looked up ond thooght 
looked up ond thooght 
looked up ond thooght 
looked up ond thooght 
to be presented consistently 
and flexibly, taking 
and flexibly, taking 
presented 
o be presented consistently 
presented 
o be presented consistently 
presented 
o be presented consistently 
presented 
presented 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
195
Adobe Caslon Pro
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567890 1234567890
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ ﬁﬂffiffl ½ ¼ ¾
At endre magna faccum velessis ad eu feuguercin henit lore et, vulla at, sequat,
consenibh et wisl iustie erosto odolessequat in vel utatue duis aliquam, quatem exeriure
vel ullam. Con utate te velit illumsan ullandre corperat alit nonsenim adit lutatie dunt
utpatie conse facipit at velesse quismol orperci tisi. Pit veliquate dolortie molutatem
ipsum vel do consenqu ipsustisi. El doloborem velis autet ad te ter luptatue ming estrud
esse modit laor aci tin hent dolortissi.
Adobe Garamond Pro
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567890 1234567890
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ ﬁﬂffiffl ½ ¼ ¾
At endre magna faccum velessis ad eu feuguercin henit lore et, vulla at, sequat, consenibh
et wisl iustie erosto odolessequat in vel utatue duis aliquam, quatem exeriure vel ullam.
Con utate te velit illumsan ullandre corperat alit nonsenim adit lutatie dunt utpatie conse
facipit at velesse quismol orperci tisi. Pit veliquate dolortie molutatem ipsum vel do
consenqu ipsustisi. El doloborem velis autet ad te ter luptatue ming estrud esse modit laor
aci tin hent dolortissi.
Adobe Jenson Pro
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567890 1234567890
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ ﬁﬂﬃﬄ½ ¼ ¾
At endre magna faccum velessis ad eu feuguercin henit lore et, vulla at, sequat, consenibh et
wisl iustie erosto odolessequat in vel utatue duis aliquam, quatem exeriure vel ullam. Con
utate te velit illumsan ullandre corperat alit nonsenim adit lutatie dunt utpatie conse facipit
at velesse quismol orperci tisi. Pit veliquate dolortie molutatem ipsum vel do consenqu
ipsustisi. El doloborem velis autet ad te ter luptatue ming estrud esse modit laor aci tin hent
dolortissi.
hierarchy of headings to ensure they conform to the agreed type speciﬁcation, and 
may want them modiﬁed. The typesetter follows the speciﬁcation or style coding. 
However, depending on the complexity of the material, the designer may indicate 
the design treatment of recurring text matter which, though covered by the 
speciﬁcation, may still need to be marked by using abbreviations or codes. 
Complex text (including tables) as well as displayed text, such as that of the 
prelims, may require speciﬁc mark-up.
Some examples of 
typefaces
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
196
Design
Designers have technical proﬁciency and usually a vocational qualiﬁcation. 
Underpinning design is a thorough knowledge of typography and the ways in 
which books and covers are put together. Mastery of software such as Adobe 
InDesign and Photoshop is essential, and an understanding of the capabilities 
of XML and HTML, and the diﬀ erent ebook formats. Designers need 
perception, clarity of thought, an ability to take a raw manuscript (perhaps 
badly presented), to analyse it, and come up with an eﬀ ective design within 
ﬁnancial and technical constraints. They should be able to anticipate the 
problems of readers. It calls for a combination of imagination, knowledge and 
understanding of current technical processes and current software, and an 
awareness of the work of leading freelancers and of trends and fashions in 
book design. For cover design a creative mind is pre-eminent, combined with 
a gut feeling of what sells.
Designers must develop the ability to extract a brief – tactfully 
overcoming some editors’ quirks and preconceptions. They must be able to 
explain to authors, editors and sales staﬀ , who rarely think in shape, colour 
and form, how they arrived at a solution, and why it is the best. They must be 
able to give clear and unambiguous briefs and instructions to other designers, 
illustrators, production staﬀ  and printers.
Highly illustrated work requires designers to get under the skin of a 
subject, to undertake research if necessary, to ask probing questions of experts 
and to pay due regard to ethnic or cultural sensitivities. The establishment of 
the all-important rapport with in-house staﬀ  and external suppliers takes 
time and experience to develop. The handling of artists, illustrators and 
photographers, some of whom can be awkward, calls for a special mixture of 
tact, pleading or coercion to induce them to produce their best work. Most 
designers work on many projects simultaneously, all at diﬀ erent stages in 
production. Thus, like editors, they need to be ﬂexible and self-organizing.

S

I L L S
Illustrations
The illustrations may reach the designer before the author has handed over 
the manuscript to the publisher. The designer may have briefed the author or 
supplied the editor with guidelines to help the author prepare drawn illustrations. 
Designers are usually responsible for commissioning the technical illustrators 
or graphic artists who execute the ﬁnal artwork – often prepared on-screen in 
software such as Adobe Illustrator. In children’s books, more traditional 
techniques of illustration may still be used. When many complex diagrams need 
to be drawn, the designer prepares an artwork speciﬁcation to serve as a technical 
reference for illustrators.
Chosen freelance illustrators or artists are contacted directly, or are recruited 
from artist’s agents, art colleges, or commercial studios. The designer, who may 
have developed or sometimes revisualized the author’s roughs, briefs the contact 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
197
about the purpose of each illustration and the style of execution (including the 
ﬁnal size) and gives a deadline for completion; the cost is estimated in advance. 
Roughs may be prepared as the ﬁ rst stage and the designer checks that the brief 
has been followed; they will also want to conﬁ rm with the illustrator that the 
technical standard is suitable for processing and reproduction by the printer. The 
designer ensures that mistakes attributable to the illustrator are not charged to the 
publisher.
Prooﬁng stages
With unillustrated books that go straight to page proofs, the edited and coded 
ﬁle (together with the type speciﬁcation and grid) is sent oﬀ  to the typesetter or 
pre-press supplier. For a book with illustrations grouped on pages, the designer 
provides a layout. When illustrations are interspersed with the text, the sized 
artwork and photographs are sent oﬀ  with the text, or the designer instructs the 
typesetter to leave speciﬁed spaces for the illustrations to be inserted later. The 
designer may ﬁne-tune the typography and correct any bad page breaks or layouts 
at page-proof stage.
With more complex illustrated books, the designer controls and plans 
completely the book’s layout by means of a manual layout on screen, using Adobe 
InDesign or QuarkXPress. The designer may be involved with the ﬁnal selection 
of photographs and advises whether they will reproduce well. The layout of a page 
can aﬀ ect the choice, and the integration of text and illustration inﬂuences the 
sizes of photographs – these may need to be adjusted or cropped. At this stage the 
designer may work with low-resolution scans of the images, which enables proofs 
to be generated showing the illustrations. The designer tunes the ensuing page 
proofs and any illustration proofs, spotting visual errors which authors, editors 
and proofreaders may fail to recognize.
It is important to establish the correct ﬁ nal version of the text of a book, and 
this issue was highlighted when the UK edition of The Corrections by Jonathan 
Franzen appeared in 2010 with hundreds of mistakes. The typesetter had 
apparently sent the ‘last but one’ version of the book ﬁ le to the printer. When the 
book is all correct and ready for printing, the typesetter produces the digital ﬁle of 
the book in one or more formats such as a high-resolution portable document 
format (PDF) ﬁle used by the printer, a low-resolution PDF ﬁle (perhaps for use 
on the web), an XML ﬁle, and ebook formats such as ePub or Kindle. There may 
be further stages undertaken by the printer to ensure the supplied PDF is 
reproducible by their system (a pre-ﬂight check), and on colour books various 
kinds of proofs to verify the colour reproduction. All ﬁ le conversions to the 
diﬀ erent ebook formats need checking.
Ebooks
Ebook ﬁ le formats can be produced from many types of source ﬁ le formats, such 
as InDesign or PDF, and are not dependent on an XML-early workﬂ ow. Backlist 
titles can be converted at relatively low cost by specialist companies or suppliers of 
publishing solutions. The greatest disruption to traditional book design has been 
the introduction of reﬂ owable text enabling ebooks to be read on a variety of
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
198
XML
Meg Barton, Project Editor, Multimedia – Health Sciences, Wiley
XML (extensible markup language) is a method of tagging text so that it can 
be used not just by typesetting systems but also by the programs used to build 
electronic products like ebooks. Tagging is a way of adding invisible labels to 
words in your text. For example, HTML tags are used to impose some basic 
formatting on the web. The example below shows the tags for italic in HTML:
Did you enjoy the ﬁ lm of <i>Pride and Prejudice</i> yesterday?
Yes, but I liked the version with Colin Firth <i>much</i> better.
The opening tag switches on the italic and the closing one switches it oﬀ . 
HTML has a single set of tag names. Here is the same sentence tagged in 
XML:
<question> Did you enjoy the ﬁ lm of <ﬁ lmtitle>Pride and  
Prejudice</ﬁ lmtitle>yesterday?</question>
<answer> Yes, but I liked the version with <forename>Colin</
forename><surname>  Firth</surname><emphasis>much</emphasis> 
better.</answer>
There are some important diﬀ erences to note:
 
▪
XML tags identify items according to their meaning, rather than just 
specifying typography or layout.
 
▪
Unlike HTML, which has a single set of tag names, the naming for XML 
tags is not standard or universal. For example it would be equally valid to 
have named your tag <movietitle> rather than <ﬁ lmtitle> or <query> 
rather than <question>.
 
▪
Anyone can make up their own XML tag names (depending on the sort of 
items they want to tag), and can devise and use any number of them – 
which is why XML is called extensible. In the above example you could 
add more tags to Colin Firth, for example <namegroup> to identify his 
two names as a group, and maybe <ﬁ lmstar> to distinguish him further:
<ﬁ lmstar><namegroup><forename>Colin</
forename><surname>Firth</surname></namegroup></ﬁ lmstar>
Apart from a few basic rules about consistency – for example each opening tag 
must have a closing tag – the only other requirement is to keep a reference list 
of the tags you have used – this list is called a DTD (Document Type 

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
199
Deﬁ nition). Any piece of text that obeys these rules is a ‘valid’ XML document. 
Diﬀ erent publishers (and other industries) have diﬀ erent names for their tags 
and develop their own DTDs.
Tagging of the text can be done by the typesetter as part of the typesetting 
process (or earlier by the author or copy-editor). The typesetter just needs to be 
supplied with a copy of the publisher’s DTD. The typesetter will supply the 
publisher with XML ﬁ les at the same time as the print ﬁ les for the book, or 
can run oﬀ  the XML ﬁ les at some later date when requested by the publisher. 
Publishers are able to use the tagged XML text for a variety of electronic 
products: for example, ebooks, online databases, or textbook question banks. 
Most importantly, the XML-tagged text can also be stored by the publisher to 
use not just for these things, but for any other electronic medium that might 
be invented in the future. Production editors increasingly need to have a 
working knowledge of XML (just as they need to be familiar with the 
typesetting process without having hands-on experience of it). In-house 
programmers and technical staﬀ  will have a detailed knowledge of XML.
It is hoped that XML is the solution that publishers have long been 
looking for – a way of storing and reusing future-proof content.
screen sizes. As Chris Jennings says: ‘Designers who work within publishing 
companies are often frustrated with the results when their beautifully crafted print 
books are converted to eBooks. Particularly if they are ﬂ owable eBooks, that can 
have their layout and fonts changed by the user’ (Jennings, page 7). Designers of 
printed books concentrate on positioning and sizing text and illustrations on ﬁ xed 
pages in an attractive way. The typography conveys functionality and aesthetics, 
and it diﬀ erentiates the character of one book from another. Reproduction as a 
PDF enables the design to be preserved when read digitally, but most ebook 
consumers are now happily choosing their own font and type size, and seeing the 
text reﬂ ow accordingly. Reﬂ owable text makes it hard for designers to control set 
proportions, or the placement of illustrations and captions. The concept of the 
page spread, across two pages, often becomes redundant, and text and illustrations 
ﬂ ow in a linear single column. The producers of ereading devices may also strip 
out formatting by the publisher to impose their own styles, reducing product 
diﬀ erentiation.
Designers can, however, work to ensure that the text design is ﬂ exible and 
capable of display on a variety of devices. They can adjust the ebook design to 
ameliorate features of printed books, which if carried over to an ebook would 
irritate readers, such as omitting blank pages or adjusting spaces around chapter 
headings. Usability is aided by providing navigational hyperlinks between the 
content page headings and the relevant point in the text, or between note cues 
and end-notes. The design limitations of most published ebooks are partly due to 
technical and commercial reasons.
There are many ebook formats in existence and publishers will rarely wish to 
publish for just one format or retailer. The most universal format is ePub, which 
is a free and open XML standard, backed by the International Digital Publishing 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
200
Forum (idpf.org). EPub supports both reﬂ owable content and ﬁ xed-layout content, 
and the needs of visually disabled readers. Although the format is supported by 
the publishing industry worldwide, and by most ebook resellers and device 
manufacturers, Amazon still uses its own proprietary formats derived originally 
from the Mobi format.
The most popular form of ePub is version 2 which is suﬃ  cient for many 
books other than the most complex. Although ePub 3 was launched in 2011, its 
uptake by reading device manufacturers and publishers has been slow. It is based 
on HTML5, supports rich media (audio and video), global languages, improved 
accessibility features, typographical and layout enhancements, user navigation and 
interactivity. The format oﬀ ers the prospect of enhanced ebooks with features 
formerly restricted to apps. Publishers could potentially ﬁ nd out information on 
reader behaviour; and through the use of embedded JavaScript gain interactivity 
with them for marketing and sales. It also allows publishers to embed metadata 
within the ﬁ le of the book, which intermediaries can then extract and use as they 
wish. In 2012, Apple launched iBooks Author and introduced its own ﬁ xed layout 
ePub (suitable for highly illustrated titles) for its devices. With iBooks Author 
it took the initial lead in enabling the design of interactive books for tablets, 
especially for use in education: ‘If you’re looking to create books that are digital 
ﬁ rst, use dynamic page designs, and are truly interactive, there is no better tool for 
the job’ (McKesson and Witwer).
Alongside the numerous ebook formats, HTML5 (the next generation 
language for the Web) is seen as another ebook publishing medium oﬀ ering great 
potential for so-called ‘browser books’. HTML5 is especially designed for low-
powered tablets and smart phones. Since HTML sits at the heart of the ePub and 
Mobi formats, O’Reilly Media advocates that authoring and production should 
take place in (X)HTML5. Such a workﬂ ow would obviate the numerous ﬁ le 
conversions from Word to InDesign to ebook output formats (which incur costs 
and errors) and facilitate digital ﬁ rst publication. Pearson too has developed the 
Pearson XHTML5/ePub 3 workﬂ ow (PXW) for enhanced educational products: 
content is tagged semantically (by meaning) for delivery to multiple formats, 
platforms and devices. The future, however, is far from set on any one technology, 
platform, format, application or device.
Some publishers have the capability themselves of converting source ﬁ les 
into ebook formats. There is a large variation in the time taken (and the ensuing 
cost) between working on straightforward books, such as ﬁ ction (very quick and 
cheap), and highly illustrated titles (slow and expensive). In practice most 
publishers use conversion houses to produce ebooks of their backlist – or of 
frontlist titles created using conventional workﬂ ows. The ebook ﬁ les produced 
have to be veriﬁ ed for each format and tested on the most-used reading devices to 
ensure they work.
Highly illustrated colour books
Some print books are sold on the quality of their design and pictorial content, 
such as colour illustrated, non-ﬁction titles and textbooks. The approach to the 
design of these titles is closer to that of quality magazine publishing – the 
designer’s role is more central. The interrelationship of the text and illustrations, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
201
and the positioning of colour within the book is planned and controlled, page by 
page, right from the outset. Sample spreads are produced to aid the writing by 
the authors or contributors. Such material (supplemented with the cover and a 
dummy) is used to interest overseas publishers in copublication. The designer 
normally has a greater say over the format, appearance, art direction and creation 
of the book, which allows more scope to vary its grid and pace, and to provide 
surprise elements. Some books, including school and ELT texts, use double-page 
spreads on topics. The strong headlines, dramatic illustrations and extended 
captions (often read ﬁrst) capture the interest of a bookshop browser or learner.
Books for international copublication have special design needs. To gain 
economies in coprinting (printing two or more editions simultaneously), the 
colour illustrations should remain unaltered in position, whereas the translations 
of the text are changed on the presses. The typographic design allows for the 
greater length of translations (into German, for example); chosen typefaces have 
the full range of accents; type is only printed in black; type running around 
illustrations is avoided; type is not reversed out of blocks or colour or illustrations; 
and illustrations are not culturally speciﬁc to the UK.
Cover design
The cover or jacket protects the book, identiﬁes the author and title, and carries 
the blurb. The ISBN and bar code enable ordering. The cover’s main purpose is 
to sell. The design should inform as well as attract, be true to the contents, and 
be tuned to the market. The sales objective of the image is more signiﬁcant in 
consumer book publishing (especially paperbacks) than other areas because of the 
importance of impulse purchase; and covers are used by the sales department to 
sell books well in advance of publication to wholesalers and retailers. The image 
must be powerful enough to attract a browser to pick the book up within a few 
seconds, and be typographically clear enough to be reproduced in reduced form 
on websites, and in the catalogues of the publisher, overseas publishers or agents.
CPI Group’s first 
colour Quantum, 
installed at Antony 
Rowe in Chippenham 
in 2012: an HP T360 
inkjet press coupled 
with a Timson T Fold 
finishing line
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
202
Cover images are usually needed at least six months ahead of publication. 
The designer is briefed by the commissioning editor and generates rough visuals 
for approval by the editorial, marketing and sales departments. The chosen 
treatment is developed, and illustrators, photographers and picture researchers 
commissioned as necessary. Designers will typeset the copy and the cover will be 
proofed. The author may be consulted over the cover, or need to be persuaded by 
the editor of the merits of the publisher’s choice. Covers arouse strong passions 
amongst all participants, and at worst may be revised right up to publication.
PICTURE RESEARCH
Picture research is the selection, procurement and collection of illustrations of 
all kinds. The number of in-house picture researchers is very small. They are 
concentrated in some of the large consumer and children’s book publishers 
(where they may create a picture library), and educational houses. More 
commonly a publisher or packager will use expert freelance researchers, who 
specialize in particular subjects and serve a range of media. Otherwise, picture 
research for the text or cover may be just part of an assistant’s work in an editorial 
or design department.
A general working speciﬁcation for a book is drawn up in the editorial 
department. This covers the title, author, publication date, print run, book’s 
market and its territorial extent, number of pictures required, ratio of colour to 
black and white, page size and picture budget. The picture researcher will be 
briefed by the editor or designer usually before the author has completed the 
manuscript, to ensure that the pictures are ready for the design stage. The brief 
can range from being very speciﬁc (the author or editor supplying a complete 
picture list citing most sources), less speciﬁc (just listing the subjects), to very 
vague (requesting pictures to ﬁt the manuscript). It is vital for the researcher to 
clarify the brief.
The researcher may read the outline or manuscript in order to generate 
a list of ideas for approval by the editor and the author, or amend the picture 
list supplied by the author to something more feasible. An estimate of cost is 
produced, based on the researcher’s experience, and the researcher advises 
whether the time and budget allocated are realistic; and potential sources are 
listed. The researcher cannot progress quickly with selection without knowing 
where to look for an image, and without a relevant set of contacts.
Sourcing pictures
The possible sources, both home and abroad, are varied and include:
 
▪
museums,
 
▪
libraries,
 
▪
archives,
 
▪
commercial picture agencies,
 
▪
photographers,
 
▪
PR departments,
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
203
 
▪
professional and tourist organizations,
 
▪
charities, and
 
▪
private individuals.
Some major collections are accessible on the web in low resolution, and there 
are low-cost banks of images which can be obtained under licence. Researchers 
consult print and online directories and picture source books, museum and library 
catalogues, guidebooks, brochures, magazines, acknowledgement lists in books 
and forage in reference libraries. They build up personal contacts with picture 
libraries and agencies, interview photographers, visit photographic exhibitions, 
and form contacts abroad. They compile their own records, indexes and address 
books. Their knowledge accumulates with each assignment.
Photographs can be commissioned for a project from photographers. 
Working to a brief, they will set up a shoot specially for the publisher. This can 
be expensive, with fees sometimes payable to the subject as well, but it should 
provide high-quality images. Often the relatives or friends of staﬀ  are called upon 
to act as subjects. Images may be put online during the shoot to ensure the right 
images have been taken.
The criteria for selecting picture sources include the nature of the material 
required, such as the subject range, type of material, quality, and the service 
oﬀ ered – accessibility, speed and reliability, terms and conditions restricting 
borrowing or use of material, and cost. The use of stock images will lower the cost 
but is likely to look cheap alongside higher-quality pictures used in competing 
titles. Researchers will know which picture libraries are more expensive and from 
Picture research
Picture researchers require the ability to interpret the message the book 
is trying to convey and, during selection, to make critical judgements 
on technical possibilities and costs as well as on aesthetic values. An 
understanding of the complexities of copyright and permission fees backs up 
their knowledge of sources; and allied to budget consciousness are the skills of 
negotiation especially with commercial picture agencies. Researchers must be 
highly organized in their work. As one art director puts it, ‘It’s a fascinating 
job – creative as well as administrative and business-like.’
Picture researchers are only as good as their source address books and 
accurate visual memories. They must keep up-to-date and use imagination 
in research, not just in visualizing fresh uses for remembered pictures but 
almost instinctively knowing where to start looking for pictures on any 
subject. Also necessary are methodical thinking, the knack of ﬁnding cheap 
sources, and a dogged persistence to get into new areas, getting behind closed 
doors. It is vital to forge good relations with sources – on the telephone, in 
writing and face to face. Some picture researchers have a degree in ﬁ ne art or 
the history of art; knowledge of foreign languages eases contact with overseas 
sources; and IT skills are essential.

S

I L L S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
204
which ones special terms may be sought, perhaps when selecting a number from 
the same source. Linda Royles, then CEO of the British Association of Picture 
Libraries and Agencies (BAPLA), said:
If you are doing a book about a speciﬁc subject, you are advised to go to an 
expert – a professor or someone with the world’s largest collection on that 
subject. But if you are just looking for a picture of someone taking a phone 
call for a design brochure, a search on the web may be sufﬁcient. (Harriet 
Dennys, The Bookseller, 25 August 2006)
With the list of potential sources compiled, the next task is to request and collect 
the pictures by telephoning, emailing or visiting. The web has made it much 
easier to view sample images, and today most images are received from agencies 
electronically. Under a limited licence, digital ﬁles can be used to prepare sample 
pages, but a full licence must be agreed in order to include the images in the ﬁnal 
publication. For non-digital images, replies are reviewed, and the incoming 
material is logged and labelled with sources’ names. The researcher is responsible 
for the good care of the material, so they select suitable items and quickly return 
the rejects to avoid paying holding fees and reduce the risk of loss.
The researcher does the initial selection and rejection of the pictures from a 
large assortment. The criteria for selection include the picture’s editorial content 
– for example does the picture make the points or convey the impression or mood 
the author intended? Also important are the picture’s composition, which should 
give the content clarity and impact, and reproducibility (tonal range, colour range 
and deﬁnition), bearing in mind the quality of paper and reproduction method to 
be used. The costs are assessed – reproduction fees, fees for digital use, print fees 
if buying prints, and search and loss/damage fees. Some pictures may be rejected 
on the grounds of cost.
Once the researcher has sufﬁcient suitable illustrations, the cost is estimated 
again and a meeting held with the editor and designer to make the next selection. 
It might be that the researcher has to ﬁnd more pictures very quickly before the 
ﬁnal selection is made. Photographs must be ready by ﬁrst proof stage to enable 
the designer to start the page layout. The researcher organizes the pictures for 
handover to the designer, and supplies the picture credit copy and information 
for the captions (provided by the sources of the photographs) to the editor.
The next task is to write to the sources for copyright permission to reproduce 
pictures, and to negotiate the fees. These will depend upon the territories and 
languages, print and digital formats required, the sales forecast, and the size (whole 
page, half page or quarter page), and whether the image is for a cover/jacket or the 
inside of the book. Some ebooks appear without the illustrations from the print 
edition in order to save on cost – the fees requested reﬂ ect the continuing anxieties 
of agencies about the use of images in digital publications (can the publisher control 
copying of the whole book or the image?).The researcher passes the suppliers’ 
invoices for payment and calculates the total picture costs. After checking the page 
proofs (some sources want copies), the book is printed, and the ﬁnal responsibility, 
if required, is to return the pictures to the sources.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
205
PRODUCTION
The publisher’s production department is the link between editors and designers 
and external suppliers. As the publisher’s big spender, it buys the services of the 
pre-press suppliers and the printers which manufacture the books – and also raw 
materials, such as paper, if purchased separately. As publishers move further into 
digital publishing, the department increasingly deals with technology providers and 
developers, and has the responsibility for reorganizing workﬂows. The production 
department manages the pre-press technologies and the digital archive of the 
publisher’s products for print and digital publication. In this respect, ‘production’ 
broadly deﬁ ned concerns content management and is highly technical. Overall the 
job of production is ‘to manage the conversion of inputs into outputs using a series 
of processes (usually provided by outside suppliers) so that the required number of 
books is available at the right time and to the right standard ... Production 
management is about project management’ (Bullock, page 25).
Organization of the production department
Within a production department, there are commonly three main levels of job.
Production manager or director
They are responsible for the purchasing policy on sources of supply; establishing 
standard book sizes and papers; controlling the ﬂow of work and maintaining quality 
standards; contributing to the preparation of the publishing programme by planning 
schedules and cost budgets for forthcoming books; and responding to major 
technical changes such as managing the pre-publication workﬂ ow. This manager 
contributes to the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability by buying materials and services at the most 
economic cost, by conserving the ﬁrm’s cash by inﬂuencing the timing of major 
items of expenditure and by obtaining the longest possible credit periods from 
suppliers. The manager also handles the production of certain important books.
Production controller
This role is responsible for seeing books through the production stages from 
manuscript to receipt of bound copies and ebook publication.They may specialize 
in whole imprints or just part of the list, for example working alongside certain 
editors. This role may also be called a production editor or project manager when 
the job includes a wider remit of overseeing the editing and typesetting.
Production assistant
Some people start their production careers at this level. The production assistant 
gives clerical or administrative support to the department. They monitor proofs and 
production schedules, chase editors and suppliers, and record production costings.
In some publishers, production activities are split. One section deals with 
the pre-press process: essentially concerned with originating the products with 
external suppliers, or creating them in-house; and with the maintenance of the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
206
digital archive and its internal and external connections. Another section 
organizes and purchases the manufacturing of printed books and journals: 
essentially from printers and paper suppliers; and sometimes of other non-print 
items, such as CD-ROMs and DVDs and their packaging.
Production and book design go hand in hand. Production staﬀ  may design 
the books or hire freelance designers, or in-house book designers report to the 
head of production – if there is not a separate design department. The production 
department gives the accounts department information on anticipated costs and their 
likely timing, details of work in progress, and materials held in stock. In a small ﬁrm 
an editor may carry out production duties or use freelancers or external companies 
which provide a project management/production service; but with increasing size a 
ﬁrm will employ its own production, IT and data management professionals.
Provisional estimates
The production manager, or an automated costing system, supplies the 
commissioning editor with estimates of the costs of producing a proposed new 
title, and may suggest alternative production options. The book is envisaged in 
broad terms, for example its format, extent, illustrative content, the quality of 
paper desired, and the binding style. The estimate itemizes the costs across 
diﬀ erent sales forecasts. Some costs, such as for editorial and design work, will 
not change with the sales forecast, and overall the unit cost will decrease as these 
ﬁxed costs are spread over higher forecasts. They include:
 
▪
the origination of illustrations,
 
▪
illustration and text permissions,
 
▪
design costs,
 
▪
editorial costs (including copy-editing and proofreading),
 
▪
typesetting and prooﬁ ng,
 
▪
printing and binding,
 
▪
paper, and
 
▪
cover printing.
Once the author has signed the contract, production may advise the author, 
directly or via the editor, on how the text should be keyed – some publishers issue 
authors with style sheets in Word, or XML templates. The production controller, 
who gathers information from the editor or from pre-production meetings, 
prepares a speciﬁcation – a detailed technical description of the book. The book’s 
desired physical attributes, the amount of money and time available for its 
production, and any special market needs (particular typefaces, a subsequent 
paperback edition or co-edition) are taken into account, and the choice of 
production processes and materials is made. In children’s publishing, ensuring 
physical product safety is vital.
Print and paper buying
The speciﬁcation is sent to one or more suppliers so that they submit an estimate 
or quotation. Although there are printers that carry out all the processes, they may 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
207
not do all economically or well. The typesetting and printing speciﬁcations may be 
sent to diﬀ erent specialist ﬁrms, known as trade suppliers. A publisher usually 
deals with a core of regular and trusted suppliers whose technology, machinery, 
staﬀ , strengths and weaknesses are known; but new ones are tried. Sometimes 
ﬁ xed price schedules are negotiated with major print suppliers for standard types 
of work, which reduces the need for quotations and simpliﬁes estimating. 
Suppliers may oﬀ er discounts on titles processed in batches or during slack 
periods. Moreover, the long time (for example six to 18 months) books take to 
produce gives publishers and packagers the option of using overseas suppliers 
(for example in Europe, the Far East or the USA). Whilst the printing of 
monochrome books is largely carried out in the UK, most colour book printing 
now goes abroad. The competitiveness of overseas suppliers is aﬀ ected greatly 
by exchange rates, but other factors such as freight, communication, and 
environmental costs, longer timescales, and the location of the book’s main 
markets are considered.
Suppliers are assessed on ﬁve main criteria:
 
▪
price,
 
▪
quality of work,
 
▪
service – the ability to keep to dates, or to make up for slippage, and 
communication,
 
▪
capability – skills and machinery, and
 
▪
capacity – the ability to handle larger jobs/reprint quickly.
The priority given to each varies according to the type of work. For example, 
a small saving from the cheapest source may be outweighed if that supplier 
produces inferior work or misses dates. Cost savings can be achieved by 
sending work abroad, but other considerations may keep the work in the UK. 
For example a quick reprint may be needed during the run-up to Christmas, 
and the domestic printer may be more amenable if they had carried out the 
original job.
The quotations are assessed, prices sometimes negotiated downwards and 
the work awarded. From the quoted prices, another in-house estimate is prepared. 
Paper is a major cost item and is bought either by the printer, or by the publisher 
from a paper merchant or directly from a mill. Pulp and paper are a world 
commodity subject to exchange rates and to price instability. During periods of 
price ﬂuctuations or of real or imagined shortages, publishers may peg the price 
by buying forward, or store paper as an insurance against non-availability for 
quick reprints, even though that ties up the publisher’s cash and incurs storage 
costs. Some publishers are responsive to environmental concerns, for example 
by choosing to purchase paper derived from sustainable forests and made with 
minimum pollutants; others use acid-free materials to ensure that their books 
and journals will last. There is a ﬁ ne balance between using newly sourced paper 
from forests certiﬁ ed by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) or paper which has 
been recycled. Each has its merits and some paper will in fact have both types of 
content. The print run for the ﬁ nal Harry Potter volume, Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows (2007), was printed on recycled paper, blended with virgin pulp 
from FSC certiﬁ ed forests.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
208
Paper
Adrian Bullock, Principal Lecturer, Oxford International Centre for 
Publishing Studies
Paper is a versatile material which is strong enough to be used in a car, and 
soft enough to wipe your mouth with. It can trace its origins back to China at 
the beginning of the second century (105 AD), when it was made from rags, 
hemp, and old ﬁ shing nets. However, since the 1860s, most paper has been 
made from wood pulp, predominantly from softwood, coniferous trees, such 
as pine and spruce. These trees are used because of their longer ﬁ bres, which 
give paper its strength; and, because they grow best in temperate climates, 
most of the world’s wood pulp is produced in northern countries like Canada 
or Finland. Pulp can be produced from broad-leaved, hardwood trees like oak 
or beech, but this is not generally done – their ﬁ bres are too short. This is also 
true of tropical hardwoods which grow in the rainforests of South America 
and Africa. The threat here does not come from papermaking: the rainforests 
are being cleared, and the trees burned, to make way for cattle ranching, 
agriculture and mining.
Trees for papermaking are planted as a crop, just like rice or wheat; and, 
like a crop, they are harvested at a later date – sometimes 25 to 30 years later, 
or even longer. Only part of the felled tree ends up as paper: the trunk, for 
example, is usually turned into timber for the furniture and construction 
industries. For every tree cut down, at least three seedlings are planted to 
ensure that the paper and the timber industries do not run out of their basic 
raw material – wood.
Despite the predictions of a paperless world, paper consumption has, if 
anything, increased over the past 15 years, bringing with it growing pressure 
on the forests as the need for pulp intensiﬁ es.
In 1993 the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) was established ‘to 
promote environmentally appropriate, socially beneﬁ cial, and economically 
viable management of the world’s forests.’
Publishers, as major consumers of printing papers, are increasingly 
aware of the need to source their paper responsibly; and more and more books 
now carry the FSC logo with the statement that the publisher ‘makes every 
eﬀ ort to ensure that the paper used in its books is made from trees that are 
legally sourced from well managed and credibly certiﬁ ed forests’. Publishers 
also use recycled papers to print their books on, though evidence indicates 
that they still prefer papers made from virgin rather than waste pulp.
Paper comes in many qualities, from newsprint to coated art paper. The 
product determines the quality of the paper, as much as the paper determines 
the quality of the product. The publisher’s skill lies in being able to match the 
paper to the product. Paper, as a natural product, has properties which are 
critical to the publisher, as well as the printer, and binder. In addition to a 
paper’s colour (shade), roughness/smoothness (ﬁ nish), and the quality of the 

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
209
pulp used to make it (furnish), the publisher needs to give careful thought to 
the following:
Weight
Measured in grammes per square metre (gsm/gm2); in the US, paper is 
measured in pounds per 500 sheets of a certain size. Heavy papers make 
heavy books. This can be a problem for the reader, who might get tired 
holding it; and for the publisher, because heavy books cost more to distribute 
by post than light ones. Book papers range between 70 and 115 gsm.
Bulk
The thickness of a sheet of paper is its bulk, measured in microns. A more 
useful way of measuring bulk is by volume basis, which makes it possible to 
calculate the bulk of a complete book, and not just one sheet of paper. Bulky 
papers are thick, and can be relatively light: for example, a tissue.
Opacity
This is a paper’s lack of transparency. Matter printed on high opacity paper 
(90 per cent plus) cannot be seen from the other side of the sheet. Opacity is 
not really an issue in work where lines of text are printed back to back on each 
side of the sheet, such as a novel. However, in highly illustrated work, like an 
art book, with pictures appearing anywhere on the page, high opacity paper is 
essential. Opacity comes more from the paper’s ﬁ nish and its furnish, than 
from its weight or thickness. Increasing a paper’s weight does not necessarily 
make it more opaque.
Grain direction
This is the direction in which the ﬁ bres lie as they are made into paper. Good 
bookmaking requires the grain direction to run parallel with the spine (right 
grain), though this is not always possible, especially with books printed on a 
web press. Books bound with the grain running from side to side (wrong 
grain) handle less well, and may develop a wave along the foredge. Covers 
printed wrong grain often bow.
Getting the paper right is the ﬁ rst step to getting the product right.
Paper has both weight and thickness (or bulk). Short books can be bulked out with 
a thicker paper; long books may need to have thinner and lighter paper. Recycled 
paper tends to be thinner than virgin papers. Paper may also be judged on its 
opacity – the degree to which image or text shows through to the other side of the 
page – and its colour or shade – from white through to cream or ivory. Coated 
papers are used for highly illustrated titles such as art books. Acid-free papers 
have a longer life.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
210
There is also a range of sizes in which books can be printed. A trade 
paperback is 198 × 129 mm (also called B format) and the mass-market paperback 
size is 178 × 110 mm (A format). Popular formats for hardbacks are demy octavo 
(216 × 138 mm) and royal octavo (234 × 156 mm). The dimension head to tail is 
given ﬁrst in the UK, but in the rest of Europe and the USA the convention is to 
give the width dimension ﬁrst (the US dimensions are also in inches).
Table 9.1 Standard book formats (UK)
Format
Dimensions (H x W)
A4
297 × 210 mm
Demy quarto 
276 × 219 mm
Crown quarto 
246 × 189 mm
Pinched crown quarto
Up to 248 × 175 mm
Royal octavo 
234 × 156 mm
Demy octavo (C format)
216 × 138 mm
A5
210 × 148 mm
B format
198 × 129 mm
A format 
178 × 110 mm
Scheduling and project management
The production controller is usually responsible for all stages in the production 
of the book, following receipt of the approved manuscript from the editor. The 
stages include typesetting and cover development through to the ﬁ nal outputs; a 
production editor will also supervise the copy-editing, proofreading, and index 
preparation. All of these activities are usually outsourced to specialist freelancers 
or companies. The controller draws up the schedule of the internal and external 
operations that end with the output of the PDF ﬁ le and ebook formats, and 
delivery of bound copies to the warehouse a few weeks ahead of the publication 
date. The schedule, related to those of other books, takes account of any optimum 
publication date, cashﬂow demands, the time needed for the tasks and to route 
material to and from suppliers. Alternatively, if the project management is 
outsourced to a full service supplier, the controller liaises with the supplier.
Production staﬀ  monitor progress and chase editors, designers and external 
suppliers to keep to agreed dates. As all the book’s material passes between editor 
and designer, and between publisher and suppliers, it is handled by production at 
every stage, as are any problems with suppliers. Outgoing material is accompanied 
by documentation and orders; incoming material is logged, sent on to editors and 
designers, and return dates agreed. If the return dates are not adhered to, the 
machine time booked at the printers will be missed and the book unduly delayed.
Content management systems
In some publishers, the pre-press processes are carried out in-house and the 
documents progress through the stages and staﬀ  entirely in digital form. Content 
management systems (CMS) were ﬁrst used by journal and reference publishers 
faced with processing and reusing large amounts of text data. They are designed to 
manage the creation, handling, storage and delivery of content for publication, 
The format of 
Inside Book 
Publishing is 
Pinched Crown 
quarto
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
211
and subsequent re-purposing. Content is stored without print-speciﬁc formatting, 
and typically XML is used to tag the content using standardized templates. As 
digital publishing has become more important, workﬂows are adapted to hold 
content in properly archived ﬁles, which can then be used to publish products on 
diﬀ erent platforms. Journals publishers have led the way in creating a production 
route that enables articles to be published rapidly online.
Additional functionality includes workﬂow management and access control. 
Such systems monitor the movement of jobs through the stages, and the 
workloads and performance of staﬀ . Automated alerts track the progress of ﬁles 
as manual or automated sequences are applied. Users of the system are given 
diﬀ ering levels of access. Authors may be part of the process – for example journal 
authors may be asked to write using an XML template supplied by the publisher; 
they can also track their articles online through the production process via 
journals management systems.
Production
Fundamental to production is a thorough understanding of current technical 
processes and digital developments, of machinery and materials, and of freight 
systems and methods of payment. More senior roles require strategic thinking 
as digital workﬂ ows are conﬁ gured or adjusted. Most production staﬀ  have a 
degree or vocational qualiﬁcation, or equivalent professional background. 
Knowledge of languages is useful in a department handling international 
co-editions. Numeracy, computer literacy skills, the ability to see alternative 
options and the consideration of all components are necessary in costing titles. 
Project management skills cover planning and progress chasing skills – 
ascertaining and clarifying objectives, setting priorities, assessing strengths and 
weaknesses of suppliers, foreseeing crunch points, and the development of 
speciﬁcations and schedules. Strong negotiations skills are required to deal with 
a range of suppliers.
Eﬀ ective and ﬂuent communication with in-house staﬀ  and external 
suppliers is crucial. Production staﬀ  must be able to work with editors and 
designers as a team even though their priorities of tight cost control and the 
maintenance of dates may conﬂict with those of editors and designers. Much 
of the work is highly administrative, requiring a good memory and meticulous 
attention to detail and record keeping. While friendly working relationships 
are formed with suppliers, production staﬀ  must never get too close to 
suppliers otherwise the negotiating edge is lost. Sometimes they have to be 
very tough, and they must have the integrity to reject any inducements.
Production staﬀ  come under great pressure. As the buﬀ er between 
publisher and suppliers they receive kicks from all sides. They must buy 
competitively, conserve the cash, meet the deadlines and not make mistakes, 
which can be expensive to correct. Much time is spent troubleshooting and 
trying to keep everyone happy. They need to resolve problems, to think 
laterally and ﬁnd the best solution, to switch quickly from one thing to 
another, and thrive under the strain.

S

I L L S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
212
Monitoring costs and quality
Many books, especially if illustrated, may change from their original concept 
during the writing and design stages. A new format may be chosen or the number 
of illustrations varied. Deviations from the original estimate and speciﬁcation are 
monitored and costed. There is a constant risk that the estimate of costs made at 
the outset will be exceeded. Substantial proof corrections quickly erode a title’s 
proﬁtability. Costs incurred to date are recorded and revised estimates of total 
costs produced, particularly at the page-proof stage. Then the publisher normally 
ﬁxes the book’s price and the balance of print/digital sales, inﬂuenced, for 
example, by the actual advance orders from booksellers. Suppliers’ invoices are 
subsequently checked, passed for payment, or queried.
The production controller checks the completeness of material at every stage 
as well as the accuracy of the instructions from the editor and designer, the quality 
of illustration originals sent to suppliers, and the quality of material returned. 
Technical advice is given to editors and designers to help them in their work. 
Constant contact with suppliers’ representatives, and visits to suppliers maintain 
relationships.
Highly illustrated quality colour books may involve the production manager 
or controller in approving the sheets of each section run oﬀ  the press – whether in 
the UK or abroad – and taking responsibility for the quality on behalf of the 
publisher or packager. The printing is compared against the ﬁnal proof to ensure 
that corrections have been made, and that the colour quality matches the values 
agreed at the contract proof stage.
Advance copies of the bound stock are checked to ensure that the speciﬁed 
materials have been used, and that the binding, as well as the overall quality of 
the product, meets the publisher’s standards. Exceptionally if a major error is 
discovered, an enquiry is held to determine who is responsible and has to pay. 
Finally, all the costs of producing the book are compiled. Controllers also cost and 
organize reprints and new editions; some large publishers employ staﬀ  solely for 
this task. The publisher or packager owning the digital ﬁle does not always use the 
original printer in which case the job is moved to the new supplier.
The printing of editions for other ﬁrms (for example English and foreign 
language co-editions) involves supplying the rights department with estimates of 
costs. The costs will include printing the bulk order – or if the buyer does the 
printing, the cost of supplying digital ﬁles – and costs of imprint changes – for 
example, the name of the co-publisher will have to appear on the title page instead 
of the original publisher’s and the details on the copyright page will change; all of 
this makes a halt in the printing and costs money. When the publisher or 
packager prints foreign language editions, the overseas publishers supply the ﬁle 
of the translated text which is checked by production to ensure it ﬁts the layout 
of the colour illustrations. Production staﬀ  may also be concerned with the 
purchasing of the manufacturing of non-print items and their special retail or 
mail-order packaging requirements.
Suppliers are chosen according to cost, technology and quality. Signiﬁcant 
cost savings can be achieved by outsourcing typesetting and printing to countries 
in the Far East. Companies in India, for example, not only oﬀ er typesetting but 
also IT services (digitization and tagging) and editorial and design work. The 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
213
whole process from receipt of the author’s text through to the digital ﬁle for the 
printer can be outsourced.
PRODUCTION PROCESSES
Typesetting
The core business of a typesetter is text and data processing, plus other services. 
This could range from cleaning up authors’ Word ﬁ les prior to editing, XML 
tagging, pagination and prooﬁ ng, through to production of outputs for printing 
copies, and for ebook and web distribution. They may digitize the backlist in 
whatever formats the books exist. There is a reduced role for typesetters when 
designers supply the ﬁnished ﬁles.
The typesetters that remain specialize in the larger, more complex jobs, such 
as legal and science or medical reference books, and, being labor intensive, 
much of this work is carried out in countries such as India. Some publishers 
supply authors with templates, however, and so for text books the authors 
essentially typeset the book as they write. (Bann, page 48)
Some ﬁrms oﬀ er additional editorial and design services while others concentrate 
on highly technical material or text database management. The vast number of 
titles with no or minimal illustrations do not require designers to lay out the pages 
– the typesetters’ largely automated pagination systems do it for the publishers. 
They can generally take a 100,000-word manuscript and submit page proofs to a 
publisher within two weeks – much faster if supplied with coded disks.
Typesetters use a variety of applications, such as Adobe InDesign and 
QuarkXPress. Only typesetters who have specialist-trained staﬀ  operate the very 
expensive and sophisticated programs designed especially for academic books and 
journals (such as Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher – formerly 3B2). LaTeX, 
pronounced ‘laytek’, is an open source program with many variants, designed by 
mathematicians in Chicago for authors of physics and mathematics to present 
their papers and books full of equations in an attractive way; or they may use 
MathML. Writers and publishers of technical and computing books may use 
DocBook – an open source XML vocabulary that allows them to create documents 
in a presentation-neutral form that captures the logical structure of the content. 
Using free tools along with the style sheets, content can be published as HTML 
pages and PDF ﬁ les, and in many other formats, such as ePub (docbook.
sourceforge.net, accessed 11 October 2013).
The typesetter will supply proofs as PDF ﬁles for checking by the publisher 
and author. The publisher will usually ask the typesetter to convert the output of 
its pagination systems into PostScript (PS) ﬁles or PDF ﬁles. Where PostScript is a 
page description language, a programming language, PDF can
also contain information not only related to how a page looks, but also can 
describe how it behaves and what kind of information is contained in the ﬁ le. 
So PDF is a ﬁ le format that is smarter than EPS. A PDF ﬁ le can contain fonts, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
214
images, printing instructions, keywords for searching and indexing, job 
tickets, interactive hyperlinks, and movies. (adobe.com, accessed 16 October 
2013)
From such ﬁles printers are able to output text and graphics straight to plate or 
press.
Reproduction of illustrations
Illustrations may be prepared or sourced in digital form and can be provided to 
the typesetter as EPS (encapsulated PostScript) ﬁles – from a drawing program 
– or as TIFFs (tagged image ﬁle format) or JPEGs (joint photographic experts 
group) – for half-tones. Non-digital originals of illustrations are converted to 
digital form. This can be done in-house, using a scanner and an application such 
as Adobe Photoshop – or by a professional repro (reproduction) house, the 
typesetter or the printer – to sizes speciﬁed by the designer.
Book printing presses cannot reproduce directly the continuous shades or 
tones of colour appearing in photographs or pencil drawings, thus ‘the half-tone 
process’ is used. The image of the black and white or colour original is ‘screened’. 
It is broken into a series of dots of varying size with larger, closer or adjoining 
dots in dark areas; and smaller, further apart, or no dots at all in light areas. When 
printed, the dots create the illusion of continuous shades.
Printing a full colour image requires a four-colour process. The image needs 
to be broken down into four basic colours: cyan (blue), magenta (red), yellow, and 
black (known as key). These colours, used to put ink on to paper, are called 
‘CMYK’, or process colours, and are subtractive primaries. Red, green and blue 
(RGB) are the additive primaries, used in TV screens and computer monitors. 
They cannot be used on a printing press. Colour separation can be done using a 
scanner, or a digital image can be saved as CMYK in an application such as Adobe 
Photoshop. In order to print a four-colour image, you ideally need a four-colour 
press, capable of printing all four colours in one impression. It is possible to print 
a four-colour image on a two-colour press, but this is less efﬁcient and can cause 
quality problems. Various kinds of proofs are submitted to the publisher before 
the ﬁnal digital ﬁle of the illustrations is accepted. If necessary, books can be 
printed in six colours. This process was used, for example, for Kevin McCloud’s 
Choosing Colours (2007), where orange and green inks were printed after the 
CMYK to create a six-colour job.
Litho printing: imposition and platemaking
The printing plates on a litho press do not print one page at a time. Rather each 
sheet of paper, printed both sides, carries 8, 16 or 32 pages (or multiples of these), 
and is subsequently folded several times and cut to make a section (or signature) 
of the bound book. Since printers have diﬀ erent sized presses and diﬀ erent 
binding machinery, each printer is responsible for its own imposition: the 
arrangement of the pages that will be printed on each side of the sheet so that 
once the sheet is printed and folded the pages will be in the right sequence and 
position. The publisher will supply the printer with PS or PDF ﬁles that have been 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
215
prepared by the designer or typesetter. The printer then imposes the pages on to 
each plate – this is called computer to plate (CTP).
Online content
Low-resolution PDF ﬁles can be conveniently put on the web for either 
downloading or viewing within a browser. The user sees a replica of the ﬁnal 
printed page. Journal articles are often presented in PDF for the ease of librarians 
and others wanting a common standard, and for publishers who are working with 
print-designed documents.
Structured mark-up of the text using XML, independent of any typographic 
mark-up, allows the text to be published in diﬀ erent ways. From a source XML 
ﬁle, the content can be published as a book, an ebook, an HTML (HyperText 
Markup Language) ﬁle for the web, or on a mobile device. Publishers also ﬁnd it 
easier to sell XML data to third parties for electronic publication. Its use facilitates 
the online linking of elements such as bibliographic references and illustrations. 
The growing use of Adobe InDesign by publishers facilitates the origination of 
XML.
Publishers or content aggregators look to add value online by generating 
keywords for content, enabling online searches, and also by identifying text 
elements or chunks by metadata. For example, a journal publisher can use a DOI 
(digital object identiﬁer) to identify an article or an illustration within the article. A 
DOI name can apply to any form of intellectual property expressed in any digital 
environment. DOI names have been called ‘the bar code for intellectual property’; 
like the physical bar code, they are enabling tools for use all through the supply 
chain to add value and save cost (doi.org). Industry-wide initiatives such as 
CrossRef enable the linking from references in online journals to the cited article 
(crossref.org).
Publishers with websites or online services which need regular updating or 
additions may opt to use a content management system (CMS) – software for 
managing websites. For some publishers the web is a diﬀ erent medium needing 
diﬀ erent design approaches, which are not based on linear textual organization 
and print-derived typographic design. Web pages may be prepared using HTML 
and supplementary content, such as animations, video clips, and sound 
recordings. Tricia Austin and Richard Doust write:
there is no reason why a website should look like the printed page, and a new 
generation of new-media designers are seizing the opportunity to throw away 
the rule book and break new ground . . . Designers can introduce sound and 
movement into their new-media designs. (pages 89–90)
Printing
Many books are still printed by oﬀ set lithography (abbreviated to oﬀ set or litho), 
but there has been a rapid growth in the use of digital printing. Oﬀ set metal plates 
have a ﬂat surface which is treated so that the areas to be printed attract grease 
(ink) and repel water; and the non-printing areas attract water and repel ink. A 
plate is clamped around a cylinder on the press, dampened and inked by rollers. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
216
The plate rotates against a rubber coated cylinder (or blanket) on to which the 
inked image is oﬀ set and from which the ink is transferred to the paper.
Many oﬀ set presses are sheet-fed and vary in plate size and in capabilities. 
There are also oﬀ set presses – known as web presses – that print on to a reel of 
paper. Sheet-fed presses would be the usual choice for standard printings of 
black-and-white books. Web presses produce a folded signature at the end of the 
operation. This, and their high running speeds, make them attractive for long 
print runs.
Digital printing
High-speed digital printing has begun to challenge litho printing. Digital printers 
do not use printing plates – instead they create the impression on the paper with 
an ink jet or by using toner and electrostatic charge (like in a photocopier). A 
number of single copy orders can be printed one after the other without the 
disruption of having to set up the press each time – the computer lines up the 
next titles. The quality of digital printing has been variable, but is now perfectly 
acceptable for most monochrome books and much colour work.
The choice of litho or digital printing comes down to economics. Manfred 
Breede writes: ‘Conventional printing processes remain unsurpassed in their ability 
to reproduce large print runs cost eﬀ ectively . . . In comparison, the cost per unit of 
operating a digital printing device is always the same regardless of the run length’ 
(Cope and Phillips, page 35). Depending on the equipment operated by the printer, 
litho runs are increasingly rare below 1,000 copies, and digital runs would not 
generally exceed 2,500 copies. For runs in between, other factors may come into 
play such as the quality, page extent, or format required. Digital printing facilitates 
the viability of printing a book with a very short run – for example ﬁ ve copies – but 
also genuine print on demand – where just one copy is ordered by a customer.
This is a T-48 Timson 
press, built for Clays 
in 2007. The 
conventional Timson 
presses are 
web-offset, fixed 
format machines – 
this one is for royal 
format books
This book was 
printed using a 
digital press 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
217
Digital printing is suitable for use by publishers of specialist books or for backlist 
titles more generally. After the initial printing (litho or digital), publishers face 
continuing demand. They could reprint a short run by digital printing, either to hold 
in stock or to supply a major customer, or print one copy in response to a ﬁrm 
order. Once the title moves to ‘on-demand’ status it need never go out of print. The 
manufacturing time from the receipt of an order for one book is measured in 
hours, rather than in the weeks taken by litho print-runs, with immediate dispatch. 
The automated workﬂ ow batches together diﬀ erent titles sharing common 
speciﬁ cations, conﬁ gures the production machinery accordingly, manufactures the 
batch and then reconﬁ gures the machinery to the next shared speciﬁ cation.
There are now also automated stock-replenishment systems using short-run 
printing, whereby printers receive direct feeds from the publisher’s warehouses 
and produce in quantities of anything from 20 to 500. Digital printers, however, 
oﬀ er a more limited range of book sizes compared to the litho printers. In order to 
work cost eﬀ ectively and quickly, they standardize sizes, paper, cover ﬁ nishes and 
binding.
Digital printing has generated new ways of working beyond the management 
by publishers of the backlist and single copy orders. Wholesalers can use it to 
produce copies for end-users from digital ﬁles supplied by publishers. The 
printing of hard copies becomes ‘distributed’ as opposed to being centralized by 
publishers through their own print suppliers. Publishers can customize for a 
teacher a pack of teaching resources drawn from a variety of titles for student 
purchase. Smaller digital presses are now commercially available, and these have 
the potential to be placed anywhere in the world, in bookshops, libraries and 
universities, with access to an unlimited catalogue of titles over the internet. The 
Espresso Book Machine, which can print and bind a 300-page paperback in three 
minutes, was launched in 2006 but has been slow to take oﬀ .
Timson Prosper: a 
complete book line at 
Clays, comprising a 
digital Timson 
T-Press with a 
T-Book transfer 
system creating cut 
pages in book block 
form that feed into a 
Muller Martini 
binding line. The 
‘sweet spot’ for the 
line is print runs of 
between 1,000 and 
3,000 copies in 
multiple formats
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
218
Binding
After printing, the sheets are folded by the printer or possibly by a trade binder. 
The folded 8-, 16- or 32-page sections are gathered in sequence to make up every 
book. Some hardbacks and some quality paperbacks, especially those printed on 
coated papers (including some textbooks) have their sections sewn together. With 
quality hardbacks, the sewn sections are trimmed on three sides (leaving the sewn 
spine folds intact), end papers are glued to the ﬁrst and last sections (unless the 
text paper is sufﬁciently strong), any decorative head or tail bands added, strong 
material glued to the spine to reinforce the hinge with the case, and the spine 
sometimes rounded. Meanwhile the case is made by gluing the front and back 
boards (and paper backstrip of the spine) to the ‘cloth’ which in turn is blocked 
with the title, author and imprint in gold, silver or a range of diﬀ erent colours. 
The outer sides of the end papers are pasted, the ﬁnished case dropped over the 
book (spine-side up), and the book squeezed. The jacket is printed on a small 
colour press, sometimes by another ﬁrm. This is often laminated with clear plastic 
ﬁlm and wraps the ﬁnished book. Sometimes the printed cover is glued to the case 
before binding to produce a printed paper case (PPC) or cover to board book.
Sewn bindings are stronger but more expensive. Adhesive binding methods 
are commonly used for paperbacks and some hardbacks. Perfect binding is used 
typically for cheap paperbacks – the spine folds of the sections are cut oﬀ  and the 
spine edge of the now individual leaves roughened. Glue is applied to hold the 
leaves together and to stick the printed cover to the book, which is then trimmed 
on three sides. The cover may have been varnished (on a printing press or special 
machine) or laminated. Another method, cheaper than sewing but stronger and 
more expensive than perfect binding, is known variously as slotted, notch or burst 
binding. The spine folds of the sections are not cut oﬀ . Instead they are perforated 
during sheet folding. The binding machine merely injects the adhesive to hold 
together the folded sections, applies the cover and trims the book.
Packing and distribution
The printer or binder packs quantities of the book by shrink wrapping, parcelling 
or in cartons and delivers them on pallets to the publisher’s speciﬁed warehouse. 
Printers have traditionally delivered the bulk stock of new titles to the publisher’s 
warehouse, which in turn ships them out to the main retailers and wholesalers. 
However, printers competing on service may deliver stock directly to key 
customers and to individuals. In the case of print journals, for example, they may 
deliver to subscribers.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
219
Now read this
Adrian Bullock, Book Production, Routledge, 2012.
Sources
Tricia Austin and Richard Doust, New Media Design, Laurence King, 2007.
Phil Baines and Andrew Haslam, Type and Typography, Laurence King, 2005.
David Bann, The All New Print Production Handbook, RotoVision, 2006.
Alan Bartram, Making Books: Design in British publishing since 1945, British 
Library and Oak Knoll Press, 1999.
Linda Bennett, PA Guide to Going Digital, Publishers Association, 2010.
Manfred Breede, ‘Plus ça change: Print on demand reverts book publishing to 
its pre-industrial beginnings’, in Bill Cope and Angus Phillips (eds), The 
Future of the Book in the Digital Age, 2006.
Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, version 3.1, Hartley & 
Marks, 2005.
Adrian Bullock and Meredith Walsh, The Green Design and Print Production 
Handbook, Ilex, 2013.
Elizabeth Castro, EPUB Straight to the Point, Peachpit Press, 2011.
Harriet Dennys, ‘Picture This’, The Bookseller, 25 August 2006.
Simon Garﬁ eld, Just my Type, Proﬁ le, 2010.
Chris Jennings, eBook Typography for Flowable eBooks, PagetoScreen ebook, 
2012.
Marshall Lee, Bookmaking, 3rd edition, Norton, 2004.
Nellie McKesson and Adam Witwer, Publishing with iBooks Author: An 
introduction to creating ebooks for the iPad, O’Reilly, 2012.
Ruari McLean, The Thames and Hudson Manual of Typography, Thames and 
Hudson, 1980.
Michael Mitchell and Susan Wightman, Book Typography: A designer’s manual, 
Libanus Press, 2005.
David Alan Rech, ‘Instituting an XML-First Workﬂ ow’, Publishing Research 
Quarterly, September, 2012.
Lucienne Roberts and Julia Thrift, The Designer and the Grid, RotoVision, 
2002.
Web resources
www.bapla.org British Association of Picture Libraries and Agencies.
www.britishprint.com British Printing Industries Federation (BPIF) provides 
information on book printing.
www.crossref.org CrossRef operates a cross-publisher citation linking system.
www.digitalbookworld.com Digital Book World.
www.doi.org International DOI Foundation.
www.futurebook.net FutureBook blog of The Bookseller.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Design and production
220
http://goodereader.com Good E-Reader – ebook and digital publishing news.
www.idpf.org International Digital Publishing Forum.
www.mashable.com Mashable – news site for digital technology.
www.mobileread.com Mobileread.
www.radar.oreilly.com O’Reilly Radar blog.
www.tasi.org.uk Technical Advisory Service for Images.
www.techcrunch.com Techcrunch.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 10
Marketing
Marketing within the publishing industry used to be regarded as primarily the 
promotion of new books. In trade publishing, this would involve talking to the 
literary editors on the national newspapers, securing coverage in the print and 
broadcast media, placing relevant advertisements, creating point-of-sale material, 
and organizing tours for selected authors. While marketing was about generating 
public interest in new books, its other main objective was to persuade the book 
stores to display frontlist titles on their shelves, thereby giving visibility to new 
books to drive sales. Whilst some marketing practices developed for print books 
carry over to the digital world, marketing has undergone a radical change in 
emphasis from the physical to the internet and mobile. Also marketing has a 
much broader role and marketers play a pivotal role in many aspects of a book’s 
publication. In an age of self-publishing, consumer publishers in particular have 
to be able to demonstrate to authors the eﬃ  cacy of their marketing eﬀ orts and 
their ability to develop and manage an author’s brand.
The eﬀ ects of the internet and associated technologies continue to have major 
implications on the ways in which books are marketed and sold. The growth of 
internet retailing has hit hard physical book stores, reducing the opportunities for 
in-store impulse purchases. Readers can see thousands of titles in a bookshop, 
and on screen they see very few. The challenge for publishers is to help readers to 
discover, and buy, their books in a digital world of content abundance, much of it 
available for free.
Whilst it has diminished print newspapers and the amount of review space 
for books, the web has opened up many new marketing opportunities, often at low 
direct cost. Internet retailing has broadened and deepened book availability 
worldwide. The rapid rise of social media has fostered word-of-mouth 
recommendation – hitherto restricted to family and close friends – and the 
inﬂ uence of bloggers and book recommendation sites has grown. The web 
enables the development of vertical communities, sharing interests, who can be 
attracted to a publisher’s books, and publishers themselves can develop such 
communities around their titles. Publishers commission online book trailers, 
author video chats and podcasts to supplement author tours. Technology reduces 
the cost of formerly print-based marketing and extends its reach. For example, 
trade publishers send digital proofs to reviewers; academic publishers send 
e-inspection copies of textbooks to teachers. Trade publishers produce online 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
222
newsletters and academic and STM publishers conduct targeted email campaigns 
when formerly they were restricted to posting out printed items. The power of 
search has given prominence to SEO (search engine optimization) and the 
importance of metadata (information about content from a book’s cover through 
to chapter abstracts).
Most signiﬁ cantly, technology facilitates direct to consumer (D2C) marketing 
and a dialogue with readers and users. Publishers can connect with individuals 
within the audience, to inform publishing decisions and increase marketing 
cost-eﬀ ectiveness. The use of analytics increases the understanding of consumer 
behaviour. This direct connection with individuals oﬀ ers the prospect of being 
able to customize and personalize the content they wish to consume, and helps to 
predict which authors and books will succeed. Book marketers play a vital role in 
the changing business models of publishers. ‘Every large house has a consumer 
insight or consumer research department, as publishers realize how important it 
is to ﬁ nd out about the consumer and how relatively easy it is to have direct 
contact’ (The Bookseller, 26 July 2013).
Marketing staﬀ  in large publishing groups may be attached to particular 
companies, imprints or lists in the group. Many marketing departments consist 
of just one or two people who do everything, but in medium to large ﬁrms there 
are usually at least three levels: marketing director; marketing, brand or product 
manager; and marketing executive or assistant. Marketing encompasses 
numerous, diverse activities. Large companies employ specialists in key areas, 
such as public relations and publicity (sometimes called ‘communications’); 
market research and analytics; website and social media; sales support; events and 
exhibitions; and product, mailing and customer databases. The collection and 
management of data in all its forms and its eﬀ ective application are increasingly 
important across all activities.
Senior marketing staﬀ  may ﬁrst become involved at the publishing proposal 
stage. They will advise on product development, especially when the project is a 
large investment. They will be involved in a range of discussions about the book’s 
pricing, cover, target market and the ways this can be reached. From discussions 
with editors and sales staﬀ , each book is evaluated and decisions made on the 
promotional material required – to support sales and for the target readership – 
and what publicity and media coverage should be sought. The marketing budget 
may be proportional to the expected sales revenue or set separately for key titles. It 
is impossible to promote all books equally and, especially in consumer book and 
textbook publishing, the lead titles receive by far the largest budgets. The key 
judgement for every title is deciding how much to spend to generate proﬁtable 
sales that more than recoup the outlay.
A company will develop an overall strategy for a list or set of products and 
services. This will involve targeting particular market segments, positioning the 
product or brand in the minds of customers, settling on the relevant marketing 
mix for those customers, and establishing a budget for marketing expenditure. 
For signiﬁ cant new products or series an individual marketing plan may be 
prepared.
Pufﬁn’s 
community 
website for 
teenage 
readers 
(spinebreakers. 
co.uk) has an 
editorial board 
of teenagers
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
223
Marketing plan
There is no ﬁ xed template but a marketing plan will contain the following 
elements.
Executive summary
Target market and marketing environment
Market segments, market drivers, and the results of market research. 
Analytical tools to be used include PEST (political, economic, social and 
technological) and SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats). 
Research into reader demographics and social media analytics may be used.
Product overview
Information about the current situation regarding the company’s products 
and competitor activity.
Marketing objectives
These should be SMART: speciﬁ c, measurable, achievable, realistic, and 
time-bound. For example, to achieve a market share within the secondary 
school mathematics market of 15 per cent within three years.
Marketing strategy
Outlines the target markets, key inﬂ uencers, positioning, the readers the 
publisher wants to reach, where they can be found, what kinds of marketing 
they respond to best, and what it will cost to reach them. Analysis of what size 
of response rate is required in order to make the campaign viable is also 
essential.
Specific strategies for each area of the marketing mix
The marketing mix is the 4Ps – product, price, place and promotion. This is 
covered in detail later in the chapter.
Schedule and budget
Set out are the actions within a time-scale, costed through in detail.
Controls
How will progress be monitored and analysed?
Follow-up plans
What are the possible next stages?

F  C U S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
224
THE MARKET FOR BOOKS
The ﬁrst step in marketing a product is to understand the nature of the market. A 
range of data is available on the purchasing behaviour and demographics of the 
consumer book market. Table 10.1 reveals the factors that inﬂuence consumer 
book purchases in the UK. For marketers it shows the importance of having a 
book in stock in a shop, the value of building author brands, and the impact of 
recommendation on a book’s sales.
Table 10.1 Purchase prompts for UK consumers (source: 2009 data from Book Facts 
Online)
Purchase prompt
Percentage of books bought
Saw browsing
28.7
Subject-matter
23.6
Read author/series before
21.2
Gift request
7.7
Review/recommended
7.7
Low price/offer
5.6
Cover design/info
3.3
Saw film/TV adaptation
1.8
Prize win/nominated
0.3
Not specified
0.1
There is variation across the population in terms of the number of books bought. 
First, around 30 per cent of adults do not buy a book at all – how can publishers 
reach this part of the population? (Mintel, 2012) Generic initiatives to encourage 
reading are important for the industry. A prominent example is World Book Day, 
and in 2013 UK schoolchildren received a £1 book token to spend on a specially 
created £1 book; or they could put it towards the cost of any book. Quick Reads was 
launched on World Book Day in 2006 to provide ‘fast-paced, bite-sized books by 
bestselling writers for emergent readers, anyone who had lost the reading habit or 
simply wanted a short, fast read’ (delni.gov.uk/quick-reads). There is also World 
Book Night, when free books are handed out on the international day of the book 
(23 April, also Shakespeare’s birth and death date), with a focus on giving to those 
who do not normally read for pleasure. City Reads, which began in Seattle in 
1998, encourages a whole city to read the same book. In September 2013, everyone 
in Brighton was invited to read the Discworld novel Guards! Guards! by Terry 
Pratchett.
Organizations such as the National Literacy Trust and Booktrust (UK) are 
involved in the promotion of reading and literacy. Reading for pleasure amongst 
both adults and children is under pressure in a rich media environment of TV, the 
internet, games and social media. Examining reading amongst children in the UK 
in 2011, the National Literacy Trust found that:
In 2005 we found that four young people in 10 read daily outside of class. 
This research carried out at the end of 2011 found that only three young 
people in 10 now read daily in their own time. However, the number of 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
225
children and young people who enjoy reading very much or quite a lot has 
remained static since 2005 (50% today vs 51% in 2005). These ﬁ ndings 
together suggest a clear issue with children’s and young people’s leisure time 
with many children and young people enjoying reading but pushing it out in 
favour of other activities. (National Literacy Trust, page 11)
Publishers consistently talk of the challenge of getting teenage boys 
interested in books, especially ﬁction, and the research discovered that more girls 
than boys said they enjoyed reading very much (27.6 per cent compared to 18.3 per 
cent). Can reading books on an electronic device encourage more boys to become 
active readers?
Libraries play an important part in promoting reading and the use 
of books, and librarians promote books in a variety of ways, from personal 
recommendations to working with children and schools to champion reading. 
Despite this, there has been a noticeable decline in library borrowings, falling 
from 376.9 m in 2001/2 to 287.5 m in 2011/12, a drop of 24 per cent (LISU issue 
statistics).
The temptation for publishers is to concentrate on selling to the heavy 
book buyers, those who purchase a lot of books. If they are regular visitors to 
bookshops, they can be reached by ensuring that the books are in stock and 
promoted there. If frequent purchasers online, they can perhaps be reached 
through social media or word of mouth.
Demographics
Table 10.2 shows book buying by gender, age and socio-economic group. The 
overall picture is that book purchasing tends to increase with age and income. 
Table 10.2 Book buying in the UK – demographics (source: 2009 data from Book 
Facts Online)
Proportion of all books (%)
Proportion of adult books 
(%)
Female
58
52
Male
42
48
12–16
2
1
17–24
4
4
25–34
15
12
35–44
18
16
45–54
15
16
55–64
21
24
65–79
26
27
AB
24
25
C1
32
31
C2
22
21
DE
20
22
The average UK 
household has 
138 books, less 
than half of 
which have 
been read 
(World Book 
Day research, 
2014)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
226
Travelling by public transport encourages reading, as can most readily be seen on 
the Underground in London. The age at which the person left education is also an 
important factor – those who leave later are bigger consumers of books. When it 
comes to ebooks:
The demographic characteristics of e-book buyers are quite similar to all 
book buyers, the main diﬀ erence being that men are almost as likely to have 
bought ebooks in the past year as women, suggesting that the anonymity of 
reading with e-readers, the convenience of the ebook and the technology are 
all factors which have served to engage men where print books have 
previously failed. (Mintel, 2012)
Targeting
With a clear view of the market segments amongst book consumers, publishers 
can decide whether to target a particular audience, say single young women for 
chick lit ﬁ ction. The same principles apply in textbook publishing, where ﬁ rst-year 
undergraduates may be chosen as the segment for an introductory marketing 
textbook.
Decisions around targeting have implications in consumer publishing for the 
cover design, where any advertising is placed, and what type of media coverage 
(including social) is planned. When in 2010 Orion published the ﬁ rst YA novel by 
Carlos Ruiz Zafon, The Prince of Mist, they decided to target both a children’s and 
adult audience. Marketing included advertising in London Underground stations 
and a targeted digital marketing campaign, based around the author website run 
by Orion, with teasers sent to the author’s existing fans. Other ways of segmenting 
the market include by retail channel: there are diﬀ erent demographics for those 
purchasing books at Waterstones or in supermarkets. A book may be seen as ideal 
for promotion through a particular channel.
Positioning
Once the target market has been selected, it must be decided how the product will 
be positioned in the mind of the consumer. Marketers can prepare positioning 
maps which show how their product or brand will ﬁ t into the market. Will this be 
a high-value item with an air of quality, or a cheaper product with an emphasis on 
value? ‘More for more’ positioning involves creating an upmarket product or 
service at a relatively high price; ‘the same for much less’ oﬀ ers a basic product at 
a competitive price. An example of the former would be electronic access to the 
Oxford English Dictionary, and an example of the latter would be a low-priced 
ebook in genre ﬁ ction. In the reference market the Dummies brand oﬀ ers 
simpliﬁ ed information across a whole range of subjects, and Marcel Knobil, 
founder of consultancy Superbrands, said: ‘Wiley has built an ownership of the 
idea that you can become an expert from a beginner’ (The Bookseller, 6 December 
2007).
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
227
MARKETING MIX
For lead titles, marketers will prepare full marketing plans which assess the target 
market for the title and lay out strategies for reaching that market both through 
online and oﬄ  ine activities. Marketing activities can be placed under the four 
general headings of what is known as the marketing mix:
 
▪
product,
 
▪
price,
 
▪
place, and
 
▪
promotion.
Product
Marketing plays a full role in the development of new projects, from coming up 
with new ideas and commenting on editors’ proposals to market testing new 
projects during their development. Marketing will also be involved in commenting 
on the book’s title (including any subtitle) and other textual elements to maximize 
search engine optimization (SEO) and discoverability; its genre or subject 
classiﬁ cation; cross-marketing opportunities with other titles; and the cover design 
and how it works with the target market.
When the Osprey Group ventured into the area of science ﬁ ction publishing, 
it was as a result of market research which showed that this would ﬁ t with the 
interests of their existing audience in the area of military history. Market research 
can inform decisions about new projects, covers and marketing ideas, and 
research into the book market can be commissioned from specialist organizations 
such as Bowker Market Research (purchased by Nielsen in 2013). Regular data on 
the sales of individual print titles, their demand curves, and books by category is 
available from Nielsen BookScan – sales rankings on Amazon are a free 
alternative. By 2013 bestseller data for ebooks was becoming available in the UK. 
Publishers would dearly love access to the data held by Amazon and Apple – not 
only on sales but also on consumer behaviour and proﬁ les. Those publishers able 
to build a direct relationship with their customers can collect their own 
information, enabling them to target new customers and design appropriate 
products and services. They can also stimulate the co-creation of value, with 
readers perhaps suggesting commissioning ideas, titles for translation, or classic 
books to reissue (see Chapter 5, page 111).
Educational publishers developing a new textbook will want to assess market 
trends in terms of student numbers in that subject, and evaluate the competition. 
They will also conduct primary research in schools, and major new textbooks and 
digital media will be concept tested using focus groups. An academic publisher 
may seek the views of librarians on a proposed online database of key texts and 
journal articles. Data analytics may show how content is being used by learners in 
schools or academic researchers.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
228
Publisher branding
It used to be said that the brand names of publishers and those of their imprints 
have little impact on sales – readers do not select books on the name of the 
publisher. It is true that the general public’s recognition of publishers is generally 
weak, apart from notable exceptions such as Penguin. Trade brand names are, 
however, important to publishers’ business connections – to agents, authors and 
book trade intermediaries – and to media relations. The success of Eats, Shoots and 
Leaves by Lynne Truss (2003), which sold half a million copies within six months 
of publication, will have persuaded bookshops to take seriously future titles from 
Proﬁle Books. Teachers in schools recognize publisher brands and this may 
inﬂuence their purchasing decisions or recommendations. Consumer branding is 
used to good eﬀ ect for book series, for instance in language learning, reference, 
travel and computing guides, and in children’s publishing; and for vertical 
communities interested in some ﬁ ction genres and non-ﬁ ction subjects. In ELT 
publishing, publisher brands will be an important guarantee of quality in overseas 
markets. In an internet world that is oversupplied with information of uncertain 
provenance, publisher branding should assume greater signiﬁcance in conveying 
quality assured products and services. The risk for publishers is that users will 
head for content on the web that is free – perceived as ‘good enough’.
As we saw in Chapter 5, consumer publishers have to direct their attention 
towards the creation of communities and brands which will work with consumers. 
Does the publisher have existing brands which will work as consumer brands, or 
does it need to create a new identity? Part of that eﬀ ort will involve the 
management of key author brands.
Brands are more than just names and symbols. They are a key element in the 
company’s relationship with consumers. Brands represent consumers’ 
perceptions and feelings about a product and its performance – everything 
that a product or a service means to consumers. (Kotler et al., page 257)
Brands and travel publishing
Stephen Mesquita, Travel publishing consultant
Travel is a fertile area in which to study the eﬀ ect of brands in publishing. The 
sales of printed travel guides have fallen in most of the major world markets. 
For example, the UK sales of world travel guides (the international series) fell 
by 44 per cent in the eight years between 2006 and 2013; and the US sales of 
this type of guide fell by 45 per cent (Nielsen Bookscan). It is a sector that has 
proved particularly vulnerable to the growth of free online information.
In the pre-internet world, the marketing eﬀ orts of many travel publishers 
focused on vying for in-store visibility, rather than building their brands. Most 
guides were bought through retail bookshops, and guides were the primary 
source of information for most travellers – all that has changed. With the rise 
of Amazon and with the competition of user-generated content (UGC) 

EP E R T
Palgrave 
Macmillan and 
SAGE are 
noteworthy 
examples of 
branding in 
academic 
publishing 
– the brand 
helps attract 
new authors to 
the publisher
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
229
available on websites such as Trip 
Advisor, the emphasis for the 
traditional travel publisher has 
changed from visibility to 
discoverability. To be discoverable, 
you need to be known – you need a 
brand.
In the eight years that saw such 
a steep decline in the sales of world 
travel guides, the two largest 
publishers worldwide in that 
category were Lonely Planet and 
Dorling Kindersley (with their 
Eyewitness books). They consistently 
outperformed the market (UK sales 
down 25 per cent) and both have 
strong brands – but brands which 
function in very diﬀ erent ways.
Lonely Planet (LP) has invested heavily, particularly in the last twenty 
years, in creating a worldwide brand. The company recognized early on the 
importance of digital information, even creating in Thorn Tree a very early 
example of a community. LP built its name worldwide with, amongst other 
moves, a series of licensing deals with powerful publishers in key European 
markets. The strength of the brand has also made it easier for LP to diversify 
into new areas such as magazines and TV – and to exploit the digital market 
for their content. The value of the brand was a major factor in persuading 
BBC Worldwide to pay £130 m for the company in 2007 (but it was since sold 
again in 2013, to NC2 Media, for only £51 m).
The DK Eyewitness guides are a brand with very diﬀ erent characteristics. 
The design – which was ground-breaking when the guides were launched over 
20 years ago – functions as the brand. It is a global brand which has made the 
guides desirable and collectable, as well as usable. They still rely on visibility 
in-store – so may be vulnerable in the longer term – but, for the moment they 
continue to outperform the market.
There are other smaller, niche brands which continue to be competitive. 
For example, the Bradt guides remain ﬁ rst choice for visitors to super-
adventurous destinations. But the whole sector has seen a major shakeout, in 
which brands such as the AA and Thomas Cook – household names in the 
UK – have thrown in the towel and stopped publishing world travel guides. 
The vacuum left by these – and other publishers – pulling out of the market 
has only served to strengthen the sales of the printed guides of LP and DK. 
The next few years will tell whether even those travel publishers with strong 
brands are strong enough to resist the rise of online travel information.
South  Sudan
Bradt
Sophie&Max Lave Hoave
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
230
Author branding
Since one of the factors that inﬂuences book purchases is familiarity with the 
author, much attention is paid to the branding of authors (and sometimes the 
characters they have created), whether on author websites, social media, book 
recommendation sites or through their covers. Publishers build author brands 
but do not own those assets. Once authors develop a fan base, those readers are 
targeted early in the promotion of the author’s next book, and are emissaries who 
spread word-of-mouth recommendations worldwide. All the covers for an author 
may receive a similar treatment, encouraging the reader to look out for and buy 
the next book by one of their favourite authors. Brands also aﬀ ect gift purchases. 
David Cooke, formerly category manager at Tesco, said of women’s purchasing 
behaviour: ‘If you’re thinking of buying a book for your husband you go for a safe 
name’ (The Bookseller, 17 August 2007).
Covers
Covers are still seen as important in a world of ebooks, and books without covers 
on Amazon will not sell as well. The challenge is to reinvent the book cover for 
an online world and publishers have experimented with moving covers such as 
animated gifs. Titling is ever important when sometimes a cover may only appear 
at a small scale. Attention must also be paid to the design of icons for apps and 
successful approaches combine creativity with simplicity in order to gain 
recognizability – examples include Hipstamatic and Flipboard.
Covers can give oﬀ  messages about a book’s target audience, and they help 
to position the book in the mind of the consumer. Research carried out for the 
Orange Prize for Fiction in 2000 found that the front cover and title of a book are 
taken by readers to be strong indicators of the kind of ﬁction, and whether the 
book is intended to be a male or female read. A novel was regarded as a female 
read based on the author’s gender, the colour and general look of the cover, and its 
title. Women are far more likely to read books regarded as male reads (40 per cent 
of the women in the survey), with only a quarter of men interested in a book if 
they regarded it as a female read. Ian McEwan’s Enduring Love was seen as a book 
which sent out signals from the look of its cover (including the use of pink) and 
from its title (using the word love) that it was a female read.
A good cover will encourage the consumer to pick up a book, and the 
consumer is then ﬁve times more likely to buy (Phillips, 2007, page 28). Mostly 
publishers target heavy buyers, who provide the bulk of their sales, and design 
the covers accordingly. Women are more likely to be heavy buyers of books, 
purchasing for their children, gifts, or themselves. Purchases can be classiﬁed by 
occasion – when the book will be read – and beneﬁts – what the book oﬀ ers to the 
reader. Covers can suggest a light read for the beach, an air of mystery, or a mood 
of passion. In general, hardback novels, which may become collectables, have 
elegant and restrained jackets, aimed at older groups. Fiction aimed at younger 
readers may go straight into paperback.
Research may be commissioned into the readers of an author and a new cover 
look may reﬂect the results. For example, research by Anita Shreve’s publisher, 
Time Warner, found that readers associated her books with emotions and human 
48 per cent of 
women can be 
considered to 
be Page 
Turners, or 
avid readers, 
compared with 
only 26 per 
cent of men 
(Guardian, 22 
March 2009)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
231
feelings. They then made sure that a new cover design put people on her covers. 
Sometimes a book is issued with two cover designs to capture diﬀ erent market 
segments. This happened with the Harry Potter books when it was found that they 
had a crossover adult market. Four designs were produced for Mark Haddon’s The 
Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time: adult and children’s editions in both 
hardback and paperback. When Bloomsbury ﬁrst published The Little Friend by 
Donna Tartt, it appeared with a disturbing image on the cover of a doll’s face with a 
cutout eye. Two years later the book was reissued with a new cover image – a child 
on a swing – aimed at a summer reading market. Cover research can also take 
advantage of eye tracking and other technology to detect the most eﬀ ective design.
Add-ons
Extra value can be created with digital add-ons to the printed book, internet or 
augmented reality links in the text, or the bundling of print and ebook editions 
together. Amazon launched its Matchbook service in the USA in 2013, allowing 
customers to buy inexpensive ebooks of print titles they had already purchased. 
Games can be created for consumer books and in 2013 the fantasy series for 
children, Spirit Animals, was launched by Scholastic linked to an online game. It 
would now be unusual to publish a major textbook without an associated website 
oﬀ ering extra resources. Videos, tests, quizzes and games may be available for 
educational texts, with lesson plans for the teachers. For academic textbooks, 
lecturers may be provided with a full course of lecture slides and, for major texts, a 
full range of resources including student assessment. Ebooks can contain rich 
media features such as videos, animations and quizzes.
Price
Marketing will be involved in setting the prices for new books. Factors aﬀ ecting 
the book’s possible published price include its perceived value to end-users; their 
ability to pay low or high prices (for example high-earning professionals); and the 
price of competitors’ books, especially if the book can be easily compared against 
similar books. Sometimes a book has a uniqueness that can let it command a 
premium price. Other factors include whether the book will be bought primarily 
by end-users or by libraries or businesses; and whether there are established price 
norms in the market which, if ignored, could reduce sales (for example to an 
impulse buyer, gift buyer, student or school). Trade publishers have to price with a 
view to the discounts oﬀ ered by retailers to consumers. Christmas bestsellers will 
have their recommended price set in the full knowledge that retailers will reduce 
the price considerably. A hardback priced by the publisher at £25 may be sold at 
up to half price by retailers if a price war develops in the market.
Pricing strategies include ‘skimming’ – pricing high a hardback before 
moving into paperback – through to ‘penetration’ pricing – capturing market 
share for a new series through aggressive low pricing. ‘Competition-based’ pricing 
is common and it is essential to review the prices of competitors’ products. 
Sometimes this can lead to counter-intuitive outcomes, as in the case of the 
independent bookseller Daunt Books:
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
232
Daunt Books, an independent bookseller in London, UK, isn’t likely to win a 
price war against Amazon or Barnes & Noble; it doesn’t even try. Instead, the 
shop relies on its personal approach, cosy atmosphere and friendly and 
knowledgeable staﬀ  to turn local book lovers into loyal patrons, even if they 
have to pay a little more. (Kotler et al., page 313)
The raising of the recommended retail price for a book would usually lead to a fall 
in demand, whereas lowering the price would usually (but not always) lead to a 
rise in the quantity sold. Products which are thought to be ‘price inelastic’ – 
changing the price has only a limited eﬀ ect on the level of demand – tend to be 
highly specialist and professional titles. A book or database may convey need-to-
know information for which an organization or professional is happy to pay a high 
price. Top science journals command premium subscription rates. Consumer 
books, especially paperbacks or ebooks, which may be bought on impulse, and 
many textbooks tend to be ‘price elastic’ – changing the price has a greater eﬀ ect 
on the level of demand. Price elasticities vary according to the type of book and 
product. It can be difﬁcult, for example, for an editor to persuade an academic or 
professional book author that lowering the price will not open the gates to a ﬂood 
of eager readers.
Digital products can be difﬁcult to price when there are no set price points in 
the market. Publishers may resort to cost-based approaches in order to recoup 
their investment, or keep prices low initially in order to encourage early 
momentum. Apps have to be priced in line with market expectations, and face 
stiﬀ  competition from products issued by other media sectors such as games. 
The prices of ebooks may match those of printed books or be lower, say two-thirds 
or a half. The pricing of consumer ebooks is in constant ﬂ ux as they have 
proved to be highly price elastic, and their prices can be altered almost in real 
time. When the price of The Hundred-Year-Old Man Who Climbed Out of the 
Window and Disappeared, by Jonas Jonasson, was reduced in 2012 as part of a Sony 
promotion to only 20p, it sold nearly 150,000 copies. Occasional ﬂ ash sales are 
used by retailers to capture market share. Publishers and self-publishing authors 
too may use ‘pulse’ pricing, dropping the title’s price drastically over a short 
period to increase demand. Larger publishers may employ analysts to work out 
pricing policies which maximize unit sales or revenue per sales channel. Such 
‘dynamic’ pricing is automated through the use of algorithms, pioneered by 
Amazon. Simon Johnson of HarperCollins said in 2013: ‘We have well over 
10,000 ebooks in our catalogue and a signiﬁ cant proportion are re-priced every 
week. It varies from market to market and partner to partner’ (The Bookseller, 26 
July 2013).
A cost-based approach to pricing is now much less common – this involves a 
standard mark-up from the unit cost of the book. Instead publishers will price to 
the market with a keen eye on the relevant competition. For trade ﬁction, pricing 
to market will override considerations such as the book’s length. There are 
common price points in the market for given categories of books, such as general 
hardbacks, trade and mass-market paperbacks. This is also true for academic 
textbooks: for example, the price points for humanities and social sciences 
paperback texts are lower than those for management and STM titles. Periodically 
brave publishers break the prevailing price points, by lifting the price or lowering 
The demand 
for consumer 
ebooks is price 
elastic
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
233
it to undercut competitors. Educational and college textbook publishers take 
account of the context the textbook plays in the total oﬀ er of digital resources and 
services.
Publishers of all types price their books primarily on their biggest market 
(usually but not always the home market) and that sets the basis for pricing in 
export markets. However, if an overseas country, such as the USA, is the main 
market, then the book is priced primarily on that territory. Pricing for export 
markets is complex and requires constant review as exchange rates (and rates of 
VAT) vary. Pricing a printed book to make it aﬀ ordable and saleable in a poorer 
overseas market runs the risk that arbitrage traders will sell it in higher priced 
market, including the home market.
The level of discounts given by publishers to booksellers is a marketing cost 
to the publisher. It determines the amount of money the publisher actually 
receives from sales made by the retailer. The trade publishers, highly dependent 
on retail exposure, give booksellers the highest discounts. Most sales in a 
bookshop are made within the ﬁrst 20 to 30 feet of the entrance, and this is the 
prime location where oﬀ ers to consumers are displayed, such as ‘buy one get one 
half price’. Retailers ask publishers for especially high discounts to participate in 
their promotions, and for additional sums (co-op payments) to secure window or 
table displays and prominence in catalogues. Co-op payments are also demanded 
by some internet retailers to increase a book’s visibility:
While the case can be made that co-op in a bricks-and-mortar store is a 
worthwhile investment – money is spent on getting books to physical areas of 
the store, such as front tables, where consumers will see those books ﬁ rst – 
it’s much less logical on a Web site. Does having a video or an author Q&A 
on a book’s page on Amazon really encourage a customer who has already 
clicked on that book to make a purchase? (Publishers Weekly, 15 December 
2011)
Academic and STM publishers oﬀ er individual titles at diﬀ erent prices. A title 
may be published simultaneously as a high priced hardback for multiple reader 
use in libraries and at a lower price in paperback for personal purchase. Digital 
publication aﬀ ords many further options. The bundling of journals as part of a 
big deal allows libraries to access the journals at a lower aggregate price than if 
subscribed to individually. Librarians seek the lowest price of printed books 
oﬀ ered by diﬀ erent sources. The use of site licences, however, enables publishers 
(directly or via aggregators) the ability to set diﬀ erent prices for each title 
depending on the ways in which it is licensed. For example, the ebook may be 
acquired under a perpetual access licence, or it may be licensed as part of a 
collection (in eﬀ ect at a discount per title), or made available through a 
subscription package or through Patron (user or demand) Driven Acquisition, or 
through short term rental. Digital textbooks may be rented to students at lower 
prices for set periods. Diﬀ erent user rights are granted in the diﬀ erent licences.
Printed books and journals are free from VAT in the UK, but the tax is 
payable on digital products such as ebooks, ejournals, CD-ROMs, DVDs and 
online content. That has the eﬀ ect that publishers have to absorb the tax cost in 
their digital pricing of an ebook or subscription journal.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
234
Place
A full view of a book’s distribution and the diﬀ erent channels through which 
books are sold is provided in later chapters. From the point of view of the 
marketer, they need to understand fully the markets into which books are sold, 
both the needs of consumers and the diﬀ erent sales channels. The movement of 
sales away from physical stores to internet retailers is a key trend which has 
aﬀ ected the marketing of books. Marketers need to assess the likely audience for a 
book and work out, with the sales department, how it can be made available 
through the relevant physical and digital channels, as well as promoted to the 
relevant decision-makers and consumers.
Given the importance of search and discovery in the purchasing and 
accessing of many books online, marketers must ensure that full and correct 
metadata is available to all the relevant sales channels and libraries. This includes 
the book’s cover (vital to drive online browsing and sales), description of the 
content, product details, and reviews. Metadata in the virtual space substitutes for 
the bookshelf in a physical bookstore or the former printed library catalogues. For 
example, books are classiﬁ ed by subject category (a metadata ﬁ eld), originally 
developed to help booksellers and librarians shelve them. For specialist books, 
assigning an incorrect subject category can be fatal to sales and library usage. 
Conversely assigning several relevant subject categories from the speciﬁ c to the 
more general aids a title’s online visibility. A choice of subject category in which 
fewer books are published increases the chance that a book would achieve a higher 
sales ranking.
Copy for web pages needs to be written with an eye to achieving a favourable 
page ranking on Google searches. Relevant keywords need to be identiﬁ ed and 
used as part of the copy, and links encouraged from other sites with good 
reputations. Consumer reviews – whether on a site such as Goodreads or on 
Amazon’s own website – are increasingly important and encourage sales (Phillips, 
2014, page 81). Investment in paid search or SEO helps to direct consumers 
towards community websites or social media (for example Facebook pages) set up 
by the publisher. There has been controversy about paid-for rave reviews on 
Amazon, commissioned by self-published authors, and click farms which will 
generate automatically likes on Facebook pages.
Promotion
The aim of promotion is to make the media, the book trade and consumers 
conscious of the company and the products it oﬀ ers; and to stimulate demand. 
The work may be divided by task. In some publishers, especially consumer, 
specialists deal solely with public relations and publicity, or with the development 
of promotional and point-of-sale (POS) material for retailers, or with catalogues, or 
with space or outdoor advertising or copywriting; or with online marketing and 
community development through a presence in social media. In some academic 
and professional publishers, the work may be divided by product type, for example 
between textbooks or journals promotion. Publishers of all kinds may also hire 
advertising agencies (especially for major projects or authors), freelance publicists 
and specialists in direct mail, SEO and website design. While in-house designers 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
235
and production staﬀ  are sometimes used, marketing staﬀ  often make extensive 
use of InDesign. They may commission freelance designers and buy print 
themselves because the relevant suppliers are diﬀ erent to those producing the 
books. Some major publishers have adopted content management systems to 
facilitate catalogue and website production. The use of XML workﬂ ows that allow 
content to be repurposed is growing.
The promotional material produced and the interest generated help sales staﬀ  
to sell to the book trade, or to schools or colleges, and also rights staﬀ  in their 
work. Details of the promotional spend and activities will help pre-publication 
orders from booksellers. Home and overseas customers use the promotional 
material as a reference source for ordering.
Online marketing
The development of online marketing has revolutionized promotion and the 
whole marketing function, oﬀ ering a cost-eﬀ ective means of reaching a wider 
international audience. At the start of the century many publishers’ websites 
were in early stages of development and were beginning to perform a range of 
functions. For most book publishers, however, their sites at the outset performed 
the direct marketing function of providing information on their titles – in eﬀ ect an 
extension of their print-based catalogues.
Today publishers in the consumer ﬁeld embellish their web pages, for 
example with author interviews and interactive material, such as activities or 
games linked to particular books or children’s characters and newsletters. Eﬀ orts 
are made to persuade readers to register through oﬀ ering, for example, discounts 
and competitions with prizes and they are encouraged to share content. 
Community sites around content by imprint or genre will encourage sales – 
usually from the main retailers but sometimes direct. This has become ever more 
important as internet and ebook sales have grown, and physical retail diminishes, 
and the challenge is to help consumers discover a publisher’s titles. Publishers of 
consumer books written by brand-name authors face the reality that their imprint 
name is a sub-brand to that of their authors in the public’s mind. In order to 
co-ordinate the promotion, publishers may advise authors on the use of websites 
and social media, or oﬀ er to host their websites.
The full beneﬁ ts of the use of social media have not yet been established, 
and there remains some scepticism about its eﬀ ectiveness. Yet the number of 
opportunities continue to multiply – from Google+ and LinkedIn to Tumblr and 
Vine. Publishers recognize they must have an active presence (with the minimum 
of Facebook or Twitter) in order to drive book discoverability and encourage 
word-of-mouth recommendations – and ensure their authors are equally active. 
A trailer for a book may be uploaded to YouTube, a viral video posted on Vine, a 
book club started on Twitter, or a cover pinned to a board on Pinterest.
For signiﬁ cant new products or services, it is important to engage in online 
communities either through the creation of one from scratch or by making use of 
those already well established. Book publishers can gain network eﬀ ects through 
developing their own community sites around their books. Community sites may 
be built around diﬀ erent levels of content aggregation: imprints, genres, series or 
individual bestsellers or long enduring titles, such as the Writers’ & Artists’ Yearbook
Pinterest is a 
popular place 
to showcase 
book covers
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
236
Online communities in publishing
Alastair Horne, Social Media and Communities Manager at Cambridge 
University Press
The ﬁ rst phase of publishing’s digital transformation centred on distribution: 
making content available in digital formats – mostly the same books that had 
previously been available as print. The second phase, which has already 
begun, focuses on data and the reader.
Historically, publishers have been perfectly happy to delegate the 
relationship with book buyers to bookshops, but that no longer works in a 
world where data about customer habits is a vital source of business 
intelligence. Retailers such as Amazon can gather immense amounts of data 
during both the purchasing and reading processes; since they are unwilling to 
share it, publishers have to ﬁ nd other ways to engage with their audience, to 
ﬁ nd out what readers want and how they want it.
Social media provides one means of building this relationship. Most 
publishers now have Facebook pages and Twitter accounts, where they share 
free content and prizes in exchange for attention and engagement: oﬀ ering fans 
an opportunity to win an iPad mini – and it’s so often an iPad mini – in return 
for their email address and their thoughts on a possible new product line.
Though social media can often be viewed as a cheap alternative to 
conventional marketing, creating this content can be labour-intensive, and 
most publishers tend to limit the amount of overt product promotion anyway, 
since a click on the ‘unfollow’ button is only ever one annoying post away. 
The better accounts focus more on building longer-term relationships with 
customers, establishing trust in the brand so that the consumer will actively 
seek out their content when the need arises.
The biggest problem for publishers with social media is their dependence 
on third parties. It can be diﬃ  cult to extract data from such platforms in 
useful quantities, and the ability to reach an audience is often dependent upon 
the latest version of the algorithm that governs precisely who sees your 
content – only a small proportion of the people who ‘like’ your page on 
Facebook will actually see your latest post, for instance.
Consequently, some publishers are building their own online 
communities, undertaking the considerable expense involved in return for 
greater control over the data created. The most successful of these communities 
oﬀ er members something they won’t get elsewhere – professional development, 
or access to an exhaustive encyclopedia for their favourite ﬁ ction genre – while 
gathering data that can be more easily aggregated and interpreted than the 
information obtained from social media. Where the value to the consumer is 
easily demonstrable, these communities may ultimately become ﬁ nancially 
self-sustaining, funding themselves from user subscriptions. For most 
publishers, however, they currently remain a marketing expense, a costly but 
rewarding exercise in gathering market intelligence and building brand loyalty.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
237
(Bloomsbury). The community has to have a purpose that matters to the people 
who the publisher is trying to reach. Sharing control is important. On the one 
hand publishers create content for and about the community, and on the other, 
value and stimulate the contributions and lively debates from community 
members. Sites are designed to attract new registrants and customers, and to 
retain membership. Many techniques are used, such as the marketing of events, 
special oﬀ ers, and membership and subscription schemes. Community sites may 
oﬀ er new revenue streams and innovatory opportunities for content sales, and 
oﬄ  ine and online services.
Designed partly to aid discoverability of content, a community can range 
from a Facebook page for an academic journal through to an online game which 
can be played alongside other fans of a character or series from around the world. 
In 2011 Orion Publishing launched the SF Gateway as a community site for sci-ﬁ  
fans whilst making available ebooks of classic sci-ﬁ  and fantasy titles. A social 
media curator encouraged visits to the site using Twitter and Facebook. In 2013 
Random House announced the launch of The Happy Foodie – its ﬁ rst ‘cookery 
vertical and responsive design website that aims to bring cookery books to life and 
help readers get happy in the kitchen’(randomhouse.co.uk). ‘Most major book 
publishers now maintain active podcast streams, featuring interviews with 
authors, extracts from forthcoming novels and occasional promotional features’ 
(Daily Telegraph, 16 February 2013), and one example is BookD from 
HarperCollins: ‘The majority of the time BookD airs its author interviews either 
on or just before publication because “the buzz generated on Twitter just makes 
so much more sense”’ (The Bookseller, 2 August 2013). Some YA publishers 
develop community sites which include writing forums.
The presence of Amazon, Apple and Google in the marketplace oﬀ ers both 
opportunities and threats to publishers. Academic publishers have welcomed the 
opportunity to display their books through Google Book Search, since they believe 
their titles have exposure they would not otherwise receive. Readers can view sample 
pages and then click through to buy the book. Amazon has such a service with 
Search Inside, and some major publishers and distributors have similar schemes.
Internet marketing does have huge potential for niche publishers. Specialist 
and academic titles are not widely stocked in high street bookstores. Publishers 
can establish special interest communities around their publications to whom 
they can directly sell their titles. For some of the well-known academic and 
specialist publishers, direct sales of their books from their websites grew quickly, 
along with sales via internet booksellers. The internet means they can keep in 
touch with their market, and mail to a highly relevant audience in a cost-eﬀ ective 
way. In academic publishing, email marketing to lecturers is a key activity.
Word-of-mouth recommendations
Publishers have long recognized that an important inﬂuence on sales is the 
elusive word of mouth (WOM). Sales are generated by trusted recommendations 
from friends, family or booksellers. Sometimes bestsellers can appear from 
nowhere, such as Captain Corelli’s Mandolin (1994) by Louis de Bernières and 
Eats, Shoots and Leaves by Lynne Truss (2003). Publishers cannot guarantee a buzz 
around a book, but they are constantly trying to encourage it through obtaining 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
238
coverage in the media (TV, radio, newspapers), spreading the word on social 
media, placing extracts pre-publication, or making sure the book is stocked 
prominently in bookshops. A long-standing method is to give books away, a tactic 
used to generate interest in Stieg Larsson by his UK publisher: ‘Mark Smith, who 
founded Quercus in 2004, became so desperate to shift copies, which some 
retailers refused to stock, he gave them away to people reading in parks – and 
planted dozens more on the back seats of taxis and on Tube trains. “At that stage 
we were giving away more than we sold,” Smith says. “It was getting pretty 
nerve-racking”’ (Independent, 6 August 2010).
Editors and marketers may tweet about a book whilst it is still in development 
in order to attract early attention. Publishers will send print or digital proofs to key 
inﬂ uencers in the Twittersphere or blogosphere in order to stimulate a 
conversation around a new title. For example, a book aimed at a female audience 
could be sent to the UK community site for parents, Mumsnet, which in 2013 had 
9 million visits per month (mumsnet.com). Bloggers on children’s/YA books are 
especially active. A viral marketing campaign may be planned – to spread an idea, 
a joke, or information.
Viral marketing involves creating a website plus a video, e-mail, mobile 
phone message, advertisement or other marketing event that is so infectious 
that customers will want to pass it along to their friends. Because customers 
pass the message or promotion along to others, viral marketing can be very 
inexpensive. And when the information comes from a friend, the recipient is 
much more likely to view or read it. (Kotler et al., page 523)
Eats, Shoots and 
Leaves by Lynne 
Truss (Profile) is an 
example of a title that 
sold by word of 
mouth
] MILLION COPIES SOW WORLDWIDE 
Eats 
& 
Shoots 
Leaves 
The Zero Tolerance Approach to Punc tua tion 
LYNNE TRUSS 
example 
example 
example 
example 
example 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
239
The success of local reading groups represents an opportunity to inﬂuence book 
sales. Publishers produce information packs and web resources around leading 
authors to encourage reading groups to adopt their titles. The Oprah Book Club in 
the USA and the Richard and Judy Book Club in the UK have given exposure, ﬁ rst 
on TV and later online, to books and authors, and have had a considerable impact 
on sales. Other inﬂuences on book sales can include winning a major literary 
prize such as the Booker (Table 10.3) or adaptation for ﬁ lm or TV. Classic as well 
as contemporary authors receive a boost to their sales when the latest adaptation 
makes it on to the screen.
The author plays a prominent part in promoting their books, from 
appearances at book signings or literary festivals to sending out ﬂyers with their 
Christmas cards and adding a link to the relevant Amazon page to their website or 
email signature. Amongst the largest literary festivals are the ones held at 
Edinburgh, Hay-on-Wye and Cheltenham. A conservative estimate in 2011 put the 
total number of literary festivals in the UK as around 250 (The Bookseller, 18 March 
2011). Lionel Shriver commented on this phenomenon: ‘If you really want to write, 
the last thing you want to be is a success. Now that every village in the United
The Five Readers 
Book Group from 
Newbury. It is 
estimated that there 
are 50,000 people in 
reading groups in the 
UK
Deckchairs for the 
Hay Festival, 
Hay-on-Wye, Wales. 
Held annually the 
festival attracts both 
writers and 
celebrities, and was 
described by Bill 
Clinton as the 
‘Woodstock of the 
mind’. The town 
boasts over 20 
bookshops selling 
both new and 
second-hand books
The Booker 
Prize for 
Fiction was 
ﬁrst awarded in 
1969, and Man 
Group became 
the sponsor of 
the prize in 
2002
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
240
Table 10.3 Man Booker Prize for ﬁction winners 2004 to 2013
Year
Author
Title
Publisher
2004
Alan Hollinghurst
The Line of Beauty
Picador
2005
John Banville
The Sea
Picador
2006
Kiran Desai
The Inheritance of Loss
Hamish Hamilton
2007
Anne Enright
The Gathering
Jonathan Cape
2008
Aravind Adiga
The White Tiger
Atlantic
2009
Hilary Mantel
Wolf Hall
4th Estate
2010
Howard Jacobson
The Finkler Question
Bloomsbury
2011
Julian Barnes
The Sense of an Ending
Jonathan Cape
2012
Hilary Mantel
Bring Up the Bodies
4th Estate
2013
Eleanor Catton
The Luminaries
Granta
Kingdom has its own literary festival, I could credibly spend my entire year, every 
year, ﬂ itting from Swindon to Peterborough to Aberdeen, jawing interminably 
about what I’ve already written – at the modest price of scalding self-disgust’ (New 
Republic, 24 October 2013).
As the novelist Jane Rogers writes:
Books are promoted to us endlessly, through adverts, reviews, adaptations, 
through glossy attention-grabbing covers in bookshops, and wild claims on 
jacket sleeves. They are set texts for exams; they are hyped by prizes and 
awards; or they are written by celebrities. But in the end, every reader knows, 
probably the most compelling reason for picking up a book which is new to 
you, is when a friend tells you, ‘Read this, it’s really good.’ (page vii)
Hilary Mantel 
became only the 
third person to win 
the Booker Prize 
twice, following on 
from Peter Carey and 
J. M. Coetzee
The top-selling 
title out of all 
the Booker 
winners is Life 
of Pi by Yann 
Martel
HILARY
MANTEL
WOLF
HALL
became only became only 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
241
Marketing ﬁction
Professor Claire Squires, Author of Marketing Literature: The making of 
contemporary writing in Britain and Director of the Stirling Centre for 
International Publishing and Communication at the University of Stirling
Publishers have always made eﬀ orts to promote, distribute and sell ﬁction, but 
the late twentieth and early twenty-ﬁrst centuries were a period of marketing 
intensiﬁcation. Campaigns for potential bestsellers combine a range of 
generic marketing materials (catalogues, point-of-sale, bound proofs) and 
targeted marketing strategies to support the journey of novels from the author 
to the eventual reader.
The traditional marketing method for ﬁction – literary journalism and press 
coverage – still has its place, but doubts about the impact of reviews on book 
sales, and the diminution of review space in most national newspapers have 
prompted publishers to attract customers in other ways. In 1969, the Booker 
Prize was established by the Publishers Association, and since this date, literary 
prizes have had a crucial impact on book sales. Alongside the rise of literary 
prizes, there has been a growing meet-the-author culture, through events in 
bookshops, libraries and literary festivals. The expansion of reading groups has 
also presented publishers with opportunities to interact with consumers, and 
print, broadcast and new media-based reading groups have pushed book sales.
The collapse of the Net Book Agreement in the UK and more recently of 
agency pricing in the USA, and competitive forces among retailers, drove 
heavy discounting practices, with ﬁ ction featuring prominently. Branding, 
however, is difﬁcult in ﬁction – titles by market-leading authors may sell 
immediately, with the help of the brand identity of cover design – but for most 
novels publishers have to work hard to diﬀ erentiate their products in a very 
crowded marketplace.
Online selling and social media are now an integral part of marketing 
ﬁ ction. Amazon’s use of customer reviews, bestseller charts, and time-limited 
sales promotions, underpin sophisticated algorithmic marketing activity. 
Metadata and data analytics are crucial tools in this environment. Shared online 
reading practices, via reading communities such as Shelfari and Goodreads, 
oﬀ er the potential for rich information to be gathered on customer behaviour.
Social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter and Pinterest provide 
opportunities for authors and publishers to interact directly with readers. New 
job roles, such as communities and web content managers, cross over editorial 
and marketing functions. A website such as Canongate.tv attempts to draw in 
readers direct to the publisher by providing additional multimedia content. 
Opportunities for crowdfunding (for example via Unbound) and crowdsourcing 
of taste-making functions (for example through sites such as HarperCollins’s 
Authonomy, and fan ﬁ ction sites) bring readers themselves into editorial and 
marketing roles, fulﬁ lling the role of ‘prosumers’. Much remains of traditional 
marketing models, but – as with all other sectors of publishing – the digital 
environment is seeing the rapid evolution of literary marketing.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
242
PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY TECHNIQUES
Before running through the promotion and publicity techniques that are 
applicable to many books, we will take a quick look at the way the marketing 
department of a consumer book publisher would set about promoting a major 
lead title. Most of the promotion budget and staﬀ  time goes on titles envisaged as 
bestsellers.
Lead consumer titles
The ﬁrst priority of marketing – many months in advance of publication – is to 
plan and undertake trade-focused promotion. The aim is to persuade the book 
trade that the book will deliver a ﬂood of customers to their stores during the set 
publication slot; that they will need to display it prominently and order large 
quantities. The central buyers of the retailers are courted. They might be invited to 
meet the famous author or visit the exotic location of the book. They are sent early 
reading copies and other devices to captivate their attention, from free gifts to 
DVDs with author interviews.
Much of the marketing budget that is directed at the book trade is spent on 
the main retailers to ensure they place the book in the prime spots in their stores 
and take it as part of their promotions (for example a summer reading campaign). 
Other techniques designed to increase their order quantities are developed, such 
as bespoke competitions for each retail chain and point of sale material to 
maximize the book’s presence in their stores. Marketing then follows through 
with their consumer-focused promotion – the big bang advertising campaign to 
potential readers occurring closer to the book’s publication. The publisher’s 
consumer marketing spend, which is known to the book trade in advance of their 
ordering, demonstrates that the publisher is backing the title to the hilt and 
reinforces the book trade’s conﬁdence to order large quantities. Meanwhile, the 
publisher’s publicist has been imaginatively engineering media interest in the 
book and author, which manifests itself around publication, alongside personal 
appearances at literary festivals and other events. A social media strategy is 
developed which it is hoped will stimulate debate about the book and its subject-
matter, or cause word-of-mouth recommendations to ripple through the 
population. The editor may have been tweeting about the development of the 
book, and this is followed by regular updates from the author and the publisher on 
the book’s content and associated promotional activities.
Children’s/YA books
Children’s books, reaching a general retail market, libraries and schools, combine 
the techniques of trade and educational publishing. The marketer creates and 
mails the catalogue, generates free publicity, organizes exhibitions, attends 
conferences and liaises with schools and libraries; and, occasionally, may dress up 
as a large, ungainly character for a delighted audience. YA titles are additionally 
marketed to adult audiences.
We now turn to the variety of techniques used more generally.
New authors 
may be 
positioned in 
terms of 
established 
writers – for 
example, the 
‘new Catherine 
Cookson’
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
243
General marketing activity
Author questionnaire
Around the time of the delivery of the manuscript, the author completes a 
questionnaire, which is returned via the editor. The author supplies personal 
information, a biography, a blurb, a short synopsis, and the book’s main selling-
points and intended readership or applicability to courses. In addition they may 
supply lists of their afﬁliations to membership organizations and online forums; 
details of blogs or websites to which they contribute; and lists of print, digital 
and broadcast media (and individuals) that might review or publicize the book. 
Well-connected authors may need to be contacted in person to gain information 
on media and other contacts. Other information could include relevant festivals, 
conferences and exhibitions.
Keywords and analytics
The identiﬁ cation and use of keywords in all marketing activities (such as in 
descriptive copy about the book, press releases and social media activity) has 
grown in importance to aid the discovery of books through the main search 
engines, social media, and retail sites such as Amazon and Waterstones. Google 
Keyword Planner can help marketers to build lists of words which attract relevant 
traﬃ  c. Words used by authors and publishers internally may not be those used by 
potential readers searching for a book. There is also a growing use of analytical 
tools, such as Google Trends, which shows interest in topics over time and the 
correlation with search terms, Facebook Analytics, and proprietary tools.
Metadata and bibliographic information
The book’s metadata is updated throughout the book’s sales life. It encompasses 
all the information associated with the publishing of the book, such as the title, 
author, formats, cover, description, subject classiﬁ cation, territorial rights, price, 
availability and reviews. It is used by search engines, social media and all 
intermediaries that help sell the book. It is essential for ﬁ ndability (when a reader 
already knows of the title) and greatly aids discoverability (when a reader happens 
upon it). The signature of the book contract with the author usually triggers the 
publisher to assign to the book the product identiﬁ er, the International Standard 
Book Number (ISBN), from the batch of numbers assigned to it by the national 
ISBN agency. An ISBN is normally given to each tradable format – in print (for 
example hardback, paperback) and digital (for example ebook) – although not 
every intermediary requires that an ebook should have an ISBN.
Supplying the main bibliographers and resellers with accurate information in 
the standard format (in the UK, BIC BASIC new title record) on each new title is 
essential. This can be done by using an agreed electronic format such as ONIX 
(Online Information Exchange).
ONIX is a family of electronic messaging standards for the communication of 
book industry product information, that share common elements. ONIX is 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
244
both a data dictionary of the elements which go to make up a product record 
and a standard means by which product data can be transmitted electronically 
by publishers to data aggregators, wholesalers, booksellers and anyone else 
involved in the sale of their publications. (internationalpublishers.org/, 
accessed 2 August 2013)
Each of the main publishing nations has its own, and diﬀ erent, book subject 
classiﬁ cation system. In 2013, the standards body EDItEUR launched a new 
system called Thema, designed to be a ‘single, international subject classiﬁ cation 
scheme for the global trade, initially alongside purely national schemes and 
perhaps eventually superseding them’ (editeur.org, accessed 8 November 2013).
The supply of rich information about a book is a low-cost means of 
promoting the title worldwide, and facilitates its ordering through the supply 
chain. Information given to the bibliographers – the main ones are Nielsen 
BookData (UK) and Bowker (USA) – nine to six months ahead of publication lists 
the new title on their electronic databases. There are diﬀ ering levels of service 
from a free listing of basic bibliographic information through to a fuller (paid for) 
description with author biographies, covers and reviews. The classiﬁ cation of 
books into subject categories diﬀ ers around the world (US publishers use BISAC 
categories published by BISG), and major retailers may use their own.
Bibliographic Data Services in the UK is a leading supplier of bibliographic 
information (data and information – rich metadata) about print books and ebooks 
to libraries and suppliers. It specializes in the promotion of new title information 
in MARC (Machine Readable Catalogue Format), a data standard used by libraries 
to store and exchange information. It also supplies the Cataloguing in Publication 
(CIP) data to the British Library’s weekly addition to the deﬁnitive British National 
Bibliography (BNB) and other products, accessed worldwide. You sometimes see 
the CIP data (and similar from the Library of Congress, USA) for an academic 
book on its title-verso page.
Legal deposit is the act of depositing published material in designated 
libraries. Publishers in the United Kingdom and Ireland have an obligation to 
deposit published material in the six legal deposit libraries, which collectively 
maintain the national published archive of the British Isles. The six libraries are:
 
▪
British Library,
 
▪
Bodleian Library, Oxford University,
 
▪
Cambridge University Library,
 
▪
National Library of Scotland in Edinburgh,
 
▪
National Library of Wales in Aberystwyth, and
 
▪
Library of Trinity College, Dublin.
The publisher’s in-house metadata includes each title’s current status (future or 
actual publication dates), current prices by format, production speciﬁ cations, 
covers, its coding by product category or subject, related products and additional 
information on each title built up over time (such as long and short promotional 
and contents copy, reviews received and association with other media releases). 
More extensive metadata will cover contractual matters, such as the rights held 
and the rights available for sale or licensed to others. The advantage of such a 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
245
database is that it is a central repository of deﬁnitive information about the 
publisher’s titles. It allows the publisher to retrieve and manipulate information 
in forms most suited to the intermediaries and end-users, in print and online 
(especially for the web catalogue).
Advance information sheet
Marketing will prepare the book’s advance information (AI) sheet, and its 
electronic equivalent, which contains bibliographic information (title, author, 
format, extent, illustrative content, hardback/paperback, ISBN, planned price and 
publication date); a synopsis, the cover blurb, and a contents list; and a biography 
of the author. The above are the book’s features, and it is important that the AI 
also sets out the book’s beneﬁts – i.e. what it will do for the purchaser or reader in 
the context of the book’s use. A dictionary will help someone with their studies or 
to work more eﬀ ectively in business. A travel guide will enable someone to make 
the best of their weekend away, giving them the key information and guidance 
they need. Is there a key beneﬁt – the book’s unique selling proposition (USP)? 
For example, for a non-ﬁction title, is it written by the leading expert in the ﬁeld; 
for an educational title, does it match the latest curriculum requirements? The key 
beneﬁts can be difﬁcult to identify when a book is coming into a crowded market, 
but the exercise is even more crucial. If there is any doubt, the editor can be 
consulted on why they commissioned the book.
The book’s description or synopsis is re-purposed in style and in length for 
diﬀ erent audiences and the places where it is read. In various forms it appears as 
the cover blurb read in bookshops; or web copy on the publisher’s or retailer’s site; 
or reduced for inclusion in an email campaign, advertisement or catalogue for 
end-users; or is versioned for the media or trade buyers, or for audiences in diﬀ erent 
countries such as the UK or USA etc. Use is made of bullet points and lists, feature 
structures and summary ﬁ rst techniques, and keywords may be tested for SEO.
The AI is sent well ahead of publication (preferably around nine months 
before) to all the people who help sell the book: the publisher’s sales force and 
overseas agents, booksellers, wholesalers and aggregators.
Cover
The cover is another promotional item used by the publisher’s home and export 
sales departments, wholesalers, library suppliers, internet booksellers and 
overseas agents. Produced well ahead of publication – preferably six to 12 months 
– it will be used to secure advance orders from bookshops. Publishers ﬁnd that 
books sell better on Amazon if they appear with a cover, and dummy front covers 
may be used when the book is ﬁrst listed, ahead of the completion of the ﬁnal 
version. The cover blurb is written by the editor, marketer, or an in-house or 
freelance copywriter.
Catalogue
Catalogue preparation is a major task: it involves gathering book information from 
all round the ﬁrm, updating it, collecting illustrations, copywriting, brieﬁng a 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
246
designer, sometimes print buying, and carrying through all the production stages, 
as well as database management. Publishers have experimented with the abolition 
of printed catalogues and stocklists, on the basis that the information can be 
accessed online. This has met with mixed success and most publishers have 
retained print versions in some form.
The twin aims of a catalogue are to present the ﬁrm and its products 
attractively to buyers – the book trade and consumers; and to act as an 
informative, readily understandable and accurate reference so that products can be 
ordered easily through the supply chain at home and abroad. Consumer book 
publishers normally produce imprint catalogues announcing their forthcoming 
books geared to their six-monthly selling cycles. The autumn/ winter catalogue 
appears in time for the preceding mid-summer sales conference; the spring/
summer catalogue appears for the preceding Christmas sales conference. 
Catalogues are distributed to all members of the supply chain and to main 
libraries, to the public (via booksellers to account customers), and to review editors 
and relevant contacts in other media.
Educational, academic, STM and professional publishers usually arrange 
their new book catalogues (and selected backlist) by subject or subject groupings. 
Diﬀ erent subject catalogues may be produced for diﬀ erent levels of the education 
system, and books within a textbook catalogue (which includes selected backlist) 
may be arranged or classiﬁed by the age group, or examination or academic level 
served. Catalogues are produced annually to cover the following year’s 
publications, or six-monthly or more frequently. Although the catalogues are 
mailed to selected booksellers, wholesalers, library suppliers and exporters, they 
are aimed primarily at teachers, academics, and professionals – those who decide 
to purchase or adopt the books. They are distributed to schools, academic libraries, 
institutions, departments; and, where appropriate, to targeted subject specialists 
or professionals, and to industry.
Reviews
It is essential to maintain an up-to-date and comprehensive database of suitable 
reviewers. Then for each title a review list is prepared, tailor-made, taking account 
of the author’s ideas and contacts. Review copies may be bound, uncorrected 
proofs, digital proofs, or printed books. They are sent out with a review slip, press 
release or email which gives the details of the title and its publication date, and 
requests a review. Any review clippings received are circulated in-house and to the 
author. Reviews have declined in importance in their inﬂuence on trade book 
sales, and greater attention has been directed to book recommendation sites, 
bloggers, social media and PR for a title. John Sutherland writes:
Old hands will hark back nostalgically to the days when Arnold Bennett could 
clear a whole edition with an enthusiastic epithet in the London Evening 
Standard. Now the literary editor, David Sexton, could disembowel himself, 
Mishima-style, on the roof of his building and it would not generate a ripple 
of interest among book buyers. (Financial Times, 9 October 2004)
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
247
Reviews can still be crucial for biographies or academic works, for example, 
where potential readers may want to gauge the quality of the work ahead of their 
purchase. Reviews on Amazon may be written by enthusiastic readers or friends 
of the author. There has been controversy over ‘sock puppets’, fake personas used 
by publishers and authors to write reviews both good and bad. In 2012 the crime 
writer Stephen Leather announced that he used sock puppets to write positive 
reviews of his own books; and another crime author, R. J. Ellory, admitted giving 
rival authors poor reviews and low ratings.
Public relations
Public relations (PR) include generating free publicity and furthering a company’s 
brand image with authors and the media. By comparison to the big budgets 
elsewhere in the marketing department, publicists operate with little direct 
expenditure. Engineering free publicity in the print and broadcast media is vital 
in consumer book publishing, and spreads word-of-mouth knowledge about the 
book. This can also come from encouraging debate and discussion in the 
blogosphere or on Twitter. For titles which do not receive marketing expenditure, 
PR can propel sales, and smaller publishers will use it to compete eﬀ ectively with 
the major players. On some major titles prior to contract, the publisher’s 
innovatory publicity ideas (and promotional spend) may persuade the author to 
write for their particular company, rather than for competitors. Publicists can 
develop strong bonds with authors, and become close friends.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
248
The publicist, also called the press and PR ofﬁcer, is in constant contact with 
press and magazine editors, journalists, radio and television producers. Their 
credibility with these contacts is crucial and will be lost if an author is pitched who 
then turns out to be poor or inappropriate. With so many books and authors 
competing for media space, a book or author has to be carefully positioned in the 
marketplace. At the manuscript stage, the publicist targets the market, and 
formulates a publicity plan to commence six months before publication. A key 
part of the task is to meet with the author and discuss their book, interests and 
promotional ideas. The publicist identiﬁes the appropriate media that would be 
interested in the book, and helps them come to a decision to cover the title by 
suggesting suitable angles. The stimulated coverage should occur around 
publication. Coverage is gained from features, author promotions which authors 
may be contractually obliged to fulﬁl – tours, literary festivals, signing sessions, 
radio and television appearances, accompanied by the publicist – press releases 
and launch parties. New authors may need coaching in media awareness and 
interview techniques. Around the time of publication, authors will appear in 
newspapers and magazines outlining their typical day or answering 
questionnaires about their likes and dislikes.
A digital campaign is planned using the author’s own online presence or 
specially created social media. For the launch of A Street Cat Named Bob by James 
Bowen in 2012, a Twitter account was set up for the ginger street cat with the 
starring role in the book, as well as a Facebook page for the book. Authors 
themselves may come up with innovative ways to promote books. For her 
collection of stories No One belongs Here More than You (2007), Miranda July 
created a website with messages written on the top of her refrigerator – the site 
was viewed more than three million times in just one week (mirandajuly.com).
Signing sessions, competitions for booksellers and joint promotions with 
booksellers, especially the main chains, are arranged in close conjunction with the 
sales department. Sales staﬀ  are warned about any impending coverage so that 
they can inform the booksellers who are thus more likely to stock the book, which 
in turn sells more copies. Major TV or ﬁlm tie-in titles receive cross-media 
promotion involving the link-up between the publisher and the media company 
for mutual beneﬁt. Film and TV adaptations work wonders for the sales of classic 
authors as well, increasing their sales by three or four times.
Other PR involves informing the trade press (in print or online) about the 
company and forthcoming titles, distributing proofs or ﬁ nished copies to 
inﬂuential people (this includes opinion formers with a huge following on 
Twitter), entering titles for literary prizes, helping to plan and attend exhibitions 
(including the publisher’s own sales conferences), maintaining contact in the UK 
with the Publishers Association, Booktrust and the British Council (all of which 
promote books) and sometimes answering queries from the public, teachers, 
librarians and booksellers.
News stories can be a good way of getting books on to the front page, or into 
the radio or television. For a major dictionary, for example, stories will be given to 
the press about the latest words to enter the language:
The Twitter-centric meaning of the term ‘tweet’ has been added to the Oxford 
English Dictionary as part of its annual revisions process. ... Standalone 
In 2013 
Facebook had 
1.1 bn active 
users
In 2013 1 bn 
tweets were 
sent every 2.5 
days
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
249
Marketing
For all roles in marketing an interest in the ﬁrm’s books and the ability to 
identify the editorial reasoning and sales potential are necessary. Creativity is 
important in the area of promotional ideas, as well as an understanding of the 
relationships between costs and expected sales in maximizing the proﬁt 
potential of each title, within budget. Marketing is a strategic activity, and 
knowledge is required of competitive behaviour and the market environment. 
Familiarity with social media and how it can be used to best eﬀ ect is required, 
and web and IT skills are desirable. There are now specialist digital roles in 
the areas of website management, online publicity and community 
development. Good personal relations inside the company (particularly with 
editors) and outside the company (for example with authors or the media) are 
vital, as are administrative and planning skills. Qualiﬁcations can be obtained 
through the Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM).
The development of promotional material and online content engages 
copywriting (which can be learnt by literate people who appreciate the diﬀ erent 
styles demanded for diﬀ erent platforms and audiences), editorial, production 
and InDesign skills. PR work involves living on one’s wits, exchanging favours 
with the media, establishing a rapport and trust with all kinds of media and 
authors, knowing when to hype and when to hold back, being able to talk 
oneself in and out of situations fast, having supreme self-conﬁdence and a high 
tolerance of rude people and working anti-social hours.

S

I L L S
additions tend to revolve around pop culture, tech and current aﬀ airs. They 
include: dad dancing, epic, ﬁ scal cliﬀ , ﬂ ash mob, follow, geekery, pay day 
lending and the silent treatment. Other notable newcomers are: fracking, tray 
bake, eggy bread, BDSM, and search engine optimisation. (Wired, 17 June 2013)
Serial rights
In consumer book publishing, publicity staﬀ  instead of the rights department may 
sell serial rights to their contacts in the press and magazines. Extracts or serials 
should appear around book publication and produce income and publicity. (See 
also Chapter 12.)
Paid-for promotion
Point-of-sale (POS) material
Eye-catching material – posters, display kits, copy holders, presenters, brochures, 
badges, etc. – is designed to focus booksellers’ and readers’ attention on major 
books, series or brand imprints; to make shops more enticing; and to capture 
display space both at home and abroad. Produced mainly for consumer books (but 
sometimes for major reference books and textbooks), most is declined or thrown 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
250
away by booksellers. Nevertheless, it shows the publisher’s commitment to the 
book and assists advance selling to the book trade and customers abroad. 
Sometimes a publisher may provide major retailers with spinners or special 
shelving for a series, but books are usually displayed on tables or standard 
shelving in the larger shops within the retailer’s set of categories.
Media advertising
For most books, the high cost of advertising in the press, magazines, online, or on 
television or radio, or by poster would not be recouped by the sales generated. It 
has to be used very selectively, and short-lived, large-scale consumer advertising is 
restricted to major consumer books. In times of budget restrictions, advertising 
spend is often readily cut. The large publishers spend most of their budget on 
press and outdoor advertising, especially adverts on the London Underground and 
buses. Although its eﬀ ectiveness is intangible, it encourages the book trade to buy 
and display the book and pleases authors and agents. Non-ﬁ ction, academic and 
STM publishers advertise selectively in specialist magazines and websites, and 
journals (especially their own) – ostensibly to sell books, but also to please authors 
and attract new ones.
The main tasks involved in advertising are conceiving selling ideas from 
editorial concepts, relating advertising to the other promotions, copywriting and 
working with the designer or agency, negotiating the best rates and positions, and 
maintaining tight budgetary control. In 2011 the top ﬁ ve consumer publishers all 
spent over £1 m on advertising, with Random House spending over £2 m.
Table 10.4 Media spend in 2011 by consumer publishers (source: Mintel, 2012)
Media type
Marketing spend £000
Proportion of total 
marketing spend (%)
Outdoor
6,911
40
Press
4,933
29
Direct mail
2,717
16
TV
1,304
8
Internet
848
5
Radio
398
2
Cinema
48
Total
17,159
Marketing on social media is sometimes called marketing by consent. It aims 
to attract attention while not interrupting the conversation. However, paid for 
advertising on social media is another tool to aid discoverability and word of mouth. 
It aims to increase visibility on search rankings, or on Twitter to resonate tweets.
Direct marketing
The preparation and mailing of brochures or email campaigns direct to targeted 
specialist audiences forms a large part of the work of promotion staﬀ  in 
educational, academic, STM and professional publishers. The relevant audience 
Outdoor 
advertising for 
books includes 
ads on London 
buses
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
251
could be teachers in schools, university lecturers and librarians, or business and 
legal professionals. Alongside mailed subject catalogues (and to some extent 
reviews) it is the main promotional means by which these groups can learn about 
new and related backlist titles (monographs are normally promoted only once). 
Together with the editor, the marketer works out the scope of the market, the best 
approach, what kind of mailing piece is appropriate including email, the time it 
should be distributed (usually around publication) and to whom, deciding which 
mailing list to use – all within the allocated budget.
The marketer writes the copy, often designs it, and carries through the 
production stages. Depending on the export arrangements, material may be sent 
direct to libraries, teachers, academics and booksellers in selected countries. Other 
promotional material includes ﬂyers or showcards which authors can distribute or 
display at conferences, exhibitions or other events.
Textbook promotion
Teachers and academics are unlikely to prescribe a book for student use unless 
they have examined a copy ﬁrst. Titles that are expected to be ordered in bulk for 
schools or placed on a reading list of books which students should buy (excluding 
monographs and professional reference titles) are displayed in catalogues or 
emails inviting a request to view. Inspection copies can be ordered or downloaded 
from the publisher’s website. The teacher, having placed the order, is asked to 
supply comments on the suitability of the book. If the book is adopted for student 
purchase, the lecturer is asked whether it is the core text or to be used alongside 
other titles, or merely recommended, and to ﬁll in the number of students on the 
course and the name of the supplier. If adopted, the recipient keeps the book for 
free; if not, they pay for it or return it – although policies diﬀ er according to the 
publisher. Some publishers will send unsolicited free desk copies of textbooks to 
inﬂuential teachers; or access may be given to the digital version. The feedback 
and response rates are used for market research. In academic publishing the 
information is passed to the sales staﬀ , who contact lecturers directly and alert the 
campus booksellers through which the books are purchased and the library, which 
may order copies. Textbook publishers of all levels build databases of adoptions 
(institution, course, student numbers) for subsequent follow-up and targeting. In 
school textbook publishing the schools ordering class sets directly are recorded.
Lecturers’ reading lists, which may be available on the internet, are the key 
determinant in a student’s choice of books. According to a research study for The 
Publishers Association in 2005, 83 per cent of students who received a strong 
textbook recommendation from their lecturer purchased a book, compared to 30 
per cent of those who received a weak recommendation (Carpenter et al.). The 
research showed a low propensity to buy books which are not recommended – 74 
per cent said they had not bought any other new books.
Direct sales
Most print books are sold via booksellers (including Amazon) to end-users. 
Some booksellers, especially the specialist, sell by mail order and may produce 
catalogues. Internet booksellers, book clubs, and direct selling companies are the 
In order to 
write effective 
copy, a useful 
acronym to 
remember is 
AIDA: 
attention, 
interest, desire, 
action
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
252
main direct sales channels. But some publishers sell a proportion, or indeed a 
major proportion, of their products directly to end-users.
Consumer publishers rarely solicit direct print orders because until recently 
most are unable to identify readers and addresses, and many of their books are 
priced for the retail outlets, too low for their distribution systems to supply one 
paperback book cost eﬀ ectively by mail order. Publishers may use Amazon or 
other distributors to sell direct-to-consumer. However, in so doing the publisher 
passes the important customer data to the retailer. Readers of ebooks are usually 
tied to a particular retailer’s ecosystem, and this discourages direct purchases 
from the publisher. There are companies, notably Harlequin in the area of 
romance, which have built a direct relationship with their consumers and have a 
high proportion of their ebook sales from their website. The development of a 
community around content also encourages direct sales.
College textbook publishers, in response to declining campus sales and the 
growth of internet purchasing, have attempted to encourage direct purchase by 
oﬀ ering incentives to students. The publishers of specialist online services sell 
directly to deﬁned professional markets (for example legal, accountancy, ﬁnance 
and business), although some of their print products pass through booksellers 
and library suppliers. The academic and STM publishers likewise actively solicit 
direct orders – or through intermediaries – of high-level books from academics, 
scientists and professionals. Publisher displays at conferences can also be an 
eﬀ ective method of reaching these markets.
Academic publishers promote their journals or databases directly to 
researchers and librarians primarily to secure institutional subscriptions from 
libraries. The bundling of packages of journals now leads librarians to choose 
packages that oﬀ er the best value. However, journal publishers also oﬀ er 
subscriptions at much lower rates for personal use, which are supplied directly. 
Their aim is to convert personal subscriptions into full-priced institutional 
subscriptions. The schools market is ideal for the direct marketing of books 
and new media, since schools may buy multiple copies with repeat purchases 
direct from the publisher. Discounts are given by quantity rather than to any 
intermediary.
The vehicle for direct marketing may be an email, space advertisement, 
website information, an insert in a magazine or book, or a mailed item (a 
catalogue or leaﬂet and personalized letter) or an app. Whatever the means, the 
marketer encourages direct purchase (sometimes by special oﬀ ers) and includes 
a response facility which eases ordering and payment (by freepost, telephone, 
or email, and using a credit card) or which facilitates, for example, a journal 
subscription via the library. By assessing the response rates, direct marketing 
allows the statistical testing of the eﬀ ectiveness of diﬀ erent oﬀ ers and creative 
approaches (such as the design of the email, letter or leaﬂet), their timing and 
frequency, and of the vehicle.
The mailing list is of prime importance. It should be accurate, up-to-date, 
and appropriate for the product. List brokers may be used, lists are rented or 
acquired free, and are tested initially. Lists may be gathered from ﬁrms which 
specialize in constructing lists in educational, academic and professional areas, 
from associations, journal subscribers, and conference delegates, and from 
authors. In time the best lists are the publisher’s own, built from successive sales 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
253
and recorded and coded into the publisher’s own database or customer 
relationship management (CRM) system. In the UK lists must be held in 
accordance with the Data Protection Act. Sometimes they are rented from, or to, 
other publishers. The most likely customers are targeted regularly with the most 
appropriate titles, and varying amounts are spent to acquire and keep diﬀ erent 
levels of customer. The publisher’s author base may be a fruitful set of contacts.
Postal mailings can still be done very cheaply and, for example, some 
publishers use mail houses in India. While email provides a highly cost-eﬀ ective 
method of mailing, companies must ensure that its use stays within the law. The 
advice from the Information Commissioner’s Ofﬁce in the UK is that:
email, text, picture and video marketing messages are all considered to be 
‘electronic mail’ ... You cannot transmit, or instigate the transmission of, 
unsolicited marketing material by electronic mail to an individual subscriber 
unless they have previously notiﬁ ed you, the sender, that they consent, for the 
time being, to receiving such communications. (ico.gov.uk, accessed 4 
August 2013)
Direct marketing sells books quickly (most feedback is usually in weeks, not 
many months) and a response rate of 1 or 2 per cent would be thought a success, 
depending on the costs and type of book, though rates of up to 5, 10 or 15 per cent 
plus are possible. If poorly executed, much money can be lost even though the 
books are sold at full price or at a modest discount. Telemarketing, by a 
publisher’s own staﬀ  or by a retained agency, is sometimes used to follow up a 
mailshot, for example, to reach teachers and professionals at their place of work. It 
may be used to follow up renewals of journals and online reference subscriptions.
Analytics
The role of data analytics has grown with the explosive availability of data. If the 
publisher does not collect data, it cannot be analysed. Digital marketing especially 
lends itself to scrutiny. For example, the design of emails eﬀ ects response rates or 
the timing of tweets to maximize re-tweets. There are many tools available to 
monitor social media activity in relation to a publisher and its authors and books. 
Direct contact with customers allows the recording of traﬃ  c and referrals, and the 
assessment of publicity campaigns by channel. Readers’ activity on a publisher’s 
website can be monitored to assess where they come from, what their behaviour 
is and how they are converted to do something, in order to collect and segment 
information about them. Resulting transactional data impacts back on marketing 
strategies. Publishers that have built strong direct contacts with large numbers of 
customers, say teachers in schools, use Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) systems to segment their customers and to plan marketing activities. The 
internal relationships between marketing, sales and customer services continue to 
develop.
Best practice is 
to ask 
individuals to 
opt in to 
receiving 
marketing 
messages 
rather than opt 
out
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Marketing
254
Now read this
Alison Baverstock, How to Market Books, 5th edition, Routledge, 2014.
Philip Kotler, Gary Armstrong, Lloyd C. Harris and Nigel Piercy, Principles of 
Marketing, 6th European Edition, Pearson, 2013.
Sources
Philip Carpenter, Adrian Bullock and Jane Potter, ‘Textbooks in Teaching and 
Learning: The views of students and their teachers’, Brookes eJournal of 
Learning and Teaching, 2:1 (October 2006).
Jenny Hartley, The Reading Groups Book, revised edition, Oxford University 
Press, 2002.
Mintel, Book and E-book Market Research, September 2012.
National Literacy Trust, Children’s and Young People’s Reading Today: Findings 
from the 2011 annual survey, 2012.
Nielsen BookScan, Travel Publishing Year Book (2012).
Angus Phillips, ‘How Books Are Positioned in the Market’, in Nicole 
Matthews and Nickianne Moody (eds), Judging a Book by Its Cover: Fans, 
publishers, designers, and the marketing of ﬁ ction, Ashgate, 2007.
Angus Phillips, ‘Jane Austen Gets a Makeover’, Logos, 18:2, 2007.
Angus Phillips, Turning the Page: The evolution of the book, Routledge, 2014.
Al Ries and Jack Trout, Positioning: The battle for your mind, McGraw-Hill, 
2001.
Jane Rogers (ed.), Good Fiction Guide, Oxford University Press, 2001.
John Sutherland, ‘Brave New World’, Financial Times, 9 October 2004.
Felicity Wood, ‘The Mighty Booth’, The Bookseller, 2 August 2013.
Web resources
www.anobii.com Online reading community.
www.bookmarketingsociety.co.uk Book Marketing Society.
www.consumerbarometer.com How people research and shop for books.
www.goodreads.com Site for readers and book recommendations.
www.jellybooks.com A web app for exploring, sampling and sharing books .
www.klout.com Klout – helps marketers to identify and engage with top 
inﬂ uencers.
www.lboro.ac.uk/microsites/infosci/lisu/ Statistics from LISU on libraries in 
the UK.
www.literacytrust.org The National Literacy Trust is a UK charity ‘dedicated to 
building a literate nation’.
www.literaryfestivals.co.uk Literary festivals in the UK.
www.themanbookerprize.com Man Booker Prize for Fiction.
www.mediauk.com Media UK contacts database.
www.publisherspublicitycircle.co.uk Publishers Publicity Circle – holds monthly 
meetings for publicists from publishers and freelance PR agencies.
www.socialmention.com Social Mention – social media search engine.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 11
Sales and distribution
While it is the job of marketing to understand the needs of the market and 
promote books to the relevant audiences, it is sales staﬀ  who stimulate the 
visibility of products and their demand through the various channels to market. 
They realize income by sustained and regular face-to-face selling to key 
intermediaries. The roles within sales, distribution and marketing continue to be 
transformed by changes in the retailing of printed books and ebooks through 
intermediaries, and by the rise of direct marketing and attempts by publishers to 
sell to end-users. A combination of the dominance of the internet booksellers (for 
example Amazon), the shift of bookselling chains to central buying, frontlist sales 
through supermarkets and the decline of independent bookselling, has led to a 
change in focus of sales staﬀ  in recent years. Publishers maintain key roles selling 
to the main accounts, but have drastically reduced the number of ﬁeld sales 
representatives (reps) who visit bookshops and have created new in-house roles in 
direct selling, website or platform development and data analytics. They also use 
third parties such as sales and merchandising agencies. It is also important for 
publishers to ensure that their books are listed online with suﬃ  cient metadata, 
and to deploy search engine optimization as a way of attracting purchasers.
In the area of print and ebook distribution, the larger publishers run their 
own operations. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) usually use third 
parties – larger publishers or independent distributors. Publishers typically derive 
most of their sales revenue from a small number of customers, and small revenue 
from a great number. This so-called Pareto eﬀ ect suggests that 20 per cent of 
customers might account for 80 per cent of total sales.
SALES
In consumer publishing, a big order from a supermarket can still put a book 
amongst the bestsellers, and high street booksellers remain important for the 
visibility of books. But Amazon has taken market share for print and come to 
dominate in the area of ebooks. The internet provides a route to sell the ‘long tail’ 
– the books that are not regularly stocked in bookshops (see Chapter 13) – and 
smaller publishers have found they can compete eﬀ ectively online. Customers 
searching online for a relevant title can come across slow-selling backlist titles as 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
256
well as the current bestsellers. Since independent booksellers rely on the trade 
wholesalers with their own sales forces, many have lost face-to-face contact with 
publishers. However, they may deal with selected publishers from which they 
receive higher discounts than from wholesalers.
With Western markets relatively mature, publishers look to Eastern and 
Southern markets to boost sales of English language editions. Export sales staﬀ  
will make visits to key markets and use local distributors and agents. If the market 
is sufﬁciently strong, the company may set up its own ofﬁce, which may be a sales 
and marketing oﬃ  ce or possibly a full local publishing company. Publishers may 
also have joint ventures – companies set up in partnership with domestic 
publishers. This would normally be where the local laws do not allow wholly 
owned foreign investment, or where local company expertise is necessary to 
penetrate the market. Alternatively the English language publisher may want to 
sell the rights to their books (see Chapter 12) or enter into copublication deals 
– where they co-operate with domestic companies on particular projects.
Sales forecasting and inventory control
Sales forecasting and translating them into the actual number to print of a book at 
the outset, especially one of expected high sales volume, is part of the risk decision 
for the publisher. The view of the sales department is critical. Too high an initial 
print run would lead to a large stock write-oﬀ  if the book does not sell; printing too 
few and being unable to fulﬁl demand quickly enough on reprint would lead to 
lost sales and antagonize the book trade and readers. For consumer book 
publishers, the all-important Christmas market of short intensity is the most 
difﬁcult to predict, with surprise and often quirky bestsellers popping up each 
year. In the UK, on super Thursdays (in late September and early October) 
hundreds of hardback Christmas titles are published (often three times the 
monthly average): ‘It’s a seasonal harbinger as reliable as the depressing 
appearance of the ﬁ rst high-street Christmas trees. In a three-week autumn 
frenzy, publishers blanket shelves virtual and real with the books that will compete 
in the lucrative Christmas charts’ (Independent, 27 September 2012).
In theory, the sales department of a consumer book publisher should receive 
the orders from the book trade three months ahead of publication – in practice, 
orders often arrive after the publisher has set the print run quantity. Therefore 
the publisher has to forecast. The management of the sales department has 
conventionally based their forecasts on judgement and experience, historic data 
of the ﬁrm’s similar books, and the conversations they have held with the book 
trade’s senior buyers. More recently they have the aid of forecasting software, 
either the publisher’s own or supplied by specialist ﬁrms; and historic and 
real-time data of actual book sales made through retailers, as supplied by Nielsen 
BookScan. Publishers are increasingly using analytics to work out the optimum 
combination of price and revenue, and may opt for a short initial run so that they 
can gauge the likely balance of sales between pbook and ebook. The ability of 
printers to deliver smaller quantities quickly has also ameliorated the publisher’s 
risk of over-stocks, while print on demand and ebooks enable books to remain 
available without inventory costs.
Rights sales are 
covered 
separately in 
Chapter 12
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
257
Tom Holman writes:
Plenty of printing decisions are still based on what publishers hope they will 
sell rather than cold calculation – but the availability of high quality data and 
market intelligence means predicting demand has become a much more 
exact science. The improvements are due in large part to the rise of Nielsen 
BookScan, which has given publishers far more accurate records of how many 
copies of their books are selling, as well as where and when. Basing future sales 
on past performance isn’t always reliable, but publishers credit BookScan with 
transforming forecasting. Combined with the publisher’s own sales data, it has 
reduced the likelihood of rash overprints, improved the timeliness of reprints 
and cut back on returns. (The Bookseller, 9 February 2007)
The international college textbook publishers, academic and STM publishers face the 
challenge of managing stock levels in their warehouses throughout the world and the 
shipping of stock between them. For example, the UK sales ofﬁce in the early new 
year would have forecast the adoption demand of a college textbook in the UK and 
northern Europe to be purchased by students in the autumn and would have the stock 
(printed overseas during the summer) to meet that demand. But what if, in 
September, at the critical UK buying period, another publishing centre overseas 
receives an unexpected and large direct order from an institution, likely to be repeated 
annually thereafter, which they cannot fulﬁl? The stock earmarked for the UK and 
Europe is immediately shipped out of the UK to the overseas centre, dangerously 
lowering the UK stock levels. But they may have other warehouses elsewhere with 
small quantities of available stock from which they can replenish the UK.
How sales data can inform publishing decisions
Richard Knight, Before his retirement Richard was Business 
Development Director of Nielsen BookScan
Publishers have had to adapt to a market that contains both physical and 
digital product and it is imperative that they understand the interaction 
between both product formats. The economics of printing books is changing 
radically as smaller print runs are needed due to digital penetration. Analysis 
of the data from physical sales is required alongside an understanding of the 
penetration of digital products. The use of normalized sales data is the only 
accurate and cost-eﬀ ective way to ensure that publishers achieve the balanced 
market view they require.
The principal beneﬁ ts to publishers from accurate weekly physical book 
sales data have been:
 
▪
The ability to size categories and genres accurately so that better ROI 
predictions can be made.
 
▪
Controlling inventory through better print and reprint decisions. This area 
is even more important in the digital era because print volumes still 
dominate signiﬁ cantly over digital copies but are reducing year on year.
 
▪
Spotting genres that have suddenly burst into life – erotic or vampire ﬁ ction 
for example. Early adopters into these growth spikes can beneﬁ t hugely.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
258
 
▪
In the academic and trade non-ﬁ ction sectors, monitoring sales will allow 
a determination of when or if a new edition should be published. It also 
allows a publisher to see how a competitor’s edition is performing and 
then plan the launch of a new title or reprint of an existing edition.
 
▪
Comparing the number of copies distributed into the market against 
actual sales from the market allows for an estimate of the level of 
‘stock-in-trade’, which will then indicate the likely scale of returns.
 
▪
Analysis of average sales prices for diﬀ erent formats, and the percentage 
of the market taken at each price point will inform which format is most 
likely to succeed.
 
▪
Comparison of market shares – you might believe you have been 
successful but with sales data analysis you can prove this.
The tracking of sales of digital products is in its infancy but the need to verify 
category or genre size and the proportion of digital and physical products 
within the category is paramount to a successful sales campaign. In the digital 
product area the key beneﬁ ts of sales data derive from:
 
▪
The identiﬁ cation of category sizes and the physical split between 
physical and digital products.
 
▪
How the above is changing over time: is digital product penetration static 
or growing or shrinking – and at what rate?
 
▪
Price point comparisons between digital and physical product.
 
▪
Analysis of discounts given to consumers, and the eﬀ ect on sales of price 
changes.
 
▪
Digital format analysis – which ﬁ le formats are dominant?
Roles in the sales department
The sales director, usually supported by a UK sales manager and an export sales 
manager, plans and organizes the sales eﬀ ort, and negotiates the terms of trade 
with the main customers. At the most senior level, the negotiation of terms 
imposed by Amazon, Apple and others is exceptionally diﬃ  cult and fraught. The 
sales management comments on editors’ new book proposals – forecasting sales 
and advising on pricing. They are involved in decisions on covers, discussions 
around marketing campaigns, and the management of stock, especially of key 
titles. In consumer publishing, the sales management may use the technique of 
dynamic pricing for ebooks, for example lowering prices for a limited period to 
stimulate titles showing a decline in sales. The large publishing houses now 
employ specialists in pricing and analytics.
Key account managers will present all new titles six months ahead of 
publication to the buyers of key accounts, and discuss the plans for promotions to 
be run by the publisher and retailer. Co-op promotions to increase book visibility 
may be based around special price oﬀ ers, summer reading or back to school 
campaigns. There are changing policies amongst the chains when it comes to the 
delegation of buying decisions to branch buyers, but most buy centrally and roll 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
259
(or scale) out order quantities to their branches. Scale-outs will always apply to 
major new books and promotions but the local managers might still have the 
ability to increase orders. Supermarkets buy centrally from publishers and stock 
may then be delivered via wholesalers.
Another sales role is the manager who undertakes so-called ‘special sales’ to 
customers beyond the traditional book trade, such as to non-book wholesalers, 
non-book retailers, direct sales companies (such as the Book People), newspapers 
and magazines (for example cover mounts), and sometimes to remainder or 
promotion book imprints. Non-book retailers are unlikely to have the skill or time 
to select titles. Some publishers operate vendor managed inventory systems for 
them. In academic, STM and professional publishing, special sales encompass 
direct supply deals made with institutions and businesses, such as bulk sales of 
textbooks to universities. Special editions may be customized and printed for 
companies to give away to staﬀ  or their customers. Pharmaceutical companies 
purchase reprints of journal articles for distribution to medics. Furthermore, 
some STM, reference and directory publishers sell advertising space in their 
books and journals to supplement their income; and on their websites (though 
advertising revenue is much lower than for print).
The licensing of content (ebooks, journals and databases) to libraries 
(public, school, university and corporate) is exceedingly complex. The large STM 
publishers license their content directly. Other publishers use one or more of the 
aggregation companies supplying the library sectors, through which the licensing 
and distribution are controlled – the licensing and loan usage models are under 
constant evolution.
In medium to large publishers the UK market sales manager (supported by 
in-house staﬀ ) runs the sales force. Small publishers may not be able to aﬀ ord the 
high cost of employing their own reps, in which case they will normally hire the 
services of a freelance sales force. If a publisher employs its own full-time reps, 
each one will cover a discrete area (a territory), and is supplied with a car, a laptop/
tablet, and receives expenses and a salary. Some publishers, more often the 
consumer ﬁrms, pay bonuses for exceeding sales targets. The reps usually live in 
their territories and meet together with the in-house staﬀ  only at the sales 
conferences (two to four times per year), where they learn about the new books, 
promotional plans and priorities. The reps are sent or can access all the 
promotional material (advance information sheets, jackets and covers), publicity 
and marketing details, and feedback orders and reports on their activities, and on 
the response of customers.
If the publisher chooses the freelance option they will expect to pay between 
10 and 15 per cent commission on their net sales. The sales force will work in 
exactly the same way as an in-house sales team, and will expect the same level of 
information and sales material. The downside of this arrangement is that the reps 
will be selling in many other lists and so the publisher will not necessarily be 
given any special treatment. Equally there are no hidden costs, and the more the 
team sells, the more they earn.
Sales staﬀ  keep in constant contact with intermediary buyers through email 
and telephone, for example by alerting them to new titles dropped into the 
publishing schedule or titles receiving media and social media attention. Some 
companies have their own telesales specialists to support and complement the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
260
ﬁ eld force or outsource the activity; in the area of academic publishing this 
activity is carried out by the reps. Telesales are also used to reach accounts that 
are not cost-eﬀ ective to visit, not primarily booksellers, or too geographically 
remote. Calling can be focused on new and backlist titles and brands, taking 
orders from regular buyers or speculative cold calling, as well as conducting 
market research.
The management of the sales channels is vital. Each channel to market oﬀ ers 
diﬀ erent sales prospects and margins. Some imprints, brands or individual titles 
are more suitable for some channels than others. Furthermore the management 
of the channels is aﬀ ected by the publisher’s distribution arrangements. Whilst 
physical retail has been in decline, accounts are managed with the growing 
number of internet retailers and distributors, and aggregators supplying products 
to institutional and corporate markets, some of which are specialist. In order to 
sell the publisher’s books, internet retailers need to be supplied over six months in 
advance with rich and correct metadata.
Terms of sale
Publishers sell books to retailers on the following terms. The deﬁnitions are 
open to variation, but the important distinction is between ﬁrm orders and sale 
or return. The risk for publishers is lower with ﬁrm orders, while the risk for 
booksellers is lowered if there is the guarantee that they can return unsold stock. 
If a book is returned to the publisher, the bookseller usually pays for the return 
delivery, unless otherwise agreed.
Firm orders
On ﬁrm orders the bookseller agrees to accept the books, to pay for them 
(preferably on one month’s credit, unless otherwise agreed) and not to return 
them for credit. Powerful booksellers will request a higher discount on ﬁrm sales 
and are likely to be more cautious on the quantity ordered. Firm orders are 
typically used by publishers on direct bulk sales to organizations (for example 
education and corporate).
Sale or return
Most booksellers will want to operate on the basis of sale or return to ensure they 
are not left with unsold stock. Within a speciﬁed period they can return books 
(provided that they are in saleable condition) for credit, or in exchange for other 
books. The bookseller’s account is invoiced at the time of supply, and payment is 
due at the expiry of the agreed credit period (which could be between 30 and 
90 days).
The terms of trade between publishers and their customers – discounts, 
credit periods and levels of returns – are subject to regular negotiation. As the 
large retailers have gained in strength, the consumer publishers essentially trade 
with them on a sale or return basis on longer credit terms. Discounts are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 13, page 308.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
261
Ebooks
The problem of returns is solved with the sale of ebooks, but there are still issues 
to be sorted out around the terms of trade. The wholesale model is prevalent 
with set discounts given to intermediaries, and there have been controversial 
experiments with the agency model (see Chapter 2, page 38). The ebook is sold 
under licence from the publisher to either the intermediary, which then licences 
to the end purchaser, or directly to the consumer.
Selling in and selling through
It is important to realize that sales staﬀ  do not merely walk into the head ofﬁces 
of the chains or into individual shops with a bag of new titles to sell, authorize 
the return of unsold books and leave. In a rapidly changing world, aﬀ ecting 
publishing and retailing, and of changing consumer preferences, the retailers 
must concentrate their time and eﬀ ort on marketing and selling the right titles 
to their customers. The role of the rep or key account manager extends to 
representing the constituent parts of the publisher – the sales and marketing 
departments, and the editorial thinking behind projects – to the retailers, and 
helping them market and sell to their customers eﬀ ectively.
Key account managers will discuss forthcoming titles with the major 
booksellers, looking to push those books most suitable for each. Sometimes a 
book is seen as, for example, a Waterstones title, one that could do especially well 
in their shops. Promotional plans will be discussed, both those planned by the 
publishers and suitable promotions being run by the bookseller. Promise of a 
sizeable spend on marketing can be required to get a title taken seriously by the 
major chains. While a retailer may bear the cost of a promotion themselves, more 
often extra discount is required from the publisher to secure a place for a book in 
a promotion, and co-op payments may be required from the publisher to secure a 
prime position in a chain’s Christmas campaign or similar.
A consumer publisher’s senior in-house staﬀ  see the main book buyers twice 
a year around nine months ahead of the main seasons – in February/March for 
September to January titles, in August/September for the February to August 
titles. They prioritize the lead titles which are part of major promotions, discuss 
other new books and important backlist. Monthly presentations to the key 
accounts follow, around ﬁve months ahead of publication. Frequency of 
presentations varies among publishers.
What has changed the practice of selling in is the widespread use of sales 
data. Booksellers can check on an author’s track record, and will not be impressed 
by wild claims by the publisher. When they are unsure about a new title, they will 
want to check the author’s previous sales to ﬁrm up their opinion. As Kate 
Kellaway writes,
In the past, publishers could fudge sales ﬁgures. Now, thanks to Nielsen 
BookScan, there is nowhere to hide. It is possible to look up sales data 
on any novelist faster than you can say Zadie Smith. And if a book ﬂops 
commercially, or, to use publishing parlance, ‘doesn’t work’, a postmortem 
can be briskly conducted. Equally, if it does ‘break out’ (desperado publishing 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
262
slang for success), the scale of its popularity can be precisely assessed. 
(Guardian, 25 March 2007)
Those ﬁeld reps who do visit individual accounts will keep a ﬁle on customers, 
listing their interests and opening hours. By appointment, they visit mainly 
booksellers – the branches of the chains and signiﬁcant independents – any 
wholesalers or library suppliers within their areas, and other outlets which justify 
the high cost of calling. The reps prepare their own folders with clear plastic 
sleeves containing neatly placed covers, and other information to show buyers. 
The folder contains the covers of forthcoming books over, for instance, the 
following six months, and the lead titles are usually at the front. They use the 
folder as a visual aid to sell books on subscription (in advance), and the catalogue
Sales
Common features of all good sales staﬀ  are their energy, self-motivation and 
discipline which get them out of bed very early, and help them work long hours. 
They need a strong knowledge of print and digital markets, and competitor 
activity. On meeting buyers of diﬀ ering levels of seniority, sales staﬀ  need to be 
alert and make a good ﬁrst impression. Listening and watching they adjust their 
selling style and procedure to a buyer’s character and mood. They need to be 
ﬂexible, pitching their style within a range from soft to hard sell, and sense 
when – and when not – to talk. They are part amateur psychologist, part actor. 
Strong negotiation skills are required, especially when dealing with key 
accounts, and they should present their ﬁrms honestly, be diplomatic and have 
authority. When a buyer asks for special terms, or some other favour, a sales 
manager must be able to make decisions which are best for the company but 
at the same time attractive for the customer. Their marketing and customer 
service skills give the publisher a competitive edge.
Field reps should have clean driving licences and be happy to drive many 
miles. Being alone, they need to be well organized to keep up with the emails 
and manage their own time. A good ﬁeld rep knows the books and the 
customers’ businesses and their customer proﬁles, interests and systems. 
Although reps are given priorities, their skill is to determine which books are 
best for their area and each outlet, and what size of order is suitable. They 
gain the conﬁdence and respect of buyers by recommending books that prove 
themselves. Educational and college reps (also called consultants) must have a 
lively interest in education and the ability to get on well with the kind of 
people in those professions and understand their attitudes, mindsets and the 
conﬂicting pressures they work under. Overt hard selling is inappropriate. 
Rather they need to be able to talk about the problems faced by teachers, 
the kinds of materials used, and the ways a teacher likes to use them, and 
then have to be able to suggest and promote suitable products – as well as 
demonstrate online and other resources. In the higher education sector they 
need to understand the purchasing systems of the institutions, as well as give 
sales presentations and product demonstrations.

S

I L L S
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
263
for covering the backlist. Tablets may be used to display covers and marketing 
materials and there are interactive catalogues such as the Edelweiss system – 
bespoke catalogues can be created for individual stores. Reps rarely carry ﬁnished 
copies, apart from exceptions such as children’s illustrated books. A high level of 
connectivity allows the reps to provide current information on stock availability, 
order status, and sales history, and to send information, such as orders and 
reports, back to their publishers in the evening. Reps may tweet or blog about 
their favourite titles; they can also use social media to pick up on trends to pass on 
to buyers.
A rep’s aim is to obtain advance orders (or subscriptions) on forthcoming 
books usually three months ahead of publication from all the main bookshops, 
in time to inform the print run decision. As most independents place orders 
electronically, and not through the reps, the reps want the orders to be sent to 
their publishers, not via higher discount wholesalers. During a call they will 
cover the new books to be published in a certain period. However, smaller and 
infrequently visited bookshops may be sold new books post-publication.
The meeting with the bookshop buyer takes place in an ofﬁce, the stock room 
or on the shop ﬂoor. The ﬁrst few minutes are spent discussing trade gossip and 
the shop. Reps provide the main contact between booksellers and publishers, and 
should be able to supply the most recent information on all the ﬁrm’s titles and to 
determine what information would be useful, and what marketing and 
promotions the bookseller could use.
The rep usually leads oﬀ  with a major, strongly promoted title. The prime aim 
is to put the buyer in a positive buying frame of mind. Two to three minutes are 
spent in presenting a lead title. Showing the cover and the AI, the rep talks about 
the book and author, covering such aspects as its contents, what part of the market 
it is aimed at, why it is good, previous books by the author, the promotion, and 
sometimes the competition. Although more time is devoted to the main titles, the 
rep generally has under a minute per title, just one or two sentences, to sell it. One 
approach is to have a key positioning line, which helps place the book in the mind of 
the buyer. The ‘new Harry Potter’ is overused, but similar lines can be created. If 
the book is of local interest or is going to receive other publicity, this is mentioned. 
Mention of participation in an online book club, for example, will guarantee a good 
subscription. Vanessa Di Grigorio, a sales rep for a number of publishers in the 
USA, wrote on her blog: ‘my job is to pick out what books will work for certain 
stores, and which books deserve to be highlighted. My job is to get people excited. 
In a way, you could say that my job is to talk to people about books – a lot’ 
(publishingcrawl.com, accessed 4 October 2013). Reps keep records of orders, so 
that they can remind buyers of orders placed on authors’ previous books.
Training is usually required to sell well, both in negotiation and interpersonal 
skills. To avoid diluting the buyer’s interest the rep, aware of his or her buying 
pattern and customers, concentrates on those titles likely to sell in that particular 
shop – retailers’ customer proﬁles diﬀ er greatly. There is a common 
understanding between an experienced rep and a good buyer with regard to the 
titles and order quantities that can be sold in that particular shop. Weak buyers 
need help. A good buyer is often aware of the books before the rep calls and can 
estimate within a few seconds the number of sales. But a buyer may want a larger 
quantity than the rep had in mind or conversely may place an order which the rep 
Advance orders 
are called 
subscriptions
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
264
feels is too low. Knowing that the book is selling well elsewhere or sensing that 
the buyer does not appreciate some aspect, the rep mentions that and suggests a 
higher quantity. If the rep is trusted, the buyer may increase the order. Part of the 
persuasion may involve the rep in allowing greater freedom on returns within the 
ﬁrm’s overall policy. But selling too many copies which are merely returned eats 
away at the bookseller’s and publisher’s margins, and erodes the trust between rep 
and buyer. It is a waste of time for both the bookseller and the publisher.
While there are bookshops which expect reps to do their stock checking and 
re-ordering for them, booksellers’ electronic stock control systems should in 
theory override a rep’s intervention, provided that the book has been ordered in 
the ﬁ rst place. In practice reps may tactfully remind buyers of new and backlist 
titles missing from the shelves, reshelve misplaced titles or mention a title that is 
gaining media attention. When visiting the branch of a chain, the rep will check 
that the store is complying with the display and positioning of key titles as agreed 
with head ofﬁce.
Backed up by attractive POS material, the rep tries to persuade the bookseller 
to mount special window or instore displays to increase visibility by oﬀ ering 
incentive terms if necessary. They will receive emails from head ofﬁce with news 
of media coverage which is relevant to titles on the list. The bookseller may ask 
the rep to arrange an author signing session in the shop, and will negotiate any 
cost attached. Reps also feedback promotional needs requested by customers or 
promotional ideas used by other publishers which could be emulated; and 
occasionally reps make editorial suggestions. They may also chase debts and 
support marketing on author events.
Academic sales
Academic sales forces are smaller than those of consumer book publishers. Reps 
visit a limited range of bookshops, such as campus stores, which stock their titles, 
and may call on specialist mail-order booksellers and library suppliers which 
supply books to home and export markets. Additionally they may visit campuses 
in order to identify courses and the lecturers who make the decisions to 
recommend textbooks. While to a limited extent they encourage academics to 
order personally, or through their library, monographs and reference books (and 
sometimes journals and online services), their main thrust is to secure textbook 
adoptions. Using the promotional material and occasionally bound copies, they 
present the most relevant texts to individual lecturers who, if interested, are 
followed up by email and are sent inspection or gratis copies of the physical 
edition, or access to a digital edition. Increasingly rep visits are being replaced 
by emails inviting lecturers to order inspection copies directly.
Reps may also demonstrate any supporting electronic resources, arrange for 
password access for the lecturer, and promote any customization possible of the 
company’s titles. The major publishers employ specialists to conduct further 
technical demonstrations. The rep also undertakes market research, such as 
looking at reading lists to check new and old adoptions or recommendations, and 
discussing with lecturers trends in subjects generally and particularly in relation 
to the ﬁrm’s and competitors’ titles. Sometimes they pick up new ideas and 
potential authors, to be developed by editors.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
265
There is a great disparity amongst publishers regarding the proportion of the 
reps’ time spent visiting booksellers and campuses. Many ﬁrms rely on direct 
promotion and reps devote most time to academic booksellers, whereas the reps 
of the larger textbook publishers may emphasize college calling. Owing to the 
difﬁculty of combining bookseller and college calling cycles, they may separate the 
activity. The busiest time of college-related shops (which derive 70 per cent of 
sales from ﬁve months of the year) and pop-up shops in universities is from the 
start of the academic year through to Christmas, followed by a secondary peak in 
the New Year to serve semester course starts. Thus the rep’s key period, from 
mid-summer onwards, is the run-up to September. Although good booksellers 
forge links with lecturers and solicit reading lists around May, reps alert buyers to 
adoptions from information gathered from campus visits and from inspection 
copy requests, and then inform librarians. There are online reading list services 
such as the one run by Blackwell (readinglists.co.uk).
Reluctant buyers are eventually triggered into building up their stock by the 
students. Only a small number of booksellers stock monographs and high-priced 
reference books. Such books are supplied by bookshops in response to orders, and 
in fact most of such sales have transferred to the internet. However academic reps 
also sell titles more dependent on retail exposure – these may be used by students 
as background reading or for reference. Examples are OUP’s series of Very Short 
Introductions and their Oxford Paperback Reference titles. A crucial aim is to get 
bookshops to stock and display the books – otherwise sales are lost. Booksellers 
are encouraged to distribute promotional material and to mount special displays at 
back-to-college time. Another activity is setting up and attending exhibitions at 
academic conferences. Large ﬁrms employ full-time staﬀ  solely for conferences. 
Against the background of the decline in campus bookstores and the reluctance 
of booksellers to hold stock of academic titles, conference exhibitions provide an 
opportunity for academics to see the publishers’ main titles.
The sales staﬀ  of the major journal publishers concentrate their eﬀ orts on 
negotiating big deals with the main customers: the research intensive universities, 
through their librarians, and library consortia throughout the world.
Schools publishing
School textbook publishers and some children’s book publishers employ a core of 
full-time educational reps (also called consultants) supplemented with term-time 
reps – often parents or ex-teachers. The large publishers have separate sales forces 
covering primary and secondary schools, and possibly the further education 
sector. Additionally, they may appoint specialist advisers (ex-teachers) in the major 
subject areas. They provide product training for reps, give talks to teachers and 
promote to local advisers. A rep for a large company may cover just two counties 
while one in a small company may have to cover a whole region. During term 
time reps usually visit two to three secondary schools per day or up to ﬁve primary 
schools. Large primary schools warrant coverage similar to a secondary school. 
The number of schools visited per day is related to their proximity.
Educational publishers may hold two or three sales conferences a year, before 
the opening of terms, at which the commissioning editors present the new books 
and digital resources. The marketing/sales manager directs the priorities. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
266
Conferences enable the reps to report on sales, and on the response from their 
schools. The key period and busiest time for reps is the spring term when teachers 
select what they will use for the next school year – their ﬁnancial year usually 
begins on 1 April. The summer term is quieter; the winter term becomes 
progressively more important towards the end. In small primary schools, 
headteachers usually choose the materials to be used; in secondary schools and 
large primary schools, departmental heads have the most inﬂuence. Thus a rep 
will try and see them, sometimes by appointment to talk about forthcoming titles, 
but mainly to show them ﬁnished copies. Teachers are asked what they are using 
and whether they are satisﬁed. If it is a competitor’s book and there is a sign of 
hesitation, this provides an opening for a rep to discuss the merits of their books.
Experienced reps know the content not only of their own books but also of 
their competitors too, and recount the experience of teachers in other schools. If a 
teacher shows sufﬁcient interest a rep will ask for an inspection copy to be sent. 
Occasionally copies of key books are left behind. Although priority is given to new 
books, especially those introducing a comprehensive course of study for National 
Curriculum core subjects, the promotion of the backlist is vital. Reps promote the 
use of digital products and services (CD-ROM and online; and for interactive 
whiteboards), and their role in this area becomes one of a consultant, advising on 
what resources work well. In those schools which manage their own budgets, reps 
encourage direct orders to the publisher, oﬀ ering incentive discounts on sizeable 
quantities if necessary.
Market research includes the regular feedback of information such as 
teachers’ suggestions, the response of teachers to their own and competitors’ 
books, information on competitors, buying policies, local authority guidelines 
aﬀ ecting purchases, and gaps in the market. Sometimes reps suggest ideas for 
books to the commissioning editors, give advice to teachers who are considering 
authorship and discover new authors. The market for digital content was 
stimulated by the government’s provision of eLearning credits over a ﬁve-year 
period up until 2008; in response publishers developed a range of CD-ROM and 
online products, including those for interactive whiteboards.
Apart from visiting schools, reps ensure that their books are included in the 
school library, maintain contact with inspectors and local authority advisers, and 
sometimes conduct seminars. They are also involved in setting up and stafﬁng 
local exhibitions, and the major exhibitions linked to national subject conferences 
held in vacations. Generally speaking, reps who work long hours during term time 
beneﬁt from the school holidays.
INTERNATIONAL SALES
There are various ways of organizing export sales staﬀ  within a publishing house. 
In small ﬁrms the sales director may be responsible for home sales and for export 
arrangements, spending perhaps one or two months abroad annually. In larger 
ﬁrms there is a separate export department headed by an export sales manager, 
who reports to the sales director. An export manager may be supported by ofﬁce 
staﬀ . In still larger ﬁrms, there may be an international sales director in charge of 
staﬀ  such as regional sales executives or area export managers, who look after all 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
267
the group’s lists in speciﬁc territories. They are usually responsible for all export 
sales within their territories and for the arrangements and relationships made 
with the distributors and booksellers. As an alternative the sales team can be 
organized by list or imprint but this is less economic as it means several people 
are travelling to the same part of the world.
Territories are usually roughly divided by continent: Europe, Asia, India, 
Middle East, Africa, Australia, Canada, South America, and the Caribbean. The 
USA can be handled in many diﬀ erent ways but trade publishers will aim to sell 
rights, rather than their own edition, into this lucrative market. Larger houses will 
have several people covering the world; smaller companies may only have one 
person, who inevitably has to prioritize the most appropriate markets. The major 
players may well have their own companies in Australia, Canada, India, or South 
Africa, and the sales role becomes more one of product manager.
A characteristic of staﬀ  in international sales is that they are usually expected 
to spend anything from three to six months abroad. For example, medium and 
large UK publishers may employ sales representatives who cover parts or the 
whole of Europe or other areas of the world. Broadly, the larger the company, the 
smaller the geographical area covered by each representative; but compared to the 
home market their territories are vast and their calls to importing book trade 
customers far less frequent. They are either home-based, travelling regularly, or 
resident overseas. Some of the major publishing groups station their nationals in 
small ofﬁces in countries outside the ﬁelds of operation of their overseas ﬁrms. 
They are mainly concerned with promoting the ﬁ rm’s books, liaising with and 
supervising arrangements made with local distributors, opening up the market
International sales
The ability to speak preferably two or more languages is invariably required, 
but is not a top priority: most customers can speak English to some extent. 
But linguistic ability enables you to understand and relate that much better to 
the market and customers. Fluency in one or more of the European languages 
such as French, German, Spanish and Italian, and semi-ﬂuency in some is 
ideal. Standard Arabic and Chinese are sometimes particularly desirable for 
certain ﬁrms. Export sales staﬀ  have a commitment to publishing and 
exporting, and have to enjoy working with books. First and foremost sales 
people, they have a burning desire to ring up the till, to increase proﬁtable 
turnover. Most of the personal skills required for selling to the home market 
are paralleled in export selling; but exporters face the complexities of 
understanding many diﬀ erent and diverse markets and need an appreciation 
of the political, social, economic and cultural factors pertaining to each 
country, as well as a sensitivity to and enthusiasm for the market. Good 
exporters are able to sell and adapt to diﬀ erent environments and situations 
fast; they are good at building up relationships with key customers. Sales 
staﬀ  must like travel, and have the self-motivation to work far away from 
headquarters, take high-level decisions, and cope with loneliness (they could 
be travelling three months of the year).

S

I L L S
Penguin India, 
started in 1987, 
publishes a 
range of ﬁction 
and non-ﬁction 
books, 
predominantly 
by Indian 
authors. It also 
publishes in 
local languages
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
268
and, when appropriate, employing local representatives. The export-orientated 
ELT divisions of major publishers typically have their own export sections 
deploying all of the above methods. Publishers may also employ full-time local 
nationals in some areas to represent their interests.
Export arrangements
The staﬀ  numbers of export departments are paradoxically far smaller than the 
home sales side because much of the work of promoting and selling books is 
carried out abroad. The international publishers with world rights in an author’s 
work have greater control to set published prices and uniform publication dates 
in diﬀ erent parts of the world. Those publishers without world rights may be in 
competition with other publishers in some markets. International sales staﬀ  
of UK publishers who are selling into open markets, for example Europe, will 
be keen to publish UK trade and ebook editions ahead of the equivalent US 
publisher’s editions. There is mixed evidence, depending on the market, as to the 
impact of translation deals on the sales of English language editions. For example, 
Dutch publishers will rush to translate a potential bestseller ahead of the arrival of 
the English edition in their market. In Germany it may be the success of a novel 
once translated which encourages sales to those wanting to read the original 
English language edition. By contrast sales of the English edition of Fifty Shades of 
Grey fell in Slovenia once a translation was published.
The main export arrangements are as follows but ebooks can of course be 
sold directly to customers right around the world.
Sister companies and branches
In countries where there are ﬁrms connected through ownership with the 
originating publisher, such sister ﬁrms usually have the exclusive right to 
distribute. For example, Oxford University Press has a number of branches 
around the world. Nevertheless, certain titles or whole lists may be licensed to, 
or distributed by, other ﬁrms. Some US-focused consumer imprints of major 
international publishers are distributed in the UK by independent distributors 
such as Turnaround. Branches or sister companies may develop publishing 
operations aimed at their own domestic market and for export throughout the 
group.
Exclusive market
A stockholding agent may have the exclusive distribution rights for the publisher’s 
output within a certain export territory. The agent services the orders originating 
from customers within the territory and collects the money. Normally the agent 
carries out the promotion and sales representation as well. Such agents may be 
wholesalers, booksellers, importers or branches of other publishers. Sometimes, 
exclusivity is restricted to part of the publisher’s output or important named 
customers within the territory deal directly with the publisher.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
269
Non-exclusive markets
In countries not covered by the exclusive stockholding agents or the publisher’s 
overseas ﬁrms, the publisher deals directly with the local book trade. However, 
non-exclusive distribution arrangements may be made with certain local 
‘preferential’ stockists (such as wholesalers), who receive more favourable terms 
from the publisher. The local booksellers can order either directly from the 
publisher or from the stockist. Some stockists also promote and sales-represent 
the publisher’s books.
Sales on commission
Freelance agents can be appointed to promote and represent the books in 
speciﬁed countries – usually but not always in open markets, and carry many 
publishers’ lists. Those representing publishers in the UK are based in the UK or 
abroad. They receive a commission of between 10 to 15 per cent on net sales 
revenue from the territory.
Terms of trade
The agents, wholesalers and booksellers trading in the books receive discounts 
from the exporting publisher, usually oﬀ  the publisher’s recommended price, in 
the same way as in the UK. They then add their costs and proﬁt which can result 
in book prices being higher than those in the originating publisher’s home 
market. However this situation is now changing as consumers are able to 
compare prices around the world and choose the most favourable option. 
Customers’ credit periods in export markets are longer (90–120 days from date 
of invoice) but can extend to six months or more from slow-paying parts of the 
world. They also have to allow for import duties and freight costs, which often fall 
to them to pay. Wherever possible ﬁrm sales are made, and rarely are books 
actually returned from export markets. Publishers will ask for a POD (proof of 
destruction) and then credit the customer accordingly.
There are diﬀ erent terms that apply to the shipping of books:
 
▪
Free on board (FOB) – the publisher delivers the books free to the buyer’s 
appointed UK shipping agent. Buyers within a country may co-ordinate and 
nominate a UK export company that will consolidate orders.
 
▪
Ex-warehouse – the customer bears the cost from the publisher’s (or printer’s) 
door. This is a common basis for trading.
 
▪
Cost, insurance and freight (CIF) – the publisher bears all the costs up to their 
arrival in a port or town. In return for saving the customer cost and (if the 
goods are sent air freight) time, the discount and credit period may be cut 
back.
 
▪
On consignment – the customer pays only on sales made and has the right to 
return unsold stock. This may be used for substantial orders.
Other export sales, not directly instigated by the publisher, are made by the UK 
and US export wholesalers, booksellers, and library suppliers. The largest are 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
270
internationally based and promote, sell and distribute books worldwide – such 
ﬁrms are major ‘home’ customers of academic and STM publishers. An 
alternative arrangement is to work with such companies to help them promote the 
books in export markets. Sales can then be correctly recorded in the publisher’s 
accounts as export. Some end-users seeking the cheapest source of supply 
(especially libraries) ‘buy round’ the publishers’ arrangements by ordering books 
from suppliers which ignore exclusive territorial markets. Furthermore, internet 
bookselling of print and ebooks has broken down national frontiers for the trade 
of diﬀ erent kinds of books in diﬀ erent languages.
Promotion and personal selling
Communication with the international network is vital. Retailers and 
intermediaries must be persuaded to concentrate on promoting and selling the 
ﬁrm’s titles rather than those of others. Constant contact takes the form of the 
supply of information through mailings, email, telephone calls and overseas visits. 
The AIs, catalogues, sales documents, covers, and point-of-sale material cascade 
on to the local network who use that material to publicize the publisher’s titles 
within their markets. Originating publishers and the distributors operate online 
systems through which information on titles can be accessed by trading partners 
worldwide. Some agents prepare their sales documentation from information 
supplied while others use material produced by the originating publisher. They 
adapt the titles’ metadata as necessary. For example, the original book description 
may be too diﬃ  cult to understand by readers for whom English is their second 
language. Agents may generate free media publicity, secure reviews, mail 
catalogues, conduct email and social media campaigns, sometimes place 
advertisements, attend exhibitions and operate a textbook inspection copy service.
The originating publisher may also send promotional material to booksellers, 
libraries, British Council ofﬁces, academics and professionals, send books for 
review to learned journals, send complimentary copies of textbooks to inﬂuential 
people and operate an inspection copy service from the UK. The promotional 
eﬀ orts of publisher and agent may overlap. Of equal importance is the quality and 
regularity of the response from agents and representatives. They provide feedback 
on their activities and on market conditions, and speciﬁc feedback on individual 
titles, such as requests for more material.
Overwhelmingly, however, export sales are generated by personal selling. The 
publisher’s senior sales staﬀ  give presentations to agents and main customers on 
their visits to their oﬃ  ces, at book fairs, and in their own countries. Their trips 
may last two, three or more weeks, and encompass half a dozen countries and up 
to 30 to 40 customers. They primarily sell to agents’ sales managers or directors 
concerned with imports and may brief the agent’s reps at a conference. They 
discuss all aspects of their trading relationship and assess agents’ eﬀ ectiveness. 
The reps need to develop an excellent knowledge of their markets in terms of 
pricing and what genres, subjects and authors work well. This knowledge can also 
feed back into commissioning decisions.
Sales reps may be working directly with customers in certain markets. They 
try to get subscriptions for new books, do not overlook the backlist, respond to 
complaints and collect debts. When appropriate they supply promotional copy for 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
271
inclusion in the catalogues of wholesalers or retailers, check orders in order to 
avoid expensive distribution mistakes, and sometimes co-ordinate booksellers’ 
ordering. Academic reps may call on lecturers and librarians in order to secure 
textbook adoptions, facilitate inspection copy orders and encourage booksellers to 
carry out joint promotions and exhibitions. ELT reps promote and sell courses 
directly to private language schools, state schools and to government agencies.
While some bestselling series sell well across international markets, other 
titles may have variable patterns of sale. What goes well in one country may not 
work in another market. Book formats and covers may have to be varied to take 
account of international diﬀ erences in taste and societal norms. International 
sales staﬀ  view titles with their markets in mind, and may join both editorial and 
covers meetings. Sales of physical books by region are given in Table 11.1 (digital 
sales are not yet broken down by territory).
Table 11.1 UK exports of physical books 2012 (source: The Publishers Association)
Region
£ m
Europe
436
East and South Asia
184
Middle East/North Africa
162
North America
141
Australasia
139
Sub-Saharan Africa
92
Other Americas
52
DISTRIBUTION
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to how books are distributed through the 
supply chain. The distribution of books and journals in digital and print formats, 
and new media products, is massively complex and critical to the publisher’s role 
of getting its product into the customers’ hands at the right time, and if in print, 
in the right quantities. The key aspects of print distribution (sometimes called 
logistics) are:
 
▪
customer care,
 
▪
accuracy in order fulﬁlment,
 
▪
speed and reliability in dispatch,
 
▪
physical protection of the product,
 
▪
economies in dispatch, and
 
▪
credit control.
Failings in these areas lead to lost sales, diminished retail display, increased cost 
to the publisher and loss of conﬁdence by bookseller and reader; improvements 
give the publisher a competitive marketing edge.
It is acknowledged that the system in the UK for the distribution of physical 
books is highly eﬃ  cient, helped by the relatively small size of the country. Even so 
book distribution is an enormous challenge and exhibits unusual characteristics. 
Diane 
Setterﬁeld’s 
gothic novel, 
The Thirteenth 
Tale (2006), 
had modest 
initial sales in 
the UK despite 
reaching the 
top of the New 
York Times 
bestseller list
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
272
Many other kinds of goods produced by manufacturers (often on continuous 
production lines) are supplied directly to wholesalers and then on to the retailers. 
But publishers hire printers to manufacture the books which are usually delivered 
to the publisher or its distributor. Printers may also distribute new books direct to 
retailers and wholesalers, and POD printers direct to readers. In material handling 
terms, book distribution presents extremes, ranging from one or more copies or 
other media products up to a container load. Publishers face the return of unsold 
books from the UK book trade (typically in the range of 10 to 20 per cent of sales), 
which are credited accordingly; and if the books are damaged or of low value they 
destroy them. KPMG in 1998 estimated that the average cost of publishers’ 
distribution represented 13 per cent of sales, while that of a consumer goods 
manufacturer was 6 per cent.
Publishers carry an enormous range of new and backlist products stored 
for a long time. In the main, publishers supply retailers – individual shops or 
their centralized warehouses – directly. Despite the growth of the wholesalers, 
book wholesaling in the UK is concentrated mainly on consumer books. The 
customers for books extend beyond the retail trade – to schools and to individuals 
needing single copies (for review and inspection if not digital, and mail-order 
sales). Publishers receive massive numbers of small orders, the proﬁts from 
which may not cover the distribution and credit cost. For some publishers, 
referring direct sales from individuals to internet retailers, which pay aﬃ  liate fees, 
is more cost-eﬀ ective than fulﬁ lling such orders themselves. Yet physical stores 
demand faster and more reliable distribution in order to compete against internet 
retailers and other kinds of products. UK publishers export vigorously and 
distribute to most countries from the UK via a myriad of arrangements and 
carriers.
Industry standards
The foundation stone on which all book trade electronic transactions and 
information systems are based was the introduction in 1967 of the 10 digit 
standard book number (SBN). By 1970 it had become internationally accepted. In 
2007 it was extended to 13 digits to make it consistent with the European Article 
Numbering (EAN) system (now international) used to identify many kinds of 
products and from which bar codes are generated. The ISBN incorporates in the 
following sequence the preﬁ x of the ‘book’ product identiﬁ er 978 (979 will be 
introduced when the current stock of numbers is exhausted); the country or 
region or language group (for example English speaking countries either 0 or 1, 
French 2, German 3); the publisher identiﬁ er (the larger the publisher’s output 
and demand for ISBNs, the smaller the number of digits are assigned to it); and 
the unique identiﬁer of each book or edition. The last digit is a check to ensure the 
preceding digits are correct. ISBNs are used by publishers to identify tradable 
products such as diﬀ erent print and ebook formats, audiobooks and CDs. ISBNs 
are obtained by publishers from the national ISBN agencies: in the UK operated 
commercially by Nielsen and in the USA by Bowker. The digital identiﬁer for 
journals is the International Standard Serial Number (ISSN).
In 1979, TeleOrdering was launched in the UK by Whitaker. This enabled 
booksellers to transmit orders electronically overnight into publishers’ 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
273
computers. TeleOrdering was the book trade’s ﬁrst proprietary electronic trading 
system deploying an early form of electronic data interchange (EDI). EDI 
facilitates the exchange of data between computer systems, saving trading 
partners’ time, errors and cost by avoiding the use and handling of paper and 
making it unnecessary to rekey information. By the early 1990s most main UK 
bookshops had installed electronic point of sale (EPOS) systems which read the 
bar codes on books. The collection of EPOS data from the UK general retail 
market by Nielsen from the late 1990s aids stock management during the rise and 
fall of a title’s sales.
EDItEUR is the international book trade standards body that co-ordinates the 
development of the infrastructure standards for EDI and other e-commerce 
standards for book and serial transactions, bibliographic and product information, 
digital publishing, and rights management and trading. It is supported in its drive 
towards electronic ordering, invoicing, information gathering and transmission, 
by BIC (Book Industry Communication) in the UK and the BISG (Book Industry 
Study Group) in the USA. The adoption of ‘standards’ is critically important to the 
trading of physical and digital products, and there are many agencies in the UK, 
Europe and in America working on standards for the description and trading of 
diﬀ erent categories of products. However, for the publishing industry and the 
intermediaries, three main areas stand out.
Product information
First, the development of standardized product information – a classiﬁcation 
system whereby publishers describe the bibliographical details of their products 
consistently – and second the technical and procedural standards whereby 
they electronically communicate that information and its updating to others, 
such as to the bibliographic providers, wholesalers and retailers (see Chapter 10, 
page 243).
Supply chain
The second area relates to the supply chain (print and digital) and covers bar 
codes; B2B ecommerce transacted through EDI (orders, acknowledgements, 
delivery notes, invoices, credit notes, and price and product availability); and the 
standardization of the authorization procedures for returns in order to reduce 
costs. The UK Industry Returns Initiative (IRI) has led to returns requests being 
sent by booksellers electronically, with credits taking place automatically when 
stock is returned. There is no precise data, but the IRI is believed to have made 
reductions in the cost of returns. Under the IRI no returns are authorized until 
three months after publication or once 12–15 months have elapsed since the title 
was supplied to the shop.
In 2007 a bookseller in Holland, BGN, introduced radio frequency 
identiﬁcation (RFID) into its stores. Called a smart bar code, a RFID tag can be 
inserted into a book, enabling fast scanning of the books within a store. This 
raises the possibility of smart shelving, which recognizes what stock is sitting 
there, and for customers to go through self-service tills. However so far there has 
been little demand for this technology from other book retailers.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
274
Digital publishing
As publishers license and sell their products online either via intermediaries or 
directly to end-users from their digital warehouses, there is a need for common 
standards to facilitate electronic copyright management in order to trigger 
payment systems. For instance, an intermediary may want to print on demand a 
publisher’s title or to customize a product including chapters from a range of book 
sources, or a researcher may want to follow-up an electronic journal reference in 
an article from another publisher’s journal server.
The classic digital identiﬁers – the ISBN and ISSN – are the basis for 
electronic rights management systems at the macro level. One problem around 
ebooks is that this system has not necessarily kept pace – for example, an ebook 
could be published on Amazon’s Kindle Direct without an ISBN; also each ebook 
edition (say Kindle, ePub, or PDF) may be given a new ISBN making the tracking 
of sales data more diﬃ  cult. The Association of American Publishers sponsored 
the concept of a micro-level identiﬁer – the digital object identiﬁer (DOI) which is 
now promoted by the DOI Foundation (doi.org). The idea behind DOI is that it is 
a simple or dumb number which can be attached by the publisher to an object, 
such as a journal abstract, author’s name and address, or book chapter, or piece 
of text or an illustration – whatever the publisher considers could be reusable or 
tradable. The publisher maintains a continually updated directory, which acts 
as a routing system where the dumb number is associated with the publisher’s 
internet address. The publisher’s database stores the most accurate information 
about the DOIs such as the copyright ownership, terms and conditions of sale and 
prices. The journal publishers were amongst the ﬁrst publishers to deploy DOIs, 
although the take-up in other areas has been slow.
Warehousing and distribution
There are three main types of distribution arrangement: self-distribution by a 
publisher to retailers; fulﬁ lment only of the orders generated by the publisher; 
or full service distribution, which ‘outsources the entire publisher-to-book-buyer 
transaction, including dispatch, invoicing and credit control’ (booksellers.org.uk, 
accessed 27 October 2013). The major publishing groups run their own 
distribution and place the facility away from the headquarters, while the very 
small publishers with insuﬃ  cient turnover to attract a distributor have to do it 
themselves from their oﬃ  ce or garage. Amazon runs a consignment scheme 
called Advantage, which can be used by small publishers or authors who self-
publish. Publishers set the list price of the printed book, oﬀ  which Amazon 
receives a 55–60 per cent discount and has the right to sell it at a discount to its 
customers, and Amazon keeps in stock quantities as low as two copies. At the end 
of each month, Amazon pays the publisher for sales in the previous month.
Small and medium publishers either distribute themselves or commonly use 
independent distributors (such as in the UK, Central Books or Turnaround for 
consumer titles, Marston Book Services, NBN or Turpin for academic and STM). 
They may use larger publishers which oﬀ er their services to smaller publishers 
such as TBS (The Book Service Ltd) owned by Random House, Macmillan 
Distribution, and Bookpoint and Littlehampton Book Services owned by Hachette 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
275
all of which are eager to increase their turnover. Alternatively, they may use 
wholesalers such as Bertrams and Gardners in the UK, and Ingram in the USA, 
which also act as distributors.
The basic diﬀ erence [between a distributor and a wholesaler] is that a 
distributor will handle orders from both bookshops and wholesalers on terms 
set by the publisher and will also hold all of the publisher’s stock. This will 
normally incur charges for receiving, storing, dispatching and handling stock, 
on agreed terms and rates. In addition they will invoice and collect payment 
on behalf of the publisher. A wholesaler on the other hand will sell on the 
terms that they agree with the retailer, and will invoice and collect payment 
on their agreed terms with the customer and undertake the associated credit 
risk. (Gardners.com, accessed 15 August 2013)
Publishers may use a mixture of services, supplying direct sales themselves but 
using third parties for trade and export sales. Third-party distributors oﬀ er to 
publishers the complete service of bulk storage, invoicing, customer service and 
cash collection, and delivery for which they charge around 12 per cent of sales: less 
for larger publishers and more for smaller publishers. Such distributors have 
extended their reach, for example to beyond the physical and internet book trade 
to libraries, schools and universities, and to members of the public, in home and 
export markets. They increasingly oﬀ er additional services to client publishers, 
such as sales representation, marketing, print on demand, ebook distribution and 
negotiation with aggregators, hosting a white label website (a plain copy of the 
publisher’s site), and platforms. Global ebook distribution has become 
increasingly complex and diﬃ  cult to manage. Publishers may operate their own 
digital warehouse (Digital Asset Distribution, DAD) or outsource it to a distributor 
or specialist company, such as Gardners, Ingram (CoreSource), or ePubDirect etc. 
Some distributors also oﬀ er to publishers Digital Asset Management (DAM) 
which includes a complete audit trail to ensure the publisher knows where its 
content is at all times.
The supply chain for books
Books can be supplied directly from the publisher or through a distributor or 
wholesaler (see the ﬁgure below for the physical supply chain). Smaller bookshops 
source the majority of their stock from the wholesalers, which oﬀ er a next-day 
service. The trend is towards fewer and larger distributors. Size gives to the 
distributor the turnover to invest in expensive electronic book handling and 
warehouse systems, the ability to bulk up order values, greater leverage in debt 
collection, and the securing of lower rates with carriers. With the development of 
faster and more reliable transportation systems, including air freight, there is a 
movement away from overseas stockholding agents to direct supply from the UK, 
giving a greater opportunity to price books more competitively in many markets. 
The independent third-party distributors occasionally go bust, which can be a 
disaster for the publisher if unable to retrieve its cash and books from the receiver.
Short-run printing and print on demand are embedded in book distribution. 
They reduce the need for the publisher to hold speculative inventory and enable
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
276
Distributor
Publisher
Retailer
Wholesaler
Supply chain
slow moving backlist titles to remain in print. Indeed for some specialist or 
academic titles, journal back issues, or ebook originals, the need is removed to 
hold any stock at all. The publisher may export and import via printing in the local 
sales market. A book is produced in response to an order, or an agreed minimum 
order is kept in stock, and the publisher’s POD supplier dispatches it direct. Third-
party distributors serving publishers may have their own POD facilities or have 
alliances with such printers.
Some publishers have built their own platforms for the delivery of online 
content; others use third parties. High levels of investment are required to develop 
online services and, for example, it is estimated that Elsevier spent £200 m on 
the establishment of their platform ScienceDirect. For ebooks, publishers may 
distribute through a third party, or opt for direct supply. In practice most 
consumer sales in the UK go through Amazon. Libraries prefer ebooks on a 
common platform and there are companies such as OverDrive (trade) or ebrary 
(academic) that will supply content from a variety of publishers.
There have been developments to develop direct sales of digital textbooks, 
and for example CourseSmart makes content available digitally to HE students, 
faculty and institutions. Instructors can obtain inspection copies and rather than 
buy the books there is a rental model for students (access expires after 360 days).
The distribution of physical books
The ‘trade side’ of distribution is concerned with processing received orders, 
raising invoices, credit control and documentation. Once orders are received, 
the invoice is raised, and the documentation, labelling and physical distribution 
begin. There are many standardized codes which tell a trade customer a book is 
unavailable for various reasons. The Standard Address Number (SAN) and Global 
Location Number (GLN) are identiﬁ ers of a physical location of a bookseller and 
are an essential part of EDI and other ecommerce transactions. New books 
or reprints not yet in stock are recorded on a ‘dues listing’ and dispatched 
when available unless otherwise instructed. Export orders need additional 
documentation to comply with the receiving country’s import regulations and 
taxes; there can also be censorship of titles in China or in countries in the Middle 
East. On orders to mainland Europe some publishers invoice in euros or local 
 ScienceDirect 
from Elsevier 
offers articles 
and chapters 
from more 
than 2,500 
journals and 
nearly 20,000 
books
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
277
currencies and oﬀ er banking arrangements. Pro-forma invoices may be sent to 
new or unsafe customers – with a non-existent or poor credit history – before the 
books are dispatched. Most publishers supply books to UK booksellers carriage 
free, whereas booksellers in Europe will pay their own carriage.
The customer services department handles return requests and resolves 
queries from booksellers regarding problems of distribution and of accounts; 
or from end-users who may make comments on social media. The textbook 
inspection copy service and mail-order or subscription sales are usually handled 
by separate departments. Adverse comments made by readers or users on social 
media, internet retailers and book recommendation sites may need a fast 
response.
The warehouse includes the bulk store of books and journals (and of any raw 
paper reserves), into which deliveries are made from printers, and a ‘picking’ area 
where titles and back-up stock are positioned for easy location (new books and 
fast-selling titles in prime sites). The invoices may include the location of titles in 
the order in which they are ‘picked’. The collated orders move to the packaging 
and dispatch area. Dispatch involves knowing the most economic, speedy and 
reliable method (road carrier, shipping, air freight, post) and negotiating bulk 
deals with carriers. If the publisher bears the cost, the incentive is to lower costs to 
increase proﬁtability; when the customer pays (for example on FOB export orders) 
the incentive is to assist them to save money, a marketing service. In order to treat 
mainland Europe as an extension of the home market and to compete against US 
publishers, some UK publishers are using pan-European delivery networks 
operated by the same carriers as used in the UK. In so doing, the publisher 
controls the level of service door-to-door, avoids dealing with dozens of carriers 
and attains economies. For the internet retailer Amazon, they may choose to 
supply an order from their own warehouse or from third-party wholesalers.
While the computer monitors stock levels, there are staﬀ  who physically 
check the stock and check the returns (the barcodes aid the task), liaising with the 
sales ofﬁce where appropriate. The application of computers to order-processing, 
distribution and dispatch provides key information for management, such as 
reports on dues, sales by title, by area, by representative (and comparative monthly 
reports), type of customer, discount structure, return levels, stock and re-order 
levels, method of dispatch, carriage charge analysis and debtors.
Looking into the future, we may see publishers abandoning their own 
warehousing and distribution, preferring to concentrate on core competences in 
editorial, sales and marketing. Investments in digital platforms and services will 
bring a greater reward.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sales and distribution
278
Now read this
Chapter 13, The sales channels for books in the UK.
Sources
Publishers Association, PA Statistics Yearbook, 2012.
Web resources
www.bic.org.uk Book Industry Communication, UK.
www.bisg.org Book Industry Study Group, USA.
www.booksellers.org.uk The Booksellers Association (UK and Ireland).
www.doi.org International DOI Foundation.
www.editeur.org International standards body for the book and serials 
industry.
www.publishingcrawl.com Blog from authors and industry professionals.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 12
Rights sales
The author–publisher contract sets out the scope of the publisher to license 
various kinds of rights to other ﬁrms: the licensing business model. These rights 
allow the licencees to exploit the book across diﬀ erent dimensions – by media, 
territory and language. Rights sales can be important to a publisher since the 
income attracts little by way of direct costs and is often simply extra proﬁt. To be 
compared directly to sales income, the revenue from rights sales should be 
multiplied by a factor of six to eight. In consumer book publishing, where the 
contract is frequently drawn up by the author’s agent, there may be a more limited 
grant of rights to the publisher – for example, agents may choose to retain ﬁ lm 
and TV rights, serial rights and translation rights to handle themselves.
Industry data rarely separates out rights income but a biennial survey from the 
Publishers Association in 2013 (to be annual in future) put a value on the rights 
sales for the larger publishers and the major literary agents in the UK. The total 
income in 2012 was £178 m, with 28 per cent from co-editions. Foreign language 
co-editions accounted for 88 per cent of the co-edition sales; the remainder were 
English language co-editions. For foreign language co-editions, 53 per cent of sales 
were in Western Europe. For the English language co-editions, 80 per cent of sales 
were to USA and Canada, and 20 per cent in the UK, including book clubs. Other 
income included translations (£29 m), permissions (£29 m) and English language 
reprints (£29 m). Under the sale of other rights, the area of electronic rights totalled 
£31 m, mainly in the sectors of academic and reference publishing; however, ﬁ gures 
for this area are not wholly representative as many publishers do not classify 
electronic arrangements (for example with aggregators) as rights deals.
RIGHTS WORK
The selling of rights may be done by editors and sales staﬀ . However, medium 
to large publishers normally employ specialists to sell rights actively. A small 
department may consist of a rights manager and assistant; a larger one has staﬀ  
specializing in particular rights such as translation, particular areas of the list or 
regions of the world. A publisher may choose to use subagents abroad (for 
example in mainland Europe, the USA, China and Japan), who receive a 
commission of, say, 10 to 15 per cent on rights sales made.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
280
In the pre-digital age, there was a clear distinction between a sales 
department which sold printed copies to intermediaries (for distribution) and a 
rights department which licensed rights to other ﬁ rms (mainly publishers). 
However, ebooks and other digital resources are often sold via intermediaries and 
those arrangements are now usually undertaken by the sales department. Former 
distinctions and demarcations between rights and sales are breaking down, as are 
the ways publishers organize the activities.
Publishers face a perennial question as to whether they would make more or 
less money by licensing a book to a local publisher (for instance in the USA) or 
distributing the book into that territory themselves. For example, a motivated local 
publisher operating under a rights deal may sell more copies but may pay a royalty 
or (if importing printed copies) pay a lower price per copy to the originating 
publisher; or the originating publisher under a distribution arrangement may sell 
fewer copies but receive a higher price per copy. A further complication arises with 
ebooks. In the former, print-only world, printed editions of English language 
consumer books would be published at diﬀ erent times in diﬀ erent territories (in this 
case countries) by diﬀ erent publishers. With ebooks, even though territorial rights 
can still be maintained under contract with internet retailers (at least in theory), 
consumers would not understand their inability to buy an ebook in their country 
when it is evidently published elsewhere. A lack of availability also fuels piracy. 
Ebook publication is expected to occur at the same time throughout the world. Thus 
a UK consumer book publisher holding world English language rights might have 
been unable to sell print rights to a US publisher, but it might publish itself the 
ebook in the USA. UK agents face the same diﬃ  culty. They may have withheld US 
rights from the UK publisher, but have been unable to ﬁ nd a US publisher. This 
has prompted some UK agents to publish ebooks in the USA under their own 
arrangements in the hope that they might make an eventual sale to a US publisher.
The large publishers maintain separate contracts departments which put into 
the contractual detail the outcome of the agreements reached with authors, 
agented authors and with publishers from whom they have bought rights; some 
may also handle contracts with licensees, although in many companies these 
contracts are handled by rights sales staﬀ . There are also contract specialists who 
oﬀ er their services to publishers and agents. Rights staﬀ  may also check and 
monitor the contracts made between the publisher and authors, and oﬀ er their 
expertise on copyright and media law.
Separate permissions staﬀ  may carry out necessary reactive work, which 
involves responding to requests for copyright permission to reproduce limited 
amounts of material (such as extracts of text, tables, technical illustrations) from 
the ﬁrm’s books in other publications or media. Usually granted is a non-exclusive 
licence to reproduce the material for a particular use, with due acknowledgement, 
for a speciﬁed edition, quantity and language throughout the world, though the 
territories may be limited. The applicant is charged a fee, usually equally shared by 
the originating publisher and author. The Copyright Licensing Agency (CLA) in 
the UK facilitates the collection of fees from educational and other organizations 
wishing to copy extracts for class sets, coursepacks and other uses. Such 
‘collective’ – or ‘secondary’ – licensing schemes are used by publishers when it is 
not possible or practical for them to license users directly. The money collected is 
shared between the publisher and the author. There are similar schemes 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
281
throughout the world, such as the Copyright Clearance Centre (CCC) in the USA, 
that have reciprocal arrangements with each other.
Many books have no signiﬁcant rights sales income, but some (such as in 
consumer publishing, especially in adult and children’s highly illustrated colour 
books) earn much or depend on rights deals for viability. Where agents are 
involved, many rights may be reserved and not available to the publisher, limiting 
what then can be sold. For example, a publisher buying volume (essentially print 
and ebook) rights for a speciﬁed territory will not be able to sell translation rights 
unless these are speciﬁ cally added to their licence for the agreed territory. By 
contrast, the non-consumer publishers will aim to acquire all rights, throughout 
the world, from their non-agented authors. As the major publishers consolidate 
their position worldwide, they gain the capability of publishing books themselves 
in foreign languages through their subsidiary companies, rather than licensing
Copyright Licensing Agency
Kevin Fitzgerald CMG, Chief Executive of the Copyright Licensing 
Agency
The Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd (CLA) was set up by UK authors and 
publishers to manage collective licensing on their behalf for the copying of 
extracts from publications. CLA was established in 1982 by the Authors 
Licensing and Collecting Society (ALCS) and the Publishers Licensing Society 
(PLS) to license the limited photocopying of books, journals and magazines. 
Today CLA also licences printed music, and digital copying and storage. 
Visual creators are also represented through an agency agreement with the 
Design and Artist Copyright Society (DACS).
CLA licenses organizations from the business, education and 
government sectors and permits limited copying under blanket licences, in 
most cases in return for one single annual fee. Through reciprocal agreements 
with sister organizations in other countries, the licences also include rights to 
copy from titles published in all major overseas territories. CLA is currently 
collecting some £75 m per year in licence fees. This money is allocated to 
individual copyright owners on the basis of the titles copied in the relevant 
period.
This core licensing activity connects creativity with industry by ensuring 
that copyright owners receive a fair reward when their works are copied as 
well as providing easy, legal access to a wide range of publications – such as 
trade and consumer magazines, journals, books, law reports and press 
cuttings – for businesses, schools, colleges, government and public bodies.
In 2012 CLA signed up to self-regulation through the British Copyright 
Council. The ﬁ rst Independent Code Review on the eﬀ ectiveness of this 
regulation was due in spring 2014. By supporting copyright owners through 
collective licensing, CLA plays a major part in maintaining the value of their 
work, thereby sustaining creativity and the creative industries in the UK which 
provide some 7 per cent of the UK GDP and generate millions of jobs.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
282
translation rights to others. The major educational and academic publishers have 
the ability to sell their products digitally and directly to end-users without the use 
of intermediaries.
Rights work involves close contact with the editorial, production, promotion 
and sales departments, and also the royalty and accounts departments. Selling to 
customers, who are mainly editors or directors of other ﬁrms, has to be carried out 
in a regular and personal way, and good negotiation skills are required to negotiate 
deals and contracts. Travel includes attending the major rights fairs of Frankfurt and 
London, Bologna (for children’s books), and BookExpo America. Staﬀ  who sell 
many books of international appeal, such as highly illustrated colour non-ﬁction, 
travel widely and frequently, making sales trips to countries in addition to their 
attendance at relevant fairs. There is a great deal of paperwork – correspondence, 
maintaining customer mailing lists, and record keeping – and after fairs and sales 
visits considerable follow-up is required. Rights managers have to keep track of 
trends around which countries are likely to be fruitful sources of business – for 
example, China has assumed much greater importance in recent years as the 
economy and the publishing sector there have experienced fast growth. In Europe, 
there are variations between countries in terms of the number of books bought per 
head of population, and in recent years markets such as Greece, Spain and Italy 
have been badly aﬀ ected by the economic recession. Those countries with a tradition 
of cheap paperback publishing are likely to have higher sales per capita.
As in other areas, rights selling is aided by technology. For example, there are 
specialist rights databases such as Bradbury Phillips, and rights components of 
larger systems such as Biblio3 and Klopotek, which enable rights staﬀ  to keep track 
of their submissions and sales and can automate many procedures such as chasing 
customers for decisions and payments. The international book fairs are creating 
virtual market-places for the trade of rights. As content is chunked into ever smaller 
units, whether chapters or pictures, there are software solutions for tracking their 
sale, ownership of the rights and royalties payable. Selling by rights staﬀ  may be 
done by telephone or email, using a variety of tools, such as specialist rights 
websites, email alerts for new titles, advance information sheets, sample pages and 
catalogues; databases can be transported and material shown to customers on 
laptops, tablets or even smartphones. However, for high-quality illustrated books 
customers still want to see physical materials. For publishers selling translation 
rights of ﬁ ction, for example into English, sample chapters may need to be available 
to overcome language barriers.
The rights department may get involved with a title before the author has 
signed the contract. An editor may ask the rights manager to assess the title’s rights 
sales potential, particularly if that aﬀ ects the author’s advance, or the viability of 
the book depends on rights sales. This can be particularly important for highly 
illustrated books with signiﬁ cant origination costs, where co-edition sales may be 
required. Sample covers and page spreads may be shown at the Frankfurt Book Fair 
to gauge the likely interest in a proposal. Around the delivery of the manuscript, the 
titles are assessed and a strategy is drawn up regarding the choice of possible 
customers, and how and when they will be approached. There are many kinds of 
rights and the deals struck are both intricate and varied. The main subsidiary rights 
are described on the following pages. Sometimes, the author’s approval is needed 
before deals are concluded, and it is any case a courtesy to keep them informed.
The Frankfurt 
Book Fair is 
held in October 
each year. In 
2013 there were 
over 7,000 
exhibitors and 
26,000 visitors
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
283
Book fairs
Lynette Owen, Copyright and Rights Consultant
Book fairs are key events in the publishing world calendar, providing a 
meeting place for publishers, agents, distributors and retailers to pursue their 
business on a face-to-face basis; authors may also attend for book launches 
and cultural events. Some book fairs admit the public, who can attend literary 
events and in some cases purchase books at a discount.
Rights trading is a major feature of many book fairs. Although this 
business is conducted year-round by letter, telephone and email, book fairs 
provide a focus for new titles on oﬀ er. The key fairs for rights business are: 
Frankfurt, held in October and covering all types of publication and featuring 
exhibitors from all over the world; Bologna, from 2008 held in late March and 
covering children’s books and some educational publications; and London, 
now held in mid-April.
BookExpo America, held annually in early June and based in New York 
until 2015, is primarily an event for US publishers to showcase their new 
publications to the US book trade, but it also provides an opportunity for 
British and other publishers to meet US publishers on home territory.
Other fairs in Western Europe have varying roles: Salon du Livre (in Paris 
in March) and Göteborg (late September) are largely cultural events, whilst 
Liber (held immediately before Frankfurt and alternating between Madrid and 
Barcelona) is primarily a forum for Latin American publishers to meet 
Spanish publishers.
In central and Eastern Europe there are now many fairs, although most 
are ‘selling fairs’ for local publishers to sell books to the visiting public. The 
Warsaw Fair, held every year in May, provides a rights forum, whilst the 
Moscow International Book Fair (early September) provides an opportunity to 
meet many Russian publishers who do not always attend Western book fairs. 
The rather oddly named Non-Fiction Fair is held in Moscow in late November/
early December and is rather more upmarket, with book launches and 
discussion panels. Fairs have also been established in Prague, Budapest 
and the Baltic states, where the book fair rotates between Estonia, Latvia 
and Lithuania. In the Balkans there are fairs in Belgrade, Bucharest and 
most recently in Thessaloniki.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
284
In the Middle East the Cairo Book Fair was long the major event as a 
sales fair, but in recent years Abu Dhabi and Sharjah have established 
themselves as rights market places; each oﬀ ers a subsidy scheme for rights 
deals, with Abu Dhabi funding the cost of rights purchase and Sharjah the 
costs for translation. Further aﬁeld there are book fairs in Calcutta and Delhi 
(sales rather than rights events), Seoul (June), Tokyo (July) and Beijing (late 
August/early September). Beijing is a major rights fair and Tokyo is seeking to 
build up this aspect of its business. In Latin America, Guadalajara (December) 
is being promoted as a rights event.
Literary agents and publishing rights staﬀ  start work on book fairs early 
and appointments are planned and conﬁrmed many weeks before the event 
itself. Many literary agents arrive in Frankfurt before the fair commences and 
hold appointments in their hotels; many overseas publishers arrive ahead 
of the London Book Fair and visit publishers and agents in their oﬃ  ces. 
Random callers at book fair stands may be accommodated, but prebooked 
appointments are now the order of the day.
Rights sellers attend book fairs armed with information and material on 
existing and forthcoming projects and work under considerable pressure; 
usually no more than half an hour is available for each appointment. 
Traditionally, sellers remain based on their own stand or in an agents’ centre, 
whilst buyers move around the fair from meeting to meeting. The physical 
conditions at some fairs can leave much to be desired! A rights appointment 
will usually start with a discussion of any outstanding business, followed 
by a presentation of new projects; the rights seller will aim to select titles 
appropriate to the customer and may be switching languages from 
appointment to appointment. Projects may be oﬀ ered on the basis of an 
exclusive option (more common for academic and professional titles, where 
the potential buyer will need time to obtain specialist reviews), multiple 
submission to more than one potential buyer, or a full-scale auction where 
would-be buyers will have to compete with each other on the basis of terms set 
by the seller.
Although rights trading is conducted all year round and has been much 
facilitated by email, book fairs remain extremely important as much rights 
business depends on personal relationships, knowledge of the taste of the 
potential buyer (particularly important in trade publishing) , face-to-face 
discussions and occasional serendipitous discoveries. Deals may be ﬁ nalized 
for projects submitted before the fair, and new deals started which may be 
ﬁ nalized weeks or months later. Business is often extended beyond a full 
working day at the fair with breakfast meetings, receptions and dinner after 
the fair; publishers are social animals and many a deal has come about as a 
result of a chance encounter in less formal circumstances than a fair 
appointment.
The period after a book fair is usually extremely busy, and traditionally 
the onus is on the rights seller to follow up with each customer promptly after 
the fair, conﬁrming what has been agreed, drawing up contracts for any
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
285
deals ﬁnalized at the fair and providing any information or sample material 
promised to the potential buyer. For educational, academic and professional 
titles, decisions tend to be taken some weeks or months after the fair itself – 
for trade titles, decisions may be made more quickly.
In the age of the internet, the future value of book fairs has sometimes 
been questioned, but most publishers would agree that they remain hugely 
important events and that ‘virtual’ events would not be an adequate substitute 
for regular personal contact and the buzz of a well-run book fair.
SUBSIDIARY RIGHTS
Reprint rights
With the emergence of consumer book publishers that publish both hardbacks 
and paperbacks, the selling of English language reprint paperback rights by 
originating hardback publishers to separate paperback publishers is now rare. But 
a small or medium-sized publisher, while capable of selling a trade paperback 
itself, may not be able to sell a mass-market paperback edition demanding 
diﬀ erent distribution channels. Thus it could access that market by licensing that 
edition to a larger publisher. The No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency by Alexander 
McCall Smith was ﬁrst published in 1998 by Polygon, a small Scottish publisher, 
before appearing as an Abacus paperback in 2003. Similarly a mainstream 
publisher might buy the print rights to a self-published work, as Simon & 
Schuster in the USA did in 2012 with Wool by Hugh Howey.
The key features of such deals are as follows. The seller deﬁnes the rights 
granted: the exclusive right to publish a particular kind of edition in speciﬁed 
territories is stated; and the duration of the licence is set out (for example eight 
years). The buyer prints its own edition and pays royalties on copies sold to the 
originating publisher. These royalties are shared between the author and the 
originating publisher. A rising royalty scale – the royalty rate increases when sales 
reach a certain ﬁgure – and the size of the advance (representing a proportion of 
future royalties) are negotiated. The advance payable is usually split, with part 
payable on signature of the contract and the balance on publication; it is shared 
with the author in a proportion agreed in the rights section of the author–
publisher contract.
The buyer will pay the originating publisher an oﬀ set fee, not shared with the 
author, for the right to reproduce the text prior to printing, and sometimes a fee 
for use of the digital ﬁles of the book. The timing of reprint publication is set so as 
not to undermine the originator’s other sales.
North American rights
The USA is by far the largest and richest English language market. Agents, on 
behalf of authors and book packagers, may retain US rights or North American 
rights (the USA plus Canada). But if held by the publisher and the book is not to 
An offset fee is 
payable in 
order to 
reproduce the 
original setting 
of a book
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
286
be sold via the publisher’s North American ﬁrm or through a distribution 
arrangement, the rights may be licensed. Sometimes US publishers request 
Spanish language rights for their territory.
Selling to US editors is carried out at a distance or personally when they visit 
the UK en route to the Frankfurt or Bologna Book Fairs, or at such fairs. The 
London Book Fair has grown in importance over recent years. Sometimes, the 
rights manager attends the annual US book fair, BookExpo, or visits New York to 
see a number of publishers. UK-based scouts of US publishers may be used; and 
UK editors are also in contact with US publishers. The submission method may 
be simultaneous – the chosen editors from several diﬀ erent US houses receive the 
material at the same time – or occasionally full-scale auctions are held. Editors 
may be given the proposal, manuscript, or proofs. Depending on the stage 
reached, the rights manager uses the author’s previous sales ﬁgures, the jacket 
and blurb, pre-publication quotes, the UK subscription order, reviews and details 
of other rights sales to stimulate interest.
There are essentially two types of deal. In the ﬁrst, a reprint deal, the US 
publisher manufactures its own edition, pays royalties and an advance which are 
shared by the UK publisher and author – for trade titles, usually the larger share 
goes to the author, for example 75 to 80 per cent. In eﬀ ect the UK publisher acts 
as the author’s agent. For academic titles, the share may be 50/50 or 60/40 in the 
author’s favour. Additionally the US publisher may pay for the use of a digital ﬁle 
of the book, or perhaps of the illustrations only. Alternatively, they may pay an 
oﬀ set fee at a rate per page. This type of royalty exclusive deal tends to be used on 
most ﬁction and on some illustrated books of considerable US interest. It may 
also be used if the US publisher needs to make (agreed) changes to the text, for 
example adding American references or perhaps Americanizing the terminology 
and spelling.
In the second type of deal, the UK publisher co-prints the US edition together 
with their own UK edition, substituting the US publisher’s imprint and ISBN. 
This is an English language co-edition. The bound copies are sold at a small 
marked-up price; and the author’s royalty of say 10 per cent of the UK publisher’s 
net receipts is usually included in the price paid. This type of deal can apply to any 
illustrated consumer book, and could also be used for academic books published 
by UK ﬁrms without a strong US presence. However, the $–£ exchange rate will 
aﬀ ect the viability of co-edition sales to the US market. Proprietary co-editions 
can be made with retailers, for instance, a UK children’s book publisher may 
customize a book for Walmart or Costco. The co-edition business model 
(sometimes called co-publishing) can be applied to any market channel which 
can be deﬁ ned.
Whichever applies, the US publisher is granted an exclusive licence, 
sometimes for the full term of copyright, but usually for a shorter period with 
provision to renew. The US publication date is stated, the UK publisher is obliged 
to supply the material by a set date, and the US publisher has to publish by a 
certain date. Contractual limitations are essential to forestall premature release of 
an ensuing US paperback or remainder, which could jeopardize export sales of a 
UK paperback. The price paid or the royalty rates, and advance, are negotiated as 
well as the exact territories. The US publisher, which is granted exclusivity in the 
USA and its territories (US publishers also commonly request Canada), is 
A non-exclusive 
licence allows a 
publisher to 
enter into 
agreements 
with other third 
parties
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
287
Rights
Rights staﬀ  preferably know French or German, and if concerned with 
co-editions especially, Italian and Spanish as well. But negotiations are 
mostly in English. However senior the role, the work can involve much 
administration.
The essential prerequisite for selling is knowledge of the books and 
customers. Editorial insight into the ﬁrm’s new titles alongside lateral 
thinking aid the assessment of rights prospects and their worth, the drawing 
out of salient points and the realization of sales revenue. With highly saleable 
titles, skilled judgement is needed on the kind of approach and its timing to 
selected customers.
The perception of customers’ needs entails an understanding of the way 
they run diﬀ erent kinds of businesses – for example their product range, 
markets, business models and ﬁnancial structure – in diﬀ erent cultural, 
political and economic contexts. It is also important to recognize personal 
interests and tastes – especially in ﬁction and children’s publishing – and 
national reading trends. Dealing with small numbers of senior people 
regularly and personally demands the development of good and close 
relations. Sales skills encompass the enthusiastic promotion of titles in 
writing, on the telephone and in person, even when there is scant information 
available on a new title. Where customers are in competition or when time is 
short in co-printing, they have to be pressured and manoeuvred to clinch deals 
quickly.
Negotiation skills allied to experience, numeracy and fast thinking help a 
rights person to tell if a customer is oﬀ ering too low an advance or too little in 
a co-printing deal. The full implications and catches in customer contracts 
must be spotted and adverse clauses removed or modiﬁed. Where physical 
or digital elements are supplied, a knowledge of production processes and 
terminology is required. As so much of the job involves remembering and 
recording which books are on oﬀ er and who is looking at what, a meticulous, 
methodical mind which registers ﬁne detail is essential. The consequences of 
selling the same book twice in the same territory are horrendous, although 
this is unlikely given the use by many publishers of rights managements 
systems.
Long working days precede and follow the major fairs, such as Frankfurt, 
at which customers are seen in back-to-back, half-hourly appointments during 
the day, and informally into the nights, over a week. The job calls for immense 
stamina and a strong voice box.

S

I L L S
excluded from the UK publisher’s territories (for example usually the UK, the 
Commonwealth countries and mainland Europe, although the latter markets can 
prove a bone of contention), and has the non-exclusive right to distribute their 
edition in other countries. The US publisher may be granted other rights within 
their agreed market, such as book club or serial right, and pays a proportionate 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
288
share of revenue from such sales to the UK publisher. This is in turn shared with 
the author in the proportion agreed in the subsidiary rights section of the author–
publisher contract. With some co-edition deals the US publisher may be territorially 
limited to North America, and the subsidiary rights granted may be fewer.
Translation rights
With the globalization of publishing, sales of translation rights have continued 
to grow. Translation sales lead the way into emerging markets such as Eastern 
Europe, the Baltic countries, South America and Asia, and help fend oﬀ  piracy. 
Acquiring translation rights gives the licensee the right to publish a work in a 
particular language. In the case of adult consumer books, translation rights (for 
some or all foreign languages) are often retained by agents. But if they are held 
by the publisher, the titles are promoted abroad by email and telephone, and 
personally at major book fairs or through sales visits. For trade titles, appropriate 
publishers within a language market area are selected and sent material 
simultaneously. Academic titles take some time to be reviewed and are often 
oﬀ ered to only one publisher at a time on an exclusive option basis. Foreign 
language editions may increase export sales of the English language edition owing 
to the book’s increased exposure, but there may also be an argument that the 
translation rights for adult titles should be withheld, for example in European 
markets with a high ability to read English such as the Benelux countries and 
Scandinavia, to encourage the sales of the English language edition (by contrast, 
children’s books would best be read in the local language). Continental European 
publishers will want to race their translations of consumer titles through to 
capitalize on the original publication and to avoid loss of sales from purchasers of 
the English edition. They also have to contend with the English language ebook, 
which may be highly competitive on price.
For many titles, the translation deal will be on the basis of a licence where 
the foreign publisher translates and produces the book, and pays royalties and an 
advance to the original publisher. There may also be a charge for the digital ﬁles of 
any illustrations to facilitate production of the translated edition. The advance is 
usually lower than for English rights, and some publishers work on an advance 
equivalent to half of the royalty likely to be earned on the ﬁrst print run. 
Occasionally a lump sum is requested to reproduce a set quantity. This can be a 
good arrangement for those territories where print runs are small, book prices 
are low and the customer may not be able to provide accurate or regular data on 
the number of copies sold. The purchasing publisher is granted an exclusive 
language licence for a particular edition, and other rights for a set period, and may 
be granted rights for that language throughout the world. Practice varies as to 
whether the deal includes ebook rights in the local language, and for countries 
where there are concerns about piracy, the rights are often refused. Sometimes, 
on a consumer book, a Spanish, Portuguese or French publisher is excluded from 
Latin America, Brazil or Quebec, respectively, since rights can be sold separately 
in diﬀ erent territories for the same language. The author receives say a 50 per cent 
share of the royalties if academic, or up to 80 or 90 per cent if popular trade. 
There are some novelists whose sales in translation greatly exceed their English 
language sales – for example the US novelist Jonathan Carroll. The rewards to
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
289
Window display in 
Moscow of cookery 
books by Gordon 
Ramsay
The Slovenian edition 
of Agatha Christie’s 
Murder on the Orient 
Express (Mladinska 
Knjiga). Her books 
have been translated 
into over 45 
languages and have 
sold over 2 billion 
copies worldwide
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
290
academic authors from translation are usually in terms of prestige and the 
dissemination of their work, rather than ﬁnancial, but for textbooks the 
cumulative eﬀ ect of lots of small deals over a number of years is an aid to both 
longevity and proﬁ tability.
Table 12.1 Top 10 translated languages (source: www.unesco.org/xtrans, accessed 5 
September 2013)
Original language
Number of translations
English
1,263,024
French
223,575
German
205,969
Russian
103,041
Italian
68,939
Spanish
54,109
Swedish
39,853
Japanese
29,038
Danish
21,149
Latin
19,652
Table 12.2 Top 10 target languages (source: www.unesco.org/xtrans, accessed 5 
September 2013)
Target language
Number of translations
German
301,884
French
239,982
Spanish
228,495
English
228,495
Japanese
130,639
Dutch
111,267
Russian
100,785
Portuguese
78,838
Polish
76,697
Swedish
71,206
UNESCO has a historical database of translations which can be consulted online 
(see Tables 12.1 and 12.2). A search on the Index Translationum reveals the most 
popular original languages, with English heading the table. This clearly gives UK 
and US publishers an advantage when it comes to selling translation rights. The 
second table shows the top target languages, into which translations are made. 
What is often commented on is the imbalance in the number of translations from 
and into English. The website Three Percent showcases translated literature and 
its name derives from the low proportion of books published in the USA which 
are works in translation. Between 2000 and 2008 the UK and Ireland saw a 
modest rise in the number of translations published – from 1,721 to 2,207 titles 
(publishers.org.uk).
Foreign language co-editions
The alternative to a translation licence deal – which is used for many highly 
illustrated colour books and children’s picture books – is for the foreign language 
publishers to supply the digital ﬁles of their translations to ﬁt around the four-
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
291
colour illustrations. This type of licence is called a foreign language co-edition. 
Several language editions are then printed together by the original publisher or 
packager in order to gain economies of scale. The printing press usually has ﬁve 
cylinders carrying the printing plates. Four cylinders carry the plates which print 
the four-colour illustrations (made up of yellow, magenta, cyan and black), and the 
ﬁfth cylinder carries the plate of the text printed in black outside the areas of the 
illustrations. The press operator changes the ﬁfth plate for each language edition 
printing. The ordered quantities, carrying each publisher’s imprint, are usually 
supplied royalty inclusive. Digital colour presses allow production of shorter runs.
English and foreign language co-edition deals are central to the work of rights 
staﬀ  of highly illustrated adult and children’s publishers and packagers. For 
example, the publication of a children’s picture book may depend upon co-editions 
to make it viable, and accordingly the content may need to be sensitive to cultural 
diﬀ erences. Rights staﬀ  usually initiate deals well in advance of publication with 
English language publishers and book clubs (although the latter are now far less 
signiﬁ cant channels to market) using the book’s contents, and mock-ups of the 
jacket and blads of selected double-page spreads. The co-printing of foreign language 
editions may follow because their publishers may translate from the ﬁ nished text 
and layout. The English and foreign language co-printing of children’s books of few 
words can coincide. Negotiations with customers on the price paid per copy, the 
timing of the deals and their combined printing can be critical for a book’s viability.
Co-editions may be combined with TV tie-ins, own-brand titles and 
sponsorship deals. The complexity of these deals, involving close contact with the 
production department, makes it very difﬁcult for authors’ agents to enter this 
form of rights selling. Peter Usborne, founder of the children’s publisher 
Usborne, comments about co-editions:
You have to invest in each of the books you produce – you have to create 
something that is more expensive than your partner can aﬀ ord to create so 
that they will buy it from you rather than making it themselves. (The 
Bookseller, 19 October 2007)
Digital rights
The licensing of electronic rights became important for publishers in some areas, 
such as reference and academic publishing, as a staging point whilst they set up 
their own digital platforms. If smaller companies do not have the resources and 
skills to establish digital services, they will look to sell to third parties. Even for 
bigger players, the sale of electronic rights on a non-exclusive basis may provide 
useful external income. Customers could be media companies, such as those 
producing games (especially for children/YA), rather than other publishers, and 
the possibilities of the internet and mobile technology continue to be explored. In 
China and Japan, for example, hand-held dedicated readers are produced for 
reference works such as dictionaries. The Oxford English Dictionary, or smaller 
lexical works, are licensed by OUP to numerous platforms and devices, including 
the Kindle. There is growing interest in travel content and language phrasebooks 
being available on mobile phones.
A blad is a 
sample printed 
section
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
292
Journal and reference articles and whole books may be licensed to 
aggregators, such as EBSCO and ProQuest, which oﬀ er content from a variety 
of publishers to academic or public libraries and other institutions. Academic 
publishers oﬀ er site licences for their own electronic services to institutions such 
as universities – the licences outline the conditions under which the service is to 
be used. In the USA, libraries have formed consortia to negotiate the terms for 
access to online databases. In the UK Jisc arranges licences for databases and 
ebooks on behalf of UK higher and further education (jisc-collections.ac.uk). 
Access will be passworded and there may be limits on the number of concurrent 
users for an ebook. Universities have also negotiated oﬀ  campus access, using 
authentication systems such as Shibboleth or Athens. Responsibility for this type 
of arrangement may vary – in some companies it is handled by sales staﬀ , in 
others by rights staﬀ .
Licensing electronic rights – a starter for 10
David Attwooll, Director of Attwooll Associates Ltd, a publishing 
consultancy and licensing agency specializing in electronic media
Finding the right partners in the area of electronic rights usually requires 
active hunting, and there are technical issues around delivering content. 
Electronic rights deals can be very time consuming and, as with all rights, 
can be done in-house or outsourced to a specialist agency. Alongside the 
distribution of ebooks through e-vendors in a range of markets (now the norm 
for many publishers), content can also be licensed to a wide range of other 
e-customers. Here are some pointers:
1. 
Electronic markets are more various than book markets, and can be 
segmented in similar ways. But they can also be sorted by ebusiness type, 
including:
 
▪
library ‘aggregators’ of data,
 
▪
ebook companies,
 
▪
apps for mobile phones and tablets,
 
▪
internet service providers (ISPs) and portals,
 
▪
hardware manufacturers,
 
▪
elearning vendors,
 
▪
company websites, and
 
▪
mobile phone companies.
2. 
Understanding your e-customer’s business model facilitates successful 
licensing deals – for example, do they charge subscriptions, sell 
individual ebooks, or rely on advertising revenue?
3. 
What do you actually own? What rights do you have to sell or license? 
Conducting an audit of your intellectual property assets (including image 
rights) is a critical ﬁrst step.

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
293
4. 
Information-based content works well on screen and in searchable 
databases, especially non-ﬁction and learning materials not organized in 
continuous prose. Any metadata enabling users to ﬁnd immediately what 
is relevant to them is extremely valuable: the structure and formal tagging 
of content (including images) are key elements.
5. 
Electronic ﬁle formats are becoming more generic. Using a ﬂexible 
data structure such as XML facilitates many deals. Many e-customers 
(especially ebook companies) will also take adapted PDFs. For ebooks, 
ePub has become the standard format.
6. 
There are some industry norms for electronic licensing deals. First, 
licensing deals are non-exclusive. The deﬁnitions of e-rights granted will 
not usually be territorial or by retail sales channel (as for print rights), but 
by speciﬁc product, platform and market. Deﬁnitions should prevent data 
being reused in other products (possibly in small chunks) by the same 
e-companies. Regarding payment terms, for licences to aggregators of 
larger data products, minimum annual guarantees and a royalty based 
on usage are often achievable. By contrast, ebook agreements are 
distribution deals, so revenues are retrospective, and should be seen as 
net of an agreed discount (rather than a royalty).
7. 
Online users expect up-to-date content, and publishers may be required 
to provide updates. This is both an organizational problem and a 
commercial opportunity to add greater value.
8. 
Licence periods should be short and some control over the start date 
should be speciﬁed (since launches are often delayed).
9. 
Security of data is essential and should be covered in the contract. 
Similarly, it does not make sense to license unabridged, valuable data to 
a paying customer who is then giving it away free on the web. Smaller 
subsets are usually sufﬁcient here.
10. Acknowledgements and feedback: in addition to full publisher and 
copyright credits it is often possible to negotiate links to the publisher’s 
website. Analysis of actual usage can be speciﬁed in the agreement and is 
extremely useful in improving editorial content.
The ebook is now usually regarded as a form of distribution rather than as part of 
the sale of electronic rights. Publishers selling electronic rights, for example in 
reference content, datasets or images, will protect themselves by granting 
short-term, non-exclusive or narrow exclusive licences, in particular languages, 
limited to speciﬁc formats or platforms, with performance guarantees and 
advances. Licensing on a non-exclusive basis means that new companies, 
technologies and business models can be tried out. Strict controls on the use of 
the publisher’s brand may be written into the contract to minimize any damage to 
its reputation. In the days of the dotcom boom, sizeable money up front could be 
on oﬀ er for the right content but those sums are now far harder to negotiate. The 
publisher may prefer ﬁxed annual fees to royalty deals based on untested business 
models. Alternatively they may enter into joint ventures in which costs and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
294
income are shared in agreed proportions, for example to develop apps or APIs 
(application programming interface) with developers. Publishers seeking to sell 
electronic rights need to ensure that they hold their content in a suitable form 
such as XML. Such ﬁles can be returned from the typesetter or planned from the 
outset. Extra value will come from higher levels of structure and metadata in the 
content for sale.
Serial and extract rights
Selling serial rights is granting the right to a newspaper or magazine to publish 
extracts from a book. Serial rights can be valuable in the case of celebrity or 
political memoirs, with the ﬁ rst serial the more important because it will appear 
before the book’s publication, and can oﬀ er a national newspaper or magazine a 
scoop of some kind. These rights are often but not always retained by authors’ 
agents. Sometimes ﬁrst serial rights can be sold to two diﬀ erent publications; for 
example David Blunkett’s memoirs, The Blunkett Tapes (2006), were serialized in 
both the Guardian and Daily Mail. The second and subsequent serial rights appear 
after the book’s publication and may be sold to a succession of regional or evening 
newspapers, or magazines, at rates equal to or above that paid for original articles 
of comparable length, or for zero on the basis that the coverage will stimulate sales 
of the books. Ideas for extracts, which may come from the editor, are marked on 
the manuscript or proof and sent to chosen feature editors of newspapers and 
magazines some months ahead of the book’s publication. The author’s share of 
ﬁrst serial rights (often as much as 90 per cent) may be oﬀ set against the advance, 
so as well as providing valuable publicity for the book, the sale of such serial rights 
could be valuable ﬁnancially. In some consumer book publishers, the marketing 
department sells serial rights instead of the rights department. The sums payable 
for serial rights declined signiﬁ cantly with the onset of the ﬁ nancial crisis across 
the world economy, alongside the long-term decline of print newspapers, which 
are now tending to invest more in developing additional online content.
Film, TV, merchandising, audio and games
Publishers, other than the major trade houses, are often unfamiliar with selling 
rights to ﬁlm and TV production companies and use specialist agents – the larger 
agenting ﬁrms have developed an expertise in this area. Usually production 
companies will acquire, for a fee, an option in a novel, which gives them the right 
to come back within a ﬁxed period and purchase the full rights to take a ﬁlm into 
production. Lynette Owen comments on the chances of a work making it on to the 
screen:
between 5 per cent and 10 per cent of options are exercised and of those 
perhaps one in ten ﬁnally proceeds to production; television options have a 
higher success rate than ﬁlm options. Since options should be paid for rather 
than granted free of charge, the income is nevertheless welcome. (Owen, 6th 
edition, page 281)
First serial 
rights are more 
valuable since 
the extracts 
appear before 
the book’s 
publication
Film rights to 
The Horse 
Whisperer 
(1995) were 
sold for $3 m 
before the 
author 
Nicholas Evans 
had even 
ﬁnished the 
novel
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
295
Preferred partner arrangements with production companies enable publishers to 
sublicense ﬁlm and TV rights (rights for merchandising and games may often be 
included in those arrangements) and in turn acquire the rights to publish books of 
upcoming programmes and ﬁlms. The Harry Potter ﬁ lms became an incredibly 
successful franchise, earning around $8 bn in box oﬃ  ce revenues. As new media 
and formats arise, partners may work together to exploit cross-media opportunities 
spanning the publishing, ﬁ lm, merchandising and games industries.
Audiobook rights can be licensed exclusively in two forms: abridged and 
unabridged. Some of the main trade publishers operate audio divisions which 
either produce their own audio books or license titles from agents or other trade 
publishers without their own audiobook lists. There are also independent and 
specialist audiobook publishers. Unabridged audiobooks used to be produced 
largely by specialist publishers supplying public libraries, which may also publish 
large print books – another right available for licensing. In recent years there has 
been a trend towards unabridged editions as the main oﬀ er. Books can also be 
licensed for reading or dramatization on radio. The use of high-proﬁ le narrators 
and the availability of diﬀ erent formats – from CDs to digital downloads on to 
devices such as iPods and mobile phones – have stimulated sales of audiobooks 
(see page 87). They are especially suitable for the US market, given the long 
distances involved in travel by car there.
Other rights
Examples of other rights include condensation, promotional reprint rights 
(low-cost editions for a mass market), large print, rights for the visually impaired, 
On the 
insistence of 
J. K. Rowling, 
the audiobooks 
of Harry Potter, 
read by 
Stephen Fry, 
are wholly 
unabridged
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Rights sales
296
including Braille and Moon (tactile reading systems) and text-to-speech (generally 
granted for free), and English language paperback licensing rights to export 
territories. Material may also be licensed for use in customized textbooks for 
college courses or in coursepacks (although in the UK the latter arrangements are 
normally made via the CLA).
Many trade author–publisher contracts still refer to the grant of book club 
rights to the publisher by the author. However, in the UK, the book club sector 
(which sold books to customers at a discount by mail order) has declined severely 
in the face of competition from discounting by retailers and direct sellers, both 
terrestrial and online, and for many people the term book club is now more often 
associated with reading groups. Formerly a major force in the book trade, Book 
Club Associates was ﬁ rst sold by Bertelsmann in 2008 and was then bought by a 
home entertainment company, the Webb Group, in 2011, but it now operates more 
like an online retailer, purchasing copies of the original publisher’s own stock at 
high discount rather then preordering copies with a book club imprint; authors 
then receive their contractual royalty percentage based on the sum received. 
The same applies to the few remaining children’s book clubs. In such cases 
arrangements would usually be handled by sales rather than by rights staﬀ . 
The Folio Society specializes in oﬀ ering special editions of titles in handsome 
decorated bindings – in some cases they may be prepared to buy book blocks, 
or may obtain a reprint licence to manufacture themselves, in which case 
arrangements would be handled by rights staﬀ .
Now read this
Lynette Owen, Selling Rights, 7th edition, Routledge, 2014.
Sources
International Literary Market Place, Bowker For book publishing contacts on a 
global scale.
Literary Market Place, Bowker Annual guide to the US publishing business, 
available online or in print.
Lynette Owen (ed.), Clark’s Publishing Agreements: A book of precedents, 9th 
edition, Bloomsbury Professional, 2013. 
Publishers Association, PA Statistics Yearbook, 2012.
Web resources
www.audiopub.org US Audio Publishers Association.
www.cla.co.uk Copyright Licensing Agency.
www.copyright.com Copyright Clearance Center (CCC).
www.lunch.publishersmarketplace.com Publishers Marketplace (USA).
www.rochester.edu/College/translation/threepercent/ Three Percent is aimed 
at those interested in discovering contemporary international literature.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 13
The sales channels for books in the UK
Publishers operate through a variety of sales channels, and the choice of channel 
will depend on the sector in which they operate. The sales success of consumer 
books, for example, may depend on retail exposure and as we saw in Chapter 10, 
page 224, an important purchase prompt is being visible in the shops. High street 
booksellers remain vital to the visibility of books but the decline in physical retail, 
and the rise of internet sales, challenges publishers to make their books 
discoverable to those consumers who do not regularly visit a physical, or ‘bricks 
and mortar’, store. Also, as with many other products, consumers may use the 
high street store to discover a title and then purchase it online.
Table 13.1 shows the source of purchase for physical books in the UK. Over 
time the trend has been for the share of supermarkets and the internet to grow, 
and for chain bookshops, independents, bargain bookshops and book clubs to 
suﬀ er a decline. By comparison in 2005 the market share of internet retailers was 
8 per cent, and of supermarkets 8 per cent. With the growth in ebook sales, the 
proportion taken by the internet of all books sold is higher still. There is naturally 
a mixed purchasing pattern across channels and in 2013 83 per cent of book 
buyers had purchased online, and 76 per cent had used a bricks-and-mortar store 
(Mintel).
Table 13.1 Market share by volume in the UK book trade (source: www.booksellers.
org.uk, accessed 5 October 2013)
Market share (%)
2010
2011
2012
Internet 
25
30
38
Chain bookshops
30
27
28
Supermarkets
14
12
14
Other shops
11
11
7
Bargain bookshops
8
10
6
Book club/direct seller
6
6
5
Independent bookshops
5
4
3
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
298
The UK book trade has seen a great many changes over the last 30 years. These 
include the collapse of the Net Book Agreement in 1995 (the ofﬁcial end came in 
1997), which led to price discounting, and the development of large chains on the 
high street. Smaller shops have closed and medium-sized businesses have been 
swallowed up by their larger rivals – for example, Waterstones acquired Ottakar’s 
in 2006. The late twentieth century saw the arrival of the superstore concept from 
the USA – large, welcoming shops with a wide range of stock (typically 50,000 to 
80,000 titles) and coﬀ ee shops. The ﬁrst Borders superstore opened in Oxford 
Street in 1998; and Waterstones in Piccadilly in 1999.
Independent bookselling for the twenty-first century
Patrick Neale, Co-owner of the Jaffé & Neale bookshop and café, 
Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire
With one bookshop closing every week for the last ten years, there is little 
need to list the challenges facing high street bookshops. Second only to pubs, 
bookshops have become the victim of supermarket pricing strategies and the 
dominance of stay at home shopping and entertainment. We are only just 
beginning to face the onslaught of the ebook revolution which could make 
bookshops seem even less relevant.
And there is the irony. Research has shown that, although people may 
like to read their books on a tablet, nearly two-thirds of customers want to 
discover them in a bookshop. This has opened the whole debate about how 
bookshops can make money from ‘showrooming’ books that are subsequently 
bought online or for an e-reader. Twenty-ﬁ rst century bookselling is linked to 
the ability of high street retailers to adapt and respond to the massive changes

EP E R T
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
299
that people have made to the way they shop. These are a few of the ways they 
can face these diﬃ  cult days:
First, bookshops need to embrace new technology and not allow 
themselves to be perceived as only for the technologically incompetent. This 
could be through oﬀ ering ebooks and e-readers to their customers or by using 
social media to reach the widest possible customer group. Be this Twitter, 
Facebook, or blogs, shops need to demonstrate that they are part of the future 
and not a museum piece.
Second, independent booksellers need to connect with the interest 
groups and movements that are suspicious of globalization. So whether 
it is becoming part of the ‘Shop Local’ or the Transition Movement, or 
participating in the outrage at the tax arrangements of multinationals, 
bookshops need to join in the clamour to save communities and keep the 
humanity in people’s lives.
US bookshops have developed a clear message for their customers 
explaining that buying a few books a year more from them makes them viable 
allowing customers to gain pride in their community and keeping more than 
one channel of book purchase available. This has been best demonstrated by 
the Indiebound campaign (indiebound.org). This call to arms was followed 
in the UK in 2012 by the ‘Books are My Bag’ campaign, where publishers, 
recognizing the value high street bookshops bring, helped to fund a national 
campaign to remind consumers that real bookshops are the best place to buy 
real books.
Finally, and most importantly, bookshops need to demonstrate their value 
to customers. They may not be the cheapest and they may not have the most 
eﬃ  cient distribution network in the world, but they can provide services and 
style that no one else can oﬀ er. The ways that this can be done are too 
numerous to list, but to name a few: staging literary events and festivals, 
providing personal shopping services, discovering the best possible read (not 
those that have been the most hyped), and creating an atmosphere of friendly 
and intelligent service supported by great coﬀ ee and cake.
It is essential to overcome the lazy assumption that bookshops are old 
fashioned. They can be lively meeting places where the customer feels valued 
and can have their cultural batteries recharged. The real challenge for 
bookshops is that most of what they oﬀ er and provide does not require a 
purchase and so they have to make sure that their cultural capital provides 
revenue that will keep them in business for the next century. There are many 
bookshops ﬂ ourishing in what looks like impossible conditions. They are 
doing so because they have found a large enough group of customers who 
understand the value of what they provide and are willing to pay for it. It is 
essential for the independent to diﬀ erentiate their oﬀ er from that of other 
book suppliers and make sure that their customers enjoy the service provided.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
300
Both Borders and Waterstones were badly aﬀ ected by the growth in sales 
through the internet and supermarkets. In 2007 came the news that Borders had 
sold their UK operation to the serial entrepreneur Luke Johnson and his private 
equity ﬁrm, and the chain closed for business in 2009 (the US company closed in 
2011 with the loss of over 500 stores). Waterstones was forced to close some of its 
bookshops in both 2011 and 2013. The supermarkets have become so signiﬁcant to 
consumer publishers that in 2007 HarperCollins launched a new mass market 
list called Avon. Called ‘channel publishing’, the list was to target supermarket 
sales of three popular genres – chick lit, romance, and crime/thrillers. 
Supermarkets can call the shots, as they do in other product areas, demanding 
large discounts as well as payments to remain preferred suppliers. Publishers 
have responded not only by changing what they publish but also by forming larger 
groups, which can oﬀ er a constant supply of likely bestsellers.
The independent bookshops have had a torrid time faced with price 
discounting not only in the high street chains but also online and by the 
supermarkets. A bookseller may ﬁnd it cheaper to buy a book from Tesco or 
Amazon than directly from the publisher. In 2014 the number of independents had 
fallen below 1,000 shops – compared to over 1,400 in 2007, and more than 1,800 in 
1997. The ones that survive have sought to make a niche for themselves by oﬀ ering 
excellent service (eﬀ ectively hand-selling to customers), prompt ordering, and 
stressing their place in the community. Just as consumers are being encouraged to 
buy from local suppliers in other product areas, the independents are emphasizing 
their value in an increasingly homogenized high street. Other book outlets of 
signiﬁcance to particular kinds of publishers include airport terminal shops, 
especially at Heathrow and Gatwick, which sell enormous quantities of paperback 
ﬁction, travel and business books (ﬂight delays are a boon for book sales).
ONLINE
In the UK online bookselling means Amazon. With an international brand, 
heavy discounting on a large range of titles, 24/7 access, and features such as 
giftwrapping, the internet bookseller has built up a powerful presence in the UK 
market. Members of the Amazon Prime service have free one-day delivery on 
physical titles, and can borrow ebooks for free, with a choice of hundreds of 
thousands of titles. The selection of books dwarfs what can be found in any 
terrestrial bookshop, opening up a window for smaller publishers, which may be 
struggling to get their titles into the chains, and for backlist titles. For specialist 
and academic titles the main supply route is now through Amazon; the same is 
true for many self-published authors of both pbooks and ebooks.
The concept of the ‘long tail’ was coined by Chris Anderson in relation to 
books and music. Usually books that are not selling in sufﬁcient numbers are 
returned to the publisher. Yet the internet provides a means of marketing and 
selling these titles. If we add up this long tail of slow-selling books, Anderson 
suggested that it could add up to a greater source of revenue than the bestsellers 
prominent in bookshops. Although the theory has attracted some criticism, for 
example that the web seems to amplify the blockbuster hits, the idea does strike a 
chord with publishers, which have seen internet bookselling open up a new 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
301
channel for backlist books which had disappeared from terrestrial retail display. 
The book return rates are much lower, and the internet provides a good route for 
the fulﬁlment of low-value single book orders.
The original model was for Amazon to source books from the wholesalers, 
avoiding the need for a large investment in warehousing. By 2013 the company 
ran eight of its own distribution centres (more were promised) – ﬁ ve in England, 
two in Scotland, and one in Wales – enabling it to provide fast supply of 
bestselling lines. Many titles are still supplied from wholesalers and dispatched in 
Amazon-branded boxes. Working practices at Amazon’s distribution centres came 
under some criticism in 2013. The jobs can be physically demanding – pickers can 
walk between seven and 15 miles a day, and hand-held computers both navigate 
them around the aisles and allow management to measure their productivity. 
‘Managers could also send text messages to these devices to tell workers to speed 
up … “People were constantly warned about talking to one another by the 
management, who were keen to eliminate any form of time-wasting,” one former 
worker added’ (Financial Times, 8 February 2013). That same year saw Amazon 
also come under ﬁ re for the amount of tax it paid, with its UK subsidiary paying 
only £2.4 m on sales of £4.3 bn in 2012 (bbc.co.uk, 16 May 2013).
For some, online purchasing will never match the experience of browsing in 
their local or high street bookshop, but especially for those without ready access to a 
bookshop, the internet provides a convenient and cost-eﬀ ective method of obtaining 
books. There is the added convenience of ebooks for either study or leisure reading 
– when you have ﬁ nished a thriller late at night you can simply download the next 
title in the series straight away. Even the most ardent buyers of books on the high 
street use Amazon as well, with 66 per cent of Waterstones’ customers also buying 
from Amazon, and 61 per cent of customers of independent shops (2013 ﬁ gures 
from Mintel). The positive attitudes of consumers to the online retailing of books 
can be seen in Table 13.2. In the area of ebooks Amazon had a totally dominant 
position in 2013, with 79 per cent of people who accessed or downloaded ebooks 
using the Kindle platform – 9 per cent used Apple’s iBookstore (Ofcom).
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
302
Table 13.2 Attitudes of book buyers in the UK (2013) to online book retailers (source: Mintel)
Proportion in agreement with 
statement (%)
Online book retailers offer the cheapest prices for books
49
It’s difficult for high street bookshops to compete with online book retailers
47
It’s more convenient to shop from online book retailers than go to 
bookshops
46
Online book retailers have the best range of titles (available in both physical 
and electronic format)
35
Online book retailers have the best promotional offers
33
Online book retailers encourage me to look for more titles from my favourite 
author
32
Online book retailers are becoming too dominant in the book market
23
Online book retailers have too much control over the book industry
16
Amazon has so far held oﬀ  competition from new or existing players in the book 
market. Play.com started to ﬁ nd a place in the market selling from its oﬀ shore 
base in Jersey, but changes to the tax arrangements on products which attracted 
VAT (it was selling DVDs and similar goods tax free) forced it to become a 
marketplace for third party sellers. It is now owned by the Japanese company 
Rakuten (which also purchased the ebook retailer Kobo). The supermarkets have 
their internet operations but have not yet created a compelling oﬀ er in the area of 
ebooks. Based in Gloucester, the Book Depository aimed to service the long tail. 
Rather than hold stock, it met customer orders from the optimal source – 
publisher, wholesaler or distributor – and oﬀ ered free delivery to many parts of 
the world. Its independent status came to an end when it was purchased by 
Amazon in 2011. A former director of the Book Depository teamed up with the 
wholesaler Bertrams in 2012 to launch the online retailer Wordery. The US 
retailer Barnes & Noble brought its Nook device to the UK in 2012 backed up by 
its own website. Innovations around a hybrid model of ‘clicks and bricks’ have 
also been developed by some shops (for example Waterstones), with a facility to 
reserve books online and pick them up from a store. Direct sales of consumer 
books (both pbook and ebook) from the websites of publishers remain minimal.
Online content
In sectors such as professional and journals publishing, the model for publishing 
has shifted from the delivery of books and printed journals to the supply of 
content online. Educational publishers produce DVDs, website add-ons and online 
subscription services for schools. Many publishers will sell through third parties 
and use rights sales to take advantage of online markets, but some have built their 
own platforms to sell directly to their markets. Companies such as ProQuest and 
EBSCO oﬀ er sales channels for publishers, providing ejournals, ebooks and 
databases to libraries, companies and other institutions.
Digital downloads of audiobooks are available from a variety of websites 
including iTunes and Audible (Amazon). Silksoundbooks is a
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
303
collaboration of actors and performers who came together and decided to 
record their favourite classic literature for you to enjoy. Headed by [the actor] 
Bill Nighy, many of the artists involved believe so much in the project, that 
they have waived performance fees in favour of taking shares in the company. 
(silksoundbooks.com, accessed 7 October 2013)
Some technical book publishers are also selling digital voice audio.
THE CHAINS AND SUPERMARKETS
There is no doubt that bookselling has become much more professional in the 
last 30 years, and there are high street shops which oﬀ er a good range of stock 
amongst pleasant surroundings, with added value from coﬀ ee bars, attractive 
areas for children, and a range of events taking place. Some shops have aimed to 
become destination stores – welcoming and lively in their approach.
The chain booksellers diﬀ er in their character, and have aimed to develop 
distinctive brands. The general retailer WHSmith has broad product categories 
of Stationery, ‘News and Impulse’, and Books. It operates two core businesses: 
Travel, with 643 stores at airports, railway stations and motorway service stations; 
and High Street, with 621 stores on virtually all of the high streets in the UK. The 
book selection diﬀ ers between these businesses. In the area of e-readers and 
ebooks, it began a partnership with Kobo in 2011 and by 2013 there were 250 Kobo 
Shops in-store. The retailer attracts all demographics but parents of children aged 
5 to 15 are an important part of the customer base. In its Travel shops, the ‘typical
The original 
Dillons shop 
was founded 
in 1936 by 
Una Dillon 
(1903–93). 
The chain was 
sold to HMV 
in 1998 and 
put under the 
Waterstones 
brand in 1999
The exterior of 
Waterstones in 
Piccadilly, London. 
Europe’s largest 
bookshop, it has over 
8 miles of shelving 
and up to 200,000 
titles in stock
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
304
customer has less time to browse than the High Street customer and is more 
interested in reading materials for a journey as well as purchasing food, drink and 
confectionery’ (whsmithplc.co.uk, accessed 5 October 2013).
Waterstones, owned by the Russian oligarch Alexander Mamut since 2011, 
had around 270 shops in 2013 . An average-sized Waterstones store has a range of 
around 30,000 individual books, with 200,000 titles in the largest store. During 
the 1980s Waterstones competed ﬁercely with the Dillons chain of shops, opening 
well-designed branded stores, typically carrying a much larger range of stock than 
traditional bookshops. The two chains were brought together by their parent 
company HMV, which acquired Dillons in 1995 and Waterstones in 1998. They 
were called ‘upmarket’ booksellers, exempliﬁed by their wide range of hardback 
and trade paperback titles and the depth of backlist titles stocked. However 
the size of these stores became dwarfed in the late 1990s by the opening by 
Waterstones and Borders of ﬂagship superstores carrying upwards of 150,000 
titles. The demographic for Waterstones is skewed towards men, and its 
customers are also ‘aﬄ  uent, being signiﬁ cantly more likely than average to be 
from the AB socio-economic group and have a gross household income of over 
£50,000’ (Mintel). To some astonishment from the book trade, in 2012 the retailer 
announced a co-operation with Amazon in the area of ebooks: ‘After previously 
describing Amazon as “a ruthless, money-making devil”, Waterstones’ managing 
director, James Daunt, announced in May that he was teaming up with the US 
internet store and would sell and promote its Kindle tablets and e-readers in the 
UK’s premier book chain’ (bbc.co.uk, 24 October 2012).
The academic-orientated Blackwell chain dominates the ownership of 
campus-related bookstores (Waterstones closed some of its campus stores in 
2013). Blackwell has over 40 outlets in the UK including its ﬂ agship store in 
Oxford, which boasts the world’s largest room with books on display for sale. 
Another important academic chain, with 20 campus shops in 2013, is John 
Smith’s. One issue for academic shops is how to attract footfall outside the two 
peak sales periods of the autumn and the new year. Some campus shops now 
stock stationery, music and gift items; and in 2013 Blackwell announced a new 
digital strategy of providing resources sourced from a variety of publishers.
There are smaller chains such as Foyles, which has six shops in London and 
one in Bristol. It is famous for its large shop in Charing Cross Road, where a 
range of events are held: ‘it’s not just Booker winners and learned thinkers who 
present their work in the Gallery; we now oﬀ er regular concerts with stars from 
Ian Bostridge and Sarah Chang to Jamie Cullum and Kit Downes’ (foyles.co.uk, 
accessed 5 October 2013). James Daunt has his own small chain of six upmarket 
shops in London, which avoid discounting: ‘The shelves of Daunt Books 
interweave travel guides with a world of literature; the shop’s cloth bags are de 
rigueur for London literary locavores’ (New York Times, 26 September 2013).
How the chains operate
The largest chain dedicated to books, Waterstones, operates centralized buying, 
that is book buyers at head ofﬁce select titles presented to them by the publishers’ 
sales or key account managers. This usually prevents the publishers’ sales 
representatives from selling titles directly into their branches. In 2009 the chain 
Waterstones 
dropped the 
apostrophe 
from its name 
in 2012 in order 
to provide ‘a 
more versatile 
and practical 
spelling’
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
305
opened its own distribution hub at Burton upon Trent, to receive books from 
publishers before distribution around its stores. As required, for example to 
source books from smaller publishers, the company also uses the wholesalers. 
WHSmith is its own wholesaler – it operates centralized buying from publishers 
and owns its own warehouse at Swindon, which receives stock from the 
publishers and then distributes the books to its branches. The chains have central 
marketing departments which organize, often in collaboration with publishers’ 
sales and marketing staﬀ , consumer advertising, in-store promotion, and author 
signings in the branches.
Supermarkets and other non-book retailers
Other kinds of big retail chains, such as the supermarkets, buy centrally and 
receive their stock either directly from publishers or via wholesalers. The 
supermarkets often oﬀ er massive discounts on bestsellers, usually up to 50 per 
cent of the recommended price. In 2007 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was 
sold by Asda at £5.00 compared to the recommended retail price of £17.99. In 
general the supermarkets make larger margins on books than they do on the 
purchasing of food. Although the supermarkets’ share of the overall book market 
is relatively limited, their share of sales can reach 50 per cent for top bestsellers, 
which explains why they can ask for discounts as high as 65 per cent or more. 
Specialist merchandisers, for example Oakwood Distribution (owned by Tesco), 
stock the shelves in supermarkets and monitor stock levels. Beyond the range 
stocked in-store there are many more titles available as pbooks and ebooks 
through the online stores of Tesco, Asda (owned by Walmart) and Sainsbury’s – 
in 2013 Tesco unveiled its own low-priced Android tablet, the Hudl; and in 2014 its 
ebook platform blinkbox. Tesco is the leader amongst the supermarkets in the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
306
sale of books, followed by Asda and Sainsbury’s: ‘Tesco achieves its position 
through a strong peak in buying among the C2 socio-economic group which 
represents its core shopper, while Asda is particularly successful at targeting the 
DE socio-economic group. Both of these are segments of the market which the 
major high street book chains like Waterstones often struggle to reach’ (Mintel). 
The more upmarket proﬁ le of Sainsbury’s may explain why it is not as successful, 
as its customers may be purchasing at bookshops.
Books are available in many other kinds of retail outlets, which the publishers 
reach through wholesalers. For example, the merchandising wholesalers serve 
newsagents, convenience general stores, ferry port outlets and garages. They will 
check and replenish stock of mass-market paperbacks, and remove slow-selling 
titles for destruction. Books are sold through garden, DIY and leisure centres, and 
specialist shops such as computer stores and toy shops.
BARGAIN BOOKSHOPS
Of declining importance are the bargain bookshops, which occupy high street 
positions, sometimes on short leases granted by stressed landlords. Publishers 
have a long history of ridding themselves, albeit quietly, of their mistakes in 
printing too many copies. When a title’s sales are insufﬁcient to cover the cost 
of storage, it may be pulped or remaindered through bargain outlets. Some 
publishers never remainder in the home market so as not to damage their brand 
and sales of full-price stock. The greater usage of short-run printing has reduced 
the need to remainder.
The promotional book publishers provide the bargain chains with a ready 
supply of newly created low-priced books. Such publishers and the remainder 
dealers are well represented at the London and Frankfurt Book Fairs, and have 
their own London fairs, organized by Ciana, in January and September. A bargain 
chain may also sell new titles at deep discounts alongside remaindered titles, and 
may sell other goods such as stationery and artist’s materials.
WHOLESALERS AND INTERMEDIARIES
Trade wholesalers
Many of the independent bookshops stock from 12,000 to 20,000 titles. Most 
purchase their stock from the two large trade wholesalers, which oﬀ er next-day 
delivery. Gardners, owned by the Little Group and based in Eastbourne, stocks 
over 400,000 titles at any one time and supplies many of the large trade retailers. 
Waterstones buys all its books from small publishers through the wholesaler. 
Bertram Books, owned by Connect Group (formerly called Smiths News), is based 
near Norwich; it has over 200,000 titles in stock. Wholesalers can also act as 
distributors for small publishers, and they have installed POD facilities and digital 
warehouses for ebooks as additional services.
From the late 1980s, the trade wholesalers revolutionized the speed and 
efﬁciency of book distribution through their supply to the independent bookshops, 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
307
which were faced with a myriad of publishers’ invoicing systems, and publishers’ 
warehouses which could be slow and inefﬁcient. The wholesalers’ growth was 
grounded in their focus on customer service to booksellers. They oﬀ ered the 
convenience of dealing with just a few invoicing systems, rather than those of 
dozens of publishers; of online bibliographic information systems (including 
marketing and purchasing advice); of online ordering; and of consolidated orders 
with fast and reliable delivery. The wholesalers became the booksellers’ stockroom. 
If the trade wholesalers had restricted their ambitions to the independent 
booksellers they too would have faced eventual decline. But they extended their 
reach into serving the retail chains and supermarkets, entered the school library 
supply market (long restricted to specialist suppliers) and began to export. At the 
end of the 1990s, they received a ﬁllip from the emerging internet booksellers, such 
as Amazon UK, which initially drew their stock from the wholesalers.
Book market information
The retail outlets summarized above account for most of the UK retail sales 
of books. The publishers sell their new titles directly to the retailers (or via 
wholesalers). But the data of actual sales made by the retailers to their customers 
is of critical importance to the retailers, wholesalers and publishers. The 
installation by retailers of electronic point of sale (EPOS) systems, reading the 
bar-codes on covers when sales are made, enables the retailers to monitor the rate 
of sale of titles and to control their inventory (by reordering the titles which sell or 
by returning unsold titles to the publisher). The eﬀ ect of EPOS installations was 
that booksellers placed smaller orders more frequently (provided that a title was 
stocked in the ﬁrst place) and expected faster deliveries.
For pbooks Nielsen BookScan collects the sales data by title from almost all of 
the diﬀ erent kinds of book retailers from across the country and from internet 
booksellers, and produces various bestseller charts which are published in The 
Bookseller weekly and in other media. Bestseller lists for ebooks became available 
in 2013 using data from publishers.
Data is also sold to interested parties. Thus, for example, publishers cannot 
only monitor the sales performance of their own titles – their rise and fall – but 
also that of competitors. Publishers armed with that information are in a far better 
position to respond to the needs for quick reprints or not. However, the data 
cannot help publishers’ sometime over-optimism or misjudgement of printing too 
many copies of a new title at the outset, or that of booksellers’ stocking too many 
copies in the knowledge that they can return unsold stock.
Returns
The return of unsold print books to publishers from retailers and wholesalers 
is an expensive and wasteful characteristic of the book business, which was 
estimated by KPMG in 1998 to cost the industry £100 m. Around 14 per cent 
of books (by sales value) are returned to the publisher, and book wastage still 
accounts for 20 per cent of production in trade publishing. This has rightly raised 
ecological concerns – is it right to have such a culture of wasteful distribution 
within the book industry?
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
308
This is alongside the issue of book miles – books may be printed the other 
side of the world, say in India, before entering the warehouse, say in Oxford: ‘As 
each order is processed, books that have already travelled nearly 8,000 miles to 
get to Oxford now set oﬀ  on their travels again’ (Bullock and Walsh, page 9). In 
the area of environmental impact, many publishers are trying to achieve carbon 
neutral targets; and the larger companies have shown an interest in corporate 
social responsibility (CSR), given their sourcing of work from companies around 
the world, often in developing nations. For example, Pearson is a founding 
signatory to the UK Global Compact, which ‘has successfully engaged many 
thousands of global companies in considering their responsibilities towards 
labour standards, human rights, environmental management and in tackling 
corruption’ (pearson.com, accessed 25 September 2013).
Library suppliers
The public, academic and corporate libraries are supplied by booksellers and 
library suppliers. The UK public library market has been difﬁcult and long gone 
are the days when library sales supported hardback runs of new titles. There has 
been continued consolidation amongst the main library suppliers. Following the 
collapse of the Net Book Agreement, the public libraries sought higher discounts 
– above 30 per cent – through collective regional purchasing consortia, while still 
demanding a large amount of bibliographic selection support and book processing 
from the suppliers such as Askews, Holt Jackson and Peters (which specializes in 
children’s books). The entry of the trade wholesaler Bertrams into the public 
library market, through the purchase of Cypher, caused consternation amongst 
the library suppliers and publishers, who have conventionally segmented this 
channel through diﬀ erent discounts and terms. In 2007 Gardners purchased 
Askews, followed by Holt Jackson in 2008, in a further consolidation of the 
wholesaler and library supply market. Blackwell’s, Dawson and Coutts (owned by 
the giant US wholesaler Ingram) served academic markets, but consolidation 
again occurred with the acquisition of Dawsons by Bertrams in 2011 and the 
withdrawal of Blackwell’s from library supply in 2013 (with its contracts sold to 
Dawsons). The library suppliers export, especially academic and STM titles, 
sometimes under tendered contracts, to national and regional government 
libraries, and university and corporate research libraries. Ebooks are sold or rented 
through the ebook platforms run by the library suppliers, for example dawsonera 
from Bertrams.
Discounts
Under the wholesale model, publishers sell their books to retailers and 
intermediaries at diﬀ erent discounts oﬀ  their recommended retail prices (RRP). 
They aim to keep their discounts secret and by law must not collude with rival 
companies. The main factors aﬀ ecting discount levels are:
 
▪
the type of book – hardback , paperback, ebook; consumer or non-consumer,
 
▪
the role and value the intermediary plays in the supply chain,
 
▪
the balance of power between the buyer and seller,
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
309
 
▪
historical precedent, and
 
▪
the size of order on a particular book or group of books.
For some publishers, the best discount is zero. The intermediaries are cut out 
of the supply chain entirely or are dealt with on low, or ‘short’, discounts. For 
example, the learned journal publishers may grant a discount to the subscription 
agents of 0 to 5 per cent. The highly specialist publishers producing very high-
priced information products sold directly to professional markets may grant a 
discount of 10 to 20 per cent on an order received from a bookseller. The school 
textbook publishers may grant a discount of 17 to 20 per cent to a school supplier 
such as a bookseller, specialist school contractor or local authority purchasing 
organization. In such examples, the publishers generate the demand themselves 
and can supply end-users directly – the intermediaries provide a convenient 
service to the end-users. If schools are supplied direct, a discount of 10 to 15 per 
cent may be oﬀ ered as an incentive, based on the size of the order or as part of a 
special oﬀ er (for example, if orders are received by a certain date).
The standard discount to booksellers for academic books is 30 to 35 per cent; 
college textbook publishers oﬀ er discounts of up to 40 per cent. The publishers 
argue that they have achieved the adoptions through their own promotion. The 
terrestrial booksellers argue that they are physically stocking the titles for student 
purchase and displaying other titles that they might buy. Textbook discounts have 
risen to some extent from the pressure exerted by the chains, especially Waterstones 
and Amazon. However, the retailers’ leverage on the textbook publishers for 
increased discounts is far less than on the consumer publishers. The major 
publishers are resistant and are building their direct supply capabilities.
In consumer books, the discounts are more varied and are the highest in the 
world. In 2012 they averaged around 62 per cent for print titles across ﬁ ction, 
non-ﬁ ction and children’s (Publishers Association). For ebooks they could reach 
65 per cent and Amazon could ask for the publisher to bear the cost of the VAT 
payable. A small publisher might give a discount of 40 per cent to Waterstones and 
55 per cent to a wholesaler, but the question then arises as to how widely their titles 
will be stocked. To get shelf space a larger publisher will oﬀ er higher discounts and 
will pay for its titles to be prominently displayed front of store. These co-op charges 
can amount to many thousands of pounds, and can be asked for by other retailers 
such as the supermarkets. The terrestrial retailers argue that their expensive display 
space generates the sales for the publishers; smaller publishers become frustrated 
by their inability to access the system. In order to survive, they have found new 
routes to market through Amazon or direct sales.
OTHER SALES CHANNELS
Direct sales
A proportion of children’s publishers’ sales and a very high proportion of 
educational publishers’ sales do not pass through retailers. Furthermore, some 
publishers, especially those issuing specialist academic and professional titles, or 
highly niche trade titles, may sell them directly to end-users by conventional 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
310
means or through the internet, and there are other sales channels available, such 
as sales at special events or fairs.
Book clubs
Sales to book clubs are handled by publishers under rights deals. Book clubs 
conventionally occupied a major segment of mail-order sales to consumers. 
Founded in 1966, Book Club Associates (BCA) was a major player in book 
publishing when there were ﬁ xed prices and few alternatives to the high street 
shops. It found it difﬁcult to retain members in the face of new retail competition 
oﬀ ering deep discounts. For example, Amazon emails information about new or 
discounted titles to customers with the relevant proﬁle. Previously owned by 
Bertelsmann, BCA is now part of the Webb Group. Another book club is the Folio 
Society, founded in 1947, which specializes in handsome illustrated hardbacks in 
a range of bindings.
Direct selling companies
Some companies sell books (and other products) directly to customers in the 
workplace, their local sports centre, or at home. They employ ‘agents’ who receive a 
percentage on sales, and allow customers time to examine the books before they 
purchase. The companies order very large quantities of selected titles from 
publishers on a non-return basis, and sell them at a discount oﬀ  the publisher’s 
price of between 50 to 75 per cent, usually six months after publication. The 
pre-eminent company is The Book People, which had revenues of over £90 m in 
2012. Through the internet or the telephone, or through its distributor network in a 
range of workplaces, customers buy at deep discounts oﬀ  the recommended price.
Children’s books
Children’s books sell well when displayed face out alongside other kinds of 
products, whether in the multi-product WHSmith chain, or amongst groceries or 
toys, where parents are likely to have their children in tow. They are available in
The Folio 
Society was 
founded in 
1947 by Charles 
Ede, with the 
dream of 
publishing 
beautiful books 
that would be 
affordable to 
everyone
Scholastic ran 13,000 
book fairs in schools 
across the UK and 
the Republic of 
Ireland in 2013, 
reaching over four 
million children
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
311
supermarkets, toyshops, and internet retailers. Like the educational textbook 
publishers, children’s publishers also supply their books directly to schools when 
their books are used to support the National Curriculum.
The school is an important outlet for children’s books, providing a setting 
where children’s books leap through the adult sales barrier and important 
word-of-mouth recommendations amongst children themselves take place. School 
book fairs have grown enormously and involve the supplier (Scholastic is the 
largest seller) providing the school with upwards of 200 titles displayed face out 
on special mobile bookcases. The school beneﬁts from a sales commission or free 
books.
Used books
Worthy of note in any discussion of the sales channels for books is the burgeoning 
second-hand or used book market. Oxfam has over 100 specialist bookshops, 
alongside its sale of books in its other retail outlets and online. The internet has 
revolutionized the search and sale of second-hand books: Amazon sells second-
hand copies through its Marketplace scheme; and AbeBooks (acquired by Amazon 
in 2008) lists millions of new, used, rare and out-of-print books from thousands 
of booksellers. As Theodore Dalrymple comments:
if there is a particular book that you want urgently, the internet is a wonder: 
you type in the title, you pay by credit card, the book arrives the next day. 
There is no need any longer to resort to the bookﬁ nder, that strange 
professional searcher after needles in haystacks, who guards his sources 
more jealously than any journalist and, I suspect, would not reveal them 
under torture. (Daily Telegraph, 3 December 2012)
Publishers are concerned about the impact of second-hand print sales on the sales 
of new books, and authors of course receive no royalties on sales past the initial 
purchase. In 2013 Amazon secured a patent which would enable it to sell ebooks 
second hand. How likely this is as a development is diﬃ  cult to determine at the 
time of writing but if it goes ahead, ‘secondhand ebooks would be very likely to 
cannibalise sales of new ebooks, and probably to a greater extent than piracy 
because it will be legal, easy and entirely without emotional repercussion’ (Forbes, 
8 February 2013). Textbook publishers have to issue new editions on a regular 
basis to counteract the attractions for students of buying second hand. There is 
also concern about the sale of used books described as being like new. These could 
be unwanted review copies or returns that have found their way into the second-
hand market. There are other channels for used books, including initiatives such 
as BookCrossing, which encourages readers to leave books in a public place to be 
picked up by others. Started in 2001 BookCrossing asks readers to tag a book 
before releasing it ‘into the wild’, enabling the book’s progress to be tracked 
(bookcrossing.com).
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
The sales channels for books in the UK
312
Sources
Chris Anderson, ‘The Long Tail’, Wired, 12:10, October 2004.
Adrian Bullock and Meredith Walsh, The Green Design and Print Production 
Handbook, Ilex, 2013.
Philip Kogan, ‘Independent in a Sea of Conglomerates’, Logos, 18:2, 2007.
Robert McCrum, ‘Fear the Revolution’, The Observer, 1 July 2007.
Laura Miller, Reluctant Capitalists: Bookselling and the culture of consumption, 
University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Mintel, Books and E-Books, September 2013.
Sarah O’Connor, ‘Amazon Unpacked’, Financial Times, 8 February 2013.
Ofcom, Online Copyright Infringement Tracker: March to May 2013, prepared by 
Kantar Media, 2013.
Publishers Association, PA Statistics Yearbook, 2012.
John Sutherland, ‘Brave New World’, Financial Times, 9 October 2004.
John B. Thompson, Merchants of Culture, Polity, 2012.
Web resources
www.booksellers.org.uk The Booksellers Association represents over 4,000 
retail outlets.
www.booktokens.co.uk Book tokens were ﬁ rst introduced into the UK in 1932; 
their story is told here.
www.readitswapit.co.uk Readers swap books online.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER 14
Getting into publishing
Publishing is a popular career choice and there is strong competition to enter the 
industry. Digital developments – from ebooks to apps and interactive ﬁ ction – 
have been prominent in the media, highlighting the exciting opportunities for 
new entrants unafraid of new technologies or fast-paced change. Companies have 
broadened out their view of what comprises a good candidate, to include digital 
literacy, an entrepreneurial mind-set, and an appreciation of changes across other 
media and throughout society. There is also a greater variety of job roles to 
consider, as these merge across functional boundaries (for example production 
editor), take on a digital focus (for example digital product manager), or venture 
into multimedia (for example media research and commissioning).
Although many junior jobs that are advertised state that previous publishing 
experience is necessary, entry to publishing is paradoxically mainly at the bottom. 
You should therefore snatch any kind of work in any area of publishing, whatever 
the size of ﬁrm. Publishers usually recruit only to ﬁll vacancies which, at the entry 
level, often occur at no more than a month’s notice. Working on a placement, a 
short-term contract, or covering for a permanent employee’s maternity leave, 
can be a good opportunity. Once in, you will be learning, gaining personal 
impressions of various jobs by talking to people, and, what is more, be in a 
position to hear about future jobs. From that bridgehead, it is usually easier to 
obtain a second job than the ﬁrst, by moving sideways or upwards within or 
outside the ﬁrm. The Publishing Training Centre originally developed the 
National Occupational Standards for Publishing for the main job categories, 
which are now available from Creative Skillset. They list job competences against 
which candidates may be assessed.
Do not fear that your ﬁrst job will necessarily determine your subsequent 
career. It is best to complete at least a year in the ﬁrst job, but two to three job 
changes in the ﬁrst ﬁve years are not uncommon. At the outset, it is preferable to 
think ﬁrst of the kinds of books you would be interested in publishing and hence 
the type of publishing company (sometimes it can be problematic to move across 
publishing sectors); and second of the kind of work for which you feel you might 
have a particular aptitude.
To increase your chances, good oﬃ  ce skills and computer literacy 
(knowledge of Microsoft Oﬃ  ce) are necessary for all jobs. Experience of 
administrative work and proofreading skills are desirable. Strong writing and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
314
analytical skills will be sought, which may have been exercised in a piece of 
research at university. The ability to use publishing software such as Adobe 
InDesign and experience of ePub ﬁ le conversion are highly useful alongside 
familiarity with social media and online communities. An understanding of 
HTML is increasingly important (set up your own website on WordPress); 
and explore Google Analytics. If you are a bookseller and want to move into 
publishing, two to three years of bookselling is ample. For any newcomer to 
the industry, work experience at a publisher will help your CV stand out, and a 
temporary job with a publisher during the summer may lead to the elusive ﬁrst 
full-time appointment. The ability to drive is also useful.
FIRST STEPS
Market research
You must carry out research on publishing in general and on your target 
publishers in particular, and especially you should research the books these ﬁrms 
publish. Read the trade press available in print or online – for example The 
Bookseller (UK), Publishers Weekly (US), Publishing Perspectives (international), 
BookBrunch (UK), Publishers Lunch (US); Book2Book (UK), Digital Book World 
(US); read book reviews and sign up for Goodreads; and visit libraries and 
bookshops to look at publishers’ books and to seek advice from librarians and 
booksellers. You can also follow publishers on Twitter and visit their Facebook 
pages. For specialist areas visit the appropriate library or bookshop. When visiting 
bookshops, during their quiet periods try to talk to the manager who deals directly 
with the central ofﬁce or publishers’ reps. When you have narrowed down the 
ﬁeld or have secured an interview, you must visit the publisher’s website and 
catalogue before any further approach is made.
Networking
Networking is a key publishing skill and once developed will stand you in good 
stead even when you are settled in the industry, when you may be searching out 
new prospects for your business. Contacts in publishing provide insight into 
particular ﬁrms, oﬀ ering you advice, spreading knowledge of your abilities, and 
alerting you to impending vacancies. Sometimes these contacts are inﬂuential 
enough to secure you a preliminary discussion or interview, though rarely a job 
itself. Therefore, ﬁrst tap your family and personal connections; if you draw a 
blank there, take the initiative. You can network by joining the Society of Young 
Publishers (SYP) in a variety of locations including London, Oxford and Scotland. 
It holds frequent meetings and an annual conference, at which senior publishers 
speak, and publishes the journal InPrint. Membership is not restricted to people 
employed in publishing. Women in Publishing (WiP) holds regular meetings in 
London. Membership is open to women of any age in publishing, unwaged and 
students. You may be able to attend meetings of the Independent Publishers 
Guild (IPG) in London and around the country (small and medium-sized 
publishers), or go to events of organizations such as the Oxford Publishing Society 
The London 
Book Fair held 
in April 
provides a 
great 
opportunity to 
view the output 
of publishers
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
315
(OPuS), BookMachine, or the Publishers Publicity Circle (PPC). Publishing 
groups  and professional connections on LinkedIn provide contact opportunities, 
especially in non-consumer publishing.
QUALIFICATIONS
Most entry into publishing requires an undergraduate degree, and common 
subjects are English, History and Modern Languages. People with degrees in 
science and other specialities, such as law or medicine, are at a premium for 
publishers in those areas; and publishers developing digital products and services 
would love to recruit graduates from mathematics and computer science. A 
teaching background or experience in English language teaching is particularly 
useful for educational and ELT publishing, and African studies or experience of 
working for Voluntary Service Overseas for international educational publishers. 
Some legal background is useful for rights and contracts positions. Language 
degrees are desirable for rights and export sales departments of all kinds of 
publishers. The level of degree is less important. Those with doctorates seeking 
their ﬁrst junior job may face the difﬁculty that they are that much older than 
competing younger applicants. Some of the major publishers oﬀ er graduate 
recruitment schemes. For example, under the long-running Macmillan scheme, 
a small number of graduates are selected each year and are given an accelerated, 
diverse and international experience to shape them for management positions.
Pre-entry qualiﬁcation
Traditionally the only departments in which formal vocationally orientated 
qualiﬁcations were highly desirable were graphic design and production. For 
marketing posts publishers have come to recognize the beneﬁ ts of qualiﬁcations 
from the Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM). The pre-entry publishing 
courses, which used to concentrate on copy-editing and production skills, now 
also cover the business and marketing aspects of publishing. At undergraduate 
level, students can choose to study publishing on its own or along with other 
disciplines. There has been a large increase in the range of courses available at 
undergraduate and graduate levels, with student places around several hundred 
per year. Their links with publishers, various work experience schemes for 
students, and the rise of their former students into management positions have 
undermined the traditionalist view that pre-entry vocational training is a waste of 
time. Attaining a BA or MA in Publishing does not guarantee a job in publishing 
but it substantially increases the chances – the established courses score 
impressive success rates. Some publishers, recognizing the quality of graduates 
from the main programmes, advertise job openings directly on their websites.
Work experience
There are some websites that advertise work experience, and some of the larger 
publishers have established mechanisms for recruiting students keen to gain, 
mostly unpaid, placements. You can write to the HR departments or if you have 
In 2014 
LinkedIn had 
over 300 m 
members
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
316
any contacts inside a publisher, use them to ﬁnd out who it would be best to 
contact. Work experience is an excellent preparation for a career in publishing. 
By working in diﬀ erent departments you can gain ﬁrst-hand experience of the 
diﬀ erent functions, ﬁnd out about your aptitudes, and build a network of contacts: 
employers may treat it as an extended interview. Whilst there continues to be a 
large amount of unpaid work experience oﬀ ered, there is a trend towards paid 
assignments (see the information at bookcareers.com).
Other experience which increases a job applicant’s attractiveness includes 
editing your school or college magazine, marketing and website work, and 
short-term work in a bookshop.
FINDING VACANCIES
Recruitment agencies
There are a variety of agencies that recruit for publishers. Examples are Atwood 
Tate, Judy Fisher, Inspired Selection, PFJ Media Recruitment, and Redwood. 
Some specialize in more senior positions and will help headhunt staﬀ  from rival 
companies. The agencies regularly advertise junior positions on their own and 
other websites. Some of the agencies encourage job hunters to register with them, 
oﬀ er free advice, and they will forward the details of likely candidates when a 
vacancy occurs. It is unlikely they will take someone on their books without a 
publishing degree and six months of work experience within the industry.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
317
Publishers also use agencies to recruit for temporary positions. There is 
always a demand from publishers for temporary staﬀ  to ﬁll jobs vacated by people 
on holiday or ill. In London this is a good way of getting the feel of diﬀ erent 
publishers and can lead to a permanent job.
Advertisements and search
Advertisements for publishing jobs appear in The Bookseller and the national 
press (mainly the Guardian on a Monday). Some companies use more generic 
recruitment websites, such as Monster, and publishers outside London may 
advertise locally. The high cost of advertising has prompted many publishers 
to advertise jobs on free websites, such as those of the IPG, SYP, and the 
Oxford International Centre for Publishing Studies; and on their own career 
web pages, as well as on Facebook and Twitter. Many jobs, especially in trade 
publishing, are not advertised at all, and publishers prefer to use word-of-mouth 
recommendations, especially referrals from their own employees. You need to use 
a variety of search engines to ﬁ nd internships, and try diﬀ erent keywords, such as 
‘publishing work experience’ or ‘publishing opportunities’: look through all result 
pages. Career-based websites, such as Prospects (UK) can be useful.
YOUR APPLICATION
Preparing your CV and covering letter
To secure an interview you must attract the publisher’s attention by submitting a 
compelling and immaculately tailored CV and covering letter, without spelling 
mistakes, inconsistent punctuation or ungrammatical sentences. Many of those 
applying for their ﬁrst publishing job, as well as those applying for subsequent 
positions, fail on these points at this initial hurdle.
A typical CV (or résumé) will have the following headings:
 
▪
personal details,
 
▪
personal statement – a short description of your attributes and personal 
qualities,
 
▪
education,
 
▪
relevant previous employment and work experience, paid and unpaid – other 
employment can be moved later on in the CV,
 
▪
skills and qualiﬁcations (include evidence of digital and commercial 
aptitude),
 
▪
personal interests, and
 
▪
references.
The CV is an organized summary of the key facts (not opinions) about yourself. 
Use bold to highlight headings (avoid underlining) and choose a readable and 
professional typeface; avoid boxes and photographs. Bullet points may be a useful 
way of emphasizing essential points about a job or your degree – projects 
undertaken, achievements and skills developed. While emphasizing your assets, 
the CV must be truthful. Each element, backed with evidence, should prove to the 
publisher that you have the qualities and skills for the job: omit those that do not. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
318
It should not be longer than two A4 pages. For those with little work experience, 
the chronological CV laid out in a form style is usually the best approach. The 
information is listed in chronological order under headings.
Under personal details give your full name, contact address with home and 
mobile telephone numbers, email, date of birth, and nationality. The education 
section lists college and school details, with dates, courses taken, grades achieved, 
special projects, scholarships, prizes. Highlight any occupational training courses 
which show relevant skills.
If you have relevant employment and work experience, you will want to put 
the details near to the top of the CV, usually in reverse chronological order – the 
most recent ﬁrst. Provide employers’ names, your job titles with duties and 
responsibilities, promotions, special awards and accomplishments (for example 
ideas that reduced costs, increased proﬁtability, streamlined administration) – 
a few key points for each job. Relevant work outside publishing should be 
emphasized, for example ofﬁce, library or bookshop work, preparing a ﬁrm’s 
literature or magazine, market research, mailing list management, public and 
customer relations, teaching and work overseas.
Whatever the CV format, the skills emphasized may be those pertaining 
particularly to speciﬁc jobs, for example design or proofreading, and those 
which are more generic, such as computer literacy, website development, 
driving, languages, numeracy, administration, communication (for example, 
presentations, telesales and email). At management levels, applicants often start 
their CVs with a personal statement highlighting their achievements, skill and 
experience. This is followed by sections on their career history and key skills.
Activities and interests may be incorporated under the above headings or 
listed separately. If you are about to leave full-time education, your skills and keen 
interests (for example, photography, sport) assume great importance because with 
little work experience they mark you out. You should list your leadership or 
administrative positions and achievements. Older candidates who have missed out 
on entry level jobs need to build a portfolio of projects.
The CV usually ends with the names and telephone numbers of your two or 
three referees who can convey your character, stability and competence to perform 
the job. Brief them beforehand. One should act as a character reference. You can 
state, if necessary, that they should not be contacted without prior consultation. It 
is increasingly common to say that references are available on request.
Use factual, concise, simple language – without abbreviations or jargon – and 
active verbs. Have someone who is literate or familiar with recruitment check and 
edit your CV. It is vital to avoid basic spelling and grammatical errors: for example, 
check your use of apostrophes and avoid mixing up their and there (do not rely on 
spell checkers). Use good quality white paper (avoid colour printing and coloured 
paper). Set good margins with adequate spaces top and bottom. Leave one line space 
between sections. Try not to break a section at the bottom of the ﬁrst page (a 
heading should be followed by at least two lines of text, or carried over).
Covering letter
The covering letter accompanies the CV. Its purpose is to show the publisher the 
beneﬁts of employing you, to whet the publisher’s appetite to learn more about 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
319
you – to read your CV and to call you to interview. The letter should be no longer 
than one page of A4, say three to ﬁve short paragraphs, printed on white A4 paper 
(the same as the CV). If you are applying for your ﬁrst job in publishing you will 
not have space, nor would it be desirable, to expound at length on your love of 
books and reading.
The letter should be headed with your name and contact details and 
addressed to the head of the department to which you are applying, to the HR 
department, or, if replying to an advertisement, to the person stated. It is vital to 
spell correctly the names of the manager and publisher. Start with a brief and 
simple statement of your reasons for writing – for example that you are applying 
for position X, advertised in journal Y, on Z date, or are seeking work, or mention 
a mutual contact referral – and that you enclose your CV.
Orientate the letter to the job, ﬁrm, your suitability and enthusiasm:
 
▪
State brieﬂy your current position, for example about to leave college with 
expected qualiﬁcations.
 
▪
Show your research of the publisher by referring to recent or future books or 
promotions.
 
▪
Stress your motives and suitability: your relevant experience, skills and 
enthusiasm. Link your attributes to those speciﬁed in the advertisement, and 
you may want to use similar phrasing. Convey your enthusiasm by anchoring 
it to some credential, or a relevant fact.
 
▪
Give positive reasons for making the career step and for your keen interest in 
the job.
 
▪
Sign oﬀ  using ‘Yours sincerely’ and sign your name above your printed 
name.
Use relatively short paragraphs rather than a few long ones; use plain English, 
concise and precise language, and the active voice. Avoid clichés and unappealing 
abruptness. To judge tone, try reading the letter aloud the next day, or ask 
someone else, such as a tutor or senior colleague, to read and proofread it. Ask 
them what overall impression you have conveyed in the letter – employers 
welcome the right level of enthusiasm. Remember you are trying to persuade a 
stranger to interview you.
Application form
Some publishers supply application forms. Make copies of the form if not 
supplied electronically. Follow the instructions and read it right through twice 
before starting. Take particular care with your full answers to the major open-
ended questions or ‘other information’. Use the photocopies for drafting and 
layout. If necessary, attach an extra sheet. You may be allowed to attach your CV 
and a covering letter.
What to do now
If you have been shortlisted, the publisher will contact you to arrange the 
interview. You may receive a rejection – like the majority – or worse, hear nothing. 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
320
Difﬁcult as it is, do not let depression and frustration colour future applications. 
No application is wasted: elements can be reused and modiﬁed. Some publishers 
hold strong but rejected applicants on ﬁle.
Direct approach to publishers
Since many publishing jobs are not advertised, writing speculatively to publishers 
can work; but be prepared to write a large number of applications. Many 
publishers have high staﬀ  turnover at junior levels or need to cover maternity 
leave and these continually create new opportunities. Because so many 
humanities graduates apply to the London consumer book publishers and their 
editorial departments, you increase your chances if you apply to other sectors and 
departments. There are many opportunities in sales, marketing and production, as 
well as in the out-of-London educational, academic and journal publishers.
Some publishers do not reply to speculative approaches, others hold 
impressive candidates on ﬁle, to be approached later if a job arises. Some will call 
you for a preliminary discussion which may lead to an interview, or are prepared 
to oﬀ er advice, possibly recommending you for interview in another house. 
If you hear nothing or receive a letter of rejection, yet are still very keen on that 
publisher, telephone the manager and persuade him or her to make time for a 
short chat. People whose commitment to publishing is so strong and who persist 
usually get in.
INTERVIEW
Preparation
If you are called to interview, acknowledge quickly. If you decide not to go, say so, 
and give others the opportunity. Prepare thoroughly beforehand. First, research 
the publisher, its books or promotions. Why do you ﬁnd them interesting? This 
greatly improves your chances. Second, think of answers to probable questions. As 
a publisher, what would you be looking for? Publishers are transitioning from 
print to digital. They always looked for a mix of creativity and commerce, now in 
addition it is digital capability and adaptability. What are your particular strengths? 
From your research, you should be able to deal with questions that relate to your 
interest in the job and test your knowledge of the publisher. Also you should be 
prepared to discuss what you think are the most important skills needed. You may 
be asked what you feel would be the most mundane or frustrating parts of the job 
and how you would cope with them.
The thinking you put into your CV and letter is apposite to questions such as:
 
▪
Why do you want to go into publishing? (Don’t say ‘I love reading and 
books’.)
 
▪
How is your previous experience applicable?
 
▪
Why do you think you are suitable?
 
▪
What are your major strengths?
 
▪
What makes you think you will be good at this job?
First 
impressions 
count at 
interview, 
including your 
appearance, 
body language 
and tone of 
voice
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
321
 
▪
What are your interests or hobbies?
 
▪
How do you assess current developments in the industry?
 
▪
What books do you read? – asked especially by consumer book publishers. 
Cite books which correspond to their interests and be prepared to analyse 
brieﬂy why you think they work.
Be prepared for questions which probe facts, explore your feelings, judgement and 
motivation. You may well be asked to explain why you left a job. Do not blame the 
previous employer or speciﬁc individuals. Acceptable reasons include: ‘I left for a 
better opportunity’ or ‘for more challenging work’, or ‘to broaden my experience’. 
Redundancy, even if no fault of your own and a common afﬂiction of many in 
publishing, can be related to the circumstances of the particular ﬁrm. Beware of 
quoting shortcomings that may be applicable to the new job.
You will need to show that you have thought of medium-term career goals, 
while stressing your preparedness to commit yourself to the job for an eﬀ ective 
time-span. Many new entrants apply, for example, to the marketing and sales 
departments, with the ambition of becoming editors. You may confess that 
legitimate target to a manager of another department but you must show strong 
commitment to the job applied for, otherwise you will be rejected.
Book publishing is an ideas business from start to ﬁnish. ‘What ideas do you 
have?’ may be asked of any applicant in any department. Do not sit dumbfounded. 
There may be no ‘correct’ answer – the question is more of a test of initiative and 
of common sense. Come up with your own questions to ask the interviewer. The 
best ones relate to clarifying features of the job and showing your knowledge of 
and keen interest in the publisher. Questions relating to the job include its main 
aspects, what factors promoted its creation, limits of authority, responsibility 
and independence, whom you would be working with most closely, terms and 
conditions, and future prospects. Those relating to the publisher (such as on new 
developments) could arise from your research. However, you should ask only a 
few questions – you are the one being interviewed. You could ask questions to 
which in part you can guess the answer and which will elicit a positive response. 
Be careful not to ask questions that are out of your depth, or cheeky, or ask the 
publisher to give you unreasonable special treatment.
You may want to take samples of printed material on which you have worked 
– for example a college magazine, book, promotional material, or a project from 
your degree. By recounting quickly the brief, the decisions and initiatives taken, 
the problems overcome, the people involved, you can reveal your analytical, 
creative, decision-making and organizational abilities, teamworking skills, your 
ideas and eﬀ ectiveness in dealing with people, and your success.
Your face-to-face interview
You will need to judge the correct standard of dress for the interview. The style 
and atmosphere of publishers diﬀ er markedly, and some departments, such as 
accounts, may be more formal than others. On the whole it is best to appear 
businesslike and well dressed and groomed. You must not be late so allow plenty 
of time, and make sure you know the precise location of the interview. If you are 
unavoidably delayed, telephone and apologize. On arrival announce yourself to the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
322
receptionist and if time allows examine the publisher’s material available in the 
reception. Some interviews include tasks and tests.
While some interviewers will greet you at the door, your ﬁrst test may be to 
enter the room conﬁdently (an important skill for most jobs). You should greet 
the interviewer and shake their hand positively. First impressions count, so do 
not forget to smile, and make sure you come across as conﬁdent and relaxed. 
Throughout the interview try to mention those assets which reveal your suitability 
and enthusiasm, anchor your skills in hard evidence, and ground 
accomplishments by giving examples. Reveal your research of the publisher, but 
do not over-praise or lecture.
Maintain eye contact with the interviewer and listen to the questions. Do not 
mumble yes/no answers. Answer questions fully, but judge the length and depth 
of your reply by watching the interviewer’s verbal and non-verbal cues, and 
interest level. Be prepared for the interviewer’s follow-up questions. When stating 
views make sure your reasoning is sensible and fairly ﬁrm, not vague, arrogant or 
inﬂexible. The danger of talking too much, apart from boring the interviewer, is to 
go beyond the question and introduce irrelevant facts or opinions, either of which 
could inadvertently reveal weaknesses. Indeed an interviewer may keep quiet and 
let you hang yourself. Interviewers tend to form negative impressions more 
readily, and on less information, than they form favourable impressions; their 
judgements are apt to be coloured by one or two striking attributes of candidates; 
and they tend to reject on negatives rather than select on positives.
A quality that most interviewers want to see, which can illuminate all others, 
is enthusiasm. It means having a positive outlook that shines through whatever 
subject is being discussed. Do not give the impression that you are not really 
interested in the job. The more nervous you become, the faster you may talk. 
Strive for measured animation. Undue modesty will conceal you, while boasting is 
damaging. If you have been dishonest in your CV or overstated the case you will 
be unable to substantiate your claims. Depending on the job, you may want to take 
along a portfolio of your design work or journalism. You will need to judge in the 
interview how much importance to give the portfolio, depending on the level of 
interest shown by the interviewer. Finally, the most intangible and important part 
of the whole exercise is whether the interviewer likes you and thinks you will ﬁt in 
because most publishers are relatively small businesses (or proﬁt centres within a 
large corporation) and publishing is a personal business. Some managers set great 
store on their quality of life expressed by the work they do and the people they 
have around them.
Having asked your own questions, by the end of the interview you should 
have a clear idea of what the job entails, what will happen next, who will make the 
next move, and the timescale. Publishers typically use either one or two interview 
stages. If called to a second interview, be armed with ideas that might help the 
publisher – but do think them through.
YOU’RE IN!
When the publisher is pretty sure it wants you, your references may be checked – 
but not always. If you are the chosen candidate reply quickly if you decide either to 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
323
decline or accept the oﬀ er. There is usually little or no room for negotiation on 
salary in junior jobs. A question you may be asked at interview or subsequently is 
‘What salary are you expecting?’ It is preferable to pass the responsibility back to 
the publisher to make the ﬁrst oﬀ er by asking, for instance ‘What are you 
planning on paying the best candidate?’ Publishers rarely state salaries in 
advertisements and there is great variation in salary ranges between diﬀ erent 
publishers.
Publishers diﬀ er markedly in style of management and atmosphere, and have 
their own culture around dress code, level of formality, and hierarchy. The ﬁrst 
months at work are a crucial period for quickly assimilating the politics of the 
organization and learning how to work within it, how to get things done, how to 
win and retain the regard of new colleagues. Tactics such as throwing your heart 
into the new job and being seen to arrive early and leave late – putting in extra 
hours when projects require – will establish an enduring reputation.
Career paths
It was mentioned earlier that the ﬁrst jobs within the ﬁrst few years may not 
necessarily determine a career path. Many new entrants have little idea of the 
work of the departments they join and may ﬁnd they develop an aptitude and 
liking for the work. It is possible to move across to other departments and areas of 
publishing, but over time it becomes progressively more difﬁcult: there are usually 
candidates who have acquired specialist knowledge of that particular area of 
publishing.
In small ﬁrms with few staﬀ  and less departmentalism it may be easier to 
move around the ﬁrm and learn diﬀ erent jobs, sometimes simultaneously. But 
such knowledge may not be considered by a larger ﬁrm to be specialist enough. In 
contrast, junior staﬀ  in large ﬁrms while often ﬁnding it more difﬁcult to cross the 
more pronounced departmental boundaries, may gain in-depth expertise aﬀ orded 
by the greater resources of the publisher. People move from small to large ﬁrms, 
which usually pay much higher salaries at the top, and vice-versa: for example, 
middle-ranking staﬀ  of large ﬁrms may attain more senior jobs in smaller ﬁrms. 
The promotion of staﬀ  with little management experience to departmental 
management positions is common.
Unlike huge industrial concerns and the civil service, not even the largest 
publisher has a big enough staﬀ  pyramid to be able to ﬁll staﬀ  vacancies from 
within at the time they occur. Publishers are not rash enough to advertise career 
pathways which cannot be fulﬁlled but in some large ﬁrms there are visible grade 
progressions within departments. Although some staﬀ  progress upwards in 
publishers, a few rapidly, it has become rare to spend a whole lifetime with one 
ﬁrm. Rather most people move from one publisher to another, sideways or 
hopefully in an upward direction. The possibility of getting stuck in any job at any 
level is ever present.
In moving around companies, most people tend to stay with the type of work 
in which they have acquired expertise. If moving between functions is far from 
easy, moving across the major types of publishing is even more difﬁcult. Generally 
speaking people stay within consumer, educational or academic publishing 
(unless, that is, they have more transportable administrative and IT experience). 
Many 
employers use 
social media 
for recruitment, 
including 
LinkedIn, 
Facebook and 
Twitter
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
324
Many have expertise that is applied to the publishing of books and associated 
products for certain markets and their contacts inside and outside publishing are 
orientated accordingly.
Some people in their early 30s may want to change direction, for instance, to 
move from academic to consumer book publishing, or vice-versa. But they are up 
against people already in that area so their chances of getting a job at the same 
level of seniority and salary are much more remote. As you increase your expertise 
of an area, the more valuable that expertise becomes and it can be difﬁcult to 
throw it aside and turn to something else. That said, people do move between 
departments and types of publishing at all stages of their careers, up to and 
including managing directors. Traditionally they have been in a minority but there 
are indications that this may be changing.
Corporate reorganizations and takeovers inevitably aﬀ ect careers. Employees 
unfortunately cannot choose their new owners. After a takeover, staﬀ  from the 
acquiring company may enhance their position in the larger organization, 
whereas the former management of the bought company is realigned. The 
managers may stay, leave or be downgraded. The more junior staﬀ  may leave as 
the new owners rationalize the departments, for example, by cutting out 
competing editorial units, merging production and design and rights 
departments, amalgamating the sales forces, centralizing HR, accounting and 
distribution services, and relocating ofﬁces (even across the Atlantic). Many staﬀ  
who leave with their redundancy payments reappear in other publishers, start 
their own businesses in specialist services or consultancy, or go freelance.
Freelance work, for example in editorial, design or web design and marketing 
oﬀ ers the freedom of working at home without the rigours and costs of 
commuting to work. Creative Skillset estimates that 48 per cent of UK publishers 
use freelancers, and that they represent 22 per cent of the workforce. The growth 
in self-publishing increases the demand from authors for freelance editorial, 
production and other services. Outside the general hubbub of a publishing house, 
and with fewer interruptions, freelancers may be able to work faster and plan their 
day to their own rhythm. But forced to maintain a ﬂow of work and pressured to 
meet deadlines, the freelancer’s day often extends far into the night, to weekends 
and public holidays. It can be diﬃ  cult to turn work down given the uncertainties 
of a freelance existence. The best way to obtain work is through personal 
recommendation, professional contacts, or by personal approach. Industry bodies 
such as the SfEP (Society for Editors and Proofreaders) and the Society of Indexers 
maintain registers of freelancers. The National Union of Journalists recommends 
hourly rates for editorial work such as proofreading.
Many people in their 30s reach a plateau below management level and fear 
that their rapidly approaching fortieth birthday is their last chance to make a 
change. With increasing age the possibilities of movement diminish. However, 
many senior jobs are ﬁlled by people roughly between the ages of 37 to 45. After 
that, unless an individual is particularly well known or brilliant or specialized, 
changing companies becomes progressively more difﬁcult. By the age of 50, with 
the same provisos, it becomes very difﬁcult indeed – there may be no alternative 
but to stay put until retirement. Another factor constraining intercompany 
movement is the housing market and the accessibility of a range of ﬁrms. House 
prices in the south-east region are higher and increase at a faster rate than in the 
Over a fifth of 
the UK 
publishing 
workforce are 
freelance
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
325
rest of the country; they rise particularly steeply towards the centre of London. 
A company away from the centre may oﬀ er to pay relocation expenses, but you 
should consider the possible career step after that. If you move home too far out, 
you may be taking a one-way rather than a return ticket.
Staﬀ  of commercial publishers are very attractive to the many public, private 
and voluntary sector organizations with their own publishing operations. 
Moreover, the contacts made and skills learnt in publishing can be applied to 
other commercial enterprises, not necessarily concerned with publishing. In 
commercial and not-for-proﬁt publishing, staﬀ  have been traditionally recruited 
from within the industry; and publishing staﬀ  tend to be retained unless they 
leave voluntarily or are forced out. It has been a relatively closed world. However, 
with the growth of digital publishing and the highly commercial outlook of most 
publishers, the industry now also looks outside for fresh talent. Managers may 
come from other industries, as well as staﬀ  with IT and logistics backgrounds, and 
consumer publishers may look for experience of other media industries, such as 
games, or for brand management expertise from retailing. Publishing businesses 
have changed dramatically over the last decades and continue to do so at dizzying 
pace.
Post-entry training
Most people in publishing learn on the job by observing the successes and 
mistakes made by themselves, colleagues, and other publishers and applying 
that experience to each new project: knowledge is passed on or reinvented. Few 
publishers give sufﬁcient emphasis to training of their junior staﬀ  in their early 
20s, or for that matter of senior staﬀ  who, while having specialist knowledge 
of their ﬁeld, may often lack a broad overview of the business and general 
management knowledge; let alone an MBA. Publishers may then complain that 
they face shortages of talent when recruiting for senior posts. If you are fortunate 
enough to work in a ﬁrm that trains, take all the opportunities oﬀ ered. But if not, 
the initiative is yours to seek out relevant meetings such as those of the SYP and 
WiP, and to make the time to attend courses. There are numerous courses oﬀ ered 
part-time by the main teaching institutions and by professional organizations such 
as ALPSP (Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers), the 
Publishing Training Centre and the SfEP.
Salaries
Within book publishing there is a great variation in salaries and no trade-wide 
statistics are available. There are salary surveys undertaken by bookcareers.com 
and the IPG. Traditionally, the many junior jobs in publishing, particularly in 
editorial, have low starting salaries, in part a consequence of large numbers 
chasing few jobs. Estimates of the typical starting salary in publishing in 2013 
were around £18,000 to £20,000. Some people argue that the incidence of low 
pay and the high proportion of female employment at junior levels are not 
unconnected.
Those who move jobs on a regular basis may ﬁnd they have increased their 
salaries above the levels of those who are content to stay for a long time in the 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
326
same company. The law of supply and demand aﬀ ects salaries across diﬀ erent 
types of publishing. For example, publishers wanting staﬀ  with a humanities 
background have a large choice and tend to pay lower salaries than legal and 
medical publishers, which may ﬁ nd it more difﬁcult to recruit staﬀ  with the 
relevant academic qualiﬁcations or experience. Moreover, some people like to 
work in areas which they see as having intrinsic interest and accept lower salaries 
than if they worked in other ﬁelds of publishing. This has applied particularly to 
those in the literary and prestigious end of publishing.
On the marketing and sales side, salaries have been approaching those of 
general commerce; but at the top end, the salaries of most directors of publishing 
companies do not equate with those earned by the heads of large fast-moving 
consumer goods industries. At the very top, chief executives earn salaries many 
times those of the lowest paid staﬀ , in some cases more than 15 times.
Diversity in publishing
There is a high proportion of women in pre-entry courses and in publishing, 
particularly London consumer book publishing, to the extent that some publishers 
wonder how to attract more men into the profession. About 70 per cent of the 
workforce is female. In senior management there is a higher proportion of men 
than in the publishing workforce as a whole, but the position of women has 
improved at board level. There are a number of prominent women in senior 
positions across the industry.
An industry study (Ethnic Diversity in Publishing, 2006) found that 92.3 per 
cent of employees within the publishing industry are from a white background, 
while 7.7 per cent are from a black and minority ethnic (BME) background. 
Although this matches the proportions within the UK as a whole, it does not 
reﬂect the ethnic make-up of London (71.2 per cent white/28.8 per cent BME), 
where most of the respondents were based. There is clearly an opportunity for 
publishers looking to broaden the readership for their books. Helen Fraser, then 
Managing Director of Penguin, said: ‘A workforce that mirrors the population, 
especially urban populations where the majority of books are sold, will be able to 
tap into the whole market’ (Kean, page 11). Equality in Publishing (Equip) 
promotes equality across publishing, bookselling and agenting.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Getting into publishing
327
 
Now read this
Alison Baverstock, Susannah Bowen and Steve Carey, How to Get a Job in 
Publishing, A & C Black, 2008.
Sources
BML (Book Marketing Limited), Ethnic Diversity in Publishing, September 
2006.
Creative Skillset, Publishing Labour Market Intelligence Digest, 2011.
Danuta Kean (ed.), In Full Colour, Supplement to The Bookseller, 12 March 
2004.
Web resources
www.publishingeducation.org Association for Publishing Education.
www.alpsp.org Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers.
www.bookcareers.com Independent careers advice service.
www.bookmachine.org Book Machine.
www.bookmarketingsociety.co.uk Book Marketing Society.
www.booktradecharity.wordpress.com The Book Trade Benevolent Society 
oﬀ ers practical, emotional and ﬁ nancial support to anyone who works or 
has worked in the book trade, as well as their dependants.
www.bytethebook.com Byte the Book.
www.careersatrandom.co.uk Random House Group’s careers website.
http://creativeaccess.org.uk/ Charity founded in 2012 to help tackle the 
under-representation of ethnic minorities in the media.
www.creativeskillset.org Creative Skillset.
www.equalityinpublishing.org.uk Equality in Publishing.
www.indexers.org.uk The Society of Indexers.
www.ipg.uk.com Independent Publishers Guild.
www.opusnet.co.uk OPuS (Oxford Publishing Society).
http://publishing.brookes.ac.uk/ Oxford International Centre for Publishing 
Studies.
www.prospects.ac.uk Oﬃ  cial graduate careers website.
www.publishers.org.uk Publishers Association – there are pages on training 
and publishing courses, and helpful career proﬁ les.
www.publisherspublicitycircle.co.uk Publishers Publicity Circle.
www.publishingtalk.eu Publishing Talk.
www.sfep.org.uk Society for Editors and Proofreaders.
www.thesyp.org.uk Society of Young Publishers.
www.train4publishing.co.uk/careers Publishing Training Centre’s pages on 
careers.
www.wipub.org.uk Women in Publishing.
www.writersandartists.co.uk Writers’ & Artists’ Yearbook.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Glossary of publishing terms and 
abbreviations
AAP Association of American Publishers
add-on extra value added into a product, for example a DVD in the back of a 
printed book
advance sum paid in advance to the author in anticipation of the author earning 
royalties from sales of their work. Advances may be paid on signature of 
contract, delivery of the typescript, and on publication
advance copy printed copy available ahead of publication. Advance copies are 
sent to the author and used in marketing
Aga saga Novel set amongst the Aga-owning English middle class
agent a literary agent may act on behalf of an author and negotiate the contract 
for a book with the publisher
aggregator an aggregator will license the rights to distribute content online from 
a variety of publishers
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
Chapter 2
perfect 
perfe
perfe
perf
perf
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Glossary
329
airport edition export paperback edition of a book sold at airport shops ahead of 
the main paperback edition
AI sheet advance Information sheet containing essential bibliographic and 
marketing information
APC an article processing, or publishing, charge
app application for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers
BA Booksellers Association of the United Kingdom and Ireland
backlist a publisher’s established titles; compare frontlist
BIC Book Industry Communication
big deal a large bundle of journals sold by a publisher as one package
blad sample printed section
blurb the selling copy that appears on the back cover or front jacket ﬂ ap of the 
book
book club traditionally a mail order bookseller; now also a reading group
born digital products originated in digital form
BRIC shorthand for the fast-growing economies of Brazil, Russia, India and 
China
bulk a paper’s thickness
bundling journals are often packaged up into bundles of titles for sale to 
institutions such as university libraries; also a printed book and ebook may be 
bundled together
cascade journal part of a hierarchy of titles; articles submitted to the top of the 
cascade may be rejected but still published by a lower-ranked journal within 
the cascade
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect perfect 
perfect 
perfect perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
MY LIFE
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
perfect 
0
0
0
0
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Glossary
330
chick lit genre of ﬁ ction principally aimed at single women in their 20s or early 
30s
CIP Cataloguing in Publication
CIVETS shorthand for the second wave of fast-growing economies of Colombia, 
Indonesia, Vietnam, Egypt, Turkey and South Africa
CLA Copyright Licensing Agency
CMS content management system
co-edition An additional part of the print run sold to a third party. There are both 
English and foreign language co-editions
commissioning creating a new project and signing up an author; or acquiring 
the rights to publish a work from the author, their agent or another publisher
contract legal agreement between the author and publisher, outlining the rights 
acquired by the publisher, ﬁ nancial terms, and the responsibilities of both 
author and publisher
co-publication joint publishing agreement between two or more companies
copy-editing editing the author’s manuscript with regard to style and consistency 
to eliminate errors and improve the text for the reader
copyright the protection which gives authors and other creative artists legal 
ownership of their work – it establishes their work as their personal, exclusive 
property. © is the copyright symbol
coursepack a collection of chapters and articles, photocopied or accessed 
electronically, for teaching use in higher education
cover-mount special edition of a book attached to the front of a magazine, or 
bundled with a newspaper
CRM customer relationship management
crossover title a children’s book with an adult market
CSR corporate social responsibility
CTP computer to plate
CUP Cambridge University Press
DAD digital asset distribution
DAM digital asset management
depreciation reducing the value of stock in the company’s accounts
digital rights management (DRM) the technical means by which the access to 
digital content is controlled
discount publishers give retailers a discount oﬀ  the recommended price to 
encourage them to list or stock their titles
DK Dorling Kindersley
DNB Dictionary of National Biography
DOI digital object identiﬁ er
dummy A mock-up of the ﬁ nal printed book, mainly used for selling illustrated 
books to retailers or overseas customers
ebook electronic book; a vanilla ebook echoes – or is a straight transfer from – 
print; an enhanced ebook has added value such as audio and video
ECM enterprise content management
EDItEUR international standards organization for the book trade
EFL English as a foreign language
ELT English language teaching
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Glossary
331
embargo restriction placed by a publisher on a book to prevent it either being 
sold or covered in the media prior to its oﬃ  cial publication date
EMEA Europe, the Middle East and Africa
enhanced ebook ebook with additional features such as audio and video
EPC Educational Publishers Council of the Publishers Association
frontlist a publisher’s new titles; compare backlist
GLN global location number
goodwill assets that contribute to a publisher’s competitive advantage, including 
its brand and employees
house style the set style imposed during the editing of a text – elements include 
spelling, grammar, capitalization and hyphenation
HSS humanities and social sciences
HTML HyperText Markup Language
imprint a list of books within a publisher’s overall publishing programme. Each 
imprint will have its own ﬂ avour and direction
institutional repository a digital collection of research papers by members of an 
institution such as a university
intellectual property (IP) a publisher’s IP includes its copyrights, licences and 
trade marks
IPR intellectual property rights
IRI industry returns initiative (UK)
ISBN international standard book number
ISSN international standard serial number
Jisc formerly termed the Joint Information Systems Committee, Jisc is funded 
by the post-16 and higher education councils of the UK
JPEG joint photographic experts group
licence a licence gives a publisher the sole, exclusive right to publish an author’s 
work and sell it as widely as possible. The publisher also licenses a book to 
other publishers, for example for translation. A non-exclusive licence enables 
the publisher to sell content – for example for digital use – to a number of 
companies
licensed publishing an exclusive licence granted to a publisher to exploit in book 
form a product or character
list-building taking a strategic view of commissioning in order to create a new 
publishing list or expand the present publishing programme
litho oﬀ set lithography. This form of printing is still common for long print runs
LMS learning management system
long tail ﬁ rst proposed by Chris Anderson in 2004 in Wired magazine, the idea 
that there is greater total value in the long tail of less popular products 
(available over the internet) than in the more widely available hits
manuscript (ms) the author’s version of the work; also typescript. It was 
originally handwritten
MARC machine readable cataloguing
marketing mix product, price, place and promotion
mass market paperback ‘A format’ paperback – 178 x 110 mm; compare trade 
paperback
mega journal fast-growing open access title, covering a broad subject area
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Glossary
332
metadata data about data. This enables content to be categorized and found 
more easily in online searches
MOOC massive open online course
moral rights additional to copyright, these statutory rights granted to the author 
are the right to paternity, the right of integrity, the right to prevent false 
attribution, and the right to privacy
NBA Net Book Agreement (UK)
NBI sheet new book information sheet – also known as AI
NSR net sales revenue
OA open access
OEBF open ebook format
OED Oxford English Dictionary
OER open educational resources
ONIX online information exchange
online marketing use of the internet for marketing. Activities include the use of 
social media, search engine optimization, email marketing and website 
promotion
on-screen editing copy-editing on screen rather than on a paper print-out
ontology the structure of a set of data
OUP Oxford University Press
overheads the ongoing costs of running a business, for example oﬃ  ce costs and 
salaries
PA Publishers Association (UK)
packager separate from a publisher, a packager supplies an edited and designed 
book for the publisher to market and sell
patron-driven acquisition free access is given to content, for example a set of 
ebooks, and payment is then triggered by usage past a certain threshold
pay per view pay as you go model for content, for example purchasing a single 
article from a journal or a chapter from a book
pbook printed book
PDA personal digital assistant; also patron-driven acquisition
PDF portable document format
peer review the evaluation by reviewers of an academic author’s work
PLS private language schools
POD print on demand. Digital printing enables the economic printing of short 
runs. True print on demand is the ability to print single copies to order
POS point of sale
positioning placing the product in the mind of the consumer
post-print journal article as revised after peer review; compare pre-print
PR public relations
pre-print commonly accepted as the version of an article submitted to a journal, 
before peer review; compare post-print
print run the number of copies printed of a pbook
production values the quality of the paper, design, printing, binding and cover of 
a book
proofreading reading proofs of a book in order to spot mistakes missed at the 
copy-editing stage as well as any errors introduced in the design and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Glossary
333
production stages. Proofs can be read against the original copy or by eye (with 
no reference to the original version)
proposal A document outlining the content and market potential of a proposed 
title
PS PostScript
puﬀ  endorsement used on the book’s cover, ahead of the book being reviewed
REF Research Excellence Framework, UK
remainder publisher’s surplus stock sold oﬀ  cheaply
returns unsold books sent back to the publisher by the retailer
RFID radio frequency identiﬁ cation
royalty the share of the income from a book paid by the publisher to the author; 
royalty rates will vary according to format and the source of the income (for 
example from subsidiary rights)
SAN standard address number
schema the structure of an XML document
serial rights the right to sell selections from a work to a newspaper or magazine. 
First serial rights cover extracts before the book’s publication; second serial 
rights are for extracts published on or after publication
smart content content with an added layer of semantic meaning
STM scientiﬁ c, technical and medical. STEM adds in engineering
subsidiary rights Rights a publisher can acquire in addition to the volume rights 
of publishing their own edition as an ebook and pbook – examples of 
subsidiary rights are translation rights and serial rights
TIFF tagged image ﬁ le format
trade paperback ‘B format’ paperback – 198 x 129 mm; compare mass-market 
paperback
trade publishing publishing of books that are sold through the book trade; also 
known as consumer publishing
Unicode an encoding system which gives a unique identity to each character, ‘no 
matter what the platform, no matter what the program, no matter what the 
language’. (unicode.com, accessed 1 October 2007)
USP unique sales proposition – what makes a book stand out from the 
competition
VAT value added tax
version of record published version of a journal article with the ﬁ nal formatting
viral marketing spreading a marketing message using social networks
VLE virtual learning environment
wasting disposing of unsold stock
Web 2.0 the new generation of the web in which users upload as well as 
download
widget mini web plug-in with sample content that can be emailed or copied on 
to the user’s social networking pages
wiki Collaborative website. The name derives from the Hawaiian word wikiwiki 
– quick
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization
WOM word of mouth
XML Extensible Markup Language
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Bibliography
The relevant sources and suggestions for further reading are given at the end of 
each chapter. This list pulls together key texts and resources.
Journals and periodicals
The Author
The Bookseller
Learned Publishing
Logos
Publishers Weekly
Publishing News
Publishing Research Quarterly
Scholarly Publishing
News services
BookBrunch
Book Trade.info
Paid Content
Publishing Perspectives
Industry databases and information resources relevant to publishing
Book Facts Online
GPI Country Reports
Mintel
Nielsen BookData
Nielsen BookScan
Outsell
Industry data is also available from the websites of the industry associations:
www.booksellers.org Booksellers Association
www.publishers.org.uk Publishers Association
www.stm-assoc.org/ International Association of Scientiﬁ c, Technical & Medical 
Publishers
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Bibliography
335
Books
Chris Anderson, Free: The future of a radical price, Random House, 2009.
Chris Anderson, The Long Tail: How endless choice is creating unlimited demand, 
Random House, 2006.
Diana Athill, Stet, Granta, 2000.
Tricia Austin and Richard Doust, New Media Design, Laurence King, 2007.
Phil Baines, Penguin by Design: A cover story 1935–2005, Allen Lane, 2005.
Phil Baines and Andrew Haslam, Type and Typography, Laurence King, 2005.
David Bann, Book Production Control, 2nd edition, Class Publishing, 2012.
David Bann, The All New Print Production Handbook, RotoVision, 2006.
Alan Bartram, Making Books: Design in British publishing since 1945, British Library, 
1999.
Alison Baverstock, How to Market Books, 5th edition, Routledge, 2014.
Alison Baverstock, Susannah Bowen and Steve Carey, How to Get a Job in 
Publishing, A & C Black, 2008.
Eric de Bellaigue, British Book Publishing as a Business, British Library Publishing, 
2004.
Michael Bhaskar, The Content Machine: Towards a theory of publishing from the 
printing press to the digital network, Anthem Press, 2013.
Sven Birkerts, The Gutenberg Elegies: The fate of reading in an electronic age, Faber, 
2006.
Carole Blake, From Pitch to Publication, Pan, 1999.
Clive Bloom, Bestsellers: Popular ﬁ ction since 1900, Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
Sue Bradley (ed.), The British Book Trade: An oral history, British Library, 2008.
Manfred H. Breede, The Brave New World of Publishing: The symbiotic relationship 
between printing and book publishing, Chandos, 2008.
Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, version 3.1, Hartley & Marks, 
2005.
Adrian Bullock, Book Production, Routledge, 2012.
Adrian Bullock and Meredith Walsh, The Green Design and Print Production 
Handbook, Ilex, 2013.
Judith Butcher, Caroline Drake and Maureen Leach, Copy-editing: The Cambridge 
handbook for editors, copy-editors and proofreaders, 4th edition, 2006.
Jen Campbell, Weird Things Customers Say in Bookshops, Constable, 2012.
Robert Campbell, Ed Pentz and Ian Borthwick (eds), Academic and Professional 
Publishing, Chandos, 2012.
The Chicago Manual of Style, 16th edition, University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When new technologies cause 
great ﬁ rms to fail, Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
Joseph Connolly, Eighty Years of Book Cover Design, Faber & Faber, 2009.
Bill Cope and Angus Phillips (eds), The Future of the Book in the Digital Age, 
Chandos, 2006.
Bill Cope and Angus Phillips (eds), The Future of the Academic Journal, 2nd 
edition, Chandos, 2014.
Robert Darnton, The Case for Books, Perseus, 2009.
Gill Davies, Book Commissioning and Acquisition, 2nd edition, Routledge, 2004.
Gill Davies and Richard Balkwill, The Professionals’ Guide to Publishing: A practical 
introduction to working in the publishing industry, Kogan Page, 2011.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Bibliography
336
Christopher Davis, Eyewitness: The rise and fall of Dorling Kindersley, 2009.
Dictionary of Printing and Publishing, 3rd edition, A & C Black, 2006.
Ned Drew and Paul Sternberger, By its Cover: Modern American book cover design, 
Princeton Architectural Press, 2005.
Susan Elderkin and Ella Berthoud, The Novel Cure: An A to Z of literary remedies, 
Canongate, 2013.
Simon Eliot and Jonathan Rose, A Companion to the History of the Book, Blackwell, 
2007.
Jason Epstein, Book Business: Publishing past, present, and future, Norton, 2002.
John Feather, A History of British Publishing, 2nd edition, Routledge, 2005.
David Finkelstein and Alastair McCleery (eds), The Book History Reader, 2nd 
edition, 2006.
Simon Garﬁ eld, Just my Type, Proﬁ le, 2010.
Albert N. Greco, Jim Milliot, Robert Wharton, The Book Publishing Industry, 3rd 
edition, Routledge, 2013.
Susan Gunelius, Harry Potter: The story of a global business phenomenon, Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2008.
Richard Guthrie, Publishing: Principles and practice, SAGE, 2011.
Frania Hall, The Business of Digital Publishing: An introduction to the digital book 
and journal industries, Routledge, 2013.
Jenny Hartley, The Reading Groups Book, revised edition, Oxford University Press, 
2002.
Barbara Horn, Editorial Project Management, Horn Editorial Books, 2006.
Barbara Horn, Copy-editing, Horn Editorial Books and Publishing Training 
Centre, 2008.
Independent Publishers Guild, The Insiders’ Guide to Independent Publishing, 
Independent Publishers Guild, 2010.
Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs, Little, Brown, 2011.
Jeﬀ  Jarvis, What Would Google Do?, HarperCollins, 2009.
Ros Jay, The White Ladder Diaries, White Ladder Press, 2004.
Chris Jennings, eBook Typography for Flowable eBooks, PagetoScreen ebook, 2012.
Hugh Jones and Christopher Benson, Publishing Law, 4th edition, Routledge, 2011.
Andrew Keen, The Cult of the Amateur, Nicholas Brealey, 2007.
Arthur M. Klebanoﬀ , The Agent, Texere, 2002.
Miha Kovacˇ, Here comes the Book: Never mind the web, Chandos, 2008.
Marshall Lee, Bookmaking: Editing, design, production, 3rd edition, Norton, 2004.
Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture, Penguin, 2004.
Jeremy Lewis, Penguin Special: The life and times of Allen Lane, Viking, 2005.
Noah Lukeman, The First Five Pages: A writer’s guide to staying out of the rejection 
pile, Oxford University Press, 2010.
Hugh McGuire and Brian O’Leary (eds), Book: A futurist’s manifesto, O’Reilly 
Media, 2012.
Ruari McLean, The Thames and Hudson Manual of Typography, Thames and 
Hudson, 1980.
Tom Maschler, Publisher, Picador, 2005.
Nicole Matthews and Nickianne Moody (eds), Judging a Book by Its Cover: Fans, 
publishers, designers, and the marketing of ﬁ ction, Ashgate, 2007. 
Daniel Menaker, My Mistake, Houghton Miﬄ  in Harcourt, 2013.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Bibliography
337
Jason Merkosi, Burning the Page, Sourcebooks, 2013.
Laura Miller, Reluctant Capitalists: Bookselling and the culture of consumption, 
University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Michael Mitchell and Susan Wightman, Book Typography: A designer’s manual, 
Libanus Press, 2005.
Sally Morris, Ed Barnas, Douglas La Frenier and Margaret Reich, The Handbook of 
Journal Publishing, CUP, 2013.
Simone Murray, The Adaptation Industry: The cultural economy of contemporary 
literary adaptation, Routledge, 2011.
Ian Norrie, Mumby’s Publishing and Bookselling in the Twentieth Century, 6th 
edition, Bell & Hyman, 1982.
Lynette Owen (ed.), Clark’s Publishing Agreements: A book of precedents, 9th edition, 
Bloomsbury Professional, 2013.
Lynette Owen, Selling Rights, 7th edition, Routledge, 2014.
Angus Phillips, Turning the Page: The evolution of the book, Routledge, 2014.
Alan Powers, Front Cover: Great book jackets and cover design, Mitchell Beazley, 
2001.
Paul Richardson and Graham Taylor, A Guide to the UK Publishing Industry, 3rd 
edition, Publishers Association, 2014.
R. M. Ritter, New Hart’s Rules: The handbook of style for writers and editors, Oxford 
University Press, 2005.
R. M. Ritter, The Oxford Style Manual, 2003.
R.M. Ritter, Angus Stevenson and Lesley Brown, New Oxford Dictionary for Writers 
and Editors, 2005.
Lucienne Roberts and Julia Thrift, The Designer and the Grid, RotoVision, 2002.
André Schiﬀ rin, The Business of Books: How international conglomerates took over 
publishing and changed the way we read, Verso Books, 2001.
Mike Shatzkin, The Shatzkin Files, Kobo Editions, 2011.
Kelvin Smith, The Publishing Business: From p-books to e-books, AVA, 2012.
Erik Spiekermann and E. M. Ginger, Stop Stealing Sheep and Find Out How Type 
Works, 2nd edition, Adobe Press, 2003.
Claire Squires, Marketing Literature: The making of contemporary writing in Britain, 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
David Stam and Andrew Scott, Inside Magazine Publishing, Routledge, 2014.
Iain Stevenson, Book Makers: British publishing in the twentieth century, British 
Library, 2010.
Rachel Stock, The Insider’s Guide to Getting Your Book Published, White Ladder 
Press, 2005.
Simon Stokes, Digital Copyright: Law and practice, Hart Publishing, 2013.
Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeﬀ  Bezos and the age of Amazon, Little, Brown, 
2013.
Michael F. Suarez and H. R. Woudhuysen (eds), The Oxford Companion to the 
Book, 2010.
Mira T. Sundara Rajan, Moral Rights, OUP, 2011.
Don Tapscott, Grown Up Digital: How the net generation is changing your world, 
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
John B. Thompson, Books in the Digital Age, Polity Press, 2005.
John B. Thompson, Merchants of Culture, Polity Press, 2010.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Bibliography
338
Michael Upshall, Content Licensing: Buying and selling digital resources, Chandos, 
2009.
Margaret Willes, Reading Matters: Five centuries of discovering books, Yale University 
Press, 2008.
Maryann Wolf, Proust and the Squid: The story and science of the reading brain, Icon 
Books, 2008.
Thomas Woll, Publishing for Proﬁ t, 4th edition, Chicago Review Press, 2010.
World Intellectual Property Organization, Managing Intellectual Property in the 
Book Publishing Industry, WIPO, 2008.
Sherman Young, The Book is Dead: Long live the book, UNSW Press, 2007.
Gabriel Zaid, So Many Books: Reading and publishing in an age of abundance, Sort 
of Books, 2004.
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
Bold page numbers refer to tables.
abundance of content 4, 20–1, 23, 44, 
80–1, 221
academic publishing 4, 66–8, 97–101; 
add-ons 231; branding 228; 
catalogues 246; commissioning 129, 
142–3, 144; digital rights 
management 123; market research 
227; pricing 232, 233; promotion 
234, 237, 250–1, 252, 270, 271; rights 
sales 279, 284, 285, 286, 288, 290, 
291–2; sales 258, 259, 264–5, 304, 
308, 309–10; territoriality 172; see also 
HSS (humanities and social 
sciences) publishing; journals; 
textbooks
Accidental Tourist, The (Tyler) 177
acquisition/merger 7, 11, 14–15, 21, 
28–9, 59–60
Addison-Wesley 59
add-ons 68–9, 101, 112, 231, 302
Adobe InDesign see InDesign 
adoption sales 68, 101, 251, 264, 265, 
271, 309
advance copies 175, 212
advance information sheet (AI) 174, 
245, 270
advances 34, 86, 99, 108, 115, 133–4, 153, 
170, 285
advertising: Google 16; publicity 92–3, 
102, 112, 226, 234, 242, 250
A format 29, 31, 210
agency model of pricing 38–9, 241
aggregation 21–2, 46, 48, 60, 74–5, 
77–8, 107, 235
aggregators 74–5, 215, 259, 260, 292, 
293; see also bundling
AI see advance information sheet
airport terminal shops 300, 303–4, 329
ALCS see Authors Licensing and 
Collecting Society
Alfred A. Knopf 9
Allyn & Bacon 59
ALPSP see Association of Learned and 
Professional Society Publishers
Amazon 16–17, 18, 33, 300; add-ons 231; 
customer reviews 234, 241, 247; data 
227, 236, 309; ﬁ le format 46, 122, 
200; Look Inside 20, 237; market 
share 301–2; pricing 232; printing 
191; self-publishing 43, 132, 135, 274; 
tax 35, 301; textbook rental 69; used 
books 311; warehousing/distribution 
274, 277, 301; and Waterstones 304; 
see also Audible; Kindle
American Chemical Society (ACS) 75
American Institute of Physics (AIP) 75
Amis, Martin 136
analytics 20, 24, 69, 71, 79, 222, 223, 
243, 253, 256
Anderson, Chris 300
Animator’s Survival Kit, The (Williams) 
113
Anova 53
APC see article processing charge
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
340
Apple 16, 18, 38, 48, 71, 119, 122, 200, 
301
application forms 319
apps 48, 49, 113, 191–2, 230, 232, 292, 
293
Aptara 71, 191
arbitrage trading 69, 172, 233
Archer, Jeﬀ rey 134
article processing charge (APC) 80, 
103
artwork 193, 196
Ashgate 67
assessment software 68
asset valuation 117–19
assimilation narratives 41
Association of Learned and 
Professional Society Publishers 
(ALPSP) 78, 325
Athill, Diana 29–30
Atlantic 53
Attwooll, David 292–3
Audible 87, 88, 302
audiobooks 87–8, 135, 169, 272, 295, 
302–3
Austen, Jane 41, 120
Austin, Tricia 215
Australia 13, 17, 19, 28, 61, 69, 96, 172, 
267
authentication 48, 74, 123, 292; see also 
digital rights management
authors’ agents 19, 21, 44, 86, 88, 128, 
130, 133–6, 140, 171, 173, 279
authors: and agents 133–6; assessment 
of 144–5; ‘author pays’ (journals) 80; 
author questionnaire 243; book 
proposals 129–30; branding 40, 55, 
85, 86, 92, 230, 235, 241; celebrity 115, 
129, 140; contract 2, 3, 27, 134–5, 
165–73, 279, 280; editing queries 
184; getting published 127–8, 130–2; 
intellectual rights 119, 120–1, 169, 
294; manuscript delivery 168, 173–4; 
promotion 24, 221, 235, 237, 239, 241, 
248; and publishers 1, 26, 27, 141, 
162, 178, 184; synthetic 20; 
typesetting 213; see also royalties; 
self-publishing
author service companies 189
Authors Licensing and Collecting 
Society (ALCS) 127, 281
A2C (author to consumer) 130
Author Solutions 43, 44
backlists: agent management 136; 
decision to publish 145; digitalization 
15, 23, 116, 191, 217, 301; medium-
sized publishers 10, 11; non-
consumer sales 93, 94; proﬁ t 151; 
under NBA 35
Baker & Taylor 18, 48
bargain bookshops 37, 297, 306
Barkham, Patrick 132
Barnes & Noble 16, 18, 46, 115, 302
Barton, Meg 198–9
Bartram, Alan 32
BCA see Book Club Associates
Benelux countries 98, 288
Benson, Christopher 121, 179
Bent Coppers (McLagan) 180
Bernières, Louis de 39, 237
Bertelsmann 9, 10, 28, 32, 52, 53, 56, 
59, 296
Bertrams 75, 275, 302, 306, 308
Bezos, Jeﬀ  16
B format 31, 210
Bhaskar, Michael 1
bibliographic information/data services 
243–4, 273; see also metadata
BIC see Book Industry Communication
big deal business model 77, 102, 104, 
233, 265
binding 85, 90, 158, 181, 206, 212, 217, 
218
BioMed Central 14, 80
BISG see Book Industry Study Group
Blackwell 60, 71, 265, 304, 308
blads 291
blogs 22, 24, 112, 140, 221, 299
Blood, Sweat and Tea (Reynolds) 124
Bloomsbury 14, 51, 52, 55, 67, 117, 173
Bloomsbury Academic 67, 73
Blunkett, David 294
blurb 174, 177–8
Bodley Head 9, 28, 32
boilerplate agreement 171
Bologna Book Fair 93, 282, 283, 286
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
341
Bonnier 7, 10
bookcareers.com 316, 325
book classiﬁ cation systems 89–90, 
234, 243–4, 273
Book Club Associates (BCA) 296, 310
book clubs: and book promotion 235, 
239, 263; children’s books 54, 93; 
development of trade publishing 21, 
30, 36, 37, 296, 310; Grupo Planeta 
10; market share by volume 297; 
rights sales 279, 287, 291, 296; 
textbooks 251; see also Scholastic
BookCrossing 311
Booker, Man prize 239, 240, 241, 248
BookExpo 283, 286
book fairs: at schools 10, 310, 311; 
industry 270, 282, 283–6, 288, 306
book formats (UK standard sizes) 210
Book Industry Communication (BIC) 
243, 273; Children’s Book Marketing 
Categories standard 89–90
Book Industry Study Group (BISG) 
244, 273
book miles 308
book packagers see packagers
Book People, The 310
book proposals 129–30, 139
Bookseller, The 39,84, 147, 307, 314, 317
bookshops: aggregation and curation 
22; bargain 37, 297, 306; and book 
clubs 30; campus 69, 99, 251, 252, 
264, 265, 304; discoverability 87; 
purchase prompts 224; retail 
transformation 18–19, 33–4, 297–8; 
and sales representatives 261–4; 
wholesale pricing method 37; see also 
chain booksellers; independent 
bookshops
Books24/7 75
Booktrust 224
Borders 34, 298, 300, 304
Bowen, James 216
Bowker Market Research 227, 244, 
272
Brain Pickings 22
branding: adding value 1, 108–9, 111; 
authors 40, 55, 85, 86, 92, 228–30, 
235, 241; chain booksellers 303–4; 
character 91; consumer 108, 228; 
journals 76, 102, 103–4; list-building 
139; market strategy 222; publisher 
228; sales channels 260; trade 
imprints 108; travel publishing 
228–9; web-speciﬁ c 114; see also 
vertical communities; D2C
Brazil 7, 12, 13, 59, 65, 96
break-even point 151
Breede, Manfred 216
Bribery Act (UK, 2011) 62
Brief History of Time, A (Hawking) 147
British Library 186, 244
Brown, Dan 42, 64, 127
Bullock, Adrian 208–9
bundling 15, 21–2, 46, 60, 77–8, 107, 
139, 233
Burgess, Melvin 91
business models 16, 20, 44, 46, 73–4, 
75, 79, 80, 81, 97, 110–19; see also 
copy sales business model; 
freemium business model; site 
licences; subscriptions
B2B (business to business) 19, 108, 273
Butcher, Judith 179, 184
Cambridge University Press (CUP) 9, 
62, 65, 67, 75
Canada 13, 61, 135, 208, 267, 279, 285, 
286
Canongate 53, 87
Captain Corelli’s Mandolin (Bernières) 
39, 237
careers in publishing: advertisements 
317; application 317–19; career paths 
313, 321, 323–5; covering letter 318–19; 
direct approaches to publishers 320; 
diversity (gender and ethnicity) 326; 
interviews 319, 320–2; job oﬀ ers 
322–3; market research 314; 
networking 314–15; qualiﬁ cations 315; 
recruitment agencies 316–17; 
rejection 319–20; salaries 325–6; 
skills 313–14; training 325; work 
experience 313, 314, 315–16, 325; see 
also freelance work; skills
Carnegie medal winners 56
Carpenter, Philip 251
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
342
cascade journals 81, 104
case study: Inside Book Publishing 
154–63
catalogue preparation 245–6
cataloguing in publication (CIP) data 
186, 244
CD-Roms 48, 50, 84
Cengage Learning 8, 60, 67, 68, 71, 
276
censorship 26, 276
chain booksellers 33–4, 36–7, 255, 
258–9, 297, 298, 300, 302, 303–5, 
306
channel publishing 300
Charkin, Richard 173
Cheetham, Anthony 11
children’s and young adult publishing 
54–5, 56, 62, 89–93, 178, 196, 242, 
309, 310–11
children’s reading habits 224–5
China 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 76, 96, 282, 
284, 291
Christensen, Clayton 17–18
Christie, Agatha 289
Christmas market 19, 87, 147, 163, 
174–5, 256, 262
chunking content 22–3, 282
CIP see cataloguing in publication
citations: impact factor (IF) 76, 77; 
permission to quote 122, 176
City Reads 224
CLA see Copyright Licensing Agency
click farms 234
closed markets 171
cloud-based production 44, 46, 79, 107
co-editions: children’s publishing 89, 
90, 93; costs 89, 107, 212; foreign 
language 279, 290–1; North 
American rights deals 286, 288; 
potential 145, 152, 282; rights income 
279; see also co-publication
college textbook publishing 4, 5, 58, 60, 
68–70; see also textbooks
Collins, Joan 170
colour printing 23, 158, 207, 214, 216, 
218, 219
commissioning: approval process 
146–7; book proposals 139; the 
decision to publish 144–6; ﬁ ction 
140; gaining experience 179; 
list-building 139; new title costing 
148–63; non-consumer publishing 
142–4, 264; predicting non-ﬁ ction 
trends 140; value-added 107
community sites 2, 21, 51–2, 221, 229, 
235–7; see also vertical communities
consolidation see merger/acquisition
consumer behaviour 224–6, 301, 302
consumer publishing 4, 9–11, 14, 
84–93; branding 108, 228–30; 
commissioning 138, 139, 140–1, 162, 
163, 179; discounts 115, 308, 309; 
ﬁ nancial performance 106, 115, 116, 
117, 118, 169; global context 7, 8, 12; 
marketing 221, 224–6, 227, 230, 231, 
235–41, 242, 249, 250; pricing 231, 
232, 258; rights sales 279, 281, 285, 
288, 294; sales 252, 255, 256, 260, 
261–4, 300, 302; territoriality 173, 
280, 288; trade education 64, 95; see 
also modern trade publishing 
development
content 1, 3, 16, 20–4, 50, 60, 70–2, 97, 
102, 112, 114, 144, 241; content 
management 191, 205, 210–11, 215, 
235
contracts 2, 3, 27, 134–5, 165–73, 279, 
280
Cooke, David 230
co-op payments 233, 249–50, 258, 264, 
309
Coordination Group Publications 
(CGP) 64
co-publication 96, 99, 201, 213, 256, 
286; see also co-editions
copy-editing 107, 178, 179–86, 194, 210
copyright 4; author’s grant 167; ebooks 
15, 123, 274; expiration/public 
domain 20, 43, 120, 123; ‘ﬁ rst sale 
doctrine’ 123; future of 123–4; 
illustrated books 135; journal articles 
102, 121; and paperback rights 31; 
permissions to use images/
quotations 122, 175, 176, 203, 280; 
protecting/creating value 110, 119–20, 
121–2; renting (textbooks) 69
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
343
Copyright Clearance Centre (CCC) 281
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
(1988) 120, 122
Copyright Licensing Agency (CLA) 
280, 281
copy sales business model 30, 46, 101, 
154, 159
Corgi 29
corporate social responsibility 207, 
299, 301, 308
Corrections, The (Franzen) 197
cost-based pricing 232
cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) 269
COUNTER 79
coursepacks 68, 69, 72, 217, 279, 296
CourseSmart 71, 276
covering letter 318–19
covers: advance orders 245, 259, 262; 
copy 175, 177–8; crossover ﬁ ction 55, 
230; design 39, 41, 175, 176, 192, 196, 
201–2, 226, 227; marketing/
promotion 226, 230–1, 234, 241, 245; 
online retail sales 227, 245
Creative Commons licences 71, 73, 79, 
80, 81, 123–4
creative writing courses 131–2, 136
CRC Press 67
CRM see customer relationship 
management systems
crossover ﬁ ction 55, 231
CrossRef 79, 215
crowdfunding 115, 132, 241
crowdsourcing 52, 241
CSR see corporate social responsibility
Cuckoo’s Calling, The (Galbraith) 
148–9
Cugnoni, Rachel 139
cultural capital 3, 299
CUP see Cambridge University Press
curation 21–2
Curious Incident of the Dog in the 
Night-Time, The (Haddon) 55, 231
curriculum publishing see educational 
publishing
customer relationship management 
systems (CRM) 253
customer service (publisher) 109, 253, 
277
custom publishing 71
CV 314, 317–18
Dalrymple, Theodore 311
data analytics see analytics
databases: aggregated academic content 
8, 15, 21, 58, 75, 78, 92, 302; 
bibliographic services 244, 245; 
catalogue production 246; copyright 
120; customer data 16, 222, 251, 
252–3; enabling custom publishing 
71; rights sales 274, 282, 292, 293
data mining 78
Daunt: Books 304; James 304
Da Vinci Code, The (Brown) 42, 127
De Agostini Editore 8, 10
delayed open access 80, 103; see also 
green OA; gold OA; hybrid OA
demographics: book buying in the UK 
225; children’s/YA 89; consumer 
224; education 60, 95; retail 226, 
303
Desai, Kiran 240
design: brief 175, 176–7, 193; in 
co-publications 201; covers 39, 41, 
175, 176, 192, 196, 201–2, 227; ebooks 
197–200; illustrated books 189, 192, 
196–7, 200–1; and production staﬀ  
206; skills 196; text design 192, 
193–5; web pages 215
Deutsch, André 29
Diagram Prize 147
dictionaries 51, 90, 92, 245, 248–9, 291
digital capital 11, 111
digital ﬁ rst publication 46, 145, 200
digitalization 15–24
digital object identiﬁ er (DOI) 215, 274
digital printing 15, 21, 23, 43, 132, 161, 
162, 189, 191, 216, 217
digital product development 48–9, 92, 
113–14; see also product development
digital rights 74, 75, 122–3, 125, 170–1, 
274, 279, 291–4
digital rights management (DRM) 74, 
75, 122–3, 125, 274; see also 
authentication
digital workﬂ ow 3, 189–92, 200, 211, 
235
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
344
Dillons 33, 303, 304
direct costs 157, 158
direct marketing 24, 87, 99, 108, 222, 
237, 250–3
direct selling 95, 97–8, 99, 251–2, 259, 
275, 297, 309–10
D2C (direct to consumer) see direct 
marketing; direct selling; see also 
A2C
Disability Discrimination Act (1995) 
184
discoverability 19, 87, 88, 227, 229, 235, 
243, 250
disintermediation 19–20, 44, 64, 136
Disney 50, 56
disruption 17–19, 25, 49, 50, 58, 72, 88, 
190; design 197
distribution 160, 191, 271–7, 272, 274–5, 
301, 305; see also book clubs; 
bookshops; direct selling; site 
licences; subscriptions; wholesalers
distributors (UK) 274–5
diversiﬁ cation/concentration 14
DK see Dorling Kindersley
DocBook 213
DOI see digital object identiﬁ er
Doing It (Burgess) 91
Dorling Kindersley (DK) 48, 50, 63, 
107, 151, 229
Doubleday 9
Doust, Richard 215
Dow, Francesca 33
Drabble, Margaret 128
Drama Online 51
Dynamic Learning online platform 95
Eats, Shoots and Leaves (Truss) 228, 237, 
238
ebooks 44–7, 72; bookshops 298, 299, 
303, 304, 305; costing 151, 153, 158, 
159, 161; cover design 230; 
distribution 163, 261, 275, 276, 306; 
explicit content 109; ISBN 274; 
lending 48, 300; libraries 48, 60, 74, 
101, 233, 277, 308; markets 91, 131, 
226; pricing 35, 37, 38, 112, 115, 232, 
258, 309; production 149, 163, 187, 
190, 197–201, 204; rights 122–3, 
292–3; self-publishing 44–5, 132; 
territoriality 173, 280; used 311; VAT 
117; see also enhanced ebooks; 
etextbooks; reading devices/
ecosystems
EBSCO 74, 78, 292, 302
e-commerce: book covers 230; and 
discoverability 87; ‘long tail’/
backlists 300–1; market share by 
volume 297; online marketing 221, 
233–4, 235–8; publisher’s production 
costs 107; retail transformation 18–19; 
supply chain/disintermediation 19, 
20, 21, 44; and territoriality 172, 173; 
see also Amazon
EDI see electronic data interchange
EDItEUR 244, 273
editing 2, 83, 102, 107, 109, 120, 139; see 
also copy-editing; editors; production 
editors
Editis 8, 10
editors: authorial relations 141, 146, 162, 
178, 184; autonomy 32–3; blurb 
writing 174, 177–8; commissioning 
138–47, 162; junior 174, 179; 
manuscript checking 173–4; project 
management 174, 175–8, 193; skills 
162, 178; and writing process 109; see 
also copy-editing; editing; production 
editors
educational publishing 4, 58, 60–6; 
book sales (UK) 93; commissioning 
142, 143–4; company mergers/
acquisitions 59–60, 62; global 
rankings 6, 7; marketing 142, 227, 
246, 250–1; pricing 232–3; 
supplementary material 302; and 
supply-side publishing 4; trade 
crossover 5, 51, 64, 95; see also 
academic publishing; English 
Language Teaching (ELT) 
publishing; schools publishing; STM 
publishing
Education Reform Act (UK, 1988) 63–4
Edward Elgar 67
Egmont 10, 56
electronic data interchange (EDI) 273, 
276
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
345
electronic point of sale (EPOS) 273, 307
electronic rights 170–1, 279, 291–4; see 
also digital rights management
Elsevier 11, 59, 66, 67, 75, 78, 276; see 
also Reed Elsevier
ELT see English Language Teaching 
(ELT) publishing
EMEA see Europe, Middle East and 
Africa
Emerald 67
Encyclopaedia Britannica 51, 92, 112
end-matter 186
engineering works 4
English Language Teaching (ELT) 
publishing 4, 65–6, 96, 114, 142, 228, 
268, 271, 315
enhanced ebooks 49, 70, 113, 191, 200
environmental concerns 207, 208, 
307–8
EPOS see electronic point of sale
ePub ﬁ le format 46, 49, 197, 213, 293, 
314
e-readers 16–17, 17, 19, 42, 46, 199; see 
also Kindle; Kobo; Nook
etextbooks 58, 63, 68, 70, 71, 95, 101
ethnic diversity in publishing careers 
326
European Union 12, 120, 172
Europe, Middle East and Africa 
(EMEA) 11, 67, 71, 98
examination boards 63, 64, 94
export: arrangements 268–9; terms of 
trade 269–70; see also promotion; 
rights sales; sales
Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
182–4, 190, 196, 197, 198, 199, 215, 
235, 293
externalities 77
ex-warehouse 269
Faber & Faber 28, 48, 51, 53, 113
Facebook 16, 51, 112, 234, 235, 243
false attribution 121
fan ﬁ ction 44, 132
ﬁ ction: blurb 177; children/young adult 
54–6, 90, 91, 131, 237, 242; ebooks 
46, 49, 200; genre 4, 40, 41–2, 44, 
46, 55, 131, 300; marketing 237, 238, 
239, 240, 241; market share 52–3; 
multi-book deals 131, 134, 135, 147, 
169; not-for-proﬁ t motivation 163; 
pricing 232, 241; translation 282, 
288, 289
Fifty Shades of Grey (James) 41, 42, 44, 
131, 268
ﬁ lm/TV tie-ins 40, 133, 135, 140, 144, 
239, 248, 294–5
Fine, Anne 91–2
ﬁ rm order 260
Fitzgerald, Kevin 281
ﬁ xed book prices 35–6; see also agency 
model of pricing
ﬁ xed costs 149, 156, 158
Folio Society 296, 310
Forest Stewardship Council 207, 208
format 29, 31, 46, 49, 145, 213, 214; see 
also PDF; XML
Foyles 304
F+W Media 52
France 7, 8, 9, 13, 29, 35, 76, 96, 120
Frankfurt Book Fair 5, 140, 282, 283, 
284, 285, 306
Franzen, Jonathan 130, 197
free on board (FOB) 269, 277
freelance work 107, 210; copy-editors 
179; designers 192; editing 2, 139; 
illustrators 196–7; obtaining 
permissions 176; opportunities 324; 
picture research 202; promotion 234, 
235; proofreaders 107, 184, 210; sales 
on commission 269; sales force 259; 
supply chain management 110; 
working conditions 324
freemium business model 20, 45, 46, 
48, 72, 73, 75, 124
free public access: free internet content 
20, 61, 63; out-of-copyright works 20, 
43, 120, 123
Frommer’s 51
frontlist 39–40, 85, 145
front matter 186
Fry, Stephen 112, 295
Gaiman, Neil 134
Gallimard 7
Gardners 48, 74, 275, 306, 308
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
346
Garland 67
gatekeepers 20
gender: book covers 230; diversity in 
publishing 326
genre: and agents 136; ﬁ ction 40, 41–2, 
44, 46, 55, 131, 300; non-ﬁ ction 42, 51; 
online marketing 235; popularity 
predicted by sales data 257
gentleman publishers 26–8
Germany 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 19, 28, 35, 76, 
268
ghost writers 129
globalization 7, 11–14, 191, 207
global publishers 5–10, 12, 28–9, 149, 
257
global ranking of publishing markets 8, 
13
gold OA 80–1; see also delayed OA; 
green OA; hybrid OA
Goodreads 234, 241, 314
goodwill 119
Google 16, 18, 20, 43, 50, 51, 123, 124, 
125, 234, 237, 243; Maps 92; Print 123
graduate recruitment schemes 315
Granada Learning 63
Grand Central Publishing 9, 28
granularity 22–3, 58, 109, 114, 282
Greece 65, 96, 282
green OA 73, 80; see also delayed OA; 
gold OA; hybrid OA
Groupe Flammarion 7
Grupo Planeta 8, 9–10
Hachette 9, 28, 52, 53, 87, 274
Hachette Livre 7–8, 9, 52
Hamlyn, Paul 27
Harcourt 59, 62
hardback publishing 27, 29–30, 33, 35, 
42, 85, 151, 159, 161, 174–5, 231
Hardy, Thomas 120
Harlequin Mills & Boon 
(HarperCollins) 41, 252
HarperCollins 8, 9, 28, 36, 38, 52–3, 
62, 232, 237, 241, 300
Harry Potter books 45, 55, 90, 91, 132, 
207, 231, 295, 305
Hay House 52
Hay-on-Wye literary festival 239
headings: typographical mark-up 182–3, 
194–5
Heinemann 28, 31, 59, 61, 62, 65, 193
Hely Hutchinson, Tim 24
History Press 53
Hodder Education 62, 95
Hodder Headline 9, 28, 36, 52, 62, 87
Holman, Tom 257
Holtzbrinck 7, 8, 10, 28, 53, 59
Hooper, Richard 23, 24
Horne, Alistair 236
Horowitz, Anthony 91
Horrid Henry books 91, 131
Horse Whisperer, The (Evans) 294
Houghton Miﬄ  in Harcourt 8, 59
house style 180–2, 184
HSS (humanities and social sciences) 
publishing 4, 73, 77, 78, 80, 97, 98, 
101
HTML 49, 76, 196, 198, 200, 215, 
314
Hundred-Year-Old Man Who Climbed 
Out of the Window and Disappeared, 
The (Jonasson) 147, 232
Hunger Games trilogy 55, 91
Hurix 191
hybrid: authors 44; journals 80, 103; 
retailers 302
HyperText Markup Language (HTML) 
49, 76, 196, 198, 200, 215, 314
iBook Author tool 49, 200
iBooks 16, 38, 71, 119, 122, 301
I.B. Tauris 67
identiﬁ cation numbers 23, 154, 170, 
186, 201, 243, 272, 273, 274
IF see impact factor
illustrated books: co-editions 290–1; 
copyright 135, 169; design/production 
174, 179, 189, 193, 196, 197, 200–1, 
212; ebooks 46, 49, 200; sector 
development 27
illustrations 122, 124, 149, 175, 176, 
186–7, 196–7, 199, 214; see also 
picture research
impact factor (IF) 76, 77
imprints 22, 33, 139
Independent Alliance of Publishers 53
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
347
independent bookshops 33–4, 37, 53, 
263, 297, 298–9, 300, 306–7
Independent Publishers Guild (IPG) 
314, 317, 325
InDesign 190, 197, 200, 213, 215, 314
indexes 120, 149, 175, 187, 210
Index Translationum 290
India 12, 13, 96, 191, 212, 253, 267
indie authors 40, 44–5
Industry Returns Initiative (IRI) 273
industry standards 272–3
Informa 8, 9, 67, 338
Ingram 23, 71, 74, 191, 275, 308
Inspired Selection 316
Institute of Physics (IOP) 75
institutional repository 80, 104, 124, 125
integrity rights 120–1
intellectual property (IP) 3, 15, 31–2, 110, 
117, 119, 119–25, 169
interactive whiteboards 63, 95
International Standard Book Number 
(ISBN) 23, 154, 170, 186, 201, 243, 
272, 274
International Standard Serial Number 
(ISSN) 272, 274
internet (impact of) 18–23, 43, 50, 79, 
87, 111–12, 122, 132, 147, 172–3, 221, 
225, 237, 297, 311
interviews 319, 320–2
inventory control 23, 174, 191, 256–8
IP see intellectual property
iPad 16, 38, 63
IRI see Industry Returns Initiative
ISBN see International Standard Book 
Number
ISSN see International Standard Serial 
Number
Italy 8, 10, 12, 13, 96, 98, 282
jackets see covers
James, E. L. 44, 131; see also Fifty Shades 
of Grey
Japan 6, 8, 13, 76, 96, 291, 302
Jennings, Chris 199
Jessica Kingsley 67
Jisc 292
Jobs, Steve 38, 48, 58
John Blake 53
John Murray 28
John Smith’s 304
John Wiley 60, 67, 69, 172; see also 
Wiley
Joint Information Systems Committee 
see Jisc
Jones, Hugh 121, 179
Jones, Nicholas 87–8
Jonathan Cape 9, 134, 240
journals 22, 75–81, 101–5, 115, 170, 191, 
211, 215, 252, 292; see also big deal 
business model; International 
Standard Serial Number; open 
access
July, Miranda 248
Keen, Andrew 112
Kellaway, Kate 261
Kenya 62
keywords 78, 214, 215, 234, 243, 245; see 
also search engine optimization
Kindle 16, 38, 46, 49, 132, 274, 301, 304
Kirtsaeng vs. John Wiley (2013) 69, 172
Kissing Booth, The (Reekles) 128–9
Knight, Richard 257–8
Kobo 16, 46, 302, 303
Kogan Page 67
Korea, Republic of 12, 13, 96, 98
Kotler, Philip et al. 100, 228, 232, 238
Lady Chatterley’s Lover (Lawrence) 26
Lampard, Frank 147
Lander, Christian 131
Larsson, Stieg 47, 238
LaTeX 213
layout 176–7, 180, 189, 193–4
lead titles 29, 34, 85, 222, 227, 242, 263
Learning Analytics 69
legal deposit 244
Lessig, Lawrence 123
Lewycka, Marina 131–2
LexisNexis 15, 66, 92
libel 179–80
libraries: academic 72–5, 77, 102; digital 
content 22–3, 48, 51, 72, 73–5, 78, 101, 
102, 277; digital rights management 
123, 292; funding 26, 27, 48, 54, 58, 
66; hardbacks 27, 30, 42, 159, 161; 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
348
legal deposit 244; and open access 
80–1; pictures 203; public 48; 
suppliers 48, 60, 74, 308; use 42, 
225
licences/rights: audio 88; author 
contract 165, 167, 170–1; or copyright 
121–2; ebooks 123, 233; institutional 
licences 259; paperback rights 27, 
30–1, 32, 285, 295; pictures/images 
203, 204; rights’ reversion 32, 88, 
169; role of agents 135; subsidiary 
rights 169, 171; territorial rights 135, 
171–3, 256, 268, 280; see also 
copyright; digital rights; rights sales; 
site licences
LinkedIn 235, 315, 323
list-building 139, 144
literary agents see authors’ agents
literary festivals 175, 239, 242, 243, 248, 
299
literary prizes 239, 240, 241, 248
literary scouts 133
litho printing 23, 161, 214–16
Little, Brown 28, 31, 87
logistics: book supply chain 275–7
London Book Fair 284, 286, 314
Lonely Planet 51, 229
long-form journalism 49
Longman 59, 65
‘long tail’ 255, 300, 302
Lownie, Andrew 134
Lulu Enterprises 43, 132
Mabe, Michael 76
McCloud, Kevin 214
McEwan, Ian 131, 230
McGraw Hill 7, 8, 60, 67, 69
McLagan, Graeme 180
Macmillan 10, 28, 59, 62, 65, 67, 75, 
114, 276, 315
mail order selling 18, 251, 252
Malcolm vs. OUP (1991) 167
Mantel, Hilary 240
manuscript, acceptability of 129, 168, 
170
marketing: book proposal 129, 130; 
design-led illustrated books 189; 
direct 24, 87, 99, 108, 222, 237, 
250–3; and genre 41; jobs 249, 315, 
326; list-building 139; online 21, 221, 
233–4, 235–8; plan 223; as publisher-
added value 1–2; see also marketing 
mix; market research; promotion
marketing mix: marketing plan 223; 
place 233–4; price 231–3; product 
227–31; promotion 234–41
market research: job roles 222; on 
publishing careers 314; publishing 
decisions 142, 145, 227; sales activity 
260, 264; school/textbook 
publishing 94, 100, 251, 266
mark-up method of costing 153–4
Marr, Andrew 147
Martin, George R. R. 131
Maschler, Tom 29, 134, 146
massive open online course (MOOC) 
72, 79
mass market paperbacks 26–7, 28, 30, 
31, 33, 148, 210, 285
MathML 213
Maxwell, Robert 75
Mayer, Peter 31
media advertising 250
mega journals 81, 104
men/boys’ reading habits 225, 226, 
230
Mendeley 79
merger/acquisition 7, 11, 14–15, 59–60
Mesquita, Stephen 228–9
metadata 22, 24, 78, 79, 200, 215, 234, 
241, 243–5, 270, 293; see also search 
engine optimization
Mexico 9, 65, 96
Meyer, Stephanie 55
Michael O’Mara 53
Microsoft 43, 50
Middle East 65, 76, 96, 98, 267, 271, 
276, 284; see also Europe, Middle 
East and Africa
middle grade children’s books 90
midlist authors 40, 131
Mills & Boon (Harlequin) 41
modern trade publishing development: 
children’s and young adult 
publishing 54–6; consolidation 
28–33, 52; digital publishing 42–52; 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
349
intellectual property 31–2; market 
share 52–4; public libraries 48; retail 
transformation 33–9; self-publishing 
43–5; stability and expansion 26–8; 
strategic changes 39–42; 
subscription services 46–7; vertical 
integration 29–31; see also agency 
models of pricing; ﬁ xed book prices; 
wholesale method of pricing
monographs 58, 73, 97, 129
MOOC see massive open online course
moral rights 120–1
Motion, Andrew 132
multimedia content 48–9, 50, 63, 95, 
114, 215; see also apps
Murdoch, Iris 178
National Curriculum 60–1, 63–4, 94, 
95, 143, 266, 311
National Literacy Trust 224–5
National Union of Journalists 324
Nature and Scientiﬁ c American 10
navigational hyperlinks 199
Nawotka, Edward 40–2
NBA see Net Book Agreement
Neale, Patrick 298
Nelson Thornes 60, 62, 95
Net Book Agreement (NBA) 35–6, 241, 
308
Netherlands, The 12, 13, 59, 60, 268
net sales revenue (NSR) 148–9, 150, 
159
network eﬀ ects 77, 104, 235
networking 314–15
New Adult genre 55–6
Newby, Eric 26
new editions 101, 169, 258, 311
new title costing 148–63, 178, 206
Nielsen: Bookdata 172, 244; BookScan 
140, 227, 256, 257, 261, 307; ISBN 
agency 272
non-book retailers 259, 297, 306
non-consumer publishing 4, 58; 
branding 109; companies 5, 59–60; 
editorial commissioning 142–4, 264; 
technology players 58; see also 
educational publishing; professional 
publishing sector; STM publishing
Nook 16, 38, 46, 302
Norris, Steven 147
North American rights 285–6, 287–8
Nosy Crow 56
novelty books 3, 89
NSR see net sales revenue
OA see open access
Octopus 27, 51, 52
OED see Oxford English Dictionary
OER see Open Educational Resources
on consignment 269
One Day (Nicholls) 177
ONIX see Online Information 
Exchange
online communities 2, 21, 51–2, 221, 
229, 235–7
Online Information Exchange (ONIX) 
243–4
online marketing 24, 221, 233–4, 
235–8
open access (OA) 4, 73, 79–81, 102, 103, 
104, 125; see also toll access
Open Educational Resources (OER) 4, 
61, 71–2, 79
open markets 171, 172, 268, 269
O’Reilly: Media 75, 200; Tim 110, 112
Orion 9, 11, 28, 36, 52, 87, 226, 237
orphan works 124
Osprey 52, 227
OUP see Oxford University Press
outsourcing 2–3, 25, 110, 160, 191, 193, 
212–13, 274
OverDrive 48, 276
overheads 151, 152, 157
Ovid 15
Owen, Deborah 134
Owen, Lynette 283–5
Oyster 46
Oxfam 311
Oxford Companion to Wine, The 
(Robinson) 112
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, 
The 92
Oxford English Dictionary (OED) 41, 51, 
92, 225, 248–9, 291
Oxford University Press (OUP) 8, 9, 51, 
60, 65, 67, 92, 167, 265, 268
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
350
PA see Publishers Association
packagers 27, 36, 54, 65, 135, 140, 170, 
171, 179, 192, 285, 291
page-proofs 186, 197
pagination 186, 189, 213
paid-for promotion see co-op 
payments
Palgrave Macmillan 70, 71, 73, 228
Pan Macmillan 52, 56, 87
paper 207, 208–10
paperbacks 85, 90, 296; see also 
mass market paperbacks; trade 
paperbacks
Pareto eﬀ ect 255
Parragon 56
part-work publishing 10
paternity rights 120, 121
patron-driven acquisition (PDA) 74–5, 
101, 233
Patterson, James 42
pay per view 74, 79, 101, 102
PDA see patron-driven acquisition
PDF see portable document format
Pearson 5–6, 7, 8, 28, 44, 52, 59, 64, 
65, 66, 101, 200, 308
peer review (journals) 76–7, 81, 144
Penguin Books 9, 26, 28, 32, 33, 39, 
52–3, 119, 132, 267
permissions 122, 175, 176, 203, 280
Persephone Books 31
Perseus 53
personalization: education/learning 
plans 95, 217; granularity 22–3, 109, 
114
phablet 16
Phaidon 53
photographs 197, 214; see also picture 
research
picture books 54, 56, 90, 290
picture research 202–4
piracy 20, 47, 110, 125, 280, 288, 311
platform-based services 74–5, 78
PLOS ONE 81
PLS see private language schools; 
Publishers Licensing Society
Pluto 67
POD see print on demand (POD)
podcasts 221, 237
point-of-sale material 221, 234, 249–50, 
258, 264, 270
Poland 12, 13, 283
Popova, Maria 22
portable document format (PDF) 45–6, 
184, 186, 197, 199, 213–14, 215, 293
Portugal 9, 65, 288
positioning 226, 263
Pottermore site 45, 112, 123
PR see public relations
prelims 186
Prentice Hall 59, 65
pre-press processes 191, 192, 205, 210
preprints 125
prestige publishing 163
price: agency and wholesale models 
37–9; costing case study 154, 161, 163; 
data analysis 258; ebooks 35, 37, 38, 
112, 115, 232, 258; elasticity 231–2; 
export 275; ﬁ xed 35–6, 38; hardback/
paperback diﬀ erence 85, 231; 
marketing 231–3; post NBA 36–7, 
241, 298, 308; value engineering 151
print on demand (POD) 23, 43, 132, 191, 
272, 275–6, 306
printing: companies/supply 191, 206–7; 
see also digital printing; litho 
printing; typesetting
print runs 24, 149–50, 151, 174, 256–7
privacy 121
private language schools (PLS) 96
product development 95, 109, 173–5, 
189, 222; see also digital product 
development
production assistant 205–6
production controller 205, 210
production costs 28, 115, 149–50, 156, 
158, 178, 206
production editors 107, 174, 178, 179, 
205
production process: binding 218; 
blurb-writing 174, 177–8; copy-editing 
179–86; cost and quality control 
212–13; cover images 201–2; digital 
workﬂ ow 3, 190–2, 200, 211, 235; 
illustrations 175; indexing 187; 
manuscript delivery 173–4; and 
marketing staﬀ  222; packaging and 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
351
distribution 218; page proofs 197; 
picture research 202, 204; pricing 
174; printing see printing; production 
editors 174, 178, 179; project 
management 174, 175–8, 189, 210; 
proofreading 186–7; staﬀ  205–6, 211; 
typesetting 213–14
production values 107, 109, 151, 203, 
226
professional publishing sector 4–5, 14; 
book sales (UK) 97; catalogues 246; 
categorization 72; direct marketing 
250–1; direct supply to customers 19, 
252; markets 142; online trends 66; 
promotion 270; terminology 97; 
textbooks 99; XML 190
Proﬁ le Books 53, 228
proﬁ t 150–3, 157, 159–60
project management 174, 175–8, 189, 
210
promotion: international sales 270–1; 
in marketing mix 234–41; and 
publicity 242–53; selling through 
261, 262, 263; see also co-op 
payments; search engine 
optimization; social media
proofreading 107, 178, 184, 210
ProQuest 74, 78, 292, 302
public domain 43, 120; see also free 
public access
publicity see promotion
public relations (PR) 222, 234, 247–9
publishers: activities of 1–3, 10, 20–1, 
108–10; adaptation 23–5; brands 228; 
criticisms of 3, 24–5, 44, 62, 64, 71, 
75, 77, 326; ﬁ nancial management 
115–17; global signiﬁ cance 5–9; see 
also asset valuation
Publishers Association (PA) 35–6
Publishers Licensing Society (PLS) 
281
publishing: deﬁ ning 1, 3, 21; 
qualiﬁ cations 315, 325
Publishing Training Centre 313, 325
Puﬃ  n Books 56, 222
puﬀ s 177
Pullman, Philip 55
purchase prompts 224, 297
Quadrille 53
qualiﬁ cations 315, 325
quality control 2–3, 212–13
Quarto 53
Quercus 11, 238
Quick Reads 224
radio frequency identiﬁ cation (RFID) 
273
Random House: advertising 
expenditure 250; BBC titles 88; book 
deals 129, 131; ebooks 38, 171; 
Everyman’s Library 107; global 
ranking 8; and Graham Greene 32; 
and Joan Collins 170; mergers/
acquisitions 7, 9, 28, 52; NBA 
collapse 36; online communities 237; 
vs. Rosetta Books (2001) 171
Reader’s Digest 27, 51
Reader’s Digest Great World Atlas, The 
27
reading/book initiatives 224, 299
reading devices/ecosystems 16, 17, 19, 
42–3, 46, 199, 252; see also Kindle; 
Nook
reading the digital map 113–14
reading groups 239, 241
recruitment agencies 316–17
Reed Elsevier 5, 7, 8, 9, 15, 59, 62, 92; 
see also Elsevier
Reekles, Beth 128–9
reference publishing: aggregation 
292; backlist sales 93; and book 
packagers 36; for children 90; 
copyright 119; databases 3, 15; digital 
publishing 51, 66, 74, 92; and the 
digital revolution 15, 20, 112; e-rights 
sales 279, 291, 293; loose-leaf 
publishing 97; major publishers 8; 
marketing 226, 228; and multimedia 
50; OUP 9, 67, 92; product 
development 174, 176, 190, 210, 213; 
sales/distribution 264, 265
reﬂ owable text in ebooks 197, 199, 200
re-importation 69, 172, 232–3
remainders 50, 168, 306
reprint paperback rights 27, 30–1, 32, 
285, 295
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
352
resale price maintenance (RPM) see Net 
Book Agreement
retail transformation 18–19, 33–9, 34, 
255, 297–302, 303–4
return on investment (ROI) 157, 161
returns 102, 153, 169, 257, 258, 260, 
264, 269, 272, 273, 277, 307
reviews 23, 30, 51, 122, 177, 221, 234, 241, 
246–7, 247; see also word of mouth
Reynolds defence 180
RFID see radio frequency identiﬁ cation
Richard and Judy 239
Richmond Publishing 65
rights sales: audio 88; book club 296; 
book fairs 282, 283–5; books for the 
visually impaired 295–6; electronic 
291–4; income 279; media 294–5; 
North American rights 285–6; 
reprint 27, 285; rights work 279–82, 
287; serial and extract 294; 
translation 23, 98, 145, 169, 282, 
288–90
risk 3–4, 23, 44, 84, 86, 111, 114, 115, 146
Ritter, R. M. 180–1
Roberts, Lucienne 193
Robinson, Jancis 112
Rogers, Jane 240
ROI see return on investment
Roman & Littleﬁ eld International 67
Romania 154
romantic ﬁ ction 41
Routledge 59; costing case study 154–63
Rowling, J. K. 45, 55, 91, 112, 128, 148, 
295
Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) 75
royalties 2, 30, 40, 44, 45, 73, 127, 150, 
165, 168, 171; see also advances
RPM (resale price maintenance) see Net 
Book Agreement
Russia 6, 7, 12, 13, 283
Safari Books 75
SAGE Publications 67, 75, 228
Sainsbury’s 305, 306
salaries 325–6
sale or return (SOR) 260
sales: academic 264–5; agents 270, 310; 
consumer behaviour 224–6, 301, 
302; data 140, 227, 256, 257–8, 261, 
307; export/international 233, 
266–71; forecasting 256–7; jobs/roles 
258–60, 261–9, 270–1; new title 
costing 148–9, 157, 158–9; Pareto 
eﬀ ect 255; point-of-sale material 234, 
249–50, 258, 264, 270; rep/buyer 
encounter 261–5; terms of 260–1, 
269–70
sales channels: second hand books 69, 
311; wholesalers and intermediaries 
306–9; see also bookshops; direct 
selling; e-commerce; non-book 
retailers; supermarkets
Sandara Rajan, Mira T. 120–1
Sandusky, Brett 109
Scandinavia 7, 10, 98, 288
scarcity 20–1
Scholastic 8, 10, 52, 62, 231, 310, 311
schools publishing 4, 60–4, 93–6, 143, 
265–6, 266, 309, 311; see also 
textbooks
ScienceDirect 8, 78, 276
science, technical and medical 
publishing see STM publishing
scouts 133, 286
Scribd 46, 112
search engine optimization (SEO) 222, 
227, 243, 255, 332; see also keywords
second-hand books 69, 311
self-publishing 4, 18, 19, 40, 43–5, 78, 
86, 109, 123–4, 132, 274
SEO see search engine optimization
semantic metadata 78, 200
serial rights 249, 294
serials see journals
services (publishers’) 2, 24, 44, 51–2, 
58, 59, 62, 66, 68–70, 102, 104, 112
Setterﬁ eld, Diane 271
Schatzkin, Mike 21
short-form publishing 49–51, 72, 92
short-run printing see digital printing
short stories 49–50
showrooming/price comparison 18, 
298
Shreve, Anita 230
Silksoundbooks 302–3
Simon, Francesca 91, 131
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
353
Simon & Schuster 9, 38, 45, 52, 56, 59, 
285
site licences 74–5, 93, 98, 101, 123, 233, 
292
skills: design 192, 196; editorial 144, 
162, 178; international sales 267; 
marketing 223, 249; picture research 
203; production 211; rights work 282, 
287; sales 262
Slovenia 268, 289
small publishers 10–11, 14, 54, 130–1, 
255, 274
Smashwords 43, 132
social media 51–2, 145, 235–8, 241, 242, 
248, 249, 250, 253, 263
social responsibility 207, 299, 301, 308
Society of Authors 122
Society of Indexers 187, 324
Society of Young Publishers (SYP) 314, 
325
Sony 16, 38, 42, 46, 232
SOR see sale or return
Spain 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 65, 96, 98, 282
SPi Global 191
Springer 8, 9, 14, 59, 67, 75, 80
Squires, Claire 41, 241
Stehlik, Liate 131
Stet (Athill) 29–30
STM publishing 4; business models 
101; catalogues 246; company 
valuation 117, 119; and digitalization 
15, 72, 73–4, 170, 190; direct 
marketing 222, 250–1; distribution 
19, 97, 98, 102; global market 5, 6–7, 
66, 67, 98; journals 75–6, 78, 102; 
major publishers 5, 8–9, 66–7; 
market research 142; monographs 73; 
sales/distribution 257, 259; strategic 
concentration 14, 36
Stones, Brenda 143–4
structural mark-up 78, 182–4, 190, 
194–5
‘Stuﬀ  White People Like’ (Lander) 131
subscriptions: advance orders 85, 263; 
journals 75, 79, 80, 102, 103, 104, 115; 
libraries 74, 104, 233, 252; online 
communities 112, 236; trade books 
46–7
subsidiary rights 282, 285–96
subsidy publishers 43
supermarkets 27, 34, 36, 37, 255, 297, 
300, 302, 305–6
supplementary texts 99
supply chain 19–20, 36–7, 44, 64, 110, 
136, 191, 273, 275–6, 275–7
supply-side publishing 3–4, 44, 73, 79, 
80, 81
sustainability 207, 208, 307–8
Sutherland, John 246
Sweden 10, 283
synthetic authors 20
SYP see Society of Young Publishers
tablets 16, 37, 46, 60, 63, 65, 95, 263, 
298
tagging structural mark-up 182–4, 190, 
198
Tartt, Donna 129
Tate Gallery 53
tax: Amazon 301; see also VAT
Taylor & Francis 9, 59, 67, 75, 154–63
Taylor, Kevin 96
technology companies (impact of) 
42–3; see also Amazon; Apple; 
Google; Sony; social media
Techset 191
teenage/young adult ﬁ ction 54, 55–6, 
90, 91, 131, 237, 242
TeleOrdering 272–3
Templar 56
terms of trade/sale 260–1, 269–70
territorial rights 135, 171–3, 256, 268, 
280
Tesco 37, 230, 300, 305, 306
textbooks 66, 68–72, 94, 98–101; 
commissioning 139, 142, 145, 162, 
179; discounting 233, 309; and exam 
boards 64; export 58, 95, 98; import 
58, 172; marketing 95–6, 226, 227, 
231, 246, 251; publication date 147, 
175; rental 69; Routledge case study 
154–61; sales 257, 264, 265, 270, 271, 
276; second-hand books 69, 311; see 
also etextbooks
Thirteenth Tale, The (Setterﬁ eld) 271
Thames & Hudson 53
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
354
Thompson, Emma 140
Thompson, Flora 165
Thompson, John 33, 114
Thomson Reuters 5, 7, 8, 60
Thrift, Julia 193
Time Warner 28, 52, 230
titling 146–7, 227, 230
toll access (TA) 79–80; see also open 
access
Touch Press 48, 49, 192
trade education 4, 64, 95
trademarks 119
trade paperbacks 31, 32, 173, 210, 285, 
304
trade publishing see consumer 
publishing
trade wholesalers 34, 256, 263, 306–7
translation 13–14, 98, 154, 171, 201, 268, 
290; copyright 120; rights sales 23, 
98, 145, 169, 282, 288–90
transmedia publishing 45
Transworld 52, 56
travel guides 20, 51, 228–9
travel shops 300, 303–4
Tribe, Lis 95
Truss, Lynne 228, 237–8
Turkey 12, 60
TV/ﬁ lm tie-ins 40, 133, 135, 140, 144, 
239, 248, 294–5
Twitter 24, 51, 112, 130, 145, 235, 236, 
237, 241, 248
Tyler, Anne 177
typeface 193, 194, 195
typesetting 15, 190–1, 197, 213–14; see also 
structural mark-up
typographic markup 182–4, 190, 194
UK Global Compact 308
UK publishing 83–4; consumer 
purchase prompts and demographics 
224–6; export 54, 271; publisher 
market share (consumer) 52; sales 
channels 297–312; title output 27, 84
Unique Sales Proposition (USP) 145, 
245
Universal Copyright Convention (1952) 
122
university presses 4, 67, 72, 78
Unwin, Rayner 26
USA 8, 9, 13, 16; American 
individualism/exceptionalism 40–1, 
290; BookExpo America 283, 286; 
bookshops 33, 298, 299; college 
textbook publishing 4, 58, 68, 69, 71; 
digital sales/lending ﬁ gures 48; 
self-publishing 4, 43–4, 132; see also 
US publishers
Usborne 56
used book market 69, 311
user-centred design 19, 24, 25, 199
user-driven acquisition see patron-
driven acquisition
user experience (UX) 15, 109
user-generated content 20, 22, 51, 112, 
228
USP see Unique Sales Proposition
US publishers: mergers and 
acquisitions 28–9, 32, 52, 53, 59–60; 
non-consumer 65, 67; pricing 38, 
241; territoriality 171–3; territorial 
rights 30, 31, 135, 285–8
value chain 18, 20, 21, 24, 58, 79, 106–7
value creation/protection: business 
model 110–19; intellectual property 
119–25; positive externalities 77; value 
chain 106–10
value engineering 151
vanilla ebooks 45–6
variable costs 149, 156, 157, 158
VAT (value added tax) 35, 83–4, 173, 
233
version of record 77
vertical communities 21, 44, 47, 81, 87, 
93, 108, 112, 221, 228, 235–7; social 
networks 51–2; see also community 
sites
Victor Gollance 32
Virago 31
viral marketing 236, 238
visibility 43, 87, 110, 221, 228–9, 255, 
258, 264, 297; journals 77–8; see also 
branding; discoverability
VitalSource 71
VLEs (virtual learning environments) 
63, 69
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index
355
Volans, Henry 113–14
Walker Books 54, 56, 89
walled gardens 16
Ware, Mark 76
Waste Land, The, app 49
Waterhouse, Keith 187
Waterstones 33, 261, 298, 300, 301, 
302, 303, 304–5, 306
Wattpad 44, 128–9
wholesale method of pricing 37–8, 39, 
154, 261, 308
wholesalers 275; Amazon 18, 274, 277, 
301, 307; and library supply 48, 74, 
308; non-book retail 306; POD 191, 
217; trade 34, 306–7; WHSmith 305; 
see also distributors
WHSmith 33, 52, 54, 303, 305
Wikipedia 20, 92, 112
Wiley 8, 51, 60, 67, 69, 172, 276; see 
also John Wiley
Wiley-Blackwell 8, 60, 67, 75, 226
Wilson, Jacqueline 42, 55
Winder, Simon 141
Winterson, Jeanette 127
WiP see Women in Publishing
Wischenbart, Rüdiger 6–8, 12–13
Wolters Kluwer 5, 7, 8, 15, 60, 62, 67, 
75
women 29–30, 225, 226, 230, 314, 325, 
326
Women in Publishing (WiP) 314
word of mouth (WOM) 23, 51, 221, 237, 
240, 311
work experience 313, 314, 315–16, 325
workﬂ ows/working practices 3, 23, 24, 
25; see also production process
World Book Day 224
World Book Night 224
Wylie, Andrew 136
XML (Extensible Markup Language) 
182–4, 190, 196, 197, 198, 199, 215, 
235, 293
Yellow Jersey Press 139
young adult/teenage ﬁ ction 54, 55–6, 
90, 91, 131, 237, 242
Young, Bob 132
Zed Books 67
www.Ebook777.com

