
 
 
 
 
 
Installing Visual Studio 2013 Step By Step
By Stephen P. Thomas

Proofreader: Stephen P. Thomas
Cover Designer: Stephen Thomas-Dorin
First Edition
Copyright © 2013 by Stephen P. Thomas
All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof
may not be reproduced or used in any manner whatsoever
without the express written permission of the publisher
except for the use of brief quotations in a book review.
Printed in the United States of America

Table of Contents
Installing Visual Studio 2012 on Windows 8 Step By Step
Introduction
Let’s Get Started
Installing Visual Studio 2012 on Windows 8
Summary
About the Author
For more books ..Ahashare.com


Introduction
This book will quickly show you step by step how to install visual studio 2013 on
Microsoft’s Windows operating system.  It can be used as a quick reference or a standard
how to document for your development team.  Most developers are overloaded with many
tasks and have limited time to search online where more advertisements are found in
internet search results that will waste more of the little time that remains.  How can one
still be effective?  Reduce the noise and obtain information free of it.   That is our goal. 
These are the prerequisites for becoming a successful professional .NET developer

Let’s Get Started
To check for any compatibility issues visit Microsoft’s site by clicking the following link:
http://www.microsoft.com/visualstudio/eng/products/compatibility

Installing Visual Studio 2013 on Windows 8
You will need administrator credentials to install Visual Studio. However, you do not need
administrator credentials after you have installed Visual Studio. The Visual Studio
installation process can be started three different ways:  One by inserting the DVD, two by
mount the .iso DVD image file, and three by downloading the Web Installer.

One Start by using DVD
Insert CD into DVD drive then click the popup window below:
The next window should open below:
 
Click under the “Other choices” label: Open folder to view files.  Go to the step Figure 3.
Run as Administrator in the next section Two Start by Mounting ISO DVD Image and
continue with the installation instructions.
Note:  If you miss the automatic popup then you can manually launch the installation by
right clicking the file explorer icon on the Windows toolbar in the desktop mode and
clicking “File Explorer”. Navigate to the DVD and double click or open the Default.htm
file.  It will take you to the screen above.

Two Start by Mounting ISO DVD Image
Right click the ISO DVD image file named:
en_visual_studio_professional_2013_with_update_4_x86_dvd_5935322.iso
 
Click Mount from the popup menu. See below.
Figure 1. Mount ISO DVD Image
After the mount is complete Windows explorer will open with a listing of the Visual
Studio ISO DVD image contents.  See below.

Figure 2. Mounted Visual Studio ISO DVD image
Right click the ISO DVD image file named vs_professsional.exe and click the Run as
administrator menu item from the popup menu.  See in image Figure 3. Run as
Administrator.

Figure 3. Run as Administrator
Only if Windows has pending updates will you see the message below “Setup Blocked” as
in Figure 4. Setup Blocked .  In this scenario you will have to restart your computer to
allow Windows to make the necessary updates.  Then repeat the installation and Visual
Install will launch uninterrupted as you see below in Figure 5. Visual Studio Initial Install
Window.

Figure 4. Setup Blocked

Figure 5. Visual Studio Initial Install Window
Next you must agree to the Microsoft’s lengthy and never read license terms and privacy
policy.  In addition agree to join the Visual Studio Experience Improvement Program as in
Figure 6. Agree to join the Visual Studio Experience Improvement Program.

Figure 6. Agree to join the Visual Studio Experience Improvement Program
You can also not agree to join Microsoft’s Visual Studio Experience Improvement
Program as in Figure 7. Not Agree to join the Visual Studio Experience Improvement
Program.

Figure 7. Not Agree to join the Visual Studio Experience Improvement Program
Next you will see the visual studio 2012 installation agreement. Select agree then click
Next. See below:

The Optional Features to install window opens next.  Select your options. In this case we
will install all options. See below:

Then click the “INSTALL” button.
The UAC will ask for permission.  Click Yes, then the installation progress window opens.
See below:

It will take a while to complete.  So go and have lunch or dinner then come back.   Once
the installation completes click the “LAUNCH” button.  See below:

Next the “Choose Default Environment Settings” window opens.  Choose your
environment settings. See below:

Next click the “Start Visual Studio” button.  The loading user settings popup will open. 
See below:
This will take a few minutes.  Take a break.  The advance option was selected for the
“Local Help Documentation” option of the “Choose Default Environment Settings”

window previously which in turn opens the “Microsoft Help Viewer 2.0 – Visual Studio
2012 Documentation” to allow you to select the documentation you would like to add
locally on your computer.  See below:
Clicking the Add in the Action column will toggle between Cancel and Add.  Make your
selection and then click “Update”. The UAC will ask for permission.  Click yes, and then
the documentation will download and install.   The progress indicator on the bottom will
display.  Go watch YouTube for a few minutes this will take a while.  Once successful you
will see the screen below:
Now visual studio 2012 is ready to use.  See below:


Summary
You have now completed the full installation of visual studio 2012.  You should be able to
use its full functionality.  You will find that the 2012 version is a major improvement over
the 2010 version. 


About the Author
Stephen P. Thomas is a successful author of Telerik Rad Grid Control for ASP.NET AJAX
by Example, How To Setup Your Verizon FIOS Static IP with Windows Server 2008 Step
by Step, a successful computer consultant of 20 years, a certified Microsoft Developer,
and a software publisher of the Grytek Millionaire Order Processing software.  He studied
computer engineering at Carnegie-Mellon University and computer science at University
of Maryland.   His firm Grytek Consulting, Inc. has been successful at completing many
projects for government agencies and private companies.  URL is www.grytek.com.  Send
e-mail with praise, condemnation, and everything in between, to s.thomas@grytek.com.

