INSTALL A FIREPLACE 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
The way that modern surrounds are constructed makes 
installing one a very simple job that anyone can undertake 
successfully. 
  
 
 
If you are installing a gas fire in a fireplace, it must be 
installed by a member of CORGI (Confederation of 
Registered Gas Installers). For further information contact: 
Gas Service Agents - Tel 0906 8517651. 
  
 
 
A fireplace is the focal point of a room and there are now so 
many wonderful surrounds available that you can't fail to 
create an eye-catching feature. 
  
Even if you don't like an existing fireplace surround, 
someone else may do; so remove it carefully and put any 
money you get for it towards the cost of your new surround. 
  
Your brand-new surround can be further enhanced by having
a companion set comprising brush, tongs and shovel, plus a 
coal hod and a firescreen. 
 
2  - Removing an old fireplace 
Before removing an old fireplace, or if you are going to open up 
a chimney to have a new fire (solid fuel, gas or electric 
ornamental), have the chimney swept and tested. Contact a 
professional chimney sweep through your Yellow Pages.  
 
 
 
Unless the room has been emptied for complete redecoration, 
roll back the carpet and cover any furniture that has to remain 
with dust sheets - there can be a lot of dust created. 
 
 
 
If there is an old fireplace surround and hearth to remove, be 
very careful, since a cast-iron, brick or stone type is very 
heavy, and you will need help lowering it to the floor. 
ts.
 
 
 
Due to its weight, you might have to allow a surround to fall. To
help prevent any damage, pile some cushions and pillows on 
the floor in front of the hearth and cover them with dust shee
Take care to stand clear.  
 
 
 
You will probably need to use a bolster chisel and club hammer 
when removing a surround. Be sure to wear a face mask, safety
spectacles and gloves.  
 
 
 
Usually the hearth will have been laid after the surround was 

fitted. It is laid on a bed of mortar, so chisel away around the 
underside until you are able to get a crowbar or garden spade 
underneath, then lever upwards to free the hearth from the 
mortar bed. Remember, it will be heavy so have help on hand.  
 
 
 
Below the hearth will be a layer of concrete which is level with 
the floorboards. This is the constructional hearth and can 
remain in place and be covered by a new hearth or 
floorcovering (1). If it needs to be smoothed, use a self-
levelling compound; this is simply poured on to the floor, 
smoothed out with a trowel and left to dry to a level finish.
Sometimes the hearth will comprise a layer of tiles level with 
the floorboards. These can remain in place or be lifted with 
bolster chi
 
the 
sel and club hammer. 
heavy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A fireplace surround will be held to the wall with screws driven 
through metal lugs. The lugs - there may be one or two on each
side - will be buried in the wall plaster (1). To locate them, chip 
away an inch or so of plaster all around the edge, using the cold
chisel and club hammer. This will reveal the screws which can 
be removed. They may, however, be rusted in and need to 
have the heads drilled off to free the lugs. The surround can 
now be lowered to the floor - remember it will be 

 
 
 
A wooden surround may be 
screwed to wood battens (2). 
Again, it's a matter of locating 
the screws which will be hidden 
behind wood plugs or filler. You 
may have to strip off any paint 
or varnish to locate the filler 
used to conceal the screw heads.  
 
 
 
A tiled surround will have a 
concrete backing which will be 
fixed to the wall through lugs 
(3). 
 
 
 
A stone or brick surround will 
have been built with individual 
components held together with 
mortar (4). Chip away the 
mortar bit by bit, starting with 
the top course. Sometimes there 
may be metal wall ties linking 
some mortar courses to the wall 
behind. These can be chipped 
out of the wall.  
 
 
 
With the fireplace surround removed, you may be faced with a 
fireback. This will be in two sections and can be removed, top 
half first, followed by the lower portion using the bolster and 
club hammer. 
 
 
 
Remaining in the hearth will be some rubble used as a backing 
for the fireback; remove all the rubble to leave a rectangular 
brick opening ready for your new gas or electric fire, fireplace 
surround and hearth. Depending on the condition of the 
brickwork in the opening, you may want to keep it or cover it 
over with a new facing of brick or stone as a feature, or fit a 
new fireback.  
 
 
 
If you are not going to resell the fireplace, then break it up 'in 
situ' to make its removal easier. Cover it with old blankets 
before dismantling it with a club hammer. This prevents pieces 
of hardcore flying around dangerously - again, wear appropriate

safety equipment. 
 
 
 
It is worth supporting a heavy 
surround while it is being freed 
from the wall (5).  
 
3 - A new surround for a modern decorative 
ire  
f 
There is a vast array of fireplace surrounds, back panels (eg 
tiled inserts) and hearths which are interchangeable so you 
can mix and match to get the precise effect you want. 
Surrounds come in such materials as marble, pine and 
mahogany effects. 
 
 
 
An electric fire does not need a flue. A gas fire requires a 
brick chimney, pre-cast flue or a pre-fabricated flue. Where 
there is no flue and the fire is to be installed on an outside 
wall, you can install a balanced-flue gas fire contained 
behind glass, or a rear-fan-flued gas fire which is open-
fronted. 
 
 
 
If you simply want a surround but no fire, then you could 
use something such as a dried-flower arrangement to form 
an eye-catching focal point in the room.  
 
 
 
Your local B&Q now have the new flueless gas fires that can 
be installed on any wall, but they do require a vent 
constantly open to provide combustion air. 
 
4  - Installing a surround  
The new surround will be fixed to the wall using keyhole 
angle plates and screws. 
 
 
 
A surround must not be installed against damp plaster - and 
plastering must be fully dried out. No lime or cement must 
come into contact with timber that will be visible on the 
completion of the installation.  
 
 
 
The surround must be fitted centrally around the fireplace 

opening, so draw guide lines on the wall to ensure that it is 
correctly positioned and is aligned both horizontally and 
vertically.  
 
 
 
The fireback needs to be removed and the fireplace opening 
reduced using bricks. Alternatively, simply remove the 
fireback and keep the wider opening. 
 
 
 
First the hearth should be la
centrally in front of the 
opening (6). Ensure that it is 
flat on the floor and check 
with a spirit level that it is 
horizontal. If necessary, use 
packing pieces of wood to 
bring it level. 
id 
 
 
 
 
 
The back panel is usually 
supplied screwed to a chip-
board frame to protect it in 
transit. The panel is removed 
from the frame, placed 
centrally on the hearth and 
screwed to the wall (7). 
 
 
 
Natural and conglomerate marble back panels cannot be 
fixed to the wall on a permanent basis. Instead they should 
be stood vertically against the wall and held in place by the 
appropriate timber mantel. If you have any difficulty doing 
this (due to the wall not being square), use a small amount 
of Unibond No More Nails to fix the panel to the wall until 
you have the surround in place. 
 
 
 

 
 
If a timber mantel is being 
used, this will come in 
sections and have to be 
assembled (8).  
 
 
 
The assembled mantel is 
temporarily lifted into place 
so that the locations of the 
screw-fixing positions can be 
marked off (9). The mantel is
then removed, and the wal
drilled and plugged for the 
screws. The mantel is then 
permanently fixed with 
screws slotted through the 
keyhole plates.  
 
l 
r tar can
 
 
 
Where applicable, a brass 
frame is located around the 
opening of the back panel to 
complete the job (10).  
 
5 - Cleaning existing fireplaces 
 
Brick: Use a stiff brush to remove general dust and dirt. If 
there is heavy soiling, use a brick, stone and concrete cleaner - 
be careful when using such cleaners as they are caustic. Wear 
protective clothing and rubber gloves, and ensure the room is 
well ventilated.  
 
 
 
Cast iron: Most grime can be removed with a general 
household cleaner diluted with hot water, according to 
manufacturer's instructions. Stubborn patches of soot o

be removed with methylated spirit and fine wire wool. Any rust 
spots can be removed with an emery cloth. To restore the 
finish, use a coat of heat-proof matt black paint, or black-le
graphite polish.  
 
ad 
 
eramic tiles: Wash with sugar soap or household cleaner 
 
.
arble: Polished stone surfaces can be washed with soapy 
 
late and granite: Use a stiff-bristle brush (not a wire brush) 
 
 
 
C
diluted with hot water - the cleaner must be non-abrasive. A
loose tile can be refixed with heat-resistant ceramic tile cement
 
 
 
M
water, dried with a chamois leather and shined with a good-
quality wax polish. Be careful with the surfaces as they are 
easily damaged.  
 
 
S
to remove deposits from unpolished surfaces, then wash with a 
liquid detergent in hot water. Only use a caustic cleaner if all 
else fails.  
 
 

 
 
 
 

