INSTALL AN ELECTRIC 
SHOWER 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
The plumbing and wiring involved in installing an electric 
shower requires sound basic skills in both areas of expertise.
  
 
 
Ensure that wiring and plumbing are properly installed. It 
pays to have a professional electrician connect the wiring at 
the consumer unit. Always turn off the electricity when 
making connections to the mains. 
  
 
 
Electric showers are economical to run and provide hot 
water on demand. 
  
Using an electric shower could save you up to a third of the 
water you would use for a bath and, because a shower heats 
the water instantaneously, you do not waste energy heating 
stored water. Electric showers are rated in kilowatts (kW) - 
the higher the wattage, the better the performance of the 
shower. An electric shower is relatively easy to install, 
requiring only a connection to mains electricity and a single 
cold-water pipe running from the rising main. 
 
2  - Planning the work 
If you plan to install a show
over an existing bath, your 
primary consideratio
where you can tap into the 
rising main. The most 
convenient location is often 
an airing cupboard close to 
the bathroom. If that is no
possible, make the 
connection in the loft and run 
the branch pipe through the 
bathroom ceiling to the 
shower. 
er 
n is 
t 
 
 
 
If you are building a new shower cubicle, you will need to 
consider drainage:  
• 
The waste pipe must have the correct fall (slope) - 
this may entail raising the shower tray on a 
platform.  
• 
When connecting to a two-pipe waste system, you 
can run the waste pipe to an exterior hopper head. 
Alternatively, connect the waste pipe to the soil 
stack of a one-pipe system.  
 
 
 

Provide access to the trap beneath the shower tray, or it 
may become difficult to service a blocked waste pipe. 
 
3  - Plumbing 
Step 1: Start by mounting the shower unit in the required 
position. Mark the fixing points using the template supplied 
by the manufacturer or use the backplate if there is no 
template. 
 
 
Step 2: Using a power drill fitted with a masonry bit of the 
appropriate size, drill holes to receive the wall plugs for the 
mounting screws.  
 
 
When drilling holes in ceramic tiles, stick a piece of masking 
tape on the glazed surface to prevent the masonry bit 
slipping.  
 
 
Step 3: Before you finally mount the shower unit, cut a piece
of 15mm (1/2in) copper pipe long enough to pass through 
the ceiling or sideways into the airing cupboard. Try to make 
neat clearance holes through the wall or ceiling to minimise 
the amount of making good. Connect the pipe to the shower 
inlet. 
 
 
Cut copper pipe with a 
hacksaw - wrap a piece of 
paper around the pipe as a 
guide to keep the cut s
Alternatively, use a pipe 
cutter. File the cut ends to 
remove burrs. 
quare. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ideally pipe runs should be concealed and, in some 
instances, it may be possible to make the connection at the 
back of the shower unit so that you can run the pipe into the 
walls.  
 
 
• 
If the wall is a stud partition, it should be possible 
to run the pipework (and electrical supply) between 
the studs.  
• 
In a solid masonry wall, you could cut a channel in 

order to bury the pipe under the plaster. This type 
of work should be carried out before you fit the 
shower unit and tile the wall. Use soldered joints in 
this situation, to minimise the possibility of a leak.  
Step 4: Inside the airing cupboard or loft, take the new 
branch pipe up to the rising main but stop just short of it. Fit
a stopcock (not a gate valve) to the end of the branch pipe, 
with the flow arrow pointing away from the rising main. 
 
 
Alternatively, fit a miniature isolating valve to the branch 
pipe, close to the shower unit, so that you can turn off the 
water for servicing.  
 
 
Step 5: Turn off the main stopcock and drain the water from 
the pipe by opening the kitchen tap. 
 
 
Step 6: Fit the T-joint onto the rising main and hand-tighten 
the cap nuts. Measure and cut a short length of pipe to 
connect the T-joint to the stopcock. 
 
 
Step 7: Assemble the component parts and tighten the nuts 
to make watertight joints. Test the plumbing.  
 
 
Showers connected to the rising main must be protected 
with a double-check non-return valve fitted to the branch 
pipe - this prevents dirty water being siphoned from the 
bath or shower tray into the drinking supply. This applies 
only if the handset can come into contact with used water. 
Caution must be exercised when inserting double check 
valves in the water supply. If unsure, contact a professional 
plumber. 
 
4  -  Fitting the sprayhead  
Step 1: Mount the sprayhead 
slider rail on the wall to one 
side of the shower unit. 
Check that there is enough 
room for the sprayhead to be 
adjusted up and down to suit 
all members of the family. 
 
Step 2: Connect the flexible 
hose to the sprayhead and to 
the shower unit. 
 
5 - Wiring the shower 

 
n instantaneously heating elec
A
tric shower requires a 
. We 
se 10mm two-core-and-earth cable for the circuit, which 
 the 
lectrical Wiring Regulations require all non-electrical metal 
 then 
d, 
onnect bonding cable to pipework with purpose-made earth
 
fully, 
itting a pull-switch
dedicated radial circuit running from the consumer unit
recommend that the circuit should include a 30 milliamp 
Residual Current Device. 
 
 
U
must be protected with a 40amp Miniature Circuit Breaker 
(MCB) or a 45amp fuse in the consumer unit. If there is no 
room in your consumer unit for a new circuit, have an 
electrician install a separate 45amp switch fuse unit for
shower. 
 
 
E
components such as pipes, baths and basins to be 
connected, one to another, with earthing cable that
runs to the consumer unit where it is connected to the 
earthing block. For supplementary bonding, as it is calle
use 6mm single-core cable, insulated with green/yellow 
sheathing. 
 
 
C
clamps and attach it to the special earthing tags on metal 
baths and basins. Your shower unit must also be bonded to
the pipework, using the earth terminal provided in the 
appliance. Please check the details of your product care
as the earth terminals within some showers should not be 
used for cross bonding.  
 
 
 
F
  
ough an electric shower has its own on/off switch, there 
  
e isolating switch for a shower must have a contact gap of
 
Alth
must be a separate 45amp double-pole switch to isolate  
the circuit. The isolating switch must be out of reach from
anyone using the shower. 
  
Th
 
at least 3mm and an indicator, such as a flag which is 
normally incorporated in the switch to show it is on. 
 
 
If the isolating switch is to be situated inside the bathroom, 
use a pull-switch mounted on the ceiling: 
 
 

Step 1: Make a hole in the 
ceiling where the pull-switch 
is to be fitted. Screw a 
mounting board between the 
joists above the ceiling on 
which to fasten the b
of the switch. 
ackplate 
 
 
 
Step 2: Run the circuit cable 
to the switch position and 
pass a loop of cable through 
the hole in the ceiling and 
mounting board. Then run 
the cable on to the shower 
unit. 
 
 
• 
You can run electrical cable inside plastic mini-
trunking fixed to the surfaces of walls and ceiling.  
• 
Alternatively, bury the cable behind the plaster.  
o 
One way is to pass the cable down between 
the studs of a hollow partition wall.  
o 
For a solid wall, you would have to cut out a
channel in which to set the cable. In this 
case, it is safest to run the cable inside 
plastic conduit and cover it with plaster 
ready for tiling.  
 
 
Step 3: At the switch point, cut the loop of cable and strip 
the ends of the cable. Fix the backplate of the switch in 
position. Cover the bare earth wires with green and yellow 
sleeving and connect them to the 'E' terminal. 
 
 
Step 4: Connect the wires of the cable from the consumer 
unit to the 'Mains' terminals of the switch. Connect the wires 
of the cable to the shower unit of the 'Load' terminals - red 
to 'L' terminals and black to 'N' terminals. 
 
 
Step 5: Strip the sheathing from the cable at the shower 
unit and connect the wires to the terminal block as shown on
the instructions - Red 'L' (live), Black 'N' (neutral) and bare 
'E' (earth). Cover the bare wires with PVC earth sleeving. 
 

Strip about 100mm (4in) of sheathing from a cable - slit it 
all in an electrician to make the connection to the 
lengthways, then peel it back and cut off the waste.  
 
 
C
consumer unit and test the circuit.  
 
 
 

