I nstalling the Deck Ledger  
 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
It attaches the deck to your house and it is also provides the reference point for laying out the deck for 
construction. Because of its importance, the ledger must be correctly positioned and fastened very securely to 
the house.  
Pressure-treated lumber is the preferred material for the ledger. It is very sturdy and resists rot and pests. It 
should be secured directly to a header joist or to a masonry foundation for maximum strength. For installation 
into a header joist, you will use lag bolts. Masonry installation requires anchors that expand as the lag bolts are 
screwed in.  
 
  
 
  Time to complete this project depends on the size of the deck and the level of help available, the times listed 
here are for two people on a 10’x 30’ deck with the house defining two sides of the deck. 
• Beginner - 4 to 5 hours 
• Intermediate - 3 to 4 hours 
• Advanced - 2 to 3 hours 
  
Install the ledger at least 1" below any doors that will open out onto the new deck. This will help 
prevent water, ice and snow from building up and leaking under the bottom door seal. 
 
  
When marking the height for cutting the siding to fit the ledger, remember that 2" x 6" 
lumber is typically only 5-1/2" wide.  
   
  
 
 
STEPS 
  
 
 

1.
  
Reference your deck plans to determine the exact location and size of the 
ledger board. You need to cut out the siding on your house where the ledger 
will be installed. On the side of the house, use a level and mark the siding to 
match the size of the ledger. The length of the cut out area will actually be 
longer than the ledger to allow room for the outside joists and any 
decorative trim you plan to install. 
2.
  
Set the depth of your circular saw to the exact thickness of your siding. You 
only want to remove the siding and leave the sheathing underneath intact. 
Cut around the marked area with the saw. 
3.
  
There are probably some areas, such as corners, that you could not get to 
with the circular saw. Use a chisel with the flat side facing the finished edge 
and cut loose any remaining areas. 
4.
  
Measure the length of the cutout area for the metal drip edge. It will need to 
span the entire length of the opening. Cut the metal drip edge using tin 
snips. Slip it under the siding. It should stay wedged in position for now. 
5.
  
Measure the length needed for the ledger. It will be shorter than the cutout. 
Mark the ledger lumber and squarely cut it to length. Put the ledger in 
position in the cut out area. Make sure you center it in the cutout area, 
leaving room (about 1-1/2 inches) for the outside joists and trim on each 
side. Tack the ledger in place with a few nails or screws and a screw gun. 

6.
  
About 1-1/2" from the top and bottom edges, drill pilot holes. Make each set 
of pilot holes about 2 feet apart from each other. Then, using a 1" paddle 
bit, retrace your steps and drill 1/2" deep holes to countersink the washers 
and heads of the lag bolts. 
7.
  
Using a socket wrench, screw in lag bolts with washers in each of the holes. 
The lag bolts should be about 4" long so that they go through the ledger, the
sheathing and into the header joist. 
8.
  
Now that the ledger is securely in place, take silicone caulk and fill in the 
holes with the lag bolts. Then run a bead of caulk along the seam between 
the siding and drip edge above the ledger. 
    
 
  
 
SHOP LIST 
Materials Needed 
• Pressure-treated 2" x 6" lumber 
• Lag bolts 
• Washers 
• Silicone caulk 
• 16d nails Drip edge 
  
Tools Needed 
• 4-foot level 
• Circular saw 
• Hammer 
• Chisel 
• Tin snips 
• Socket set 
• Hammer Drill 
•  Drill bits 
  
 

