
Institutionalization 
of UX
Second Edition

This page intentionally left blank 

Institutionalization 
of UX
A Step-by-Step Guide to a User 
Experience Practice
Second Edition
Eric Schaffer
Apala Lahiri
Upper Saddle River, NJ • Boston • Indianapolis • San Francisco
New York • Toronto • Montreal • London • Munich • Paris • Madrid
Capetown • Sydney • Tokyo • Singapore • Mexico City

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trade-
marks. Where those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the 
designations have been printed with initial capital letters or in all capitals.
The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make no expressed or implied 
warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental 
or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of the information or programs contained 
herein.
For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales opportunities (which may include 
electronic versions; custom cover designs; and content particular to your business, training goals, market-
ing focus, or branding interests), please contact our corporate sales department at corpsales@pearsoned.
com or (800) 382-3419.
For government sales inquiries, please contact governmentsales@pearsoned.com. 
For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact international@pearsoned.com. 
Visit us on the Web: informit.com/aw
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schaffer, Eric.
[Institutionalization of usability.]
Institutionalization of UX : a step-by-step guide to a user experience practice / Eric Schaffer, Apala Lahiri. -- 
Second edition.
   pages    cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-321-88481-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. User interfaces (Computer systems) 2. Computer software--Development. I. Lahiri, Apala. II. Title.
QA76.9.U83S36 2013
005.4'37--dc23                                                                  2013039144
Copyright © 2014 Human Factors International
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright, and per-
mission must be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, 
or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To 
obtain permission to use material from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., 
Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458, or you may fax your request 
to (201) 236-3290.
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-88481-7
ISBN-10: 0-321-88481-7
Text printed in the United States on recycled paper at RR Donnelley in Crawfordsville, Indiana.
First printing, December 2013

v
Contents
Preface 
xiii
Acknowledgments 
xvii
Read This First! 
xix
About the Authors 
xxxix
Part I: Startup 
1
Chapter 1: The Executive Champion 
3
The Value of Usability 
4
Reducing Design Cycles 
7
Avoiding Building Unnecessary Functions 
7
Expediting Decision Making 
8
Increasing Sales 
8
Avoiding “Reinventing the Wheel” 
9
Avoiding Disasters 
9
Beyond Classic Usability 
11
Ecosystem Viewpoint 
11
Strategy 
12
Innovation 
14
Persuasion Engineering 
15
CEO Wants a Great Customer Experience:
Now Don’t Fall for UX Fads or Half-measures 
16
Relying on Good Intentions 
17
Relying on Testing 
17
Relying on Training 
17
Relying on Repair Jobs 
19
Relying on Projects by Ad Agencies 
19
Hiring UX Consultants 
19
Hiring New UX Staff 
20

vi
Contents
Who Can Be a Champion? 
22
The Role of the Executive Champion 
22
Keep Moving on the Strategy, Keep Expanding 
and Innovating 
24
Chapter 2: Selecting a Usability Consultant 
29
Staffing 
32
Completeness of Solution 
33
Domain Expertise 
34
Methodology 
35
Tools and Templates 
36
Object-Oriented Approach 
37
User-Centered Size and Stability 
38
Corporate Cultural Match 
39
Specializations 
40
Organizational Structure 
41
Change Management Ability 
42
Quality Control and Feedback 
42
Ongoing Training for the Consultancy’s Staff 
43
Summary 
44
Part II: Setup 
45
Chapter 3: Institutionalization Strategy 
47
What to Consider When Developing the Strategic Plan 
51
A Proactive Organization 
52
Coordinating Internal Staff and Consultants 
53
The Importance of Sequence 
54
Reacting to Past Events 
56
Targets of Opportunity 
57
Slower Can Be Better 
58
Phasing in Design Standards 
58
Key Groups for Support or Resistance 
60
Training 
63
Methodology and Infrastructure 
64
The Project Path 
65
Levels of Investment 
65
Summary 
66

vii
Contents
Chapter 4: Methodology 
67
What to Look for in a User-Centered Methodology 
68
An Outline of The HFI Framework 
73
Strategy and Innovation 
73
Assessment 
76
Research 
77
User-Centered Design 
78
Feedback and Improvement 
80
A Quick Check of Your Methodology 
82
The Challenges of Retrofitting a Development Life Cycle 
82
Using Classic Methodologies 
86
Retrofitting a Method That Has Added User-Centered 
Activities 
86
Retrofitting a Development Process That Has Only 
Usability Testing 
86
Templates 
87
Summary 
88
Chapter 5: Interface Design Standards 
89
What Is an Interface Design Standard? 
90
Types of Standards 
91
Screen Design Templates 
92
Patterns 
94
Other Contents of a Design Standard 
95
The Scope of Design Standards 
96
The Value of Design Standards 
98
The Process and Cost of Developing Standards 
100
Disseminating, Supporting, and Enforcing Standards 
102
Summary 
105
Chapter 6: Standard User Profiles and Ecosystem Models 
107
The Worst Practice 
108
Thin Personas: “Jane Is 34 and Has a Cat” 
110
Quality Personas 
111
The Best Practice: Working with Full Ecosystems 
112
Standard User Profiles and Ecosystems 
113
Static versus Organic Models 
115
Summary 
116

viii
Contents     
Chapter 7: Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities 
117
Introduction to Your Toolkit 
118
Testing Facilities 
119
Recording of Testing Sessions 
122
Modeling Tools and Software 
124
Data Gathering and Testing Techniques 
131
Advanced Methods 
134
The Special Needs of International Testing 
135
Recruiting Interview and Testing Participants 
137
Summary 
140
Chapter 8: Training and Certification 
141
Types of Training 
142
Knowledge Training 
144
Who Should Get Knowledge Training? 
145
Skills Training 
146
Who Should Get Skills Training? 
148
Certification 
149
A Typical Training Plan 
151
Conferences 
151
Summary 
153
Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 
155
Why Conventional Knowledge Management Fails 
157
The Cost of Failure 
158
Object-Oriented UX 
159
Professionals Don’t Start from Scratch 
162
Linkages 
162
Summary 
164
Part III: Organization 
165
Chapter 10: Governance 
167
The Roots of the Governance Problem 
168
Memes That Kill 
169
Education Helps 
172
Verify That a Methodology Is Applied 
174
Closing the Loop on Standards 
178

ix
Contents
Checking If the Practice Is Alive 
180
Measuring Progress 
181
Tools Support for Governance 
181
Using Certification for Governance 
182
Summary 
184
Chapter 11: Organizational Structure 
185
Organizational Structures for User Experience Design Teams 
188
Decentralized Structure 
189
Matrix Structure 
189
Centralized Structure 
191
Placement of a Central Team in the Overall Organization 
192
Placement within Quality Assurance 
193
Placement within IT 
193
Placement within Marketing 
194
Placement under a CXO 
197
Escalation of Problems 
198
Graphic Artists, Writers, and Other 
Usability-Oriented Staff 
199
Summary 
200
Chapter 12: Staffing 
201
The Chief User Experience Executive 
203
The Central Usability Organization Manager 
204
The Central Usability Organization Staff 
206
The Infrastructure Manager 
207
The Mentor 
208
The Topical Specialist 
209
The Ecosystem Researcher 
214
The UX Manager and Practitioners 
214
The Creative Director and the Graphic Designer 
216
Outside Consultants 
219
What to Look for When Hiring 
219
Selecting and Training Skilled Professionals 
222
Education 
225
Experience 
226
A Background That Includes Design 
227

x
Contents
Specialist versus Generalist 
228
Real Skills and Knowledge 
228
Interpersonal Skills and Level of Expertise 
230
An Offshore Model 
230
The Challenges and Success Factors of Offshore Staffing 
231
The Limits of Offshore Usability 
233
Summary 
233
Chapter 13: Projects 
235
Doing It Right 
237
Managing by Project Importance 
237
Who Will Do the User Experience Design? 
239
Different Strategies for Practitioner Involvement 
240
Working Smart 
242
Efficient Project Planning 
244
Estimating Experience Design Work 
244
Summary 
246
Part IV: Long-Term Operations 
247
Chapter 14: Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
249
Maintaining Respect and Negotiating Effectively 
251
Maintaining Momentum 
252
Evangelizing 
255
Training 
258
Mentoring 
259
Supporting Standards 
260
Supporting the Community 
262
Performing Usability Testing 
263
Focusing on Metrics 
264
Having Responsibility 
266
Reporting to Executives 
267
Summary 
271
Chapter 15: The Future 
273
Symptoms of Leaping the Chasm 
274
Maturity 
276
Your Organization’s Maturity 
277

xi
Contents
Process, Capabilities, and Staffing 
277
Strategy, Innovation, and Persuasion 
280
New Technologies 
281
Chapter 16: Design for Worldwide Applications 
283
Do International Markets Really Matter? 
283
How Does Bad Cross-Cultural Design Happen to Good 
Organizations? 
284
Internationalization, Localization, and the Challenges of 
Current Practice 
285
Between the Idea and the Reality Falls the Shadow 
287
The Criteria for Success 
287
A New Global Delivery Model for Local User Experience 
288
Foundational Ecosystem Model 
288
“Cultural Factors” Training 
289
Critical Tools 
290
Local Understanding, Global Success 
291
Are There Populations We Cannot Reach? 
294
Can We Look Forward to a Unified Globe? 
296
Emergence of the “Third China” 
298
References 
301
Index 
305

This page intentionally left blank 

xiii
Preface
More than ten years ago, I wrote The Institutionalization of Usability. 
Now, so much has changed in the field that a very new edition is 
needed. For one thing, the name of the field has changed. We now 
call ourselves “user experience (UX) designers.” With that change in 
title comes new responsibilities. We no longer can focus on simple 
tasks and human–computer interaction. Systems are embedded 
everywhere, and we must design for complex ecosystems. That 
means using ethnographically inspired methods and advanced 
tools for knowledge management. It is no longer enough to make a 
site or application easy to use. Usability is now a hygiene factor—to 
be competitive, most organizations must understand how to engi-
neer persuasion into their digital systems. In turn, we need a whole 
new set of methods and insights that let us systematically design for 
engagement, psychological influence, and customer commitment. 
The field has also reached up the value chain within organizations. 
A UX team that deals with only the details of radio buttons and 
check boxes is committing a disservice to its organization. Today 
UX groups must deal with strategy. We must help define how exec-
utive intent can be turned into successful designs and the desired 
business results. So the executive wants to transition customers into 
low-cost, digital channels—why will the customer want to make 
that transition? The UX team must design the cross-channel integra-
tion and optimization so that customers will understand which 
channel to use and will experience a common but appropriate inter-
action on the Web, mobile device, tablet, or other device. 
Finally, the UX team is a key component of the organization’s inno-
vation process.
When I wrote Institutionalization of Usability, the idea of a mature, 
industrial-strength practice seemed remote to most people. I debated 

xiv
Preface
this topic with the great usability pioneer Jared Spool in a session 
that was billed as “The Celebrity Death Match.” His argument was 
that usability could be practiced only as craftsmanship—that it could 
not be institutionalized. Yet I was already institutionalizing it within 
my own company, Human Factors International, Inc. (HFI), and 
starting to help my corporate clients build their own practice. Today, 
most organizations of any size and sophistication are building UX 
teams, and there is widespread recognition that customer-centered 
design is the best practice for system development. In the process of 
helping to mature our clients’ UX teams, we have learned quite a lot.
The challenges of institutionalization have clearly changed. In the 
past, the major issue was securing executive championship. Today, 
however, most high-level executives understand that customer 
experience is a key business goal. They have read about the user 
experience economy, seen Apple Computer thrive, and read innu-
merable executive briefings on customer experience. Unfortunately, 
these executives often have no idea how to bring about UX, and 
they take a fairly predictable set of wrong paths to try to make it 
happen. In addition, there are still challenges in culture change and 
governance—cultural and organizational design issues are pivotal 
today. Staffing also poses serious challenges. It is common for orga-
nizations to get perhaps 2% of the UX staff they need and then drop 
the initiative when they find that their designs have not substan-
tially improved, and their UX team seems demoralized. Yet the pool 
of qualified UX specialists remains small. HFI is by now quite expe-
rienced in hiring practices, internal training, and the use of offshore 
resources.
Setting up a UX infrastructure today is relatively easy. Training and 
certification are available. Methods and standards simply need to be 
customized to fit an organization’s needs, and plenty of new UX 
tools can be readily accessed. These foundational components 
should no longer be an impediment to creating a UX capability.
The best practice of UX work has been a bit of a surprise. My initial 
thought was that institutionalized UX work would be like what it 
was in the 1990s, except that there would be more of it. I thought 
implementing UX would involve more craftspeople and appren-
tices. They would have methods and standards, of course, but, I 

xv
Preface
thought, the experience would essentially be more of the same. 
Instead, it turns out that pivoting to a serious UX practice entails 
fundamental changes in the way the work gets done. We have even 
seen the dawn of object-oriented UX work, which optimizes reuse.
Finally, in this book I would like to introduce Apala Lahiri, CEO of 
HFI’s Global Customer Experience Institute and an expert in cross-
cultural design. The Institute has one objective: to answer the ques-
tion, “How does one best operate a UX practice that must design for 
users worldwide?” Do we need to have a UX team in each of our 
115 target countries? Clearly not. Yet Apala’s motto is “think glob-
ally and lose locally.” A design created for “the world” will rarely 
compete with a design created with sharp focus on a given culture 
and context. Based on my experiences, and with Apala’s contribu-
tions, we will share the current best practices for a global UX opera-
tion in this edition.
—Eric Schaffer

This page intentionally left blank 

xvii
Acknowledgments
This book was drafted from my personal experience with thousands 
of individuals who, over the last thirty-five years, have struggled to 
instill usability engineering capabilities within their companies. 
While I cannot possibly name them all, I am sure they will see them-
selves within these pages, sharing their insights and knowledge 
through my eyes. This book is theirs more than mine.
I would like to thank Dr. Robert Bailey, Dr. Darryl Yoblick, and Gary 
Griggs, who were my mentors when I first joined the field. Without 
them, I don’t know if I ever would have figured out how to do this 
work right. I would also like to thank the pioneers of institutional-
ization who created effective usability departments. Among these, 
special thanks go to Dr. Arnie Lund, Dr. Ed Israelski, and Dr. Tom 
Tullis, from whom I learned much.
I would like to thank the staff at Human Factors International, Inc. 
(HFI). Our president, Jay More, has been at my side for nearly 
twenty-five years, helping me to see usability from a business per-
spective. I am indebted to Dr. Phil Goddard, Dr. Susan Weinschenk, 
and Dr. Kath Straub for their technical contributions and review of 
this book. Indeed, my entire staff at HFI has contributed in many 
ways to this book, developing methods, sharing ideas, and working 
directly on the book itself.
I would like to thank the pioneering clients I have been able to work 
with in applying institutionalization strategies. In particular, thanks 
go to Abdul Notcha, Amanda Seboli, Reynard Uys, and the other 
leaders at Standard Bank who have been so supportive of advanced 
work toward industrial-strength customer-centricity. And a note of 
thanks to my editor at Addison-Wesley, Peter Gordon, who has sup-
ported both editions and provided invaluable counsel and support. 
Thanks go also to Douglas Gorney, who helped refine the manu-
script, making your reading experience far better.

xviii
Acknowledgments
Finally, I would like to thank Apala Lahiri, who has been a great 
innovator in the transition of the field to process-oriented work, not 
to mention her contribution to the internal design strategies that she 
shares in this book.
—Eric Schaffer

xix
Read This First!
Cultural Transformation
 
➤This is a journey to create a user-centered organization.
 
➤Change your organization’s focus from building lots of 
functions to meeting user needs.
 
➤Change your organization’s focus from developing cool 
and impressive technology to creating software that is sim-
ple, practical, and useful.
 
➤Help executives and project managers focus on the value of 
user experience design.
 
➤Customize and follow a systematic and complete process 
for institutionalizing user experience design.
You are embarking on a program to institutionalize user experience 
design in your organization. What is the long-term view? You may 
find that your company already has some of the organization or 
groundwork in place, and you may be well on your way to estab-
lishing a user-centered process. This book can help you get all the 
way there—that is, to a full, mature practice. If you are starting from 
scratch, you can expect it to take about two years before the full 
implementation is in place and user experience design has become 

xx
Read This First!
routine. Significant benefits and progress will occur before then, 
however, and you’ll recognize and appreciate gains as you work 
toward full implementation.
Of course, some setbacks may occur along the way. These almost 
always come in the areas of mindset, relationships, and communica-
tion. Remember that we are changing the way people think about 
design. We may move control of the design process to a new set of 
user-centered staff, and those changes can be contentious. Even so, 
these setbacks will illuminate the deep issues that you must work 
on continuously. These issues are explored in the first chapter of this 
book and are not fully covered in the following chapters, which 
explore infrastructure components, staffing requirements, and other 
activities. We will talk about cultural change here because it tran-
scends the surface level and permeates the whole initiative. 
Addressing these issues involves shifting the core belief system of 
your organization, and that is why they are so important to consider 
early in the process.
For decades, a major thrust of the user experience field was to train 
developers to create better interfaces. Today, however, there is a 
clear global understanding that user experience design is best done 
by specialists in the field. The user experience design field is quite 
complex, skill intensive, and always growing. For these reasons, it 
generally does not make sense to have these responsibilities be the 
part-time job of a developer or business analyst. In addition, the 
characteristics of a good user experience designer are generally very 
different from those of a developer. It is a bit like asking the engi-
neer who specializes in the tensile strength of steel to design the 
architecture of a building, decorate the entrance, and arrange the 
flowers on the side table. In our case, the business analysts and tech-
nical staff need to accept the user experience design staff and work 
with them effectively.
Unless the internal environment is changed through training and 
repeated showcase projects, there is a large natural disconnect 
between the viewpoint of the user experience design staff and that 
of the technical development team. It’s not unusual to experience 
some conflict and misunderstanding. If developers or business ana-
lysts have been doing the interface design, they will be attached to 

xxi
Changing the Feature Mindset
their designs, so criticism will likely create hard feelings. People 
also tend to be attached to their design decisions (like the use 
of tree-view menus as a solution to all navigation). People see 
the world in terms of their own context, and it can be difficult to 
get them to see the user’s viewpoint. What is even harder is taking 
control of the user experience design from staff who have previ-
ously had control over these decisions (even if their skills, processes, 
and tools did not allow for a successful outcome). Certainly, it is 
possible to train, and have some user experience design tasks be 
done by technical staff or business analysts. Nevertheless, the con-
trol of the user experience design effort must always be placed 
within a central user experience design group.
Once you realize the value of user experience design engineering, it 
is difficult to be patient with those who haven’t made this leap in 
understanding. But ignoring the hard work of shifting others’ per-
spectives makes it likely that all your accomplishments will do little. 
Good standards and facilities will sit idle if these deeper shifts fail 
to happen. The following section explores the deep changes that the 
real institutionalization of user experience design requires.
Changing the Feature Mindset
A deep philosophical change must take place in the shift to user-
centered development. Most companies build applications intent on 
meeting a given time frame and providing a specific level of func-
tionality. There is a whole flow of feature ideas, but this flow is not 
really user centered; rather, it is usually a combination of executive 
inspiration and customer comments. So how can a selection of fea-
tures based partly on customer comments and requests not be con-
sidered user centered? Certainly, customer comments need to be 
considered (mostly as a way to discover bugs). But listening to cus-
tomer comments merely gives the illusion of listening to the user. In 
many situations, these “customer” requests come from executives, 
marketing departments, or sales staff. They are not in any way rep-
resentative. The real user is not studied or fully understood by most 
of these well-meaning “user representatives.” In other situations, 

xxii
Read This First!
comments do flow from actual users. The users may share ideas, 
but typically only very happy or very angry customers send feed-
back. Also, these comments tend to focus on features, rather than 
the overall design, error handling, page layout, or other user experi-
ence design issues. The result is the design of features that may not 
represent the needs of the majority of end users and may not address 
the application as a whole.
It isn’t enough to just apply standard user experience design tech-
niques such as user experience design testing, because just applying 
techniques does not address the underlying issue. There is still a 
need to change the focus away from functionality. Software devel-
opers often build applications that have unneeded functions. They 
focus on completing a checklist of features for each product. Unfor-
tunately, a clutter of irrelevant features makes the product harder to 
use. The whole focus of the development team is on creating all 
these functions on time, but if those functions are not needed or 
cannot be used, is timeliness so important?
It will take some work to get your organization to understand that 
the function race was one of the roads to success in the 1990s, but is 
no longer critical. Certainly, users want features. Some users focus 
on obtaining the maximum set of features and actually thrive on the 
challenge of learning their operation, but they typically comprise a 
small group of early adopters. In this new millennium, software 
and website developers must deliver adequate features that are 
simple and useful. Most users want information appliances to be as 
easy to operate as a toaster—practical, useful, usable, and satisfying 
solutions. Achieving this feat requires a broader change to the mind-
set of design and development.
Changing the Technology Mindset
Most people who work in information technology (IT) love the tech-
nology. They are in the field because technology is fun, challenging, 
and impressive. The developer’s job is to understand the technol-
ogy and use it. Therefore, developers naturally focus on learning 
about the technology, and they feel excited about using the latest, 

xxiii
Changing the Process Mindset
most powerful facility. To a degree, this bias creates development 
groups that are more focused on creating something impressive and 
cool instead of practical and useful.
Knowledge of the scientific principles, together with working with 
user experience design engineers, helps create a major shift in the 
way that IT professionals see technology. Technology is a tool that 
lets you meet user needs. Much like a professional carpenter who 
picks the tool that best meets the need and does not anxiously seek 
an excuse to use the latest hammer, developers need to focus on 
creating the design that customers need, rather than just exercising 
the software technology that will make them feel proud.
The people who have to use the things we design may not be using 
a product because it is new and fun. Although there are always 
early adopters, most technology users want to use your design to 
get something done—get information from a website, pay their bills 
online, or look up directions, for example. Most users are not look-
ing for technology that is challenging and interesting; instead, they 
want the result to be useful and interesting. In fact, many users 
expect the technology to be not challenging but actually transpar-
ent. Professional developers are often intrigued by the technology 
and its quirks. Users often find the same quirks annoying.
Changing the Process Mindset
In organizations that are dominated by business analysts, the focus 
can be on defining and optimizing efficient processes. This approach 
might sound like it would be a good one from a user experience 
design viewpoint. In fact, there is a very big difference between effi-
cient processes and customer-centered design. You might create a 
generic account origination process that covers all the functions 
necessary in a very efficient way. There might even be efficiencies 
put into place, such as the concatenation of multiple account origi-
nation requirements so that the user will never have to enter the 
same data twice. But would this be optimized from the user experi-
ence design viewpoint? It might not. The user might need to think 
about each account separately. It might make more sense to 

xxiv
Read This First!
customers to configure each account as a unit, because they think 
about each account separately. In contrast, a logical functional 
model might have the beneficiaries set up all at once and then the 
alerts established all at once. The functional analysis would also 
probably include the customer’s data (e.g., name, addresses) first in 
the flow, as this is more logical. But user experience design experts 
know better than to implement this model: You want to first config-
ure the accounts so that the customers feel ownership and have an 
investment in their acquisitions. Only then should the application 
ask for the boring registration details. In this way, customers become 
invested in the accounts and are unlikely to abandon the 
application.
Business analysts with a functional viewpoint can be wonderful 
supporters of a user experience design effort. With training, they 
can really contribute to the design workload. Nevertheless, an orga-
nization that is focused on process efficiency needs to be brought 
around to see that success requires much more than a functional 
viewpoint.
Changing the Graphics Mindset
Good-quality visual design is often an important part of a success-
ful user-centered design. It generally increases trust. Moreover, 
visual designs that are developed around focused persuasion 
engineering strategies are very powerful. But visual design is only 
a small part of what it takes to be successful in user experience 
design. In fact, interesting counter-examples can be cited. A target 
population such as “youth,” for example, would seem like a natu-
ral fit for exciting graphic treatments. Yet Facebook is wildly suc-
cessful with youth, even though its graphics are limited and 
unimpressive. Why? Because Facebook fulfills a set of fundamen-
tal needs for youth.
Some organizations equate user experience design with rich and 
polished graphics. When this is done without exploring the under-
lying strategic and structural design, it is like putting lipstick on a 

xxv
Executives
bulldog. The results are not pretty. Executives are often focused on 
the appearance of the design, but this is a common mistake.
Some executives seem really wedded to the graphic issue. In a way, 
this emphasis might simply reflect the fun of doing uncontrolled 
graphic work, much in the same way that people love to select col-
ors for their house or clothing. In classic visual design work, the 
graphics team often focuses on creating a design that pleases the 
executive. Their criterion for success is that the executive likes it. In 
such a case, the graphics team creates one good design and two bad 
designs, and then they hope the executive picks the good design 
from the lineup. There is no real measurement of success, so the 
process of graphics development can be free, easy, and entertaining. 
In contrast, in serious graphic development, the design needs to be 
informed and validated. The criteria for success, in turn, are based 
on observed user behavior.
Graphic designers can be trained and can learn to do the more ana-
lytic and interpersonal work of the user experience design practi-
tioner. Even the most sophisticated creative directors, however, do 
not have training in the user experience design field.
Executives
Today, it is hard to find an executive who does not care about cus-
tomer experience. As executives around the world play the chess 
game of business strategy, most of them are having the same real-
ization: Every organization can get hardware that works (usually 
better than really matters), and every organization can get software 
to run and not crash and hold tons of data. Thus, there is now one 
primary differentiator among companies in the digital space: cus-
tomer experience. Today, the organization with the best customer 
experience wins.
Top executives are usually determined to optimize their organiza-
tion’s customer experience, but they usually try things that don’t 
work well. They give passionate speeches that address caring about 

xxvi
Read This First!
customers, with sweet stories describing how their kids were treated 
in Disneyland. In reality, the problem with digital customer experi-
ences is not a problem with staff motivation. Being motivated does 
not make for good designs. Being motivated without the training, 
and certification, and methods, and standards, and tools of the user 
experience design field just makes for dispirited staff—and shout-
ing at them until they panic just makes things worse.
Some executives get frustrated, rip off their ties, roll up their sleeves, 
and start designing interfaces themselves. Of course, most execu-
tives have no human–computer interface design skills. What they 
create makes sense to them (because they know what it’s supposed 
to do), but it rarely makes sense to the users.
Some executives think that “customer-led design” means design 
work that is “led by customers.” As a result, they arrange for real 
customers to be a part of the design process. Unfortunately, users 
are not designers, so they don’t know what the designs should be. 
Also, the users allocated to the design committee are really never 
representative (you tend to get either users who are experts in the 
software or users who are below average and therefore expend-
able). In addition, the users quickly become less representative as 
they learn the organization’s viewpoint and language, so they 
quickly stop being even a good source of insight into “how things 
are” (subject-matter expertise).
Exhausted by the effort, senior executives finally turn to other key 
areas such as security and advertising. They decide that user experi-
ence design is a mystical thing and hope that a miracle occurs. With 
luck, the scattered user experience design people in the organiza-
tion will climb up the organizational structure and share a clear 
understanding of what it takes to make an industrial-strength prac-
tice in user experience design. Otherwise, the whole initiative 
dissipates—perhaps to be reinvigorated later by a startling loss in 
market share, wasted design efforts, or a change in leadership.
When presented with an understanding of the requirements for the 
development of a mature practice, many top executives become very 
excited and want to get started right away. It is a challenge to per-
suade them to carefully plan the overall institutionalization process. 

xxvii
Changing Middle management Values
In many cases, they may demand to start something tangible, at 
which point they typically kick off a user interface standards pro-
gram. Even worse, they may insist on persona definitions (at the 
end of which, no one will be sure why you spent so much money). 
This “Ready, fire, aim!” approach results in an inefficient, uncoordi-
nated, and unreliable path to a mature practice—so please insist on 
a strategy before serious investments start.
Changing Middle Management Values
While the development community makes the move away from 
fixation on features and new technologies, middle management 
must also change. Management is used to asking whether mile-
stones are met and budgets are under control and establishing com-
pensation schemes that reinforce the need to produce functions on 
schedule. This approach has worked well in the past, but it won’t 
work well in the future. Things that were thought of as secondary 
intangibles and “nice-to-haves” must be quantified and managed, 
because those “soft” design capabilities are now the key to the orga-
nization’s future.
Management must understand that the company is building not 
just systems that will function, but also systems that will work in 
the context of a given range of users, doing a given set of tasks, in a 
given environment. Success is measured as the real business value 
of the application. Achieving success takes much more than just 
delivering the website or application on time. The deliverable must 
be usable and satisfying to operate. In many cases, the emotional 
engagement and resulting conversion of customers is the real target. 
And it is not enough to simply make designs that are easy to oper-
ate. The target outcome of the design will depend on the organiza-
tion and may include increased sales or enrollment, more leads, 
increased willingness to pay fees, larger sets of items per purchase, 
and so on. These are the results that user experience design buys 
you. Few organizations will not directly benefit from good user 
experience engineering.

xxviii
Read This First!
Once organizations realize that user experience design is a key area 
in ensuring their success, they sometimes will charge executives 
with making improvements, which is great. Unfortunately, they 
often compensate those executives based on moving the results on a 
customer satisfaction survey up a fraction of a point. This is not 
quite right, as customer satisfaction ratings don’t really equate to 
user experience design quality. Instead, they are more like a rough 
indication of whether the customer’s expectations are met. You can 
probably lower a customer’s expectations and get a nice jump in 
satisfaction.
Advice for Those Considering an Investment 
in User Experience Design
Harley Manning, Research Director, Forrester Research
The single biggest gap in knowledge we see at Forrester is a 
lack of understanding of what and why. What makes for a great 
user experience, and why you should care—tied to numbers. 
That’s the great barrier. People must understand that there are 
objective methods of improving user experience and that user 
experience moves business metrics.
The second biggest gap is a lack of the right skills. We see a hi-
erarchy of skills, process, and organization, where skills are the 
most important. Whether you try to do this kind of develop-
ment internally (which is a trend we see) or hire out, you still 
need somebody on the inside with a deep clue. Otherwise, 
you’re not going to follow the right processes, even if you have 
them in place, and you’re not going to hire the right vendors or 
manage them effectively.
Regarding processes, there are many good processes out 
there—just pick one and use it consistently. I was talking with 
the Web development team at Michelin Tire, and I said, “You 
guys don’t wake up in the morning and say, how should we 
manufacture tires today, do you?” And they said, “Of course 
not, but we never thought of a website that way.” They’re 
smart—as soon as I said this, they got it.

xxix
Changing the Process for Interface Design
Business schools have always taught about marketing issues and 
brand management, but now they must go further. Marketing can 
point out a potential market niche; user experience engineering can 
help build a product that will reliably succeed in that niche. The 
implications of poor user experience design can be catastrophic for 
a company. It therefore makes sense that executives and senior man-
agement attend to this critical success factor. Project and business 
line managers are interested in identifiable metrics. As user experi-
ence design matures within an organization, it is not enough to 
occasionally review the latest “customer satisfaction rating” or “net 
promoter score.” Depending on the type of website or application, 
managers must be concerned about task speed, task failure rates, 
drop-off rates, competitive metrics, return on investment (ROI), 
retention rates, and other factors. Executives must be aware of and 
support a user-centered process. Perhaps most importantly, middle 
managers must care about user experience and performance levels 
as an essential success factor.
Changing the Process for Interface Design
Many companies expect developers to sit down and just draft the 
interface design without doing expert reviews, data gathering, or 
any testing. If your organization currently uses this approach, you 
must be willing to learn and use a different approach. User interface 
design must be an iterative process. You sketch and prototype an 
interface, then change it, then get feedback from users, then change 
it, again and again. There are two reasons why effective interface 
design must be iterative:
1. Design is a process of deciding among many sets of alternatives. 
Getting them all correct the first time is impossible.
2. As users see what an interface is actually like, they change their 
conceptions and expectations—so the requirements change.
User interface design, by its very nature, is too complex for anyone 
to accomplish successfully without feedback. Even user experience 

xxx
Read This First!
User Experience Design within Government
Janice Nall, Managing Director, Atlanta, Danya International, Inc.
Former Chief, Communication Technologies Branch, 
National Cancer Institute
There are probably three or four core things we have done to 
institutionalize user experience design. Number one is involv-
ing the leadership—through presentations and participating in 
testing or showing them results of a usable site versus an unus-
able site.
Number two is using the language from leaders driving the 
new trend to e-government. Because the National Cancer Insti-
tute is part of the government, it helps to be able to tell our 
leadership that user experience design and user-centered de-
sign are supported, from the president of the United States to 
the Office of Management and Budget to the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS). Using their own words, 
language, and documents has been very powerful.
Number three is training, which has been hugely successful—a 
way to institutionalize user experience design across HHS and 
the federal government. We believe in teaching people to fish 
rather than feeding them the fish. We also use tools and re-
sources, like the Research-Based Web Design and User Experi-
ence Design Guidelines, to teach them.
Number four is our list of about 500 federal people who receive 
our online publication U-Group (shorthand for user experience 
design group) via the U-group listserv. Through this listserv, we 
are trying to get current information out, and we’re saying, 
“Let’s share information; let’s collaborate”—encouraging peo-
ple to share lessons learned.

xxxi
The Step-by-Step Process
design professionals with decades of experience don’t expect to sit 
down to design a screen and get it right the first time.
Everyone developing software and websites needs to remember 
that both development and design are iterative processes. Being 
brilliant does help, but the willingness to get feedback and apply it 
selectively is more important. Designers must be willing to learn 
and create better designs each time, and organizations need to have 
a culture that supports such iterations without blame.
The Step-by-Step Process for Institutionalizing 
User Experience Design
The final deep challenge is the tendency to address user experience 
design in a piecemeal fashion. Many companies that see the value of 
user experience design still attempt to address it with a series of 
uncoordinated projects. Instead, there must be a managed user 
experience design effort. This section outlines the process covered 
in this book. It is gleaned from experiences of working with hun-
dreds of companies across thirty years within the field of user expe-
rience design at Human Factors International, Inc. (HFI).
Figure 0-1 illustrates the typical flow of activities for institutional-
izing user experience design in an organization. You need to make 
sure these activities fit with your corporate culture and circum-
stances. In fact, you cannot hope to be successful if you treat this 
process as you would treat steps within a simple kit. To succeed, 
you must proceed consciously and creatively. Since 1981, HFI has 
worked with many companies and organizations that have not 
institutionalized user experience design yet and many others that 
have made this transition. Based on thousands of projects and expe-
riences with hundreds of clients, HFI has distilled, tested, and 
refined the key elements that lead to success. Hundreds of compa-
nies, large and small, have followed this process and experienced 
more efficient user experience design methods and processes, as 
well as more effective products and applications.

xxxii
Read This First!
The following sections briefly describe each of these phases—
Startup, Setup, Organization, and Long-Term Operations. Later 
chapters discuss each step in detail.
The Startup Phase
In the 2004, in Institutionalization of Usability, there was a whole sec-
tion on how a company needed to experience a horrid disaster to 
provide a wake-up call. Only then would the organization really 
move forward. Today that is no longer true—user experience design 
is becoming a recognized global best practice in development. 
Nasty wake-up calls are no longer needed. Instead, enlightened 
executives can often understand the need based on their past expe-
rience and education as managers. Even so, the key to success with 
such a venture remains the identification of an executive champion. 
This person provides the leadership, resources, and coordination 
for going forward. This person takes the wake-up call to heart and 
moves institutionalization forward within the organization. The 
executive champion must be at a high enough level in the 
Figure 0-1: Overview of the institutionalization of user experience design

xxxiii
The Step-by-Step Process
organization to motivate coordination across the siloed groups that 
affect customers. That person must also be able to influence the total 
development budget.
It is challenging to start a user experience design institutionalization 
program from scratch without help from a user experience design 
consultant who has experience, training, tools, intellectual property, 
and an established team. To establish this program, you must have 
or create an internal user experience design manager and an inter-
nal team—but you will need help from a consultant to set up a seri-
ous practice. Selecting a consultant is important because you need 
to find a person or company that has the skills and infrastructure to 
help your organization move ahead quickly. The consulting organi-
zation will often have to meet immediate tactical needs, complete 
showcase design projects, and concurrently set up your internal 
capabilities.
The Setup Phase
We always tell organizations that “Well begun is half done.” When 
you set up a hospital, there are lots of interdependent systems that 
need coordination (e.g., walls, pipes, elevators, cables, operating 
manuals, and organizational designs). It is much the same with a 
user experience design practice. First, you need a strategy that fits 
your organization. The strategy should be specific about what will 
be done. It should include the timing, sequence, validation, and 
funding that will be necessary for your user experience design pro-
gram to be successful. You may prefer to start with a short-term 
strategy that establishes the basics and then let the strategy evolve 
over time, or (ideally) you may develop an all-encompassing, mul-
tiple-year project plan.
Every company has a methodology for system development. It may 
be home-grown or purchased, but in either case the existing meth-
odology is unlikely to do a good job of supporting user-centered 
design. It is important to have a user-centered design method in 
place—one that is integrated with current methods and accepted by 
management and staff. Otherwise, there is no common road map 
that will pull user experience design engineering into the design 
process.

xxxiv
Read This First!
Interface design standards are usually a high priority in the institu-
tionalization process. Standards are easy to justify because they help 
both the developers and the user experience design staff. Even if 
you have several user experience design staff members on a project, 
you will likely have poor results if standards are lacking. The 
experts may independently design good interfaces, but their designs 
will be inconsistent and incompatible. Moreover, if the standards 
are not developed quickly, there will be an ever-growing installed 
base of inconsistent designs.
Without a central standardized set of user profiles and ecosystem 
models, you will find yourself paying to repeat research. And what 
is worse, the research you do will probably be underfunded 
(because it is justified by just one single project) and, therefore, will 
provide a weak set of insights about customers. It is far faster, 
cheaper, and better to have a central model of your customers and 
staff. Research can then be carried out and added to this model. In 
turn, the model gets richer and richer instead of accumulating a 
daunting stack of reports.
There is a whole toolkit of tools, templates, and testing facilities 
that you need to be able to work with effectively as part of user 
experience design. This toolkit should include a venue for testing, 
templates for questionnaires and deliverables, and user experience 
design testing equipment.
Of course, it makes no sense to have methods, standards, and tools 
if the skills to use them properly are lacking. The initial strategy for 
institutionalization of user experience design should include train-
ing and certification for in-house staff. You can provide general 
training for the development community and more extensive train-
ing and perhaps certification for those individuals who will be 
interface development professionals. Out of this training, staff who 
are talented and interested in the user experience design field will 
probably emerge.
During the Setup phase, it usually makes sense to have one or more 
showcase projects. Conducting these projects provides an opportu-
nity for the infrastructure, training, and standards to come together, 
be shaken out, and be proven. Such projects also offer a chance to 

xxxv
The Step-by-Step Process
share the value of user experience design with the whole develop-
ment community.
The Organization Phase
With successful completion of the Setup phase, you have a solid and 
proven infrastructure for user experience design work, methods, 
tools, and standards, as well as a process that works. At this point, 
you need to ensure that the practice can operate effectively within 
the organization. The main issue to pay attention to is governance. 
Will the user experience design practice be brought into your design 
programs? Will the recommendations and designs from the team 
actually be used? Will there be metrics that ensure that everyone 
focuses on user experience as a key area? Each of these questions 
springs from serious challenges faced by organizations worldwide. 
If a set of appropriate measures is not taken, the problem of gover-
nance will likely derail the entire effort.
It remains important to follow the organizational design principle 
of spreading user experience design throughout your company or 
agency. User experience design should not reside within a single 
group or team; instead, to succeed, user experience design must 
permeate the entire organization and become part of the system. In 
all cases, you need a small, centralized, internal group to support 
your user experience design initiatives. For medium- and large-
sized companies, user experience design practitioners need to 
report to specific project teams. The executive champion needs to 
establish the right placement and reporting for the group and the 
practitioners.
The Organization phase is the appropriate time to start staffing the 
organization. Now the full process of user-centered design is work-
ing within your organization, and you can see the best way to put a 
team into the framework. The steps you went through in the Setup 
phase provide a clear understanding of the types of people needed. 
Remember that about 10% of your development headcount should 
be user experience design professionals.
When establishing a central user experience group, it is best to pull 
together a critical mass of your strongest practitioners. In the prior 

xxxvi
Read This First!
training process, there is a good chance that several people will 
have stood out. This is part of the reason that the internal organiza-
tion is generally established after the initial training—it provides an 
opportunity for the best internal staff to join the team. It is usually 
important to hire some additional highly qualified user experience 
design staff. In this way, the organization benefits from both insid-
ers who know the corporate culture and outsiders who are more 
knowledgeable about user experience design technology. A man-
ager of the central user experience design group should be the main 
“go to” person for the user experience design staff.
With the user experience design staff in place, it is time to apply 
user experience design methods to a whole wave of projects. Doing 
so delivers immediate results and value. It will soon be possible to 
have every project completed with appropriate user-centered design 
methods, but in the immediate future you are likely to need to man-
age a shortage of user experience design staff. To remedy this prob-
lem and to cost-effectively manage large volumes of user experience 
design work, offshore user experience design teams can be a worth-
while addition to the overall staffing strategy.
The Long-Term Operations Phase
The established central group now has an ongoing role in support-
ing the user experience design engineering process. This role 
includes the maintenance of the user experience design infrastruc-
ture and skill sets within the organization. User experience design 
practitioners should now be involved in all development work, fol-
lowing the user-centered methodology and applying the resources 
established in the Setup phase and continually updated by the cen-
tral user experience design team.
As the user experience design institutionalization effort matures, 
the relatively informal executive champion may give way (or be 
promoted) to the chief user experience officer (CXO). This is not a 
chief user experience design officer, but rather a broader role. The 
CXO is responsible for the overall quality of customer experience. 
Being a CXO requires expertise in user experience design, as well as 

xxxvii
Summary
a thorough understanding of many other disciplines, including 
aspects of branding, marketing, graphics, and content development. 
The CXO must be able to reach across lines of business to ensure 
compatibility of presentation and messaging. If the role of CXO is 
not established, the central user experience design team should be 
placed under some executive organization, such as marketing, and 
the company must ensure that the team members receive good 
executive stewardship.
Summary
In choosing to set an institutionalization process into motion at your 
organization, you are choosing to change the feature mindset, tech-
nology mindset, management values, and process for interface 
design that previously governed your operations. This bold move 
requires the commitment of staff and resources. Organizing your 
activities to align with the step-by-step process outlined in this book 
will help ensure visible progress. While this book presents a step-
by-step approach, clearly this sequence may vary at specific organi-
zations. Most organizations must face the problem of “changing the 
wings while the plane is in flight.” At HFI, we must often use our 
own staff to meet our client organization’s immediate needs, while 
we concurrently develop internal capabilities. This is not all bad, as 
we can use the immediate programs as a training opportunity for 
internal staff and as a proving ground for methods and standards.
Chapter 1 outlines some of the more typical wake-up calls to user 
experience design that companies experience. An exploration of 
some of the more common reactions to these experiences is valuable 
for capitalizing on initial momentum.

This page intentionally left blank 

xxxix
About the Authors
Dr. Eric Schaffer, founder and CEO of Human Factors Interna-
tional, Inc. (HFI), has gained a reputation as a visionary for recog-
nizing that usability would be the driving force behind the “Third 
Wave of the Information Age,” following both hardware and soft-
ware as the previous key differentiators. Much as Gordon Moore 
realized that processor power would double every eighteen months, 
Dr. Schaffer foresaw that the most profound impact on corporate 
computing would be a positive online user experience—the ability 
for a user to get the job done efficiently, easily, and without 
frustration.
Dr. Schaffer has completed projects for more than 100 Fortune 500 
clients, providing user experience, design consulting, and train-
ing. He has extensive experience in the financial, insurance, man-
ufacturing, government, healthcare, and telecommunications 
industries. Dr. Schaffer codeveloped The HFI Framework, an ISO-
certifiable process for user-centered design, built on principles from 

xl
About the Authors
human–computer interaction, ergonomics, psychology, computer 
science, and marketing. In addition, Dr. Schaffer has brought an 
array of certification programs to the user experience field, includ-
ing the Certified Usability Analyst (CUA) and the advanced Certi-
fied User Experience Analyst (CXA) designations for user experience 
practitioners, and the Certified Practice in Usability (CPU) and Certi-
fied Usable Design (CUD) programs for organizations.
Apala Lahiri, global chief of technical staff at Human Factors Inter-
national, Inc. (HFI), and CEO, Institute of Customer Experience, is 
one of the world’s top experts in cross-cultural design and contex-
tual innovation. Her innovative and pioneering techniques have 
benefited global giants such as HP Labs, Adidas, Nokia, Sony Erics-
son, NCR, and Intel, among others.
Ms. Lahiri’s vast array of data-gathering techniques—such as the Bol-
lywood Method, Bizarre Bazaar, and Funky Facilitator—help compa-
nies understand user experience in diverse cultural and economic 
environments. The “Ecosystem Chart,” developed by her team, orga-
nizes vast amounts of ethnographic data into a coherent model.
Serving with HFI since 1999 as managing director, HFI India, and as 
vice president, HFI Asia, Ms. Lahiri creates user experience strate-
gies for organizations seeking a breakthrough user experience for 
their customers and other stakeholders. Her writing and classes on 
contextual innovation, ecosystem research, internationalization, 
and designing for emerging markets have won her acclaim in the 
United States, Canada, Europe, India, and China.
In addition to her usability certifications (CUA and CXA), Ms. Lahiri 
holds an M.Sc. with distinction in User Interface Design from Lon-
don Guildhall University. She is also an award-winning designer 
(recipient of the Audi International Design Award) and a TedX 
speaker (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MiwjplU6kAc).
Ms. Lahiri coedited Innovative Solutions: What Designers Need to 
Know for Today’s Emerging Markets (CRC Press, Taylor and Francis 
Group, 2010).

1
Part I
Startup
The Startup phase is about bringing attention to the issue of user 
experience (UX) design and aligning the mandatory executive atten-
tion and consultative support to start an initiative toward a more 
mature practice. You may have internal staff with appropriate 
degrees, training, and certification. Still, a strong executive hand 
and the specialized experience of a consultant will be critical.
Among those experienced in the UX field, there seems to be total 
agreement about the criticality of an executive champion. This 
champion should not be a lone evangelist in the trenches; rather, the 
champion should be someone high enough in the executive suite to 
have a real impact on the corporate focus as well as the ability to 
bring a strategic level of resources to bear on the problem. Without 
this executive, there is little hope of meaningful long-term success 
in establishing an effective user experience practice.
While the executive champion provides direction, resources, focus 
and accountability, the consultancy provides executive advisory—
advice and benchmarks from a trusted expert outside the organiza-
tion’s politics and culture. The consultancy will guide you. 
Additionally, you should have an experienced and integrated team 
along with a full set of methods, tools, templates, and standards to 
help you build your infrastructure.
1

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Chapter 1
The Executive Champion
 
➤We don’t need a train wreck—most executives are interested.
 
➤The value of classic usability.
 
➤The value of advanced user experience design.
 
➤The CEO wants a great customer experience now—don’t 
fall for usability fads or half-measures.
 
➤Who can be a champion?
 
➤The role of the executive champion.
Today, thankfully, few organizations need a disaster before they can 
get serious about usability. Most executives understand that cus-
tomer experience is a key foundation for business success and a key 
differentiator. Many understand that the user experience of internal 
staff is also critical, and they will talk about ensuring that the orga-
nization is a “great place to work.” For most of us, then, there is lit-
tle convincing about the value of usability needed at the senior level 
of organizations. We don’t need to wait for a “wake-up call” in the 
form of a decline in market share, rejected offerings, or rage in the 
social media space. For the most part, executives know that user 
experience design is important (even if they don’t really understand 
what it is or what it takes to make it happen).

4
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
However, initiating or even discussing a serious user experience 
design practice often entails describing its exact benefits. The setup 
of a serious practice will usually cost $800,000 to $1.4 million, with 
an ongoing operation amounting to about 10% of the overall design 
expenditures. Those are numbers that require more justification 
than just a gut-level desire and some encouraging press.
The fact that you are reading this book suggests that you know that 
there is an ironclad case for user experience engineering. Neverthe-
less, this chapter will review the arguments for the value and criti-
cality of this work so that you have the information readily available 
when you need to convince others that usability is worthwhile. 
Keep in mind that it is very rare to find an organization that decides 
to do serious usability work based solely on numeric calculations 
(such as ROI). Most organizations seem to need more—they need to 
see the work pay off in their own environment.
The Value of Usability
The need for basic usability is very real. It is really a hygiene factor, 
a basic requirement in most industries. Both consumers and tech-
nology companies have accepted that if a product is easy to use, 
more units are sold and the product requires less maintenance. 
There was a time when you needed to argue that point—but no lon-
ger. Usability specialists ensure that software is practical and useful. 
Primarily, though, usability work focuses on user experience and 
performance. These elements can be measured and quantified in 
terms of characteristics of the user:
• Speed
• Accuracy
• Training requirements (or self-evidency)
• Satisfaction
• Safety
By applying usability engineering methods, you can build a site or 
an application that is practical, useful, usable, and satisfying.

The Value of Usability
5
Experiencing the Wake-up Call and 
Beginning a Usability Process
Pat Malecek, AVP, CUA, User Experience Manager, 
A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc.
In 1999, we began a process to greatly and ambitiously reengi-
neer our public and client-facing Web presence. An army of us 
just plunged right in and started marching right along. In the 
eleventh hour, we solicited an expert review from an external 
source. That expert review said that one of the critical applica-
tions, or critical pieces of our new Web presence, was unusable. 
And by the way, you need some usability people.
If I look back, I’m pretty sure that was the impetus for the cre-
ation of what has become my team and a recognition of usabil-
ity issues. Almost immediately thereafter—within months—we 
had brought in training and crystallized the efforts.
I remember reading Eric’s white paper, “The Institutionaliza-
tion of Usability” [Schaffer 2001], and thinking, “This really 
sets the course for what we’re up against.” That paper says that 
going through the institutionalization process takes about two 
years. From the hard lessons I mentioned before up to today, it 
has been about two years.
Which steps have we taken? Well, we obviously hired people 
who had the skills or at least closely matched the skills we 
needed. Then we brought in multiple training opportunities to 
our campus. We’ve also sent people out for training. We have 
endeavored to incorporate my team and usability practices into 
the development methodology. We have representation on var-
ious committees that steer development, and we’re also repre-
sented on essentially all Web-based projects. Our usability 
team is located within the Internet Services Department (ISD). 
ISD basically owns the Internet channel—anything that’s deliv-
ered via the Internet or our intranet. We are involved as much 
as possible in everything that channel delivers.

6
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
In a Dilbert comic strip, Scott Adams had Dilbert present his man-
ager with a tough choice: either spend a million dollars to fix the 
incomprehensible interface, or close your eyes and wish real hard 
the users won’t care. The manager is left with eyes closed, wishing 
intensely, and thereby saving all that money.
Usability does require an investment. It costs money to provide 
staff, training, standards, tools, and a user-centered process. It takes 
time to establish the infrastructure. You may need to hire consul-
tants and new staff.
Is it worth spending this money and time setting up a usability 
effort? Harley Manning, Vice President & Research Director of Cus-
tomer Experience Practice at Forrester Research, posted on one of 
the studies that have shown a correlation between capability in user 
experience design and stock price [Manning, 2011]. While many fac-
tors affect share price, companies that are customer experience lead-
ers clearly do better than customer experience laggards, even in a 
bear market. It really seems like investors have understood the criti-
cality of customer experience. When HFI awarded ROLTA a certifi-
cation for its usability practice, an article in Yahoo Finance (“ROLTA 
India Accelerates on Receiving an HFI Level V Certification”) cited 
a 5.33% increase in share price. It is actually not a very surprising 
result when you look at the more detailed numbers.
It is common for a usable website to sell 100% or more than an unus-
able one [Nielsen and Gilutz 2003], and for site traffic, productivity, 
and function usage to more than double. Unfortunately, it is also 
common to see developers build applications that users reject 
because of lack of usability. For example, clients who have come to 
HFI recently include a major service provider whose new sign-up 
process had a 97% drop-off rate and bank with a voice response sys-
tem that achieved only a 3% usage level. There is no question that 
usability work can prevent these types of multimillion-dollar 
disasters.
If you follow a user-centered design process, you can expect to 
spend about 10% of the overall project budget on usability work 
[Nielsen and Gilutz 2003]. This includes everything—from evalua-
tion of previous and competitive designs to data gathering with 

The Value of Usability
7
users, to the design of the structure, standards, and detailed screens. 
It also includes usability testing.
There is a lot of work to do, and 10% is a big fraction of the budget. 
The good news is that the overall money and time required to create 
an acceptable site or application are unlikely to increase. In fact, the 
cost is likely to go down for several reasons, some of which are dis-
cussed in the following subsections.
Reducing Design Cycles
Today, it is still common to have projects that require major rework 
because the application does not meet user needs or is unintelligible 
to users. Implementing good usability practices greatly reduces the 
chances of having to rework the design. The cost of retrofitting a 
user interface is always staggering. The cost can be substantial if the 
detailed design must be improved. Nevertheless, these changes in 
wording, layout, control selection, color, and graphics are minor 
compared with the creation of a new interface structure.
When people use a site, Web application, software, camera, or 
remote control, the part of the product that the human interacts 
with is the interface. The interface, therefore, is the part of the prod-
uct that gets the most usability attention. The interface structure 
determines the interface design—it defines the paths and naviga-
tion that the user of the product will take to find information or 
perform a task. If usability engineering is not applied at the begin-
ning of interface design, the interface structure is where serious 
usability problems emerge. Because 80% of the usability of an inter-
face is a function of its structure, a retrofit often amounts to a rede-
velopment of the entire presentation layer. That is why the best 
solution is to design the interface right the first time.
Avoiding Building Unnecessary Functions
Often, users evaluate software against a checklist of features, and 
companies feel compelled to include these features to be competi-
tive. In fact, users may not need or want certain functions. Discover-
ing this earlier—before the product is fully designed or coded—makes 
the user interface better because there are fewer functions to 

8
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
manage and the interface can become cleaner. There is also a huge 
savings in development and maintenance costs. Unnecessary func-
tions need not be designed, coded, tested, and maintained.
Expediting Decision Making
There is a great deal of research on how best to design interfaces. 
For example, it is well known that using all capital letters slows 
reading speed by 14–20% [Tinker 1965, 1963], that using three nouns 
in a row confuses people [Waite 1982], and that users expect to find 
the home button at the top left corner of webpages [Ber nard 2002]. 
This means the development team need not spend hours second-
guessing design decisions of this sort. Familiarity with these and 
other usability research principles saves development and testing 
time and contributes to development of a more usable product.
Increasing Sales
If you are developing a product for sale, a usable product will sell 
more units. If you are developing a website to sell a product or ser-
vice, a usable site will sell more products and services. Usable prod-
ucts mean more sales. For example, an insurance company has a site 
that is currently feeding 10 leads per day to its insurance agents. 
The company could be feeding them 15 leads per day, but it is los-
ing 5 leads per day because of usability problems. Visitors are drop-
ping out because they can’t figure out how to contact an agent or 
finish using the “insurance quote application” on the site. If usabil-
ity became routine in this organization and those usability problems 
were fixed or prevented, how much would the company be able to 
increase its sales? The answer can be determined with a few simple 
calculations.
1. The company estimates it is losing at least 5 leads per day from 
usability problems, which is 1825 leads per year.
2. The company assumes that for every 5 leads received, it can get 
1 customer. This means the company is losing 365 customers 
per year.

The Value of Usability
9
3. Each customer provides an average of $600 in income from pre-
miums per year. This means the company could increase sales in 
the first year by $219,000 if did not lose the 5 leads per day.
4. Using an average customer retention time of 12 years, fixing the 
current usability problems could increase the company’s sales 
during those 12 years by $2,628,000.
Avoiding “Reinventing the Wheel”
Good usability engineering, much like other engineering pro cesses, 
means designing with reusable templates. There is no need to rein-
vent conventions for the design of menus, forms, wizards, and so 
on. This saves design time. Moreover, because it is easy to create 
reusable code around these templates, they save development and 
testing time as well.
Avoiding Disasters
Users are highly adaptable. Even when an interface is poorly 
de signed, some users have enough motivation to keep trying to use 
the product, even if the application is remarkably complex and 
awkward. But sometimes a design is completely rejected. The peo-
ple who are supposed to use the product may refuse to stick with it; 
they go back to their old ways of getting the task done, buy else-
where, or just give up. These are usability and product disasters. It’s 
best to get it right the first time.
For all these reasons, the 10% of the budget you should be spending 
on usability work is easily saved on every project, in addition to the 
benefit provided by the improved value of the end design. Even if 
you take into account only the typical savings from working with 
reusable templates, usability work pays for itself—it is really free. 
However, the decision to begin institutionalizing usability requires 
more than a simple calculation of benefits. The organization—and 
particularly the executives in the organization—need to under stand 
how implementing usability means changing the way their busi-
ness is done. For this realization to occur, a strong wake-up call is 
often required.

10
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
Usability within the Medical Industry
Dr. Ed Israelski, Program Manager, Human Factors, 
Abbott Laboratories
Usability or “human factors” are important to Abbott in two 
ways. First, the competitive landscape is such that more and 
more of our main competitors are putting an emphasis on their 
safe products by noting that they are also easy to use and learn. 
The second way involves the FDA and the safety regulations 
that Abbott must follow. If it were just the regulations, people 
could find loopholes; combine the regulatory requirements 
with the business case supporting human factors, however, 
and it’s a good one–two punch.
Also, there are standards, such as the medical device standards, 
out there. An important organization called Association for the 
Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI, www.aami
.org) develops standards and training courses for the medical 
device industry. One of the standards it has developed is a hu-
man factors standard. This process standard, which came out 
last year, is called “ANSI/AAMI HE 74:2001 Human Factors 
Design Process for Medical Devices.” Now I can refer to the 
standard’s human factors step and build it into the budget and 
product development schedule because it’s a standard and the 
FDA will be looking for it. Then we can also show that it makes 
good business sense as well. We can show financial benefits be-
cause it saves money on training, produces fewer recalls, reduces 
liability exposure, and increases customers’ satisfaction so they 
come back to buy more—all of which are important things.
If you institutionalize usability, you give people tools and 
methods and resources, including internal and external per-
sonnel. Then it’s easy for people to do this—it’s the path of 
least resistance. They don’t feel they have to question it and 
make a business case each time they decide to put human fac-
tors process steps in the development project. So, if you institu-
tionalize it, the decision-making process becomes more 
efficient.

Beyond Classic Usability
11
Beyond Classic Usability
Around 2006, the usability field changed its name to the user experi-
ence field. The transition happened gradually, with groans from 
many of us. Our cards already read “Engineering Psychologist,” 
“Human Performance Engineer,” “Human Factors Specialist,” 
“Software Ergonomist,” “Human–Computer Interface Designer,” 
and “Usability Specialist,” to recount just a few titles. Printing 
another new set of cards sounded tedious. But the name change did, 
in fact, herald a new set of requirements and some new skills. We do 
not yet have much research on the value of these enhancements, but 
we are confident that they are of even greater value than the contri-
bution made by the classic usability work.
Ecosystem Viewpoint
The foundation of classic usability work was a model of a person, 
interacting with a device, in a specific environment. That model was 
often simply a person in an office using a computer to do various 
tasks. We built a whole industry around optimizing that human–
computer interaction. As early as the 1990s, however, that model 
started to fall apart. With graphical interfaces, interactions became 
so complex that we could not analyze all the tasks. Instead, we had 
to analyze a sample of tasks (which the industry has termed a sce-
nario or, if involving only online activities, a use case). Since then, 
this model has also unraveled.
Today we have ubiquitous computing. Numerous devices (mobile 
devices, tablets, laptops, and desktops) are being used by many dif-
ferent people acting out various roles. These devices operate in 
diverse environments and employ a blizzard of artifacts. The field 
has been forced to adopt a set of methods modeled on the work of 
various ethnographers to handle this complexity. The ecosystem 
could be “everything that happens with a mobile device,” “every-
thing that happens in an x-ray room,” or “everything involved in 
making a buying decision.” We will see later in this chapter how 
this complex array of users, channels, and contexts plays out and 
pays off.

12
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
When we talk about user experience design, we are assuming an 
ecosystem viewpoint that allows us to consider movement through 
physical stores, mobile confirmations, and group decision making. 
With this perspective, the contribution of user experience design is 
far wider than it has ever been.
Strategy
If we don’t have a good UX strategy, we are likely to build a usable 
wrong thing. Each siloed team builds a great offering. When all the 
features and points of entry are taken together, however, they are inef-
fective and confusing. Figure 1-1 is an example from a bank: imagine, 
as a customer, trying to work out whether you need to use telephone 
banking, speech-activated banking, mobile banking, or .mobi!
A good UX strategy will dictate the plan for how users will be moti-
vated in the online environment. For example, if you are “the Asian 
Figure 1-1: The result of multichannel silos.

Beyond Classic Usability
13
Bank,” what does that really mean in terms of your online designs? 
It is nice to say, “We are the Asian Bank”—but what do you do dif-
ferently? In this situation, you will find that different parts of Asia 
need different designs. For example, Japanese people have a very 
low tolerance for ambiguity and risk, so the design needs to have 
lots of explanations, FAQs, help, and confirmations. Or suppose 
your organization wants to migrate mobile customers to digital self-
service. It is a great idea, but just building a usable online facility 
probably won’t make that shift happen. You need a scheme to pull 
people into a digital relationship. You might start with a small step, 
such as sending an alert for a low balance via SMS. Then you can 
gradually increase the online interaction (a method called compli-
ance laddering). You might also appeal to a specific motivational 
theme as you move people into a digital relationship. Perhaps that 
theme could be the status of an account geared to the digital life-
style. Perhaps it might be saving paper and being eco-friendly. Per-
haps it might be the physical safety of paying bills online from the 
customer’s home. In any case, we can never just hope that people 
will convert to the new system exactly the way we want them to; we 
have to plan a motivational strategy that compels them to migrate 
the new system.
Once you have a motivational plan, then you need to look at the 
way that the various channels fit together to meet your objectives in 
a coordinated way. This is the beginning of a journey toward cross-
channel integration. The idea that “the user can do everything, 
everywhere, at any time” is very attractive, mostly because it is sim-
ple and has a certain rhythm. In reality, it is rarely the right answer. 
The ATM is not a great place to pay bills. Sure, you can do it. But 
people feel anxious at an ATM. Also, there is rarely enough room to 
lay out your bills, and the keyboard is not likely to be designed for 
bill payment tasks. Each channel has its own characteristics.
We need a simple story. If you can’t tell the user where to go for 
which activities in a single breath, then you have a problem.
Once the overall design of the set of channels is in place (possibly 
with multiple Web properties and various mobile facilities), then 
it becomes possible to design the right facilities with proper 

14
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
alignment. There is still a lot to do, of course. We need to use the 
same information architecture in all the channels (“pervasive infor-
mation architecture”). That means we keep task sequences and con-
tent organization the same. We need standards to maintain interface 
design conventions. We might even try to avoid forcing customers 
to remember a half-dozen different passwords.
Innovation
New product and business ideas are often developed by technology 
groups or business experts. There is no question that each of these 
groups adds a valuable perspective, but their ideas often fail because 
of a missing “human element.” Part of being a user experience 
designer is participating in a systematic, industrial-scale innovation 
process. There is an enormous difference between implementing a 
professional innovation process and asking people to be innovative. 
Certainly, you can ask people to be aware of opportunities that they 
see. You can mobilize staff and customers to contribute ideas. Nev-
ertheless, even “crowdsourcing,” while popular, is unlikely to pro-
vide truly innovative origination.
When user experience design staff get involved with innovation 
work, they don’t just sit around trying to be creative or evaluating 
other people’s ideas. Instead, they do research to build an ecosys-
tem model that then serves as the foundation of the creative work. 
For example, when we worked for Intel developing the Classmate 
PC, we first studied the educational ecosystems of several emerg-
ing markets. We understood the roles of students, parents, teach-
ers, and tutors. We modeled their environments and their 
activities. I think the product was so successful because the inno-
vation and design work continuously referenced research on 
those ecosystems.
Innovation projects are generally large-scale operations. They take 
months and require a strong and specialized team. There is a flow of 
foundational research, ideation, concept selection, concept elabora-
tion, assessment, and economic/feasibility analysis. While the user 
experience design team is critical to success, it is always best to have 
participants who specialize in both business and technology.

Beyond Classic Usability
15
Persuasion Engineering
In 2003, Dr. Don Norman published the brilliant book Emotional 
Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. This book marked a 
real transition in the usability field. Certainly, many of us had been 
interested in the motivational aspect of software for years (c.f., 
E. Schaffer, “Predictors of Successful Arcade Machines,” Proceedings 
of the Human Factors Society, 1981). The focus of the usability field 
was on making it possible for people to use their computers, how-
ever (Figure 1-2). When you run usability tests and find that per-
haps 6% of customers are able to check out, you are not concerned 
about making the checkout procedure fun—you just want it to 
work. But Don got the timing right. By the turn of the millennium, 
we were, fairly routinely, able to create software that people were 
able to use. It then became possible to turn to issues beyond basic 
Figure 1-2: Chart of findings from a car manufacturer’s website. 
Only one-third of the users could get a quote.1
1. Data taken from an HFI usability test of a major auto manufacturer’s website, completed 
in 2002.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Task or Information
% Success in Navigating
Photos
Search inventory
Find a dealer
Owner’s manual
Clothing
View a vehicle
View special deals
 Extend service contract
Apply for a loan
Leasing
Look for used vehicle
Compute monthly payments
Awards
Look at specs
Order parts
Ask maintenance question
Get a quote
Contact manufacturer
Visa card
Concept cards
Compare
Send me info
Get an accessory
Build a vehicle
Auto Manufacturer—Initial Navigation Success Rate

16
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
usability. That is why I say that basic usability (“I can do”) is a 
hygiene factor. You pretty much have to get that right to even be in 
business.
In Emotional Design, Don talked about designing things that people 
love to use. This is a fascinating area that is certainly among the 
capabilities of a user experience designer. But it is generally not his 
or her main focus. The real question is, “Will people convert?” For 
most organizations, it is a plus if people love their designs, but it is 
making the sale that makes the company executives happy.
Conversion is partly about making things that people like, but it 
goes far beyond that. There is a whole world of persuasion engineer-
ing that determines whether people will buy the product, use the 
software, ask their doctor, vote for a candidate, tell their friends, 
migrate to a digital self-service channel, or otherwise do what the 
organization wants them to do. To reach this point, we have to go 
beyond “Can do” to “Will do.” “Can do” is a hygiene factor—you 
really have to make it usable. But persuasion engineering is the key 
differentiator. Only advanced user experience design practitioners 
are good at it. Persuasion engineering is not magic: PET (“persua-
sion, emotion, and trust”), as we call this field at HFI, is based just 
as much on a scientific approach as human–computer interface 
design work. Research-based models on how to motivate custom-
ers have been developed, and there are so many ways to influence 
customers that I’ve felt the need for HFI to restrict the kinds of 
companies we work for. The methods of influence are just that 
powerful.
CEO Wants a Great Customer Experience:
Now Don’t Fall for UX Fads or Half-measures
The first edition of this book included a long section on how train 
wrecks were needed to alert executives to the need for good user 
experience design. I tossed it out. Today’s executives are very much 
aware of the need for good customer experiences. Indeed, they often 
get very excited about it. But then what do they do? They usually go 
through a somewhat predictable set of attempts to move their 

CEO Wants a Great Customer Experience
17
organization toward effective user experience design. Let’s go 
through some of the more common pitfalls.
Relying on Good Intentions
Many top executives start with this approach because it is attractive, 
not to mention cheap. It seems logical to think you can tell staff 
members to “Put the customer first” or “Be customer-centered,” 
and then expect them to just be able to do it. The problem is that 
they can’t “just do it.”
Creating usable designs takes far more than good intentions. Today, 
everyone in the development field wants good usability, but usabil-
ity is hard to achieve. The proof for this statement is painfully 
apparent in the awful designs that are so commonplace. Even highly 
motivated professionals often create usability disasters.
Simply motivating people won’t result in good user experience 
design. In some cases, a manager taking this path needs to see a 
whole project built under his or her well-intentioned motivation, 
only to find that UX has not been greatly improved.
While the manager reviewing the designs may immediately see that 
the designs are unintelligible, it takes a serious application of usabil-
ity engineering technol ogy and methods to ensure that an organiza-
tion’s program will be successful.
Relying on Testing
Sometimes companies get the idea that all they need to create a 
good user experience is usability testing. It is good to be able to test, 
but testing alone is not enough. Testing pinpoints problems in the 
design and its usability that can be fixed. But to be successful and to 
institutionalize user experience design, companies need a complete 
methodology including concept development, data gathering, 
structural design, design standards, and so on. While testing is 
important, by itself it’s not a long-term solution.
Relying on Training
It makes sense. You have smart people who know the domain and 
technology, so you think you can just give them some training in 

18
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
usability, and things will be fine. If you pick a good program, train-
ing will help, and the staff will learn a good set of basic skills.
The key word here is basic. You will probably give people 3 to 10 
days of training. In this time frame, they are not about to become 
doctors of user interface design. Instead, they will be paramedics. 
The trained staff members will see the problems clearly. As a result, 
they will create better designs, but they will still feel frustrated. The 
corporate culture won’t have changed enough to value UX, and 
there will be no plan for user experience design in the corporate 
system development life cycle. There will be no design standards. 
Organizational channels won’t be provided for testing with users. 
There will be no one to call with questions and no repository of 
Being an Advocate for the Process
Dana Griffith, CUA, Web Consultant—Interactive Media, 
American Electric Power
One of the principles I have gained from usability training is 
that you should never become the advocate for the user. I 
thought that was really interesting because at the time I was 
sitting there during the session and thinking, “Of course I’m 
supposed to be the advocate for the user.” But the idea pre-
sented was that, once you become the advocate for the user, 
people try to go around you. They just really don’t want to stop 
what they are doing and change things. But if you simply be-
come an advo cate for the technology or the process and let peo-
ple decide what they’re going to do with that, you will have 
better success.
Becoming an advocate for the process can have very practical 
applications. Perhaps we’re looking at a very simple applica-
tion on a website (a form, for example), and someone wants to 
know whether one area should be populated already or 
whether it should drop down with selections. In this type of 
scenario, I can say to the people involved in that project, “I can 
test that for you tomorrow and find out.”

CEO Wants a Great Customer Experience
19
examples and templates. The staff members will know when some-
thing isn’t quite right, but they probably won’t know how to fix it.
Relying on Repair Jobs
Repair jobs try to fix user experience design problems at the last 
minute. This is inefficient and creates only limited potential for 
improvement. Ideally, UX work should start when requirements are 
defined. If you bring UX engineering into the process late, you can 
improve small pieces of the design, such as the wording, layout, 
color, graphics, and control selection, but there will be no time for 
more profound changes such as standardizing user interface ele-
ments, the flow of logic, or other major elements.
Relying on Projects by Ad Agencies
Another common response to addressing UX concerns is to bring in 
the advertising agency with which the organization already works. 
Unfortunately, ad agencies currently have few real UX specialists 
on their staffs. While the agency will be able to help with branding 
and perception issues, advertising is a different skill set than user 
experience design work. There is some overlap, in that both adver-
tising and UX staff members are focused on the customer, but the 
goals of the ad agency and the goals of the UX team are not always 
the same. The methods and processes each group uses to complete 
its work are also very different. Moreover, bringing in an ad agency 
will not spread user experience design throughout the organiza-
tion, and it may not delve deeply enough into navigation structures 
to improve task usability on even a single project. Usability focuses 
on whether users can perform certain tasks with the technology 
product. Adver tising concentrates on captur ing and focusing atten-
tion, commu nicat ing brand information, and influencing behavior. 
Advertising and usability efforts should work hand in hand, but 
they are not the same.
Hiring UX Consultants
A common response to a wake-up call is to hire a consultant to 
review a site or application. This might be a good starting point and 

20
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
will probably help with a particular project, but it won’t address the 
problems of the next application or website. That is, bringing in a 
consultant on one project will not disseminate usability engineering 
throughout the organization.
These consultants can be expected to do a good job and can be cost-
effective. However, hiring consultants still leaves the client com-
pany without internal capabilities. The company may see the value 
of the good design work, but it will have to call the UX team back 
for each new project.
Some user experience design consultants try to transfer knowledge 
to the client organization. Following this practice does help com-
pany staff see that good UX practice makes a difference. Realisti-
cally, though, without training, standards, and tools, this approach 
leaves little behind that is useful over the long term.
Hiring New UX Staff
With a clear understanding of the competitive value of user experi-
ence design work, managers sometimes make the substantial com-
mitment of  hiring UX staff. This is laudable but, unfortunately, it 
often fails. The manager may not be able to find or screen for expe-
rienced UX specialists. Some people looking for work in usability 
be lieve that experience on one project that involved UX qualifies 
them to be a user experience design specialist. In reality, becoming 
an effective UX practitioner takes an educational foundation (e.g., 
cognitive psychology), specific training in usability work (e.g., 
expert review, structural design), and a period of mentoring by a 
seasoned expert. After attaining a master’s degree in the field, it 
generally takes three to five years of mentored experience before 
totally independent work is advisable.
It is all too easy to hire people who need a lot more experience, 
training, and mentoring before they will be effective. Hiring one 
such staff member is time-consuming enough—you don’t want to 
end up with an entire usability group whose members are imma-
ture or inexperienced.
Typically, a manager hires one or two people to start. Even if the 
new hires are experienced, having only one or two people often 

CEO Wants a Great Customer Experience
21
means that the “group” is quickly besieged and rendered ineffec-
tive. The team members may soon be so busy that they can’t get 
design standards in place and may not have enough resources to 
provide training.
In these types of situations, it is best to have many of the initial 
activities completed by outside consultants who have an established 
team that has specialized skills in training and standards develop-
ment and can work quickly and successfully. The consultants will 
be seen as outsiders, and employees may be more willing to have an 
outsider dissect the flaws in their designs. Outsiders can say things 
that an insider has left unsaid. The consultants will be there to get 
the internal UX staff headed in the right direction and can hand 
over their knowledge and expertise to help the internal staff become 
established and ready to take on projects on their own.
If you install a user experience design team, your efforts should 
include more than simply hiring the people to staff it. Making the 
team members effective means putting them in a position to be an 
integral and harmonious part of the organization, establishing clear 
roles and authority, and addressing the integration of the usability 
team with the other parts of the workforce.
Seeing the Real Numbers Creates a Call to Action, Too
Harley Manning, Research Director, Forrester Research
Let’s say you do care about usability—the organizations we sur-
veyed don’t have a formal process for evaluating the usability of 
the packaged applications when they come in. They’re rarely 
looking at the cost of ownership with regard to usability—and 
even if they do care about it, they don’t know how to evaluate it.
Knowing that in theory it costs me money to have poor usabil-
ity and being able to actually evaluate how poor the usabil ity is 
and put a number on it—that’s the huge gap. Once you do that 
and start looking at what the real numbers are, then you say, “I 
must do something about this!” But that’s what the organiza-
tions we surveyed haven’t done yet.

22
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
Who Can Be a Champion?
In discussions of executive championship, there is often an eager 
volunteer. This person will meet the criterion of being passionate 
about user experience design. This person will want the job. But this 
person is likely to be a great candidate for the position of UX Direc-
tor. The executive champion must truly be a senior executive in the 
organization.
One criterion that seems to work is that the champion must influ-
ence the entire budget across the target design areas. Looking at the 
need for user experience design across an organization can be a bit 
overwhelming. There are needs on the public website(s). The call 
center has issues. Software products have issues. The intranet and 
back-office operations have issues. User experience design seems to 
be needed everywhere. If the champion is going to be really effec-
tive, he or she needs to have an overarching role across everything. 
This might seem to be a clear call for championship by the CEO. In 
fact, while CEO support is very useful, CEOs usually don’t make 
great champions. The CEO will not have sufficient time and atten-
tion to spend on the job of executive champion. Instead, this role 
should usually be filled by someone just a bit lower in the organiza-
tion. It is a real challenge to find a champion who will have time to 
really do the job well and at the same time covers a large enough 
area of the organization.
In the evolution of institutionalization, it is often the case that we 
start in one area of the business and then expand to the full organi-
zation. Certainly, there will eventually be a need for a single, central 
organization that supports the user experience design effort—
otherwise, things will become fragmented and ineffective. But it is 
better to have a serious executive champion in a key area and focus 
on that area than to be spread thin and have spotty support.
The Role of the Executive Champion
The executive champion might be the most challenging role in the 
entire institutionalization effort. There will probably be no formal 

The Role of the Executive Champion
23
position and authority, and the organization may not have even 
begun the process of sensitization and assimilation. Yet the execu-
tive champion must gather resources, create a strategy, and keep the 
process moving. He or she must manage points of contention and 
chart the course to full acceptance.
Without a champion, the usability staff often has a hard time being 
included as part of a cohesive strategic effort. The presence of an 
effective executive champion is the best predictor of success for a 
UX institutionalization effort. Without a usability champion, the 
usability group does not have access to key players in the organiza-
tion, and it is nearly impossible for them to effect change within the 
organization. With an executive champion, however, the group has 
a chance to create change and attain the visibility needed to 
succeed.
The executive champion doesn’t need a background in usability 
engineering or software development, but he or she does need to 
understand the value of user experience design, its proper applica-
tions, and the importance of an implementation strategy. It is pos-
sible to get a sufficient foundation in usability engineering from a 
short course and some reading. First and foremost, though, the 
champion must have a clear understanding of the business impera-
tives of the organization and must see how UX work supports these 
objectives. He or she must understand the core value of user experi-
ence design in the organization and repeatedly reinforce this focus, 
with examples showing how UX design will reduce call time or 
increase sales.
The champion keeps the whole effort focused on the business goal. 
This guidance is the differentiator between an effective executive 
champion and an ineffective one. Ineffective champions say, “We 
need user experience design.” That is nice, but the reality is that no 
business ever needs UX for the sake of UX. Effective executive champi-
ons say, “We need to sell more, get fewer returns, and reduce sup-
port costs.” They know the specific things their business needs. 
They say this over and over, thousands of times. The business focus 
of the usability effort is their mantra—and it works.
The executive champion needs to be able to effectively influence the 
key people in the organization’s power structure. This means 

24
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
arranging for project funding as well as convincing key people in an 
organization whose approval and support are necessary for the 
institutionalization program to succeed. The executive champion 
needs to employ the approach that works best with each person—
understanding individuals’ hot buttons and learning styles.
The executive champion must guide the UX staff through the proj-
ect approval and selling process. The champion needs to check for 
acceptance and detect areas of resistance at all levels of the organi-
zation. The executive champion is the key agent of change and, 
therefore, must be able to network with key people in the company, 
detect areas of resistance before resistance emerges, remove organi-
zational obstacles as they arise, and work continuously to promote 
acceptance. These skills are essential.
The executive champion must be responsible for the institutional-
ization strategy, no matter whether the practice is new or seasoned. 
There must always be a written strategy that directs how that opera-
tion will be maintained and enhanced. This means ensuring that the 
capability-building activities are aligned and that they progress. It 
also means identifying how the required usability work is to be 
staged and ensuring the proper allocation of responsibilities and 
resources. A good strategy is critically important (see Chapter 5), 
but beyond the content of the strategy, the champion must monitor 
progress and demand results. Progress takes place when an execu-
tive regularly asks for updates and checks milestones, keeping staff 
members on task. The executive champion cannot create a strategy 
and forget it. He or she must firmly ensure that the team carries out 
the strategy.
Keep Moving on the Strategy, Keep Expanding 
and Innovating
To be successful, executive champions cannot just avert problems 
and maintain the user experience design operation. Instead, they 
must find new methods, create new ways of working, and make 
new markets and business models. If they do not engage in innova-
tion, they are caretakers, rather than executives.

Keep Moving on the Strategy, Keep Expanding and Innovating 
25
Why Support from Senior Management Is Crucial
Harley Manning, Research Director, Forrester Research
The person at the top of the organization must believe that user 
experience is important and must require people to fol low 
good practices. Unless that person is committed to this idea, 
good usability is not going to happen.
The companies that really get it tend to have C-level people who 
care deeply, like Charles Schwab. Charles Schwab himself, the 
guy who runs the company, uses the site every day. The woman 
who headed up the site design came to a workshop I ran a few 
years ago. She said that Schwab called down on a pretty much 
daily basis. Certainly, she didn’t go a week without hearing di-
rectly from him about some problem that he or his mother or his 
friend had with the site or about something he thought could be 
better. So this guy is very engaged, very demanding. And the 
site works as well as it does because, from the top down, it’s 
critically important that the site deliver a great user experience.
We come back to this time and again—the executives must un-
derstand the importance of the user experience to the business. 
Because no executives will put up their hands and say, “Let’s 
do something that’s bad for business” or “Let’s do something 
that hurts our customers”—they won’t do that on purpose. 
When they do those things, they do them out of ignorance.
You don’t get widespread attention to user experience unless 
its importance is understood at the top. That’s where the lever-
age is.
The executive helps to expand user experience design throughout 
the organization. Creating usable software can be essential to many 
different groups in the organization, or it may be the only way to 
keep up with the competition. Usability can save millions of dollars 
when there are large numbers of internal users. For example, the 
usability team at Sun Microsystems estimated that poor design of 

26
Chapter 1    The Executive Champion
the company intranet cost the average employee 6 minutes per day, 
for a total of $10 million in lost time per year [Ward 2001]. A single 
second removed from the average call-handling time can be worth 
$50,000 per year or more in large call centers. With an application 
that has a large number of use rs, even benefits from small improve-
ments can add up fast (Figures 1-3 and 1-4). It is no accident that the 
term “usability” is commonly discussed in executive suites now. 
Once the executive champion determines the specific value of 
usability to the organization, he or she must spread the word and 
keep people focused on the goal.
Figure 1-3: Chart showing increased lead generation from a mutual fund 
and an insurance site reworked by an HFI user experience design team.

Keep Moving on the Strategy, Keep Expanding and Innovating 
27
Figure 1-4: Chart showing customers shifting from expensive 
human-intermediated channels to online self-service from an insurance 
site reworked by an HFI user experience design team.

This page intentionally left blank 

29
Chapter 2
Selecting a Usability 
Consultant
 
➤Outside consultants are important to usability institutional-
ization—they can do things no insider can do.
 
➤Retain a usability consultancy early in the process to pro-
vide infrastructure and jump-start the institutionalization 
process.
 
➤There are many usability consultancies, and there are huge 
differences in their capability, resources, and fit with your 
culture. Pick the right consultancy for your organization.
 
➤A good consultant will guide your strategy, set up your 
infrastructure, help develop your staff and internal organi-
zation, and smoothly transition to a role that supports the 
internal group.
A few companies invest in a solid internal usability group during 
the early phases of user experience institutionalization, but most 
companies start with a usability consultancy. The consultancy 
brings an integrated and experienced team of people and a com-
plete set of resources. They can help your organization establish a 

30
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
well-tuned strategy and do most of the work of setting up the infra-
structure. Consultants are skilled in supporting change manage-
ment issues. As outside experts, their advice is often more easily 
accepted than internally made recommendations. Also, in the 
unlikely event that the whole initiative fails, consultants are easy 
and inexpensive to fire. For all these reasons, it makes sense to start 
with a consultancy.
In my experience at HFI, the cost of an effective initial setup for 
ad dressing usability concerns within a large company could be in the 
range of $800,000 to $1.4 million just for consultancy resources. This 
level of investment is required to cover the minimum set of activities, 
documents, and deliverables needed to get usability going.
You should select a usability consultancy that has a critical mass of 
staff, processes, tools, and specialists who can help with the startup 
tasks and the creation of the infrastructure. You want to select a con-
sultancy that comes equipped with a full infrastructure because you 
do not want to create a methodology and toolkit from scratch. Also, be 
sure to select a firm with a good set of training courses so you won’t 
need to build and maintain a suite of courses for your company—this 
can be a very expensive and time-consuming endeavor.
The consultancy’s role changes over time. In the Startup and Setup 
phases, the consultancy guides the strategy and establishes the 
infrastructure. The firm may help with the design of one or two 
showcase projects. In the Organization phase, the consultancy helps 
with recruiting and supporting the initial projects for which internal 
staff members are not yet in place, experienced, and confident. Dur-
ing the Long-Term Operations phase, the consultancy’s role changes 
yet again. The consultancy should continue to provide training and 
supplemental support where needed. This supplemental support 
may take the form of a very high-level consultant who performs 
audits and provides a second opinion, or it may take the form of 
specialists who assist the organization with uncommon technolo-
gies. The consultancy may also provide lower-level staff to help fill 
the ranks of usability practitioners. One particular advantage asso-
ciated with some consultancies is the provision of offshore usability 
support. Done properly, the quality and low cost of an offshore 
group can make it possible to support all the projects that need 
usability work.

Selecting a Usability Consultant
31
It is important to select the right consultancy, and this chapter will 
help you by describing what you should look for. Table 2-1 summa-
rizes the selection criteria and suggests weightings for these items.
Table 2-1: Weighted Criteria for Selecting a Usability Consultancy
Criteria
Description
Points
Staffing
Has trained and professional usability 
personnel
17
Completeness 
of solution
Can provide a complete integrated 
solution, rather than hiring multiple 
vendors who specialize in niche areas
16
Domain 
expertise
Saves time and offers some special 
insights for your specific domain
11
Methodology
Follows a methodology that has clear 
activities and deliverables and is 
appropriate and comprehensive
10
Tools and 
templates
Already has an infrastructure of tools 
and templates in place
9
Size and stability
Is large enough to absorb your project 
requirements
8
Corporate cultural 
match
Matches or complements your own 
corporate culture
6
Specializations
Has a wide range of specializations in 
the field
5
Organizational 
structure
Has a clear and easy-to-work-with 
organizational structure
5
Change 
management 
ability
Helps you build usability into 
your organization rather than just 
providing usability consultancy
5
Quality 
control and 
feedback
Has a good quality assurance and 
process improvement program in 
place
4
Ongoing training 
for consultant’s 
staff
Makes a continuous effort to keep 
staff up to date in usability knowledge 
and practice
4
Total points
100

32
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
While it is unlikely that any consultancy will score 100% on these 
criteria, you should try to find a company that comes close to this 
ideal. We have included a point system to reflect that some items are 
more important than others. This rating system should hold up well 
across different organizations, but you may want to adjust the 
weightings to match your needs and priorities.
Staffing
You should make sure that your consultancy has professional 
usability engineering staff. (Chapter 12, Staffing, describes the dif-
ferent types of usability engineering skills.)
Some of the consultancy’s staff should have advanced degrees in 
usability engineering. These degrees can go by different names, 
including the following:
• Software Ergonomics
• Human Factors Engineering
• Engineering Psychology
• Usability Engineering
• User Experience Design
The staff members may also have backgrounds in cognitive psy-
chology or sensation and perception.
Make sure that the staff members are oriented toward practical 
design work rather than research. If some staff members publish a 
lot, make sure that their firm also employs people who do the prac-
tical work. They should be familiar with the current research, but 
they don’t have to author it all.
At least some of the staff members should have substantial experi-
ence in the field. It typically takes 10 years to develop solid compe-
tence. Although some of the staff may have less experience than this 
level, a consultancy in which most of the members have only one or 
two years in the field is likely not experienced enough to guide your 
organization.

Completeness of Solution
33
Without skilled staff, there will be little value added by the consul-
tancy, no matter how good its infrastructure is. The people within 
the consultancy must be at the vanguard of the field and become 
role models for future growth within your organization.
Completeness of Solution
Some companies can provide a few pieces, but not all, of your 
usability solution—some may perform only usability testing or 
training, while others may offer expertise in projects or do high-
level change management consulting. You can try to piece together 
a solution, but the parts will never be perfect matches. Certainly, all 
good usability consultants have a similar philosophy and work 
from similar principles. However, even small discrepancies in the 
interpretation of research or nomenclature can reduce credibility 
and confuse internal stakeholders. Therefore, you should select a 
consultancy that can provide a complete and integrated solution, 
including the following elements:
• Support for institutionalization:
° 
Strategic consulting—consulting on the strategies for usability 
within the organization
° 
Expert reviews—evaluation of existing technology products, 
such as applications or websites, to see which usability prob-
lems they contain
° 
Introductory training—training on the basics of usability
° 
Detailed skills-level training—training on more detailed skills 
for in-house usability professionals
° 
Methodological standards—standards for a user-centered de-
sign process
° 
Design standards—standards for the visual and interaction 
decisions for projects
° 
Templates and tools to support the standards—tools to make 
standards easy to implement
° 
Recruiting of usability practitioners—help and advice in find-
ing qualified practitioners

34
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
• User-centered design on specific projects:
° 
High-level user interface design—consulting expertise in high-
level design for critical and showcase projects
° 
Graphic design—graphic design expertise that dovetails with 
usability
° 
Detailed design and functional specifications—user require-
ments from a usability point of view
° 
Usability testing—consulting and help with the design and 
implementation of standard usability test protocols
• Ongoing support:
° 
New research updates—a strategy for keeping the staff up-to-
date on the latest work and research
° 
Usability audits—periodic audits of standards and processes
° 
Mentoring—mentoring of both executives and practitioners 
to advance their expertise
These criteria are very important because the effort required to 
 manage a fragmented solution is significant. Even simple problems 
such as discordant terminology can slow the process. (For example, 
is the description of the user’s workflow called task design, scenario 
creation, or story boards?)
Domain Expertise
Organizations often overestimate the importance of specific domain 
expertise when selecting usability consultants. What is more impor-
tant is that the consultant can augment his or her general domain 
knowledge with exceptional usability expertise.
The consultant should have general expertise in your type of appli-
cations and high-level domain expertise—that is, the consultant 
should understand the general domain of your business. Extensive 
specific domain expertise in the unique focus of your organization 
is not necessary. If your organization is in the financial industry, for 
example, it is important that the consultant have experience with 

Methodology
35
financial products. If your organization produces software for 
chemical engineers, your consultant should have experience with 
scientific applications. He or she does not need to have extensive 
knowledge about your particular type of chemical product or finan-
cial offering.
Consider how you might choose an accounting firm. It would cer-
tainly be helpful if your accounting firm had worked in your 
industry—after all, your industry has some unique conventions 
and special needs, so a certain level of familiarity with these issues 
could save days or weeks of time that would otherwise be spent 
on investigation and learning. But when it comes right down to it, 
the accounting domain is pretty similar across industries. If this 
were not true, there would be no large accounting firms; instead, 
all accounting would be done by specialty firms focused on nar-
row vertical markets. You might be better off with a firm that 
knows your industry less but has a better staff or a superior 
process.
Like accounting, usability work is relatively similar across domains. 
Consultants with domain knowledge can save some time and offer 
some special insights, but having this level of expertise should not 
be a critical factor when choosing a consultancy.
Methodology
Select a consultancy that follows a complete and systematic user-
centered development process. This means that the process is fully 
documented and has specified activities and deliverables that can 
be modified as needed to meet each new set of project demands. It 
is also important that the methodology you choose be appropriate 
and comprehensive.
Many user-centered design methods are available. HFI has devel-
oped its own user-centered development process, which is outlined 
in Chapter 4. The Usability Engineering Lifecycle: The Practitioner’s 
Handbook for User Interface Design by Deborah Mayhew [1999] 

36
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
describes another such process. A brief look at the evolving soft-
ware usability methodologies would include the following:1
• Gould and Lewis (1985)—published one of the earliest usability 
methodologies
• Manter and Teorey (1988)—outlined a usability methodology 
that was integrated into a standard software development life 
cycle
• Nielsen (1992)—expanded earlier usability principles to 10 de-
tailed steps that should be integrated into an overall develop-
ment plan
• Schneiderman (1992)—introduced eight interactive stages for 
usability considerations across any interactive systems devel-
opment process
• Mayhew (1992)—advanced usability methodology by offering 
more detailed specifications for integrating iterative usability 
techniques into the software development cycle
There is also some useful ISO work, such as “Ergonomics of 
Human–System Interaction: Specification for the Process Assess-
ment of Human–System Issues” (ISO/TS 18152, first published in 
2010). In any case, there is no need to try to write your own method-
ology. It is faster, cheaper, and better simply to customize an exist-
ing method.
Tools and Templates
User-centered design requires a lot of work, but the amount of effort 
can be vastly reduced if the consultant has a set of tools and tem-
plates that support the process. Templates such as questionnaires 
for interviews, screeners for usability testing, templates for docu-
menting expert reviews, and usability testing reports are critical to 
ensure that deliverables are easy to create and standardize. Without 
1. This list is summarized from Cost-Justifying Usability [Bias and Mayhew 1994], which presents 
information on these authoritative methodology texts in more detail. Please consult that source 
for full bibliographic information for the books listed here.

Object-Oriented Approach
37
these templates in place, the consultant will spend a great deal of 
time reinventing everything from scratch—an expensive process 
that will extend the project timeline.
In addition to the templates, there is significant value in having a set 
of tools. The consultancy might have remote testing software, a 
port able or fixed usability testing lab, and software for tasks such as 
cluster analysis of card sort data. Working with tools and templates 
makes consultants more efficient and the deliverables and results 
more consistent. But it is even more important that you obtain these 
tools and templates for your own organization so that your com-
pany can use them in the future. It makes more sense to use a com-
mercial off-the-shelf solution and have it customized to meet your 
needs than to invest in creating these resources from scratch. You 
can certainly create your own templates over time, but having a set 
to use initially saves months of effort.
Object-Oriented Approach
If you were looking for a systems integrator, you would never con-
sider one that did not have an object-oriented approach to systems 
development. You would not hire a company that just coded flat 
files for everything, burying all the work and making reuse impos-
sible. Unfortunately, as of this writing, most user experience design 
companies tend to just create slide decks, or perhaps documents. 
After a few years, you are likely to end up with terabytes of data, 
worth millions of dollars—lost forever in a document management 
system. A simple question such as “What do we know about high-
net-worth customers using a bank branch?” becomes nearly impos-
sible to answer, because the search to answer it yields hundreds of 
documents that need to be read slowly to determine whether they 
are even relevant.
Best practice today calls for creating slide decks that tell a story as 
part of a project, while breaking out most of the content into sepa-
rate objects (e.g., user profile, scenario). At that point, UX practition-
ers throughout the company can grow and share a set of ecosystem 
objects that relate to your domain. Instead of jumbling everything 

38
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
together in a flat set of slides, the organization should separate its 
user profiles, scenarios, environments, artifacts, needs and opportu-
nities, projects, specifications, standards, and methods.
It should be easy to know or quickly identify every project that 
usability-tested a given type of user. Otherwise, you will be paying 
to re-research and re-design the same elements. Being able to pull in 
and work with UX objects is far more powerful and efficient than 
building everything from scratch.
User-Centered Size and Stability
Many usability consulting firms have only a handful of practitioners—
perhaps even just a single practitioner—and possibly some additional 
contractors. These companies can have significant limitations. If you 
are working on a usability institutionalization program in a large com-
pany, your company’s needs may overtax the capabilities of the qual-
ity staff in a small organization. Even if your own organization is 
small, a one- or two-person consultancy will be quickly overwhelmed 
by the swings in demands during even a single project.
If a consulting firm has eight staff members and you hire all eight 
staff members for five months, at the end of the project you might 
find that the firm disappears because it cannot immediately find 
new work to absorb all of the resources released at the end of your 
project. That means the same consultancy will not be there to help 
later when your organization has further needs.
Needless to say, it is a serious problem to have a consulting com-
pany fold in the middle of your strategy. The time you have spent 
getting its staff members up to speed on your organization will be 
lost. If the consulting firm cannot meet your fluctuating needs, you 
will have to slow down or modify your process to accommodate its 
limited capacity and capabilities.

Corporate Cultural Match
39
A large firm can provide a team of people to support your projects 
and won’t collapse if you don’t need that support for a while. Larger 
firms are also generally more stable. The fact that these companies 
are well established means that they will be more likely to be there 
for you over the long haul, and they are more likely to have special-
ists who can meet your needs and facilities that can support your 
effort.
Corporate Cultural Match
It is not easy to achieve a perfect fit between corporate cultures. You 
want to be sure that the consultancy’s technical staff will fit with 
your company’s environment. In some situations, it helps to have a 
strong figure who can walk into a confusing situation and provide 
order. In other circumstances, you may need a usability expert who 
can work with your team and smoothly create consensus. It is 
important that the consultants have some flexibility in style. It may 
be even more important that they can provide a variety of staff 
members with different personalities and working styles, so that the 
ones who best fit your corporate culture can work with your 
organization.
Many other special characteristics of organizations need to be con-
sidered. In some cases, uncomplimentary cultures present some 
advantages. For example, a very systematic and controlled culture 
might need a consultant who can break the mold, be artistic, and 
provide a different perspective. Conversely, if your organization 
lacks a systematic process, it helps to have a consultant who can 
inspire that structure. In most cases, however, similarity in cultures 
is more helpful and often leads to a more comfortable long-term 
relationship. If you have a scientific- and engineering-oriented cul-
ture, pick a usability firm that has a similar approach. While the 
consultant will work closely with you for a relatively short period, 
there will also be a less concentrated, longer-term relationship. 
Being comfortable with your consultant’s organization has value.

40
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
Specializations
Hiring a consultancy that has staff with different specializations in 
the field offers a significant advantage. People who have focused 
deeply on a given topic can answer questions in an instant.
There are many different types of specialists. Some usability profes-
sionals have experience in meeting the exact challenges of specific 
populations:
• Cross-cultural and multilingual design
• Design for the visually impaired
• Design for children
Some have experience in specific technologies:
• Mobile and embedded applications
• Gesture interfaces
• Telematics
• Voice response
• Web and responsive design
• Workstations
Others have experience with specific technical areas and topics:
• Search strategies
• Natural language dialogs
• Representation of large networks
Some staff may have particular experience in different parts of the 
user-centered design process:
• Interviewing
• UX strategy
• Innovation
• Persuasion engineering
• Complex structural design
• Usability testing

Organizational Structure
41
• Graphics
• Prototyping
UX staff also may specialize in certain types of situations and 
businesses:
• E-commerce
• Intranets
• Shrink-wrapped software
• Emerging markets
• Bottom of the pyramid (poor people)
Having consultants with a wide range of experiences at your dis-
posal allows you to draw on solutions from many contexts. For 
example, someone with cross-cultural design expertise would take 
one look and notice that your command abbreviation “S” may mean 
“save” in English, but “exit” (sortie) in French.
Organizational Structure
Look for a consulting firm with the necessary staff to fit your orga-
nization’s needs. With a small organization, it may not be difficult 
to manage all the usability work that is occurring simultaneously. 
When a larger organization is the client, the consultancy may also 
need to offer a business manager to handle contractual relation-
ships, an accounting contact to handle payment issues, and a sepa-
rate legal person to handle nondisclosure and contractual issues. 
For large-scale efforts, you have to deal with more people than just 
the usability consultants.
There will always be a primary usability lead and perhaps some 
additional usability staff on the team. In addition, it helps tremen-
dously to have an escalation channel separate from the usability 
lead. When only the usability lead serves as a contact, it can be chal-
lenging or awkward to communicate when difficulties arise in the 
consulting engagement—especially if the usability lead has created 
the problem!

42
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
Change Management Ability
The consultant must provide high-level strategic guidance in the 
organizational process. Organizations must often realign their oper-
ations to support a user-centered design process and they almost 
always have to manage resistance to change. The consultant will 
actually provide assistance in change management. Change manage-
ment refers to making changes in a planned and systematic way so 
as to make the transition to new processes easy and effective. This 
kind of guidance should include pointing out pitfalls, helping to 
identify and manage specific areas and people in need of special 
attention, and opening communication channels. The consultant 
should directly support the organizational process and have many 
examples, case histories, and research to substantiate his or her 
position.
Select a consultant who will help you meet your essential political 
goals and will defend your best interests, even at his or her own 
expense—one who will “stand in front of a freight train” for you. 
The consultant should have the ability to talk as a peer to anyone, at 
any level of the organization.
For some organizations, change management may be an important 
but not critical factor in the success of the usability implementation. 
For other organizations with a history of change management 
issues—or with highly charged changes already under way—effec-
tive change management might be a “make or break” factor in 
implementing usability.
Quality Control and Feedback
Some organizations rely on the skills of a single practitioner to 
ensure the quality of usability process deliverables. In such a case, 
there may be no standard process, review, or oversight. This is like 
the early days of programming when the work was done in a garage 
by a master programmer. If he or she was good enough, the code 
would work, but there was usually no concept of a separate and 

Ongoing Training for the Consultancy’s Staff
43
formal quality assurance process. The only concept of process 
improvement in this scenario was trial and error.
Look for a consultancy that has good methods to ensure quality. Is 
there a method of certifying staff quality and knowledge? Is there a 
review process for deliverables? Is there a process for gathering 
feedback about the quality of the design and results and improving 
from lessons learned?
Make sure the consultancy has, at a minimum, a systematic user-
centered methodology and actually follows it. Such adherence 
ensures a more reliable application of design. This methodology is 
just the minimum, however. You should seek out a consultancy that 
engages in ongoing process improvement. Provisions for quality 
assurance and process improvement indicate a more mature organi-
zation that will provide you with far better service and support.
Ongoing Training for the Consultancy’s Staff
Earlier in the chapter, we mentioned that the consultancy should 
provide training for your organization’s employees, but it is also 
important to know how current the firm keeps its staff. The usabil-
ity field is constantly adding new principles and methods. If the 
consultancy does not gather and disseminate these insights, you 
will not benefit from current best practices.
For example, usability specialists once thought that the optimal 
limit on menu size was either 7 (plus or minus 2) or 10 items [Miller 
1956]. More recent research suggests that the optimal menu size is 
more like 16–36 items, as long as they are presented in groups of not 
more than 10 items each [Paap and Roske-Hofstrand 1986]. Insights 
such as these, which are often presented at critical conferences, can 
be valuable to your projects, so you should be sure that at least some 
of the consulting firm’s staff attend these meetings. Chapter 8 lists 
some of these top conferences in the field. In addition, a continuous 
stream of useful books, articles, blogs, and e-communications can 
provide up-to-the-minute information about the UX field.

44
Chapter 2    Selecting a Usability Consultant
Selecting a consultancy that keeps its staff up-to-date on the best 
practices in usability and user experience ensures that those staff 
members can bring those practices to your organization’s emerging 
user-centered design program.
Summary
A good usability consultancy is invaluable in helping your organi-
zation transition to an efficient and thorough user-centered design 
process. It is worth spending additional time screening consulting 
firms early in your institutionalization effort to make sure that you 
choose one with the most appropriate capabilities for your 
organization.
The next chapter provides insights into how you can create a practi-
cal strategy for your efforts that includes the activities and resources 
you have begun to formulate.

45
Part II
Setup
The Setup phase establishes the infrastructure needed to complete 
efficient and professional usability work. Certainly, you could hire 
some usability staff members and put them into project teams. But 
completing this phase marks the difference between a real institu-
tionalization effort and unprofessional puttering. Without an effec-
tive strategy, training, methodology, facilities, tools, templates, and 
standards, a usability practitioner is unlikely to be successful and 
efficient.
In the Setup phase, you create a strategic plan that includes specifi-
cally sequenced steps, resources, and activities. This plan helps you 
build an infrastructure to support ongoing usability work. The 
infrastructure includes training for everyone, which provides an 
understanding of usability as well as specific skills for the design 
team. The organization also develops a user-centered design meth-
odology, integrated with the general system development life cycle. 
A user-centered process recognizes the design of the user taskflows 
and experiences as the first priority.
You also create a set of reusable questionnaires and templates, 
decide which facilities and equipment you need, and develop inter-
face design standards. The Setup phase is about building the infra-
structure so that ongoing user-centered design can be completed in 
an efficient, repeatable, and professional manner.
45

46
Part II    Setup
Quite a few components and interactions are included in the Setup 
phase. The methodology must work with internal processes, and 
the standards must work with the technology and the business 
objectives. With all these complex elements to address, you can’t 
expect everything to work out smoothly the first time. That’s why 
the showcase project is strongly recommended—to work out the 
kinks in the process and prove that it all works.

47
Chapter 3
Institutionalization Strategy
 
➤Create a strategic plan that has an overall roadmap and a 
detailed description of each activity, including objectives, 
activities, and deliverables.
 
➤Getting this plan right is critical. It is a very complex puzzle, 
specific to your situation.
 
➤Select and sequence activities to optimize practicality, effi-
ciency, and support for cultural change.
 
➤You can bootstrap the usability effort. The benefits of the 
small early activities often can fund the larger tasks of estab-
lishing infrastructure and an internal team.
 
➤Let’s avoid these strategies that do not work.
With all the excitement and pressure around user experience design, 
it can be difficult to take the time to strategize. But we have learned 
that the old saying, “Well begun is half done,” holds true with UX 
design. A strategy for the institutionalization of UX design will lay 
out the plan and ensure that every component of it happens at the 
right level of investment, with the right tuning of the deliverable, 
and the right timing (Figure 3-1).

48
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
Sample Strategy—Unisom Pvt., Ltd.
Usability Institutionalization Strategy for January–June
Projects
Organized by
Details
Cost
Training Plan
DESEC 
Training
Four open presentations of the 
Basic Usability Course (two 
in Washington office, one in 
Colorado, and one in Texas). 
Schedule ASAP.
About 
$40,000
TNF 
Development 
T. Smith, Lead
Two presentations of Web 
Design class (Washington office). 
Openings for 25 people per course. 
Schedule ASAP.
$20,000
Methodology
TNF 
Development 
T. Smith, Lead
Purchase HFI Framework and 
integrate with current RUP process. 
Target completion by Feb. 1.
$30,000
Facilities, 
Tools, and 
Templates
TNF Purchasing 
F. Chavan, Lead
Agreements to use testing facilities 
in Washington and Texas. Target 
completion by Feb. 1.
None 
until 
used
TNF 
Development 
T. Smith, Lead
Prepare customized set of testing 
and PET research questionnaires 
customized to our environment. 
Target completion by April 1.
$40,000
Standards
TNF 
Development 
T. Smith, Lead
Develop customized interface 
standard to cover our public Web 
presence, extranet, and intranet. 
Target completion by March 15.
$140,000
Showcase 
Projects
T. Lam, 
Development 
Manager
New expense reporting system 
for intranet. To be completed as 
Showcase Project. Expected start—
June 1.
About 
$175,000
S. Chandra, 
Development 
Manager
Public website module for new 
member registration. To be 
completed as Showcase Project. 
Expected start—June 15.
About 
$150,000
Organization 
and Staffing
Office of the 
President
Create initial concept for 
organizational structure and 
staffing levels. Target completion 
by May 15 for presentation at 
Director’s Conference.
About 
$25,000
Personnel 
Department 
D. Lang, Lead
Recruit head of central usability 
team. Target—start by April 1, 
sooner if feasible.
About 
$130,000 
per year
Figure 3-1: Sample strategy for institutionalizing user experience design

49
Institutionalization Strategy 
Without question, the executive champion must outline and own a 
written strategy for setting up and maintaining the UX practice. 
Nevertheless, this executive will not be equipped to create the strat-
egy alone. He or she may have insights into the range of possibili-
ties for a user-centered design practice as well as the priorities of the 
organization, but an expert will be needed to help set up the pro-
gram. That expert cannot just be a good user experience designer—
you need someone familiar with the issues in setting up a practice.
In some situations, you may be setting up a practice from scratch. 
More likely, you will be taking a limited internal capability and 
evolving it into a more mature, effective operation. In either case, 
there must be a roadmap that defines the specific activities needed 
(Figure 3-2). Each activity needs clear and detailed descriptions 
(Figure 3-3). It is not enough to say to your team, “We are going to 
develop a methodological standard”; instead, you need to docu-
ment the exact focus of the standard.
Figure 3-2: Sample roadmaps for institutionalizing user experience design

50
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
Creating a strategy could take a few weeks, or in a large compli-
cated operation it might take several months. It is always necessary 
to have a good picture of the current user experience design capa-
bilities (to identify gaps), the current design quality (to prove the 
value of improvements), and the organizational culture (as execu-
tive championship, governance, and organizational structure are 
likely to be key challenges). With this foundation, it is possible to 
create a list of work packages needed and then sequence these as a 
roadmap.
This chapter indicates some of the key considerations and tradeoffs 
to be aware of when carefully composing a strategy. No simple for-
mula works in all environments, but it’s important to get your strat-
egy right. A poor strategic plan can doom your institutionalization 
effort.
Figure 3-3: Sample detailed write-up for institutionalizing 
user experience design

What to Consider When Developing the Strategic Plan
51
What to Consider When Developing 
the Strategic Plan
Putting a mature user experience design practice in place can be a 
lot like changing an airplane’s wings while it is in flight. There is a 
blizzard of current projects that have to be supported. At the same 
time, you need to put capabilities into place. While this situation 
might seem daunting, it is actually a good place to be (assuming 
you have the resources to avoid getting buried under the immediate 
tactical needs). Ideally, you can have a real synergy between tactical 
programs and building capabilities. Recognize that your tactical 
programs can serve as showcases through which the value of 
mature user experience design can be demonstrated. It is odd: you 
can show a dozen industry examples of the value of user experience 
design to executives, but they never seem to have the impact of a 
single internal project. It is particularly useful when you have some 
programs that try to get by without user experience design, and 
perhaps others that a marketing firm and perhaps some good visual 
designers have attempted to help make customer-centered. When 
these efforts are compared with serious user experience design, the 
results usually make a compelling case for UX institutionalization.
Concurrent showcase projects also have value beyond conveying 
the value of user experience design. They allow you to refine and 
validate the infrastructure created in your capabilities-building pro-
gram. You can apply the methods and standards and see if they 
work smoothly in your environment, and verify whether your staff 
can really complete designated activities. In the end, then, it is a 
major benefit to have parallel tracks of tactical work and capabilities 
building.
While it may take two years to complete your overall institutional-
ization effort, you will see benefits from your tactical work almost 
immediately. Moreover, the growth in user experience design infra-
structure will start to pay off within a few months. The documented 
plan itself can be a short-term program with a duration of as little as 
three months or as long as two years. In any event, there should 
always be a written strategy covering the current growth path of the 
user experience design operation.

52
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
Your strategy must identify the planned activities, time frame, 
resources, and responsible entities in your organization and should 
address the following questions:
• Which sequence of usability initiatives will work best? Al-
though some steps must be completed before others, you have 
choices with some of the sequence decisions you make.
• Have you considered your environment? How will your orga-
nizational culture affect the way you implement your user ex-
perience design practice?
• What are your most pressing projects, concerns, and objec-
tives? As you begin the process of institutionalizing user ex-
perience design, you can have it unfold in a way that meets 
your most important issues.
• Are there people or units that particularly need to get on board? 
Pockets of resistance exist in every organization. Iden tifying 
yours and building them into your strategic plan is  critical.
The strategy essentially describes who will be responsible in your 
organization and what they will be doing. This concept seems sim-
ple, but the decisions you make have significant implications. The 
following sections cover the main considerations involved in select-
ing the who and what for your strategy. Your usability consultant 
may be able to help you think about these issues and develop the 
best strategy for your environment.
A Proactive Organization
As you start the institutionalization effort, it is essential to set up a 
proactive effort. It is easy to start putting out the numerous fires of 
poor usability and have a small dedicated staff work to fix the tidal 
wave of bad designs, one by one. Be forewarned—this approach is 
guaranteed to fail. It is like having doctors administer to all the 
health needs of the community, from taking temperatures and 
applying bandages to transporting patients and performing sur-
gery. The medical community can’t work that way, and neither can 
your user experience design staff.

Coordinating Internal Staff and Consultants
53
The medical community has paramedics, nurses, and physician 
assistants to help with the range of its activities. For your company’s 
strategy, you need to build a similar set of facilities to create a pro-
active organization. This is the only way to ensure routine usability.
Coordinating Internal Staff and Consultants
In Chapter 2, we described why your organization should consider 
using an outside usability consultant and how to choose one. Even 
with all the value that a consultant can bring to an organization, 
however, internal staff remain invaluable. Using internal staff costs 
less than hiring local consultants, to be sure—but there are far more 
advantages related to this decision than simply the cost. Internal 
staff members are the only people able to focus fully on business 
content and strategy within the company. They can learn the subject 
matter deeply, or they may already know it. As a consequence, they 
can be more efficient in design work. They can also develop a set of 
instruments and procedures that really fit perfectly with the issues 
the company faces. For example, if your organization is in the medi-
cal field, staff members will be aware of the latest FDA require-
ments. If your organization is in customer service, the staff will 
know the history of issues with workstation and voice response sys-
tem integration. They know from first-hand experience what to 
attend to in the next release. Having the greatest familiarity with 
your customers, internal staff members can focus on building a 
shared model of the customers’ ecosystem.
The global best practice for user experience design is to have it done 
primarily by an internal group, possibly with the supplemental sup-
port of vendors. Hiring a set of disparate vendors ensures a hodge-
podge of incompatible, misaligned results.
Internal staff members also have an advantage when it comes to UX 
design institutionalization because they work in the organization on 
a long-term basis. They have established relationships with employ-
ees and groups within the company that are not involved in usabil-
ity. Perhaps most importantly, they know the opinion leaders and 
sources of power in the organization, so they can often achieve a 

54
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
level of consensus and buy-in that consultants can’t match. Internal 
staff also hold you accountable to your user experience design 
goals: while it is all too easy to tell a consultant, “Yes, we will accom-
plish user-centered design now,” and then ignore the issue the next 
week after the consultant has gone, the internal group is in a posi-
tion to deeply embed the usability perspective into the organization 
over the long term.
It is possible to have supplemental support from vendors. Organi-
zations vary a great deal, so it is vital that your strategy fits your 
company culture. For example, some companies may be accus-
tomed to having consultants work closely but independently, while 
others may want a consultant to just coach staff briefly or may pre-
fer to do all the work with in-house staff. In every modality, how-
ever, there must be a strong internal user experience design group 
that maintains standards, methods, a persistent knowledge base, 
and strong quality assurance.
The Importance of Sequence
This book presents phases and activities for institutionalizing 
usability. Most companies modify this process somewhat. As you 
Consultant and Internal Group Mix
Todd Gross, Ph.D., former Director—Corporate Statistics 
and Human Factors, Medtronic MiniMed
At Medtronic MiniMed, we used a mix of in-house and outside 
resources to complete our human factors projects. Outside con-
sulting offered several benefits. Consultants could focus exclu-
sively on our projects, whereas in-house personnel were often 
faced with multiple competing priorities. Consulting firms also 
offered greater depth of resources and expertise to dedicate to 
a project. This allowed them to complete the projects more 

The Importance of Sequence
55
quickly and with more comprehensive output than in-house 
staff can generate.
Another benefit of outside consultants is that they brought a 
fresh perspective to a project. Their experience with a broad 
range of products and applications allowed them to present 
recommendations in a way that was valuable. There’s some-
thing about hearing opinions from an outside entity—the good 
news sounds better and the bad news has greater credibility 
than when in-house personnel present it. It’s sort of like if a 
date tells you that you dress funny, you might give that greater 
credence than if your mother tells you the same thing.
In my experience, this mixture of outside consultants and inter-
nal staff can produce a powerful alliance to promote the use of 
human factors knowledge throughout the organization. I like 
the idea of having a department that provides core resources—
I think that, on a long-range basis, manufacturers need to have 
that internal core. But the in-house staff can be complemented 
by a strong consulting relationship, especially for a company 
like Medtronic MiniMed, which makes devices with a broad 
range of human factors issues. Some of the devices are purely 
mechanical and others are electronic, with both hardware and 
software interface issues. This product diversity requires a cor-
responding wide range of human factors approaches in both 
design and evaluation. In addition, the FDA has continued to 
champion, and even mandate, the use of human factors during 
product development and usability testing. Knowledgeable 
consultants can supplement internal staff’s experience with 
these regulatory requirements.
It is truly exciting to see the dynamic that can develop between 
internal and external team members, with in-house content ex-
perts providing the raw material, in the form of product-line 
knowledge and development history, and consultants helping 
tweak both product design and usability evaluation plans, 
combining to create a cohesive and effective strategy.

56
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
develop your own strategy, be sure to consider the sequence of 
activities that will make the most sense for your environment.
Many logical connections are built into the institutionalization 
methodology described in this book. For instance, keep the follow-
ing sequences in mind:
• Have your strategy in place before the infrastructure setup be-
gins; otherwise, you will spend money in an inefficient and 
uncoordinated way.
• Have standards in place before starting projects; other wise, 
you will create a larger installed base of noncompliant 
designs.
• Get the upfront design process working before doing usabil-
ity testing so that testing can fine-tune reasonable designs in-
stead of documenting designs that are not even close to 
correct.
• Finalize your methodology and organizational design before 
you start the hiring process so you can be sure to hire user-
centered design staff with the right skills and abilities.
These interdependencies are important and should always be con-
sidered when planning your strategy. It is also important to use the 
sequence to maintain flexibility. As in a chess game, it is unwise to 
move in a way that unnecessarily closes off options.
To demonstrate the value of considering sequence, let’s consider 
when to hire usability staff. It’s often better to delay full-scale hiring 
of usability staff until you have a formal methodology documented 
and the work within that organization allocated within the organi-
zation. You might find that with mentoring and oversight, trained 
business analysts can handle detailed design. This approach leads 
to a very different staffing requirement than large-scale hiring.
Reacting to Past Events
Many organizations have had bad experiences with consultants, 
making it difficult for them to work with a usability consultant. The 
new consultant may say that he or she is different—but then the 
previous consultant may have made the same claim.

Targets of Opportunity
57
If you have a negative history with outside consultants, it is critical to 
go about the relationship-building process more slowly. You may 
need to start with very small projects. Take time to gain trust and put 
the bad experience well in the past. The staff may also need much 
more explanation about the consultant’s conclusions. There is never a 
time when people should take user experience design recommenda-
tions on trust—they should always be given the full rationale and 
research data behind each recommendation. Allow extra time for this.
Another past event that should trigger reflection is a difficult wake-up 
call for the organization when a design failed. This otherwise negative 
experience can be a resource that provides momentum for change in 
the organization. However, such challenges can also create too much 
drive. Overall, it is best to avoid strategies that are driven by a sense of 
panic. They rarely work well in the long term. If you are reacting to a 
wake-up call, avoid taking on lots of projects. Instead, select a few key 
programs and make sure they are completed successfully.
Targets of Opportunity
The greatest drivers for differences in strategy are existing tactical 
opportunities. It is important to establish a plan and shift the 
sequence of institutionalization to take advantage of the organiza-
tion’s current activities.
You might find that you can get training in conjunction with another 
company in your area, so training might be moved to meet this 
schedule.
You might find that you are installing a revised system develop-
ment methodology. This is a great time to add a user-centered pro-
cess to supplement the new method, instead of having staff 
members learn the system-centered method first and then learn 
about user-centered design separately.
You might select a showcase project because it is visible, or because 
the staff members are very interested in usability, or because the 
project is small and manageable and needs to start at the right time 
for the usability initiative.

58
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
Perhaps you have an opportunity to hire a very skilled usability 
specialist who is a good fit for your culture. Usability staff with 
skills and compatibility are very hard to find and may be on the 
market only for days. If unique opportunities are present, mold 
your strategy to hire sooner.
Clearly, as you establish your strategy, you must shape it to your 
opportunities and also expect some fine-tuning to occur as new 
opportunities arise.
Slower Can Be Better
Achieving a successful institutionalization program re quires time 
and patience. There is an uncomfortable joke in aviation that cap-
tures this principle quite well. A plane called the “V-Tailed Doctor 
Killer” has a funny tail design, but is nonetheless a powerful and 
complicated aircraft. Many doctors have the money to buy such a 
machine, but they do not have the time or experience to use it safely. 
They can fly the plane under normal and comfortable circum-
stances, but in more dangerous and pressure-filled moments, they 
lose control.
It is much the same with a user experience design practice. You can 
buy a complete user experience design infrastructure. You can 
implement training, methodology, standards, tools, projects, and 
hiring. It takes a great deal of effort and money to put these ele-
ments in place, but until the organization has had time to fully 
digest each intervention and each component of the infrastructure, 
there is little value in it. It is all too easy to bite off too much and 
then think you are well fed. Take your time in implementing usabil-
ity, and build that time into your strategy.
Phasing in Design Standards
In your strategic plan, make sure you get interface design standards 
in place early. Good design standards are so valuable that they can 
be justified almost anytime there will be significant and ongoing 

Phasing in Design Standards
59
development. Standards save development time—and there is a real 
increase in expenses when developers must spend time reinventing 
the wheel. When there are no standards, it is as though you can hear 
a clock ticking. Also, developers do not have the time, skill, or atten-
tion to dedicate to creating a design that a standards team has. There-
fore, developers’ designs are almost certain to be suboptimal. 
The biggest concern, however, is that current projects completed 
without standards will lead to a growing set of noncompliant 
screens. These screens must then be modified to bring them into 
compliance. This is a daunting task, and no company ever seems to 
do it all at once. Instead, noncompliant designs are grandfathered 
in. They are brought into compliance with the standard only when 
they are being revised as part of some renovation or enhancement 
program. This makes the conversion less daunting and spreads the 
cost over years. While this tactic might seem like the rational thing 
to do, it is quite costly to let developers keep churning out nonstan-
dard designs while you delay standards development.
Aside from the costs of eventually converting the designs, working 
with a committee that represents an installed base of noncompliant 
and diverse designs can create a psychological drag on the process 
of creating standards. You can see each committee member judging 
the concepts based on how closely they match his or her own 
designs or the designs of his or her department. These committee 
members cannot see the ergonomic quality of the new, standards-
based designs, and they cannot interpret the value of the new design 
to the company; instead, they are simply entrenched in defending 
their past decisions.
These groups can be hard to work with. You end up painstakingly 
having to take apart those past designs one by one. Typically, you 
have to show the ergonomic problems with the old designs, and 
the people involved must go through the process of accepting that 
they created an imperfect design and realizing that their designs 
need changes.
Providing a training class for the committee members leads to an infi-
nitely smoother process. With training, they can see the problems 
with their designs themselves. Nevertheless, the larger the installed 
base, the more staff members have a vested attachment to the designs, 

60
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
and the more visceral resistance to making changes they are likely to 
demonstrate. Of course, you should avoid making unnecessary 
changes in past design conventions. Recognize, however, that people 
can develop powerful arguments for retaining very poor designs.
Key Groups for Support or Resistance
The institutionalization of user experience requires a set of discrete 
activities and resources, but the key to success does not lie in these 
accomplishments, but rather in the understanding and beliefs of the 
people within the organization. It is not unusual for companies to 
spend six figures on a usability testing lab, only to see it sit unused. 
Without the acceptance of user experience as a focus of concern by 
the people in the organization, there will be no real success.
The people in your organization can be classified into a number of 
key groups from the viewpoint of institutionalization. First, there 
are the early adopters, easily excited about usability, who almost 
instantly grasp the concept, methods, principles, process, and value 
of user experience. The earliest stages of the institutionalization 
effort need to focus on identifying these people and getting them on 
board. They will provide early momentum. As time goes on, you 
will need to worry about keeping them motivated and preventing 
them from feeling too frustrated with the pace of the overall organi-
zation. If they become bitter, they will alienate others, so keep them 
seeing successes.
A second key group is the power structure within the company. In a 
sense, the progress of institutionalization is wholly reflected in this 
group’s level of understanding and appreciation. As user-centered 
design becomes a given from the perspective of the executive suite, 
impediments will melt, resources will appear, and success will be 
assured. If the executives are indifferent, long-term success is essen-
tially impossible. Reaching these players is key. Put effort into 
including them in the design process (as experts in strategic direc-
tion and brainstorming), communicating successes, and providing 
education. You do not need these leaders to do the design work, but 
they should help you work on the organization’s process of design.

Key Groups for Support or Resistance
61
When executives get involved in design, they follow several pat-
terns. Some may attempt to micromanage the entire process or 
single-handedly reinvent the entire human engineering profession 
and literature. Others may drop into the design pro cess periodically 
and make recommendations. This can be quite detrimental, but the 
worst situation is the executive who hands down design edicts from 
on high. These executives are the people who want to see “a big red 
area at the top” or “a tree view at the left.”
These executives are usually so powerful that the design team feels 
forced to follow their orders precisely, rarely with a positive impact. 
Such executives become an all-powerful design constraint—and the 
design team already has enough constraints. Executives need to 
Executive Support for Usability within AT&T
Feliça Selenko, Former Principal Technical Staff Member, AT&T
In an employee message to the people of AT&T, Dave Dorman, 
AT&T CEO, states, “AT&T has an important initiative under 
way to dramatically improve our ‘customer lifecycle’ pro-
cesses. The intent of this effort is to drive higher levels of cus-
tomer satisfaction and retention, and differentiate AT&T from 
the rest of our industry. By removing errors and the resulting 
rework, we reduce cycle time, improve customer satisfaction, 
and re duce our costs of doing business.” That sentiment is re-
flected in every set of executive goals and objectives I have 
seen this year—that is, optimizing the customer experience is 
always one of the most important goals/objectives.
Although AT&T executives are using the term customer experi-
ence, which is broader than usability, goals/objectives focusing 
on the automation of manual processes, optimizing the cus-
tomer’s self-serve experience via easy-to-use Web tools, and 
removing errors from processes and interactions to reduce re-
work and improve cycle times are all aspects of the customer 
experience impacted by usability engineering.

62
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
reinforce the need for user-centered de sign and the value of opti-
mizing user experience, performance, and design consistency, but 
they should never specify a design feature. Even with great experi-
ence and training, it is quite difficult for a consultant to select any 
substantive design decision that can be mandated in every situa-
tion, so executives should certainly not attempt to do so.
A third important group is the people who are against usability, or 
the “naysayers.” It might seem odd to think that there could possibly 
be people like this in the modern-day business world, but there are. 
Down deep, they do not want to lose control of the design process. 
They want to continue to enjoy designing things they like, without 
needing to validate that the users can understand, use, or appreciate 
the result. There is a joyful freedom gained just from creating elegant 
code, while there is an unpleasant messiness to meeting the inconsis-
tent, ambiguous needs of users. Naysayers won’t admit to this type 
of thinking, but it is often what really drives their criticism.
Naysayers can come from different groups. Marketing staff mem-
bers might think things will go well if they make sites that wiggle 
and dazzle users (although users often consider such sites “sales-y” 
and disreputable). Graphic artists might want to concentrate almost 
wholly on the beauty of the design and not worry about whether it 
can be navigated and operated easily. Systems coders might want to 
use the easiest technological route or perhaps the latest and coolest 
technological innovation.
Rather than seeing the benefit of referring to user needs and limita-
tions as they create a design, naysayers will suggest that systematic 
user-centered design “takes too much time.” Expect them to ques-
tion the ROI of usability work. (In response, you might ask them if 
they have ever seen an ROI calculation for having a database 
designed by professionals instead of by amateurs.) Naysayers may 
suggest that, because their design intuition is so good, they can cre-
ate better user interfaces than the ones based on ergonomic princi-
ples and user-centered design. Users will certainly like their designs 
more, these folks will claim. They will suggest that good usability 
cannot be achieved within technical constraints. If you point out 
problems in past designs, they will often reference past technical 
constraints that were recently solved by new technology.

Training
63
Your strategy must eventually address these naysayers. They will 
listen to proclamations about user experience by executives, but 
think and act as if it is just the management buzzword of the month. 
(After paying it lip service, they will try to forget it.) They will pay 
some attention to presentations demonstrating the value of usabil-
ity in pilot projects, and take more interest in presentations that 
include testimonials from other nay sayers saying they saw value 
and practicality in the user-centered design process.
But one strategy works best. Most of these naysayers will be problem-
solvers by nature. They will love to solve the most complex develop-
ment challenges, and they will feel effective when they can break 
through these challenges and succeed. A breakthrough is possible 
when these people are tasked with finding a way to meet a customer 
need; they will find that usability is fun, and that it offers them a 
whole new set of puzzles to solve. No amount of ROI calculation or 
explanation will match that thrill.
The final key group comprises the masses in the development 
community—the mainstream developers. Once a strong core 
group is established to support usability, the members of that core 
group must begin the process of evangelizing and mentoring other 
developers. This effort will take some time because there are many 
mainstream devel opers, and they change slowly. Nevertheless, 
institutionalization is established only when this mass of develop-
ers has been reached. They will be swept up in new projects that 
apply user experience design practices. In addition, they will ben-
efit from training and presentations. The mass of developers can 
also be reached by a set of online methods and tools presented on 
a company’s intranet. Finally, consider including user experience 
as a part of your training program.
Training
While training is not a magic pill, it is a major pillar of the institu-
tionalization effort. You may need several levels of training—for 
more information, see Chapter 8. Training provides widespread 
awareness of usability issues and instills a crucial element of 

64
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
motivation in the early stages of institutionalization. It can also be 
used to educate executives and evangelize the value of user 
experience.
Training provides skills for developers who must participate in 
user-centered design. It is true that the fine points of usability engi-
neering seem to be best shared by mentoring, but without training 
in the basics, the mentoring process is long and frustrating. Skills-
level training is really required.
Methodology and Infrastructure
It is common to see companies hire a few usability people and toss 
them into the design environment. It is like deciding that you want 
to have metal weapons and hiring a few metal workers. Certainly, 
they can set up a few huts with hand-driven furnaces and can begin 
work with a hammer and anvil. But if you want both efficiency and 
quality, you need to build a modern factory—then when you toss 
the metal workers into the factory, you can expect good results.
Without a user-centered design methodology, the development 
team members will end up working tactically. They will think of 
some of the right things to do, and they will have a positive impact, 
but a systematic approach will be more thorough and more efficient. 
For this reason, it makes sense to fit a user-centered process to your 
current development life cycle. Do this early, because time spent 
without a structured process is likely to be inefficient.
Once you’ve chosen a methodology, you can move toward estab-
lishing a toolkit that supports the methodology. Facilities, tools, and 
templates make work on the user experience design engineering 
process even more efficient. These “modern machines” lead to qual-
ity and efficiency. Chapter 4 provides more information on method-
ology, while Chapter 7 provides details on facilities, tools, and 
templates.

Levels of Investment
65
The Project Path
Selecting the showcase projects to work on first is one of the big-
gest decisions in the strategic plan. Obviously, you must select a 
project that is just starting so you can demonstrate the whole pro-
cess. You should also select a project of manageable size and dura-
tion. It helps little to tackle a showcase project that won’t be 
completed for many years.
It is equally important that the showcase project have significant 
user experience design objectives. Find a project with lots of users to 
whom user experience and performance is important. Chapter 13 
covers in detail what to look for when selecting a showcase project.
Levels of Investment
User experience institutionalization, infrastructure, projects, and 
staffing are not free. It costs less in the long run to complete designs 
with the right methods and tools, but in the short run, an invest-
ment is required. It is valuable to calculate the ROI for implement-
ing usability within your organization. Know the specific ways that 
user experience design will pay off.
The investment in user experience can be staged and progressive. 
For example, in my experience, the investment in an expert review 
or usability test will be in the range of $35,000 to 70,000 and can 
motivate managers to get serious about user experience design. The 
cost of the initial setup of a usability program for a large company 
by a consultant is typically about $800,000 to $1.5 million. The cost 
of establishing a UX design group and supporting it might be 
$1 million to $5 million annually.1 Clearly, then, starting a usability 
program is a progressive process: each step should instill the 
1. This figure, along with the others in this paragraph, is based on HFI’s 20 years of experience 
with hundreds of clients across thousands of user-centered design projects.

66
Chapter 3    Institutionalization Strategy
confidence to go ahead with the next level of investment, and each 
step should fund the next.
Summary
Your attempts to make customer-centered design become routine 
will require significant changes throughout your company. A practi-
cal, high-level strategy will create the organization necessary to 
bring your decision making to the next level. This is the transition 
from a piecemeal and immature usability capability to a mature and 
well-managed process. The next chapter provides more details 
about the training element of your strategy.

67
Chapter 4
Methodology
 
➤A methodological standard describes how to do user- 
centered design—select a good methodology that will work 
for your organization.
 
➤You probably already have a system development life cycle 
in place, but it is probably not a user-centered methodology. 
You may need to retrofit a user-centered process onto or in 
front of the current technical methodology.
 
➤Implement a quick test of your life cycle. Is it user-centered? 
Take the test in this chapter.
 
➤Review The HFI Framework 7 as an example of a proven 
user-centered process.
Some people do not like standard development methodologies. 
They prefer to work with each project and figure out what is needed 
for that one project without thinking about standard practices. They 
may feel that any inefficiency and non repeatability are inherent to 
the creative process.
With a user-centered design process or methodology in place, the 
critical steps to make a product usable will not be missed. All projects 
will follow a similar method, ensuring a standard level of quality.

68
Chapter 4    Methodology
A methodological standard primarily plays the role of a memory 
jogger. It makes sure that you do not forget to complete some of the 
hundreds of major steps needed for good design. Implementing a 
methodology also provides your company with a mature process—
that is, a systematic methodology that can be organized, supported 
with tools, monitored, and improved. A standard process of user-
centered design is essential, and the methodology you choose or 
develop must enable you to be reliable, successful, and efficient in 
your design process.
A methodology is also the core of your institutionalization effort. 
Because many of the other steps to institutionalization are depen-
dent on the methodology project, it is often the first thing that gets 
done. The methodology program will not only define what needs to 
be done, but also identify which groups and class of staff will do 
each type of work. If you decide to have your business analysts do 
much of the detailed design work (generally with mentoring from 
user experience design professionals), then you will need training 
for those business analysts. Doing the methodology first, as you 
might imagine, is often a good plan.
This chapter describes how to choose a methodology and outlines 
some of the challenges you may face as you integrate it into your 
current development process.
What to Look for in a User-Centered Methodology
Mature development organizations today use a defined system 
devel opment life cycle for software development. That means they 
have a plan for developing software that includes an entire cycle 
spanning from feasibility to programming to implementation. Some 
of these are industry standards with software tools available, such 
as the Agile approach and the Rational Unified Process (RUP), while 
others are proprietary processes developed within companies. 
Although some software development life cycles may mention 
usability, none seems to provide the comprehensive set of steps nec-
essary to follow a user- centered design process. Software develop-
ment life-cycle methodologies concentrate on the technical aspects 

What to Look for in a User-Centered Methodology
69
of building a software product, as they should. They do not make 
engineering the user experience and associated tasks the primary 
focus of development, which means they build applications from 
the technology and data, in side out. User-centered design is a differ-
ent way to approach development: it concentrates on the user and 
the user tasks, rather than on technical and programming issues. 
Following a user-centered design process is the only way to reliably 
create practical, useful, usable, and satisfying technology products. 
In a user-centered process, you design the user experience first, and 
then let it drive the technology (as shown in Figure 4-1).
Almost all practitioners in the field agree on the general steps 
required to follow a user-centered design process. You can docu-
ment these steps yourself and build your own user-centered design 
process. Accomplishing this feat, however, may be slow, expensive, 
and time-consuming. You should undertake this task only if you 
have senior usability staff with many years of experience, as that 
Figure 4-1: The “old” technical-centered solution needs 
to be replaced by the “new” user-centered solution

70
Chapter 4    Methodology
approach will ensure you are following industry best practices. In 
most cases, however, you are far better off buying a process and 
then customizing it for your organization.
Your user-centered process affects the way functional specifi cations 
are created. For example, you will craft the user taskflows before 
you worry too much about the database structures. The user-
centered process will mostly bolt onto the front of your technology 
process. Then throughout the software development process, steps 
connect the user-centered process to the work that the technical staff 
is doing as well as to the documents that serve as input to the pro-
gramming staff. In addition, many linkages ensure that the methods 
stay coordinated. Document handoffs need to be identified at a 
detailed level.
This is not to say that technical limitations are ignored in the early 
design phases. Interface designers need to know about the technical 
issues for a particular project. They need to understand what the 
technology can and cannot do to ensure that they have used the 
technology to the fullest extent and without designing something 
that will prove difficult to implement. The primary concern here, 
however, is meeting the customers’ needs. You need to engineer the 
user experience and performance and derive the user interface 
structure to support this user taskflow. At that point, the technical 
staff can design the software to support the user interface design. 
This effort might require pulling together data from a dozen servers 
to provide a summary view when entering the site, using graphic 
preloads to shorten the download time on a website, or using cook-
ies so that users get book offers that relate to their needs. The tech-
nology has a huge role to play, but it needs to remain focused on the 
needs of the users.
Select a user-centered methodology that meets the following 
criteria:
• The methodology must be comprehensive. It is not acceptable to 
have a process that relies on usability testing alone—it must 
address the whole life cycle.
• It must be user-centered. The methodology must be firmly 
grounded in designing for an optimal user experience and 

What to Look for in a User-Centered Methodology
71
performance first, and the interface design and technology 
must be based on user needs. It must take those user needs 
into account and must actually access representative users to 
obtain data supporting the design and feedback.
• It must have a complete set of activities defined and deliverable doc-
uments required. The methodology should not be a loose col-
lection of ideas but rather a specific set of activities with actual 
documentation throughout the process.
• It must fit with corporate realities. Ill-defined or changing busi-
ness objects are by far the most important cause of feature 
creep. The user-centered design process needs to include steps 
that bring together the diverse strategic views and ideas of 
your organi zation’s stakeholders. There need to be activities 
in the process to ensure that all key stakeholders contribute 
and feel heard.
• It must include more advanced user experience design activities, if 
appropriate. Today, methods that simply ensure usability are 
usually no longer sufficient. As UX practitioners, we need to 
deal with the complexities of cross-channel alignment and 
integration—so there needs to be a UX strategy. We are often 
asked to participate in systematic innovation programs—so 
we need innovation methods and not just a general intention 
to be innovative. We need to design for conversion by apply-
ing persuasion engineering methods. For most organiza-
tions, all of these capabilities must be part of the current 
methodology.
• It must be a good fit for your organization’s size and criticality of 
work. Large organizations that build large and critical applica-
tions should have a more thorough process and more detailed 
documentation.
• It should be supported. While it is wonderful to have a process 
described in a book, implementation requires much more. It re-
quires training, templates, tools, and a set of support services. It 
is a daunting challenge to create all of these components or cob-
ble them together from a diverse set of sources. You might find 
a pretty good user-centered design methodology—you might 
get it from the Web or from a friend. Then, of course, you need 

72
Chapter 4    Methodology
to determine what is required to support that methodology. Ex-
pect to devote a good half-year of work to this process if you 
have to create all the deliverable document formats, question-
naires, tools, and standards, and another half-year to develop 
training to support the standard.
• It must be able to work with your current development life cycle. 
This is no small task, and is discussed later in this chapter.
• The methodology must have a cross-cultural localiza tion process 
through which the design is evaluated for language and cul-
ture issues (if you are doing cross-cultural or international 
development).
Integrating Usability into the Development Cycle
Janice Nall, Managing Director, Atlanta, Danya International 
Former Chief, Communication Technologies Branch, 
National Cancer Institute
We really want usability to be so integrated into the develop-
ment cycle that it’s just like graphics: It’s just a process, and it’s 
where you insert it into the process that matters. It’s not at the 
end—when it’s ready to go out the door—but rather at the very 
beginning. We just want to make usability mainstream and not 
constantly have to argue the cause. We are still in that mode; 
we feel like we have to prove ourselves every day.
If we can get it into the next realm where we can take it to the 
next step, where we are not spending all the time justifying 
why we need to do it, we can pursue research to get answers to 
the questions that don’t have answers. I think there is a huge 
interest in really pushing the science—from our end certainly, 
but from across the federal government as well. We must make 
better-informed decisions and start advancing the field, shar-
ing that knowledge and really disseminating what all of us are 
learning effectively.

An Outline of The HFI Framework
73
An Outline of The HFI Framework
To give a sense of what a user-centered methodology should 
include, this section outlines The HFI Framework, a methodology 
based on the practices that have evolved at HFI over the last 30 
years. Driven by cycles of data gathering and refinement, this 
method pulls in the knowledge and vision of the organization and 
harmonizes them with user needs and limitations. This solid pro-
cess for ensuring quality design includes designing screens by using 
templates (instead of “reinventing the wheel” each time) and sup-
ports deployment and localization to different cultures. It covers the 
whole thread of user experience design work that starts with execu-
tive intent, and runs through UX strategy, design, and continuous 
improvement. If the thread is broken in an organization, sound 
executive ideas about what is needed for success will eventually fall 
to the floor, and the design will become nothing more than a set of 
functions only roughly associated with the intended organizational 
direction. We follow this process consistently at HFI and have inte-
grated it in practice with almost every commercial system develop-
ment process and hundreds of bespoke methods.
The technical part of our ISO certification is based on following this 
process.
Figure 4-2 shows an overview of The HFI Framework. The first col-
umn lists needs that are fulfilled, and the second column lists 
engagements we use to fulfill those needs. The last column outlines 
the business need that is being fulfilled. Not every type of engage-
ment gets completed on every program. Instead, what is important 
is a coherent set of engagements ensuring that the thread between 
executive intent and design is unbroken.
Strategy and Innovation
The input into this work is the executive intent. Executives have 
various types of intent statements, as the following examples 
suggest:
• Reduce service calls and return of tickets in error
• Migrate customers to digital self-service channels

74
Chapter 4    Methodology
• Increase conversion and market share by 40%
• Gain a 20% share of the mobile market in Kenya
It is the executive’s job to come up with these types of desires. But 
then as we start our UX strategy program, we must ask the hard 
question: “How is that going to happen?” We might want to migrate 
customers to digital self-service. But that won’t happen by just cre-
ating a self-service facility. Nor will it happen—on a large scale—by 
just making the self-service website easy to use. First, we need to 
determine how to motivate customers. Where a decade ago the 
journey of a major development program might start with a discus-
sion of the technological framework for the development, today it 
starts with work on the customer’s motivation. Once the customer’s 
motivation is understood, then we need to see how that target moti-
vational experience can be supported with the wide range of avail-
able channels (Figure 4-3). Success generally requires coordination 
of applications, across various channels. There may be a physical 
Figure 4-2: The HFI Framework

An Outline of The HFI Framework
75
store and a call center. In the end, the whole ecosystem solution 
needs to be simple to understand and a good fit for the capabilities 
and limitations of the various channels.
While it is common to find organizations that do strategy work, in 
the end they deliver only generalities—and those at a very high 
price. At HFI, we always illustrate a motivational and cross-channel 
solution with conceptual designs. This concretizes the recommen-
dations. In the end, those concepts become the initial foundation for 
ongoing structural design.
The UX strategy is likely to spawn one or more innovation pro-
grams, identifying areas that need innovation in the business model 
or product design. Many organizations try to innovate by asking 
their staff to be innovative—they might provide a quick training 
program on “thinking outside the box,” for example. In reality, a 
request for lateral thinking is quite different from industrial-strength 
innovation processes. Serious innovation takes a systematic defini-
tion of the context, including the capabilities of the organization and 
Figure 4-3: The diverse capabilities of various channels

76
Chapter 4    Methodology
the ecosystem of the customers (Figure 4-4). An innovation process 
creates many ideas and then determines those worth applying.
Assessment
If there is an existing application, it may make sense to evaluate the 
quality of the current design to justify the redevelopment program 
and identify areas that need special emphasis during redesign. During 
this phase, we also may perform a competitive analysis to understand 
the current best practices and identify competitive imperatives.
Two kinds of assessment methods may be employed. In a usability 
test, designs are evaluated by having representative users attempt 
to use the facility or be interviewed about the facility. In an expert 
review, trained experts in user experience design systematically 
investigate the design based on research-based principles and mod-
els in the field. You might think that the user research is much better 
than the expert review, but, in fact, the expert review is usually 
Figure 4-4: Results of a systematic innovation 
program about online security

An Outline of The HFI Framework
77
faster, cheaper, and better. User research might result in solid data 
that the user takes three minutes to complete a transaction. But what 
does that mean? Is three minutes good? An expert, in contrast, 
might immediately point out that default values can be used to 
slash the time requirement. In reality, the best application for usabil-
ity testing as an assessment is when strong political issues are pre-
venting stakeholders from listening to the expert.
You need different methods to investigate whether people will do a 
task as opposed to assessing whether they can do a task. PET is 
HFI’s acronym for persuasion, emotion, and trust. The methods we 
use to check whether people get confused while using an applica-
tion don’t really work when we are trying to understand whether 
they will be motivated to convert. Today usability is no longer 
enough. It is certainly an expected hygiene factor to have a checkout 
flow that everyone is able to use, but assessing the customer’s will-
ingness to actually buy the product requires different methods.
Research
User experience design practitioners rarely do pure research, 
because they are too busy designing things. Nevertheless, there are 
two kinds of research that may be needed to perform. One is foun-
dational ecosystem research. This type of research is performed to 
define the range of users, environments, scenarios, and artifacts for 
the target application (see Figure 4-5 for an example). You might do 
this research once, and then apply it to many ongoing projects 
(which is why we would think of it as foundational research).
The second type of research that user experience design practition-
ers undertake is a controlled experiment. This scientific research 
study, with proper controls and statistical analysis, is needed when 
a critical decision must be made between two different designs and 
millions of dollars hang in the balance. A controlled study is clearly 
justified when you really need to be certain which design is better. 
Controlled experiments are also appropriate to support marketing 
assertions. For example, HFI recently had a smartphone company 
approach our firm and tell us the blogosphere had proclaimed that 
they had the fastest keyboard. The company wanted scientific back-
ing for the claim so it could own that distinction and make it the 

78
Chapter 4    Methodology
core of a marketing campaign. So we ran the study (the company’s 
keyboard was the third fastest).
User-Centered Design
Once the strategy and innovation have ensured that you are build-
ing the right thing, then it is time to do the actual design work. It is 
best to think of this endeavor as two separate programs. The first 
deals with the user interface structure. Our years of experience at 
HFI have shown that 80% of usability is determined by a good inter-
face structure: it ensures that users can understand what is offered, 
find things quickly, and navigate efficiently. There is also a PET 
aspect to the structure. Just as we have always designed the struc-
ture of the navigation, so we must now design the structure of the 
conversion as well. We need to know which drives, blocks, beliefs, 
and feelings we are dealing with. We need to know which set of 
tools will be employed to trigger conversion.
Figure 4-5: Example of an ecosystem around ATMs 
showing scenarios, users, and other elements

An Outline of The HFI Framework
79
It is often best to complete the structural design before planning the 
detailed design. The structural design will create the overall con-
tainer for the interface (Figure 4-6). It defines how the user will nav-
igate, and if done well this structure will match the user’s deep 
mental model. The result is that the design will seem obvious and 
laid out in a common-sense manner. The user will be able to find 
things. The navigational container must also be physically efficient. 
It must fit with the user’s taskflow so as to minimize the time and 
physical effort involved. Finally, it must define the persuasion strat-
egy and the style of the site.
The structural design takes a high level of expertise. Once it is done, 
however, it is easy to plan the ongoing detailed design. Each screen 
must be fully designed and specified. It is easy to find good struc-
tural designs that are built out with poor detailed design: they are 
good-looking and easy to navigate, but awkward and frustrating as 
the user proceeds through the interaction.
Figure 4-6: Example of a structural redesign

80
Chapter 4    Methodology
The detailed design work is easier than the strategic and structural 
design, but often involves quite a bit of work, and it is critical to 
maintain quality throughout this step. The detailed design must be 
guided by user interface standards (or patterns). Detailed design 
also requires staff who understand a wide range of design methods, 
principles, and techniques. It cannot be left to graphic artists or busi-
ness analysts unless they are competent in user experience design 
principles. The detailed design process also generally requires cycles 
of usability testing, so that skill set is essential as well.
Feedback and Improvement
Once the design is complete and coded, it is a good idea to do a UX 
validation. This step offers an opportunity to ensure that the design 
works as intended by looking at the ability of users to operate the 
design without getting stuck, and by checking the users’ emotional 
reactions to the design. This evaluation is a bit different from the UX 
testing involved in the design process. The testing during the design 
stage is “formative” testing focused on gaining insights into why 
the user is having trouble so that you can make design changes. The 
UX validation, in contrast, seeks to measure the user’s performance 
to see if the objectives are met. It’s a worthwhile step, as it can stop 
a bad design from being released as well as provide lessons on what 
might be done better next time.
The last phase of the user-centered design process, continuous UX 
measurement and improvement, is often neglected, but is poten-
tially a great investment. If the design is for a large application, it 
pays to make ongoing improvements. At HFI, we once changed just 
one page on an office supply company’s website and increased sales 
by an estimated $6 million per month. Ideally, you will create an 
ongoing dashboard that provides an array of UX measurements. 
This can allow you to track the impact of the ongoing work done on 
the design.
Generally companies have good business metrics on their sites and 
applications. And in a sense that is exactly the focus of UX work. We 
really care only that our work has increased conversion, saved time, 
and reduced call center load. Why, then, would you need user expe-
rience design metrics in addition to the business metrics?

An Outline of The HFI Framework
81
A.G. Edwards’ Usability Process and Methodology
Pat Malecek, AVP, CUA, Services Solutions Executive, Dell, Inc. 
Former User Experience Manager, A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc.
I’ve heard from usability practitioners at other companies that 
it’s fairly common to have a formal and well-documented 
method ology in place but that it’s not often followed to the let-
ter. We certainly have a very well-documented methodology—
whether or not it’s followed to the letter varies from project to 
project, depending on scope, schedule, and things of that 
nature.
We have a summary version of that methodology that we are 
putting the finishing touches on. It is a product development 
life cycle that we’ve crafted, and it provides a much simpler 
view. This life-cycle document was developed by both the busi-
ness and technical sides, and it puts forth a mutually agreeable 
methodology that calls for early attention to presentation is-
sues and lots of opportunities for iteration and look-and-feel 
corrections. We are hoping to disseminate the life-cycle docu-
ment to all the relevant parties because it shows in simple 
terms where various usability issues could be addressed.
In terms of examples of the usability practices that we put into 
the process—in the grandest terms, we do it all. We’ve com-
pleted projects in which we go out and interview users, and we 
do card sorting, and then we go to navigation mock-ups and 
move through paper mock-ups and test paper mock-ups, all 
the way through to a finished product. And when things are 
being done with great urgency, typically we do wireframing—
and when I say “we,” I mean our user experience designers. 
They have the proper skills and the proper knowledge, and—if 
time doesn’t permit testing with the appropriate user groups—
at the very least they will take those mock-ups to a cluster of 
people and do some informal testing to shake out some of the 
big bugs.

82
Chapter 4    Methodology
By having specific measurements for user experience design, we 
can tell if that design is likely to improve the business metric. If both 
the business metric and the user experience design metric yield 
poor results, then design improvements will most likely be helpful. 
If the business metric is poor but the user experience design metric 
is great, then the problem probably stems from something else, such 
as pricing, marketing, or even the executive intent.
A Quick Check of Your Methodology
You may discover that your current methodology has some user-
centered design in it, but you might be wondering if it is a good 
process. The following exercise will help you test it. HFI developed 
this test based on feedback from 35 usability professionals with a 
great deal of cumulative experience in the field. They were asked to 
identify the most important activities in user-centered design. HFI 
then asked the participants to provide weightings for how much the 
activities influenced the quality of the results, and fine-tuned the 
rating system by working with clients. This quick check works for 
websites, applications, and any other software designs.
To take the test, look at the 15 design activities described in Table 4-1. 
Check which ones are included in your method ology, and then add 
up the points to get your Usability Quotient. The maximum rating 
is 100. If your methodology scores less than 75 or so, it is probably 
in need of enhancement. If it scores less than 50, you probably need 
a whole new process.
The Challenges of Retrofitting a Development 
Life Cycle
It is a rare company that does not have an existing system develop-
ment life cycle. Your company may have purchased a method, or 
perhaps you built one from scratch. Someday every method will fol-
low the user-centered paradigm, but today it is unlikely that either 
system does.

The Challenges of Retrofitting a Development Life Cycle
83
Table 4-1: Calculate Usability Quotient
Checklist Items
Explanation
Notes
UQ 
Value (if 
Complete)
1.  Define brand, 
style, and tone
Define the character of the 
site with a list of adjectives 
(e.g., cool, high tech, 
trendy; stable, reliable, 
simple).
Use existing brand 
values where 
appropriate.
4
2. Define user
Describe the users in 
terms of skills, knowledge, 
interests, objectives, and 
simple demographics.
Also known as user 
profiles or personae, 
this addresses users’ 
psychographics 
instead of 
population 
concerns.
8
3.  Set usability 
objectives
List of specific objectives 
from the user’s viewpoint 
(e.g., complete a trade 
faster than the competitor, 
or rate the site as easier to 
use than driving to store to 
buy product).
Usability objectives, 
goals, or criteria 
can be based on 
task time and error 
performance or the 
satisfaction survey 
ratings.
7
4.  Define user 
environment
Describe the user’s 
environment (e.g., 
interruptions?), pattern 
of work (e.g., uses once 
a month), and social 
context (e.g., needs to get 
supervisor’s approval).
Base the description 
on interviews and 
observations made 
during a contextual 
inquiry.
6
5.  Analyze 
current tasks
Understand how the site 
functions are done today. 
Draw a taskflow diagram.
Use contextual 
inquiry techniques. 
Develop user 
scenarios of use that 
can be derived from 
use cases.
9
6.  Redesign tasks
Develop a story of how 
the functions and tasks 
will be done in the new 
application. Describe the 
scenarios and make them 
simple and easy. Optimize 
use of new technology.
Reengineer and 
match the taskflow 
to the limitations of 
the technology used 
in the application 
under development.
13
(continues)

84
Chapter 4    Methodology
Checklist Items
Explanation
Notes
UQ 
Value (if 
Complete)
 7.  Verify useful 
with unique 
value
Check that the site will 
offer substantial benefits, 
beyond other sites, 
applications, or manual 
facilities.
Does the site offer 
compelling value to 
make users return? 
Is it sticky?
4
 8.  Verify 
practical
Conduct a formal 
walkthrough of the 
taskflow design to 
ensure that it will be 
practical in the real-world 
environment.
Is the site practical 
from a common-
sense point of view?
3
 9.  Test 
navigation
Run a short usability test to 
make sure people can find 
things on the prototyped 
main navigation pages.
Use low-fidelity 
paper or similar 
prototypes.
9
10. Test aesthetic
Run the test that validates 
the positive appeal of the 
visual design. Also check 
that the design supports 
the branding objectives.
Use the test of 
brand perception 
appeal to measure 
that the design 
is aesthetically 
pleasing and 
supports the brand.
2
11.  Use page 
design 
standards
Design most pages by 
copying from sample 
templates.
Use generic or 
customized best 
practice page 
templates.
7
12.  Complete 
detailed 
design by 
staff with 
training in 
usability
Get at least basic training in 
usability before designing 
pages.
Can be an HFI-
Certified Usability 
Analyst.
8
13.  Review 
all pages 
systematically 
for usability
Review the pages for 
usability and consistency. 
Do this with someone who 
is not on the development 
team.
Do a walkthrough 
of the site using 
the most important 
user tasks and user 
profiles.
7
Table 4-1: (continued)

The Challenges of Retrofitting a Development Life Cycle
85
Occasionally, a company needs a whole new development process. 
This scenario occurs not just within brand-new organizations; a new 
development process may also be needed when there is a major 
change in the technology or scope, such as the switch from simple 
Web brochures to complex Web application development. Usually, 
however, the organization already has a software development pro-
cess and needs to deal with the relationship between the exist ing 
process and the newer user-centered design methodology. The 
methods have to be interwoven with proper communication and 
handoffs between the different types of development staff. There 
may need to be particular stage-gates to verify that the required 
user experience design work has been done in one stage before pro-
ceeding to another.
There are three likely scenarios when there is an existing process: 
classic methodologies that are not user-centered, patches where 
some user-centered activities have been added, and classic meth-
ods that just have usability testing added. These same situations 
tend to appear in commercial methodologies that do not have an 
Checklist Items
Explanation
Notes
UQ 
Value (if 
Complete)
14.  Usability test 
site
Perform a simulation test 
where users complete a 
set of tasks and see where 
they have problems. Fix the 
major problems.
Use in-person, 
one-on-one testing 
“think aloud” 
protocol. Can be 
supplemented 
with remote online 
testing or with the 
application.
7
15.  Monitor 
initial usage
Review initial usage with 
click stream analysis and 
user data. Fix significant 
problems.
Establish success 
metrics and monitor 
them.
6
Project’s Usability Quotient
(0–100)
Table 4-1: (continued)

86
Chapter 4    Methodology
ideal user-centered process. The following subsections explore 
these three scenarios in greater detail.
Using Classic Methodologies
Most software development methodologies seem to follow a classic 
process. One such method is the waterfall method, in which the steps 
follow logically and build in sequence. Another classic approach is 
the spiraling method, in which design cycles are more iterative. 
Increasingly, there is some sort of rapid development method (e.g., 
Agile), which moves quickly to prototyping and tends to work well 
only for small projects. All of these are classic methods because they 
fail to put the user first: they identify business and technical functions 
and database design and middleware in progress, before the user 
tasks and actions are identified and taken into account. Therefore, in 
this context, classic means old, but not in any way good.
Retrofitting a Method That Has Added 
User-Centered Activities
Sometimes there has been an attempt to add user-centered activities 
to a software methodology. The problem is that while the attempt is 
always well intentioned, it is often not well done. Instead of a thor-
ough user-centered design process, the end result is a software 
methodology process with a few usability activities added here and 
there. The effort is neither thorough nor sustained.
Both software methodologies and user-centered design methodolo-
gies have many steps. These steps are important for each methodol-
ogy, and they need to be completed in a certain order. However, the 
steps are different. Trying to retrofit the steps of one methodology 
onto the steps of the other methodology does not work, just as try-
ing to force the tools, templates, and documentation of one to fit the 
other does not work.
Retrofitting a Development Process That Has Only 
Usability Testing
In still other cases, a team has created a user-centered methodology 
by simply adding usability testing to its software development 

Templates
87
process. This is a common practice, though, not surprisingly, an 
ineffective one. Disappointment in the results is like being surprised 
at reaching the wrong destination when you travel without being 
given maps, a compass, or navigation tools for the journey.
Without a full user-centered process, performing a usability test at the 
end of the development process merely serves to highlight the unac-
ceptable nature of the design. It’s a sad and frustrating result, but there 
is usually little that can be done except to release the poor design.
With a user-centered process, the usability test becomes a source of 
useful, easily implemented changes. These changes are not radical 
because the structural design has been solidly built and tested; there is 
no need to throw it out when problems crop up. The insights provided 
by the usability test tend to be small—in the form of minor changes to 
wording, layout, and graphic treatment—and easily implemented. Yet 
this type of final usability testing is well worth doing.
Implementing full user-centered development can be compared to 
creating a wooden statue. In the early phases, there is sawing. Then, 
you need to switch to a chisel. Finally, you apply sandpaper. The 
final usability testing becomes the fine sandpaper. Without the full 
user-centered process in place, the development effort is just like 
trying to create a wooden statue by starting with fine sandpaper.
Templates
The methodology reminds practitioners about steps that must be 
taken. As such, it is helpful in planning projects. Once the method-
ology is created, however, you can build templates for the various 
forms and deliverables required to complete the methodology (Fig-
ure 4-7 provides an example). It is far faster to edit a template than 
to create each item from scratch. It is fair to say that “professionals 
don’t start from scratch.” It is hard to convey this lesson to staff 
fresh out of school, who have likely been threatened with disciplin-
ary action for copying. In the user experience design group, though, 
you are not trying to prove you can do it all yourself; you are trying 
to put out a design that is fast, cheap, and good.

88
Chapter 4    Methodology
Summary
Following a user-centered design methodology makes your de sign 
activities reliable and repeatable. Without a methodology, it is diffi-
cult to produce high-quality designs. The maturity of your method-
ology is a reflection of your organization’s commitment to 
user-centered design, so be sure to invest in the most effective meth-
odology available. The next chapter outlines the interface design 
standards you will need to design efficiently and consistently while 
following the methodology.
Figure 4-7: Example of a template

89
Chapter 5
Interface Design Standards
 
➤You can have interface design standards for browser-based 
applications, mobile devices, USSD (low-end phone), voice 
response, and other platforms.
 
➤If you look at any application or environment, you can 
likely identify a few screen types that account for approxi-
mately 85% of all screen development. Templates are repre-
sentations of these key screen types and can be used as the 
“DNA” on which the entire application is built.
 
➤In addition to templates, a design standard should include 
general presentation and operation rules.
 
➤Interface design standards save development time, main-
tain consistency in designs, improve usability, and make 
maintenance easier.
 
➤There are a number of ways to create a design standard. 
Developing one from scratch should be a last resort.
 
➤Design standards can be applied to a website as well as to 
all of an organization’s public sites, extranets, and intranet.
 
➤Don’t develop standards unless you have a clear plan and 
resources for disseminating, supporting, and enforcing 
those standards. The completion of the standards is the 
beginning of the real process.

90
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
When teaching classes on design standards, I always start by ask ing 
how many people are excited by the prospect of doing all their 
future design work under a strict set of standards. Few people 
respond with enthusiasm. Many feel that design standards will be a 
terrible restriction, and implementing a standard feels like eliminat-
ing creativity. In reality, standards (both methodological and design) 
are like the well-known melodies in jazz (which musicians also call 
“standards”). Jazz standards provide a baseline melody, which the 
artist uses as a starting place from which to begin tasteful improvi-
sation. Interface design standards are essential to provide a similar 
starting place and format. But it takes a great artist to work within 
the standard and make something worthwhile, just as it takes a 
great musician to work within the standards in jazz and create 
something special.
This chapter explains what interface standards are, explores why 
they help a usability team be efficient, and describes the content and 
characteristics of effective standards.
What Is an Interface Design Standard?
As you create a user experience engineering infrastructure, there is 
probably no more critical component than interface design standards. 
Done right, these standards help users who visit your page feel like 
they have interacted with a page like it before. With standards, the 
development is faster and maintenance is easier. But these design 
standards are not methodological standards, not software coding 
standards, not style guides, and not design principle documents.
Methodological standards, such as those described in Chapter 4 on 
user-centered design methodology, describe the process for design 
but do not specify precise design conventions.
Software design standards apply to the design of the underlying 
software. They do not address presentation-layer design conven-
tions at all.
Style guides are usually like the style guides for writing a 
manuscript—they document specific fonts, colors, and the proper 

Types of Standards
91
use of images and may even state the tone for the text. They may 
make suggestions on other topics, but they do not ensure full design 
consistency. These types of guidelines are useful, but they are not 
synonymous with design standards. Basically, a style guide docu-
ments rules for presentation style, but it does not get down to the 
level of specificity necessary to give the user the experience of real 
operational consistency. The style guide does not dictate the naviga-
tional and operational details of each screen, nor does it indicate 
which button is used to go forward—and we do need rules down to 
the level of selecting OK, Enter, or Continue for the button names.
Organizations often want to document design principles, essen-
tially in the hope that such a document will tell designers how to do 
good interface design. In reality, design principles do not address 
the specifics needed to ensure design consistency. In any case, peo-
ple rarely read documents of that sort. It is usually better to spend 
money on training rather than on writing a design principles 
document.
Interface design standards establish very specific requirements for 
the way screens look and operate. The key to these standards is the 
idea of a reusable screen type, pattern, or screen design template.
Types of Standards
You do not need a different standard for every system. You can cre-
ate one standard that covers an entire range of applications in a 
given platform, such as a browser. A browser, for example, is used 
for both public and private websites—but that does not mean that 
you need different standards for each of those environments. A 
form can be designed with a set of conventions (such as how to 
show required fields), and those conventions can apply nicely 
across a wide range of systems and environments. If the interactive 
environment is different, however, you will need another interface 
standard. For example, a browser interface has different conven-
tions from a thick client, a mobile application, and a voice response 
system. Each of these requires a separate standard. The browser 
standard can be extended to cover browser-based interactions on 

92
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
tablets and smartphones using responsive design, but then you 
need a browser standard that covers responsive design.
You do not need a different standard for each type of application. 
There might be cases where you have very different users and sce-
narios between applications, of course. You might find that you 
have scientists using one application and high school students using 
another. Do these two populations need a different design for data 
entry forms? They really don’t need different standards. We can 
pick one name for Enter and decide if the field labels will be fol-
lowed by a colon. Such a decision can be applied across both of 
these populations without difficulty. There may be some screen 
types in the standard that are appropriate for scientists but not for 
students. A complex tree view, for instance, might be a bit difficult 
for the students to understand, in which case we would simply not 
use that screen type for a younger population.
Screen Design Templates
If you look at any given Web environment, you will find a limited 
number of page types that account for approximately 85% of the 
total development time.1 Some of the most common page t ypes are 
home pages, forms, wizards, and database maintenance pages. The 
number of page types is not infinite; you might need a total of 
10–15 page types for an entire environment.
Ideally, you will develop templates of commonly used page types 
and then modify them to create the specific instances you need. For 
example, on a form you would change the headers and field labels, 
but you would not need to change the Enter button name or the 
conventions of left alignment and required field marking.
The templates you create will become the foundation of your 
 template-based standards; these standards can be developed for 
computer software screens as well as webpages. Figure 5-1 shows 
an example of a template for a wizard. This template reflects good 
1. This figure is based on HFI’s 20 years of experience in user interface design and standards 
development.

Screen Design Templates
93
design practices, even for the parts of the interface design that are 
not standard, and will be customized by developers when using 
this particular wizard. A template should include accompanying 
documentation on when to use a page type, rules for the parts of the 
page that are standardized, a prototyping tool (allowing the tem-
plate to be quickly converted into an individual page or screen), and 
reusable code.
Instead of creating each page from scratch, the developer can con-
sider the user’s task and then select the template page or pages that 
support that taskflow. As a consequence, he or she can work at a 
higher level instead of a very detailed level. Identifying the type of 
page needed and choosing the best template, the developer can 
de cide whether to use a menu, a display table, or a wizard and then 
copy the conventions for the page type. If necessary, the developer 
Figure 5-1: Example of a reusable standard page template 
for a faceted search, taken from UX Enterprise

94
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
can create hybrid pages that combine multiple types. Without a 
design standard, developers must invest time in creating everything 
from a name for each button to navigational features. The names 
and features they select are often ergonomically unsound, and the 
user is left to try to figure out the meaning of the buttons on each 
page. This problem is why a design standard needs to be specific 
about these types of details.
The templates serve as the “DNA” for all designs, so they must pro-
vide an example of quality design in all respects. At the same time, 
you need to identify and document those aspects of the template 
that are actually standards. Standards fall into two categories: basic 
standards and optional standards. 
Basic standards are elements that you must have to use a given 
page type. They include the features that will identify the page type 
to the user and the universal ways of operating the screen.
Optional standards are a little more complex, but are required to 
make the standards work. They are elements that may or may not 
be needed. For example, on a search page, you may or may not 
require a link for an advanced search. The optional standard says 
that if you don’t need an advanced search, you can leave it out. If 
you do need this feature, then you must call it “Advanced Search” 
and place it in a consistent spot on the page. These rules need to be 
documented so that developers can look any item up and know 
what is actually required.
Improvements in technology for applying reusable code and con-
tent management have made the template concept work even bet-
ter. These technologies make it easy to use program modules to 
support a given function on multiple pages. Once a defined page 
type exists, developers can readily write code to support it. In turn, 
designers actually need to do even more work if they want to violate 
the standard—they have to go into the reusable module and edit it.
Patterns
The screen template approach described in the preceding section 
works by describing overall screens and then having designers 

Other Contents of a Design Standard
95
modify those screens with task-specific content. An alternative “pat-
tern” approach attempts to provide smaller standard modules—an 
address, calendar, or carousel, for instance—that can then be com-
bined to create a screen. While this design practice is certainly effi-
cient, it comes with a catch.
Organizations that create a half-dozen commonly used patterns do 
very well. Other organizations, however, may try to create compo-
nents to handle almost all of their interface design needs. In most 
cases, this amounts to hundreds of items. After some time, it 
becomes quite difficult to find the pattern that you need, particu-
larly as you develop more variations of those patterns—with the 
result that the patterns stop being used. We recommend limiting 
your pattern library to a couple of dozen designs, not hundreds (see 
Figure 5-2 for an example of a reusable pattern).
Other Contents of a Design Standard
While page templates are the core of a good design standard, other 
sec tions and materials are needed as well. Some requirements and 
issues, such as those listed here, arise with all page types:
• Header and footer designs
• Error handling (pop-ups, inline error messages, embedded 
messages, graphic treatments, and formats for message 
wording)
Figure 5-2: Example of a reusable pattern for a calendar 
component, taken from UX Enterprise

96
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
• Button labels (guidelines such as “Use ‘Next’ button to get the 
follow ing page” and “Do not use ‘Forward,’ ‘Continue,’ ‘ OK,’ 
‘Up,’ or ‘Down’ buttons to get the following page.”)
• Justification of text
• Alignment of labels and data fields
• Formats for data (such as addresses and phone numbers)
• Fonts
• Restrictions on color usage
There is some overlap between style guide issues and design stan-
dards, of course. In many cases, the entire contents of the style guide 
can be incorporated into the general principles section of the design 
standard.
The Scope of Design Standards
It is important to note what is not included in the design standard. 
Except where there is a need to create a unified style and theme, it is 
best to leave significant design freedom to the developers. For 
ex ample, an intranet may include hundreds of sites, and many will 
require different themes. The design standard should generally 
address only the elements critical to the user’s recognition and the 
operation of each page type—or restrictions needed to ensure a con-
sistent brand perception.
It is important not to mix up the design rationale with the research 
behind various decisions within the design standard; this would 
create an unmanageable amount of work and a vast body of infor-
mation when developing standards. Such documentation can over-
whelm developers and other users of the design standards. The 
design standard should describe only the results of all this research. 
The full research and rationale can be archived in books or explored 
in training.
Some design standards go so far as to document the windowing 
environment or browser operation. In our view, it is a waste of time 
to document third-party environments, operations, and purchased 

The Scope of Design Standards
97
facilities like e-mail clients, along with anything you will build only 
once. For example, standards for the design of a staff directory 
aren’t necessary because these standards apply to just that one 
application, and it is a one-time deliverable. It is far more efficient 
simply to develop specifications and build the directory instead of 
writing a standard that will guide the specification.
Another pitfall in this standardization process is the specification 
of underlying technology and coding practices. There is no ques-
tion that technical standards are needed, but the design standards 
specify requirements for the presentation layer. While these 
requirements must be carefully reviewed to ensure that they can 
be implemented, there is no reason to make the presentation-layer 
standards dependent on the technology. It is wise to code the pre-
sentation layer separately. It is also wise to keep standards for 
middleware, databases, and coding practices separate from the 
design standards.
An interface design standard can cover a single application or a 
suite of applications, or a single Web site or a family of sites. For 
ex ample, a financial institution might have a site for retail banking, 
a site for commercial banking, a brokerage site, and a corporate site. 
These sites might have different headers and footers. Different style 
guides might dictate different colors. But at the end of a form, all the 
sites should use the same word to say Enter rather than referring to 
the same function by different names (e.g., Enter, Submit, OK, Con-
tinue, Go). A single standard can cover a whole family of sites, such 
that when customers go from one site to another, they see that the 
company is consistent in its practices.
It is also possible to have a single design standard cover public Web 
sites, extranets. and the intranet. While some activities provided in 
the intranet could never be offered to the public—complex database 
maintenance, for example—there is a considerable advantage in 
using the same interface design conventions in multiple environ-
ments, such as for single functions or content modules. For exam-
ple, current product features must be seen by the public—yet 
marketing staff, customer service representatives and suppliers 
must view those features, too. If the design standards are consistent, 
that page can be shared with all users.

98
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
You can also develop standards that work across different operating 
systems. While the controls for a form might differ somewhat in 
shape and style for each operating system, most of the conventions 
can be generalized successfully. While differences in hardware plat-
forms do force some variations in page designs, you must make 
sure that a user who accidentally follows the wrong platform con-
vention does not encounter any serious problems. If you make the 
Enter key mean “take an action” in one environment and “move to 
the next field” in another, for example, you will frustrate users and 
create significant mistakes.
Design standards can cover a very wide range of appli cations, but 
the one place where they cannot usually stretch is between plat-
forms and technologies. For example, a standard for a voice 
response system cannot be applied to Web design. The standard 
scripting that works for telephone interactions does not apply to the 
Web. Also, as of this writing, it is difficult to develop a standard for 
both windowing applications and Web sites because the user expec-
tations are quite different for each platform. Therefore, you need 
separate standards, although the page design, operation, and other 
attributes should remain as consistent and compatible as possible.
The Value of Design Standards
Design standards save development time. For example, instead of 
developers spending hours reinventing design decisions such as 
whether to call a button “Enter” or “OK” and where to place that but-
ton, they can simply refer to the design standards. This also ensures 
that all members of a team of developers can follow the same guide-
lines and makes the pages of an application or site consistent.
A design standard also saves development time by supporting the cre-
ation of reusable code. For example, if you define a single way for a 
search and list page to work, you can create reusable code to support 
that design. Applying that page type then simply requires making 
changes to the base code. This practice also reduces the need for qual-
ity assurance because the reusable code has already been debugged.

The Value of Design Standards
99
Design standards make applications more usable: because the 
de signs are consistent, users can generalize their knowledge of how 
one screen works to all the other screens of the same type. If the 
standard is successful, users will look at the screen and think, “Hey! 
I’ve seen screens like this before.” The screen then works the way 
they expect. This consistency has tremendous value, even if the 
designs are a bit suboptimal or idiosyncratic. Standard designs are 
likely to be far superior to ad hoc designs ergonomically, however. 
Ad hoc designs are generally created by an individual with limited 
experience and limited time, whereas a standard represents the best 
thinking of an entire committee—generally including highly experi-
enced usability staff. Also, because the decisions of that committee 
are leveraged across hundreds of designs, the committee members 
tend to work harder on each design decision.
Design standards make maintenance and upgrades easier, too. For 
example, the development of a new DHTML slider control might 
make some graphic display standards obsolete. Assume that this 
slider is so compelling that all designs really have to be changed to 
take advantage of it. This change requires that the standard be 
upgraded, with the change then being applied to designs across the 
organization—a lot of work. Without a standard, you must scan 
through a wilderness of different graphic display designs, consider 
each one separately, reinvent each design, code it, and then test it. 
With a standard, however, you can review page types and find those 
places where the slider is needed. These changes can then be sys-
tematically rippled across all those page types—a vastly more sim-
ple process.
A few other intangible advantages of standards are quite signifi-
cant. In a standards-based design process, the attention and creativ-
ity of developers will shift to more productive areas. For example, 
instead of having to worry about how to reinvent another type of 
menu, they can apply their creativity to understanding user task-
flows and making improvements; instead of renaming the OK but-
ton, they can find a faster way to process claims.
Standards also support the creation of a unified brand—a crit ical 
element in a public Web site or private intranet site. The standard 

100
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
can provide a site with a sense of cohesion, organization, and reli-
ability. Many customers become confused when they find that 
designs are different between modules of a single application or 
sections of a Web site. Consistent designs, in contrast, create a posi-
tive impression—a seamless experience that supports the brand. 
While developers may initially resist the implementation of a design 
standard, it is essential to have one if you must do a significant 
amount of development. In fact, experienced developers are becom-
ing more welcoming toward usable standards. They recognize that 
standards make it easier for other resources within a user experi-
ence design-centered organization to help them design pages or 
screens that allow users to run applications successfully.
The Process and Cost of Developing Standards
Standards development should be a high priority when creating a 
strategy, and it should be tackled early in the activities list. There are 
three ways to get a design standard: buy a generic standard, cus-
tomize a generic standard, or create a standard from scratch.
If you have a small company or a lean operation with typical inter-
face needs, it makes sense to start with a purchased, generic stan-
dard. Clearly, you’ll eventually need to add conventions for your 
business area, special branding, specific user needs, and so on, but 
the off-the-shelf product will give your company a head start. You 
can start small, with customizations, and gradually build up your 
standard elements. 
If you have a large company or your environment has many special 
needs, you need a full design standard, including a customized set of 
page types with specific designs to reflect your conventions and user 
needs, your brand (not just in color and logo), and the personality of 
your company—down to the style of interaction and page layout.
Purchased standards are a good starting point for a custom stan-
dard, even for a large organization. It is quicker to modify a stan-
dard than to create one from scratch. Full customization of a generic 
standard generally takes six to eight weeks.

The Process and Cost of Developing Standards
101
In some situations, you will need to create a standard from scratch. 
The most typical case is one where your environment is so idiosyn-
cratic that you can find no generic standard that remotely fits your 
requirements. The introduction of a new interface technology, for 
example, might mean there are no generic standards. Also, some-
times the corporate culture strongly values internally designed 
materials. If you decide to create design standards from scratch, be 
aware that this can be a long, painful process with many challenges. 
It will take a minimum of three months and perhaps even up to a 
year to do it right. The process will typically require $180,000 for a 
consultant’s support.
If you are customizing a standard or creating one from scratch, you 
probably need to employ a committee-driven process with a usabil-
ity  consultant as a facilitator. This method starts with a review of 
your strategy, business areas, applications, and sites that seeks to 
determine the types of screens you need. The consultant then designs 
a good example of each page type (these prototypes may be based 
partly on your screens and partly on a purchased standard). This set 
of designs goes into a committee process. The committee, made up 
of the key opinion leaders in the development organizations, reviews 
the de signs and decides whether the approach for each screen type is 
appropriate. This is a concrete process; the committee is essentially 
asked, “Is this the way you want to do a menu/form/wizard?” The 
final standard is based on their decisions. The process for customiz-
ing a generic standard takes usually takes from six to eight weeks 
and costs about $100,000 (for the modification of the standards deliv-
erable, including the consultant’s fees). If you can make your own 
design decisions without this level of facilitation and high-level 
guidance, however, your cost can be cut nearly in half.
No matter which method you use, here is one important piece of 
advice: ensure that your standards effort will not run out of steam 
by the time the standard gets written. Sometimes committees suffer 
from endless cycles of iteration during the standards creation pro-
cess. After a year-long process, the standard may finally be com-
plete, but committee members may by now be so sick of the process 
that they have lost the motivation to push the standard into adop-
tion. In fact, the completion of your standards is just the beginning 

102
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
of the real process. It is important to pace yourself accordingly. No 
matter which method you choose to create a standard, be sure that 
you have the energy, will, and resources to follow through with its 
implementation.
Disseminating, Supporting, and Enforcing Standards
Before investing in a standard, be sure to plan for its dissemination 
and support. This means training, consulting, and enforcement.
Even though the design standard may strongly support creativity 
and improve an application’s or Web site’s usability, the resentment 
of standards is real. Thus, unless you work to evangelize and 
uphold that standard, nothing will happen after its creation. Your 
investment in developing it will be lost. You should not even 
develop a standard, in fact, un less you have a clear plan and budget 
for the standard’s dissemination and support. Getting the standard 
written is just the beginning of the process.
At HFI, we have argued vehemently over the years about whether a 
paper or an online standards document is better. A paper document 
is easier to work with in some ways; the developer is already using 
the full screen for design work, so an online standard requires switch-
ing between windows. However, there is a significant cost involved 
in having a paper version of a standard—it must be printed and dis-
tributed. Updates will be required, and then it will be difficult to tell 
if you have the current version. Also, increasingly, purchased stan-
dards come with online materials such as reusable code.
If you have an online version of the standard, everyone has access 
to it. When the standard is updated, everyone gets the new version 
at the same time. Of course, making sure that everyone has the stan-
dard is very different from getting everyone to actually use the stan-
dard. You have to get the word out. Send notices of various kinds 
and highlight a link to the standard on the developer’s intranet 
pages. Nevertheless, these efforts alone will not be enough to ensure 
appropriate use of the standard.
It is essential to provide training on the standard. Standards train-
ing differs in important ways from training on general usability 

Disseminating, Supporting, and Enforcing Standards
103
engineering methods. Standards training needs to sell developers 
on the value of a standard. It needs to convince them that rather 
than stifling their creativity, the standard will actually make them 
more creative, effective, and professional—that there is still plenty 
of room for cre ativity with standards, but with a higher quality and 
consistency that make for better designs.
The standards training also needs to show people how to use the 
design standards. This means understanding the structure of the 
de sign standards themselves and ways to find things within them. 
Developers must be familiar with the different types of pages and 
be able to pick those that fit a given situation. They must also know 
how to use the general presentation rules. All this material can usu-
ally be presented in a half-day class. Done well, these classes 
increase acceptance of the standards and teach people to operate 
effectively within them.
Preparing reusable code is a powerful way to support standards. 
Often, a single standard is implemented in different environments: 
for example, your menu may be created in Macromedia Dream-
weaver and Microsoft FrontPage, as well as by old-fashioned HTML 
coders working in Microsoft Notepad. It makes sense, however, to 
select the main environment(s) and create reusable code as a spe-
cific project. This may mean creating a template for each page type 
in a browser environment. The development process then becomes 
faster, and developers have to work harder to violate the standard. 
Maintenance is also easier because common code underlies the vari-
ous pages. Alternatively, page designs may be placed in a content 
management tool. Whatever the environment, the introduction of 
reusable code will help move the standard into general usage.
With dissemination of the standard, along with training and tools 
that provide support for it, developers will start to try to follow the 
standard. They will sometimes have misconceptions or otherwise 
run into trouble when working with the standard. They might think 
that optional standards are required, might not understand which 
page to use for a given user task, or might even think that the con-
tent in the examples must be copied into the designs. Poor results 
like these can threaten the entire standardization effort. Designate 
one person or team as a resource to contact for help. The best way to 
staff this position is with internal consultants—key staff members 

104
Chapter 5    Interface Design Standards
within the central usability organization who can answer commonly 
asked questions quickly.
If a developer reinvents a page, however, there is no question for 
the internal consultants to answer. While the developer may be 
happy in such a case, the standard is undermined. Without feed-
back to the developer or immediate feedback to management, there 
is only a silent unraveling of your standards investment and, even-
tually, poor usability of the application itself. The only answer to 
this type of scenario is some type of enforcement.
Enforcement of standards is a hot topic. While it can be unpleasant 
in practice, some form of enforcement is required. The trick is to 
make this process fit the corporate culture. In some organizations, 
heavy-handed enforcement is natural and normal. In other environ-
ments, the very idea is abhorrent. In the latter case, don’t call this 
practice “enforcement,” but do at least institute feedback. Have 
designs reviewed by a usability engineer, and point out to develop-
ers specific places where they have violated standards.
The most common, worrisome problem is the reinventing of page 
types. Developers may attempt to create a new type of menu, for 
example. The review cycle for such elements is the time to point to 
the standard menu and suggest that developers use an approved 
page type to fit their needs. In some cases, all you can do is give 
feedback. In other environments, you might require changes, 
reporting the level of compliance to the developer’s manager. The 
need for support of your standard is an ongoing requirement. At 
HFI, we have often created offshore teams that scan all screens for 
both ergonomic quality and adherence to standards. It has been a 
cost-effective way to ensure that standards are routinely applied.
Even after you have developed standards, they will continue to 
need attention. The standard is a living document. You will need to 
make improvements, add page types, and clarify areas that receive 
frequent consulting questions. It is also likely that areas where 
refinements are needed will be brought to your attention after your 
showcase project is launched. This refinement will lead to further 
improvements and greater buy-in from all users.

Summary
105
Summary
Implementing interface design standards should be a high priority 
for any serious, user-centered design strategy. The initial costs to cre-
ate standards may seem high, but the return on investment in terms 
of branding, consistency, navigation, performance, and time savings 
from following template-based options more than offsets them. 
These gains will far outweigh any initial cost. Remember, the com-
pletion of the standards is the beginning of the real process—using 
them for actual UX design work. The next chapter outlines the steps 
for achieving a successful showcase project, which will also present 
an opportunity to refine your organization’s standards.

This page intentionally left blank 

107
Chapter 6
Standard User Profiles 
and Ecosystem Models
 
➤Why knowledge of users and ecosystems is so important.
 
➤Working with various levels of user knowledge.
 
➤The imperative of a shared standard.
 
➤Static versus organically growing standard models.
If you ask a good tailor to make a suit, the tailor is sure to ask you to 
come in for extensive measurements. Savvy executives know to 
hand the tailor a large tip to ensure that the job is done with great 
care—it’s that critical. Of course, you can create a suit without any 
measurements. There are common features, after all (most of us 
have two arms and two legs). A “one size fits all” solution is seldom 
flattering, however, and is not really able to fit all. It is the same 
with user experience design. Some features are common to almost 
all users. Most users can see color in the way that humans see color, 
for example. Even so, we can expect that roughly 9% of men will 
have some color perception weakness, and we know that putting 
red on black makes an effect called chromosteriopsis (making the 
object look three dimensional). Thus we can design based on these 
general principles—but not well.

108
Chapter 6    Standard User Profiles and Ecosystem Models
Before 1995 or so, usability specialists concentrated on designing 
human–computer interactions. To build these focused dialogs, we 
needed to know about the user population, their tasks, and the envi-
ronment they worked in. That was really enough when we were 
working with a computer that sat on a desk and was used by a single 
person, in an office-like environment. Today, of course, computing is 
much more ubiquitous. Computers are used everywhere and in much 
more complicated and interrelated ways. We now need to employ eth-
nographically inspired methods to understand many different users 
(or “actors,” in ethnographic terminology), interacting in diverse envi-
ronments, using various artifacts (such as tools, art, and electronic 
devices), in a variety of scenarios. That makes it harder to “know your 
user”—but it also makes such knowledge far more critical.
I’m often asked why Apple Computer was so successful with the 
iPhone, iPad, and other such devices. Without question, these items 
are nicely designed. Apple also uses a lot of persuasion methods 
(such as keeping people waiting in line for purchases of new mod-
els). But the core reason for Apple’s success is that the company 
developed an ecosystem solution. It is not just selling a smartphone 
or a tablet; it is selling a device that allows people to access material 
in a huge application vending website, and go to a physical store 
where Geniuses provide support. In the same way, the Kindle Fire, 
which was initially an awkward tablet, sold millions of units 
because it was a portal to the Amazon.com environment.
Today it is essential to know your user’s complex ecosystem. How-
ever, that ecosystem is big, complex, and difficult for a single person 
to understand, much less research extensively.
The Worst Practice
Some user experience design practitioners are forced to design 
without good data on customers. Many have limitations because 
their organization will not invest in data gathering. This is particu-
larly true with offshore operations, where the cost of travel becomes 
prohibitive. Some UX designers are just not trained properly. But 

The Worst Practice
109
the worst of the lot are those who think they already know every-
thing and don’t need to learn more to do their design work. In all 
cases, these designers are able to apply general principles, so the 
user experience design work is not without value. Unfortunately, 
the resulting design cannot be adjusted to the real needs, workflow, 
environmental factors, and cultural perspective of the users.
You need to know your users. Here are a few examples explaining 
why this is important from my own experience.
HFI was once approached by a medical device company that had a 
moderately complex device that was successfully used in American 
homes. The company wanted to adapt the device for sale in India, 
China, and Brazil. It asked if HFI could translate the instructions for 
these new markets. Soon, however, the company realized that those 
ecosystems are different and actually required a substantially differ-
ent design. It was initially surprised to realize that a continuous 
power supply, clean water, and literate caregivers were not always 
available in the new target markets.
I once designed a website that claimed that it had great security—
the organization’s head of security taunted hackers to just try to get 
to his account. I thought it was a brilliant, persuasive design, but 
our research quickly showed that the design terrified local users. 
Rather than being more persuaded to trust the site, they were actu-
ally made more afraid by my design.
On another occasion, I was reviewing a Japanese website and was 
quite certain I had found a serious flaw. The user was constantly 
hounded by “Are you sure?” questions. The website included 
unnecessarily detailed instructions that went so far as to feature a 
downloadable PDF with a detailed description of each vegetable. 
Apala, however, pointed out that the Japanese have very high 
uncertainty avoidance. The level of detail and extensive instructions 
and verifications worked for the users. They even wanted the phone 
numbers of the company’s officers.
Even very smart and experienced user experience designers will do 
poor work without solid models of the user population and entire 
ecosystem.

110
Chapter 6    Standard User Profiles and Ecosystem Models
Thin Personas: “Jane Is 34 and Has a Cat”
Some user experience design operations proceed with only “thin 
personas.” If you truly understand a set of people, you will under-
stand the group in terms of many dimensions and characteristics. 
Most of these are best understood as distributions of data (see Fig-
ure 6-1). In the bottom distribution of Figure 6-1, we can see that 
substantial populations are focused on physiological, safety, and 
love/belonging needs. This is useful information—but in making a 
persona, you create a single fictitious person (occasionally a couple 
of them). A single person must represent the entire population. Such 
a persona is quite useful in sharing insights with armatures, but 
professional user experience design experts should always work 
with user profiles and not with personas.
It is also important to include the things about the user commu-
nity that are important to design. In a thin persona, we often are 
given very little information of use. If we are told that “Jane is 34 
and has a cat,” what do we know that we can apply to design? We 
might suspect that our user population centers on an age of 34, but 
we don’t know if it includes kids or seniors. Also, knowing that 
your population includes kids or seniors changes a lot in your 
design. Moreover, while pet ownership is a recurring theme in 
thin personas, it does not impact design (with the exception of a 
few pet management-related projects).
Figure 6-1: Population 
distribution of needs, 
taken from UX 
Enterprise. Note that both 
of these charts show a few 
people focused on self-
actualization, and many 
more people focused
on physiological needs 
and love/belonging needs, 
respectively.

Quality Personas
111
Quality Personas
Even the richest personas have the problem of missing out on the 
insights you get from distributions. The good ones, however, can be 
a quick way even for a professional to grasp the user profile. An in-
depth persona description will provide real depth in areas that mat-
ter to the design (see Figure 6-2). A good persona may also 
characterize the fictitious user with a simulated interview and even 
a DILO (Day In the Life Of, pronounced “die-low”) model.
Quality personas are a bit useful, and we start to see the potential of 
having a centralized standard set. These centralized and standard-
ized personas can reduce the amount of data gathering that teams 
have to complete. At least they start to reduce the amount of time 
spent repeating the same research over and over again.
While creating standard personas is useful, we hate to see this as a 
primary initiative in the institutionalization of a user experience 
design practice. Many organizations make this their first project, 
and at the end they just have a set of fictitious people. Someone 
always asks how that outcome has justified the cost of develop-
ment. This is an embarrassing question, because those personas 
won’t do anything until they are applied. In addition, the decision 
makers in the organization are unlikely to understand and feel good 
about the expenditure.
Figure 6-2: User profile, on sale at 
UX Marketplace

112
Chapter 6    Standard User Profiles and Ecosystem Models
The Best Practice: Working with Full Ecosystems
Today’s environment is characterized by truly ubiquitous comput-
ing. We develop applications that are used in a wide range of com-
plex environments. We can no longer just look at one user operating 
one device. We need to design for complex ecosystems that have 
many user types (or “actors”), involved in many scenarios, in many 
environments, using many artifacts, and therein using our software 
(Figure 6-3). We have had to learn to apply ethnographically inspired 
methods to develop this type of understanding. Most real ethnogra-
phers, of course, spend months or years observing a culture—but we 
just don’t have that much time. Even so, we can gather this type of 
widespread understanding on a given context.
The best practice of user experience design is to work from these 
ecosystem models and often design offerings that adapt to these 
ecosystems. Every organization has a range of ecosystems it tends 
to work with. To be able to claim that you truly “know your 
Figure 6-3: A high-level ecosystem drawing for a bank branch

Standard User Profiles and Ecosystems
113
customer,” you must have a good model of all the major ecosystems 
that you target.
Standard User Profiles and Ecosystems
A thin persona takes very little time to develop, but you get what 
you pay for (though it might be better than nothing). In contrast, a 
serious user experience design team needs to get solid ecosystem 
models that can cost a lot to develop. Just studying one environ-
ment, such as an x-ray room in a hospital or use of mobile phones 
by middle-market digital natives in New York, can easily cost 
$250,000. Now consider how management will like having to pay 
this bill for each project. The costs become prohibitive very quickly. 
But there is a solution that makes it possible to work off of good 
data while keeping research costs to a reasonable level.
The answer to managing the cost of ecosystem research is to first 
maintain a shared standard for the commonly addressed ecosys-
tems. Most organizations have a limited number of ecosystems that 
they address. A bank focuses on a branch, a high-net-worth client, a 
call center, and so on. An e-commerce company perhaps focuses on 
house renovations, with householders, contractors, families, and 
bankers as components of the ecosystem. A media company works 
on ecosystems of commuters, homemakers, and advertising buyers. 
There may be a dozen different ecosystems that are important—but 
the number is hardly infinite. In turn, we can create standard ecosys-
tem models based on research and apply those findings to different 
projects for years. The cost of the research is amortized over dozens 
of programs, and now that $250,000 total cost for the research looks 
like $20,000 for each project, which is pretty easy to justify.
When we develop standard user interfaces, we always start with a 
generic set, if possible (see Figure 6-4 for examples). It is far easier to 
edit three generic interfaces than to develop those three standards 
from scratch. In the same way, a major benefit can be realized from 
the acquisition of baseline research that can then be fine-tuned to 
your specific environment.
By acquiring a generic ecosystem model for your domain, you 
will have a much easier time creating a model for your specific 

114
Chapter 6    Standard User Profiles and Ecosystem Models
organization. You can focus your efforts on what makes your situation 
special, instead of wasting time documenting common knowledge.
Acquired ecosystem objects can even be merged to provide a more 
sophisticated starting place. For example, you might need to create a 
health care ecosystem for China. If you can get profiles for only Ameri-
can health care users, you might be able to merge those American users 
with Chinese cultural attributes and obtain at least a generic starting 
place that will be closer to the ecosystem knowledge you really need.
If you have complex needs, it becomes important to have ecosystem 
models that can be accessed using a relational database. As an exam-
ple, let’s think about a pharmaceutical company. It might need to see 
the ecosystem knowledge about a surgeon’s use of a hospital phar-
macy. There may have never been a specific study focused solely on 
this area, but a relational database can pull up all the ecosystem 
knowledge gathered from various studies that would apply. In the 
same way, a bank might need to know about high-net-worth custom-
ers’ use of a branch ATM (Figure 6-5). It is unlikely that a specific 
study will have addressed this issue, but there might be enough parts 
to pull together to get a pretty good idea of that ecosystem. Perhaps 
the understanding will not be sufficient to create a design, but at least 
it can be used as a starting place to do more focused research.
At first glance, it might seem obvious which ecosystems will matter 
for your environment. A bank wants to know about branches; a media 
company cares about how people watch videos. In reality, the defini-
tion of an ecosystem quickly becomes very complex, because various 
ecosystems can be very different. The branch ecosystem consists of 
Figure 6-4: A generic set of health care-related user profiles available for 
$900 from www.uxmarketplace.com

Static versus Organic Models
115
knowledge of everything around an environment; the watching vid-
eos ecosystem entails knowledge of everything around a scenario. In 
fact, ecosystems may be centered on almost anything. You might need 
to know everything about how a given design is used, or what a user 
experiences. You might need to know the focus of a previous study, 
everything around high-level design projects that have been com-
pleted, or everything around a strategic need (such as migrating cus-
tomers to digital channels or reducing calls to the support group). And 
if this is not complex enough, you might need to know about combi-
nations. For example, you might need to know about a user in an 
environment (e.g., a surgeon in her office), or about multiple users, 
using a device, while completing a scenario, in an environment (e.g., a 
family using mobile devices while watching movies at home). With 
these permutations, you can see why a relational database is almost 
essential for managing ecosystem knowledge.
Static versus Organic Models
Even if you have a very focused business, you will never really 
achieve a complete and final understanding of your customer. Your 
standard ecosystem models will always need to expand.
Figure 6-5: Even though a specific study with this focus has never been 
done, we can still see everything we know about high-net-worth customers’ 
use of a branch ATM using the UXEnterprise environment

116
Chapter 6    Standard User Profiles and Ecosystem Models
Today we live in times where every ecosystem is subject to change. 
There are changes in technology, so, for example, you might need to 
understand how mobile technology fits in, or near-field communi-
cation, or wearable devices. But technology is not the only source of 
change. There are rapid changes based on climate, and geopolitics, 
and shifting values, and memes. While your ecosystem models may 
be essential and efficient, you will still need to invest in periodic 
updates, just to keep up with changes in your field.
There is also a need to continuously get deeper and more specific 
insights. Obtaining such in-depth understanding is far better than 
doing the same research over. The standard ecosystems should pro-
vide solid foundational models, but you might want to conduct in-
depth studies of how customers feel about using an ATM. That 
research will then need to be added to the existing ecosystem model. 
You will also find that good research tends to reveal a very complex 
and interesting set of driving forces, roadblocks, beliefs, and feel-
ings. Beyond the obvious cost savings attributable to a shared and 
standard ecosystem model, there is value in letting research focus 
on more sophisticated issues.
Summary
Every organization should have standard, shared ecosystem models 
for the major user domains in its space. Development of such mod-
els eliminates the need for (and cost of) re-researching your custom-
ers. Even more important, it allows you to invest in research that 
gives a deeper and more specific understanding of your customers. 
You can also amortize the cost of the research across years of devel-
opment projects.
For large-scale organizations, it is important to have these ecosys-
tem models computerized so that they can be continuously 
upgraded. In addition, they must have relational database capabili-
ties so that you can pull out just the knowledge of interest to your 
design project.

117
Chapter 7
Tools, Templates, 
and Testing Facilities
 
➤If you throw usability staff into the organization without 
the right equipment, they are going to be slow and ineffi-
cient, and impractical in their approach.
 
➤Get appropriate tools (e.g., lab equipment and prototyping 
software), templates (e.g., reusable questionnaires), and 
testing facilities. These items form an essential toolkit—the 
core infrastructure for routine usability work.
 
➤Your toolkit can enable usability designers to efficiently 
complete the user experience design methodology. To deter-
mine the toolkit you need, review your methodology.
A well-trained staff in a room with nothing but paper can out-design 
a poorly trained staff equipped with a state-of-the-art facility. While 
in China, I was once given a tour of a half-million-dollar usability 
testing facility. It was impressive—very advanced looking. Later, in 
quiet conversations with the staff, it became clear that the team had 
no idea what to do with the facility. They had equipment, but no 
software to support the testing, and no methods or skills.

118
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
The main value of facilities, tools, and templates derives from time 
savings. Instead of creating a testing form from scratch every time a 
test is needed, a user experience design engineer can take an exist-
ing form and modify it for a client’s specific test in approximately 
20 minutes. By comparison, creating the concept and forms for a test 
from scratch may take days or even weeks. Clearly, it is advanta-
geous to hire good staff members and supply them with the tools 
that can make a difference.
This chapter outlines the tools you need, the templates that are help-
ful, and the usability testing facilities that will help your staff be 
most efficient and effective. Of course, by the time this book is pub-
lished, some of the tools and templates described here may be out-
dated. New developments are taking place all the time. For example, 
you might hear that usability testing labs have recently moved from 
“marginally useful in special circumstances” to being “a practical 
part of almost every test.” Or you might learn that remote testing, 
which isn’t used often today, is becoming far more practical and, 
therefore, much more widely used. Remote testing is usability test-
ing performed at a distance; the participant and the facilitator are 
not in the room together (and may not even be on the same conti-
nent), yet the facilitator can monitor what the participant is doing 
and saying. Unmoderated remote tests are tests that are run auto-
matically. The participant interacts with a scripted program that col-
lects performance data and responses. Because the contents of 
toolkits will likely change, a skeptical attitude about these tools is 
useful—if a tool does not really make a difference in the design, 
spend your usability testing budget elsewhere.
Introduction to Your Toolkit
Your methodology points to the facilities, tools, and templates you 
need. For example, if the methodology specifies that a test of brand-
ing occurs at a certain point, you will want to have templates for 
reusable questionnaires and a standard template for the final report.
If you update your methodology, you may need to update the cor-
responding tools, templates, and facilities as well. Conversely, the 

Testing Facilities
119
introduction of new facilities, tools, and templates might lead you 
to change your methodology. Online prototyping has become eas-
ier, for example, so you might move it to an earlier point in the 
design cycle. Likewise, as remote testing becomes more feasible and 
useful, you might add it to your methodology and develop new 
tools and templates to fit it. Be careful about implementing these 
kinds of changes, however: some “amazing” breakthroughs are 
actually not particularly useful. Consider the new, crowdsourcing 
solutions that let many people review your design. While there are 
some known advantages to crowdsourcing supporting innovation, 
having a load of armatures be reviewed out of context may not be a 
valid methodology.
The following sections cover the infrastructure you should consider 
implementing at your company. They also explore scenarios and 
priorities for each facility.
Testing Facilities
Depending on the circumstances, testing facilities can range from a 
 simple office setting or hotel room to a full-blown usability testing 
lab. Of course, a full usability testing lab is not necessary to conduct 
usability testing. If office space is at a premium, the office of one of 
the usability team members can be used for testing. There may not 
be a one-way mirror, special equipment, or videotaping in such a 
site; instead, you may have only a few chairs, a desk, and a com-
puter at your disposal. Skilled staff members, however, can still suc-
cessfully create and run the tests. Similarly, it is quite acceptable to 
use a conference room to run tests, but it is critical that the room be 
reasonably quiet and free of visual and auditory interruptions. For 
this reason, it is best practice not to use participants’ workspaces for 
testing. You can observe them there, but workspaces are not good 
places to run tests.
There are a number of reasons for establishing a formal, dedicated 
usability testing facility. Notably, designating a space for testing 
shows a commitment to testing within the organization. While it is 
nice to have a room or perhaps a suite with that label, the practical 

120
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
value of a usability testing facility is less significant than the politi-
cal statement it makes. Of course, the facility becomes an albatross if 
it is not regularly used—or evolves into a storage space.
While running tests in storage closets can still yield quite good 
results, it is best to have a testing environment that makes the par-
ticipants and the facilitator feel comfortable and important. If you 
can make the test a relaxed experience, you will get more accurate 
and complete results. At the same time, you do not want the evalu-
ation environment to feel too formal. Facilities that feel imposing 
and clinical should be avoided. Usability engineers call the people 
who engage in testing participants instead of subjects for a reason; no 
one likes to feel like a lab rat!
Facilitating a test is a very demanding activity. It takes focus, and 
it’s difficult, if not impossible, for one person to simultaneously 
keep the test process running, observe the nuances of the results, 
and record data. There is no additional energy or time left to greet 
participants, provide the initial forms, and hand out the compensa-
tion once the testing is complete. Consequently, it is very useful to 
have additional staff available to handle these functions. Profes-
sional testing facilities, for example, have support staff.
In some cases, you will need a facility geographically separated 
from your offices. You might decide to do testing in a number of cit-
ies intermittently, or you might even need to complete testing in 
these different cities quite often. In this scenario, it makes sense to 
establish a relationship with a testing facility in each location. These 
testing facilities are generally set up for marketing studies, but they 
work well for usability testing. It is also possible to use a conference 
room in a hotel, but testing facilities come with valuable amenities 
such as a greeter, a one-way mirror, built-in sound and video, and 
usually a more comfortable atmosphere.
Whether you sign a contract with a professional testing facility or 
build your own testing space, there are a few other advantages asso-
ciated with use of a professional testing facility versus use of a sim-
ple conference room for usability testing. Figures 7-1 and 7-2 show 
the appearance of a typical professional testing facility. Your facility 
may have a one-way mirror. Most people can tell when you have a 
one-way mirror, so if your facility has one in place, you should be 

Testing Facilities
121
Figure 7-1: Observer’s side of a professional testing 
facility using a one-way mirror1
Figure 7-2: User’s side of a professional testing 
facility using a one-way mirror2
1. Photo courtesy of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
2. Photo courtesy of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

122
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
straightforward about it. With proper briefing, the mirror works 
very well. Developers, business owners, and marketing and usabil-
ity staff can come to the site and observe the participants without 
disturbing the test. They can discuss what they see and send in their 
questions to the test facilitator. Alternatively, instead of a one-way 
mirror, you can use video feeds to adjacent rooms to allow others to 
observe without disturbing the test.
Recording of Testing Sessions
There is value in recording data-gathering and testing  sessions. Pro-
fessional facilities have video capability, and the new portable labs 
support video as part of their software.
Two types of recording usage may be employed. One common prac-
tice is to produce a full video recording of the session for the record. 
A continuous tape is made of the test, and you end up with many 
hours of tape. If someone later says, “I don’t believe the user actu-
ally did that,” you can offer to let him or her see the appropriate 
portion of the tape. In other cases, a much shorter highlights tape is 
culled from the full videotaping sessions. This edited video, 
5–10 minutes long, shows key findings of the usability testing 
through the voices and actions of the participants themselves. Care-
fully selected examples on well-edited highlights tapes often can 
depoliticize the usability test findings: the finding is no longer the 
“opinion” of the tester, but rather the voice of the participant. High-
lights tapes effectively grip the audience’s attention when used as 
part of the final presentation (which, from a practical standpoint, 
cannot be done with the full, unedited video of the session). This is 
a very effective practice—there is nothing like showing video of the 
users in action.
In the past, recording sessions were prohibitively expensive, but the 
“shoebox” usability equipment available today (see Figure 7-3) has 
made the cost much more reasonable. Such equipment includes a 
TV camera, microphone, monitor, and a remote marker to make it 
easy to find interesting tape segments. There is actually no tape—
just a high-capacity hard drive to save the data—so it is also far 

Recording of Testing Sessions
123
easier to edit and present the results. This ease of use, combined 
with its reasonable cost, makes the shoebox lab a practical alterna-
tive to traditional equipment.
Most labs are using applications and hardware that make video 
editing increasingly efficient. With these new facilities, you can eas-
ily place parts of the video record in the report (see the sample of a 
test presentation video in Figure 7-4). The lab software lets you 
record the user’s facial expressions and the activity on the screen. 
You can then add detail to reports with clear instances of user 
actions and reactions.
A few labs use an eye-tracking device, which identifies where the 
user’s eye is fixating. You can gain a lot of information from this 
device. For example, you can see users scanning around the page 
because they are lost or scanning an image because they cannot tell 
if it is selectable.
Eye-tracking devices are very useful for research purposes. For 
ex ample, studies have shown that people start scanning in the main 
area of a webpage and initially ignore the logo, tabs, and left-hand 
Figure 7-3: Shoebox usability equipment

124
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
navigation [Schroeder 1998], and that people’s eyes are drawn first 
to areas that have saturated colors (pure bright colors), darker areas, 
and areas of visual complexity [Najjar 1990].
You do not need an eye-tracking device to run an excellent usability 
test. A good facilitator can see where the user is looking and can 
supply you with very similar data. An eye-tracking device is expen-
sive and requires setup time, so you probably won’t use it for rou-
tine usability tests. It may come in handy in a remote usability test, 
however, because the facilitator will not be physically pres ent with 
the participant.
Modeling Tools and Software
Most of the important usability work can be completed with a 
 simple Microsoft Office suite and software for graphics work. It 
may help to have a flowcharting package, but that’s about all the 
software you need. You also need to be able to use a word processor 
to document meetings and descriptions, and to have some kind of 
Figure 7-4: Example of a video record from a usability test

Modeling Tools and Software
125
tool to mock up screens and pages. Which tool you use is not as 
critical as making sure that the usability staff members are comfort-
able with that tool and do not get distracted or waste time writing 
“code” to make the screen mock-ups work. Some people prefer a 
graphics program such as Adobe Photoshop, but Micro soft Power-
Point or other presentation tools work just as well. Some usability 
staff already have facility with tools such as Microsoft Visio. What-
ever tool your staff members already know how to use that allows 
them to quickly mock up screens and pages is the best tool to use.
Selecting Design and Research Tools: 
Why the Rules Are Changing
Michael Rawlins, Sr., User Experience Design Architect—
ESPN and President Emeritus, CT UXPA
The options for selecting UX tools for creating wireframes and 
conducting research seem ubiquitous. Expect this trend to con-
tinue for the foreseeable future. UX teams will play a role in 
shaping the future proactively by revolutionizing the UX do-
main while opening the field up to more diverse thinkers and 
product visionaries.
Innovating the Trigger
Typically, UX teams start the innovation process in response to 
feedback provided by a new team member or some excitement 
generated out of a training class or conference demonstration. 
To innovate more effectively, we need to proactively experi-
ment with software on our own using all trial periods offered 
by software vendors (take the tools through the paces).
Forget about the Traditional Software Purchase Matrix
Strategies are evolving for influencing funding stakeholders 
and corporate procurement/purchasing offices (getting them 
to “say yes”) to acquire design and research tools. There are too 
many tools to perform traditional matrixes—rather, we should 
perform SWOT analysis (a diagram that maps strengths, 
(continues)

126
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
Selecting Design and Research Tools: 
Why the Rules Are Changing (continued)
weakness, opportunities, and threats) to influence funding 
stakeholder decisions. This will enable you to establish criteria 
that are more salient:
• Who are the leaders?
• Who are the lagers?
• Who are the obsolete players, and why?
This evolution will continue for the foreseeable future—primarily 
because some smart product designers noticed opportunities to 
surpass the industry incumbents. Design and research tools have 
become vulnerable. Some are “too big to respond”—and some 
“simply out of touch.” It’s important to establish “direct” relation-
ships with the software vendors—and join them as product cre-
ation collaborators. Tool choices are somewhat overwhelming. 
Here are a few recommendations to help UX grow and expand.
What Are the New Rules and Expectations?
New expectations have influenced the table stakes in software 
acquisition. As consumers, we are accustomed to the “no 
strings attached,” full-feature, free-trial period. Here are a few 
expectations:
• Installation should be as easy as uninstallation.
• No invasive sales interaction will occur during the trial 
period.
• The software will work as marketed.
UX teams should merge traditional software acquisition strate-
gies while aggressively moving toward a stronger role in influ-
encing software product developers (vendor community).
Three Key Acquisition Strategies
1. Perform SWOT analysis for research.
• Why this software?
• Are demos available?

Modeling Tools and Software
127
• What are the critical path features of the software—are 
they “must-have features”?
• Which optional features could be useful?
• Can we cost-effectively and efficiently build this in-house?
• What is the cost of this software?
Questions that lead to innovative thinking:
• Will the software disrupt the current process?
 °
Example: Why do we need to sketch on paper, when 
there is prototyping software that looks like a sketch?
• Is the software easy to adopt—extending the type of re-
sources that can use the tool?
 °
Example: Can the UX team delegate specific user test-
ing rounds to non-UX resources?
• Are the software makers/vendors accessible?
 °
Will they openly share their product development 
roadmaps?
 °
Are they including the team in ideation sessions?
 °
Do they feel like partners?
Nailing this preliminary research is the first step in buying 
software successfully. Not only does it save you money in the 
long run, but it also allows you to fully grasp your company’s 
future needs.
Take your time and analyze your company’s needs. Vet your 
SWOT analysis with other UX teams in your company (and 
create scorecards for how features and capabilities align with 
the leading software solution).
2. Costs: Low cost does not equal low value.
There have been many exciting innovations in software as a 
service (SAAS) targeted toward enhancing our ability to de-
velop and share interactive prototypes and perform product 
research. Many of the best tools are subscription based. I see 
(continues)

128
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
Selecting Design and Research Tools: 
Why the Rules Are Changing (continued)
this trend becoming more pervasive going forward, with the 
leaders disrupting the current processes (becoming more 
“lean” and “time-to-market” focused). UX teams need to be 
pragmatic about asking cost-structure questions carefully—
making sure that the vendor can sustain the long-term 
viability:
• How did the company form?
• What is the year-over-year performance?
• Are there any rebates available?
• Are you paying for other features that aren’t necessary?
• How flexible is the individual per-seat licensing 
structure?
In an ideal world, cost wouldn’t be a determining factor when 
buying software. Unfortunately, we live in a world where we 
need and want the price to be right. Making sure you pay only 
for the features you need is the number one priority when it 
comes to price.
3. Learning curve.
• Who needs to use this software?
• How difficult is it to use and grasp all the important 
features?
• How much will it cost to train employees?
• Will you have to outsource training?
• Are the time and resources available?
What is the time frame to learn the software? Minimally, there 
should be a demo version of the software available or a full-
feature trial to download. If not, that omission is indicative of 
the vendor being out of touch.

Modeling Tools and Software
129
Conclusions
Most UX professionals are facing the challenges associated with 
demonstrating our considerable value proposition to product 
design—especially in the face of shorter time frames and devel-
opment life cycles. Tools enable us to disrupt the current mind-
set and contribute to the success of the product design and 
adoption. Here are a few implied takeaway messages:
• Select tools for prototyping that can be shared with non-
UX resources (increase our effectiveness to focus on more 
valuable project activities).
 °
Example: Balsamiq Mockups software allows non-
UX resources, using drag-and-drop widgets, to create 
low-fidelity visual examples. This enables non-UX re-
sources to disrupt the current work streams through 
collaboration and sharing visions.
• Seek research tools that extend the reach of traditional 
tools (e.g., remote unmoderated usability testing tools) 
that can be shared in social media channels.
 °
Example: ZURBapps such as Verifyapp and Solidify-
app enable stakeholders to participate in constructing 
and seeing real-time responses to how people work 
with their product visions. This disruption to the typ-
ical business relationship builds more trust and cred-
ibility for the UX community—and leads to a greater 
understanding of why our methods work.
The rules for selecting software have changed. UX resources 
need to try as many tools as they can. Don’t wait for the new 
team member, or the inspiration to come from a class or semi-
nar. Download, subscribe, try, blog, complain, and influence!

130
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
Sophisticated modeling tools may or may not be necessary. Avail-
able software can assist in the development of very large taskflows 
and the modeling of taskflow behavior. An example of this type of 
software is Micro Saint (from Micro Analysis and Design, Inc.), 
which supports task modeling. This software has been used to good 
effect in very complex, critical applications, especially in the mili-
tary design arena (although it has yet to be employed in producing 
commercial websites or applications).
Limited modeling tools are available for usability work. You may 
wish to create your own. At HFI, we built an application called the 
Task Modeler—essentially a specialized spreadsheet that adds up 
the number of clicks, mouse movements, and keystrokes used to 
complete a task. Using this application on a group of tasks that are 
representative of the work to be completed on a given interface pro-
vides a good indication of the time it will take an expert user to use 
the software. Such data are important because when measuring 
how fast users complete tasks during a usability test, you’re mea-
suring their speed during their initial usage, not their speed after 
extended experience with the interface. During the test, users spend 
only minutes with the software, so they will not be experts on using 
the interface.
In many cases, however, you may be designing for expert users. 
Also, you don’t want to make the classic blunder of designing your 
software or application for first usage only. For example, while a 
menu design that can be used easily and quickly by novices is ini-
tially a much better choice than using keyboard commands, com-
mands are usually faster once they are learned. If the software is to 
be used on a full-time basis, going with the “easy” menu can be a 
million-dollar mistake.
Many companies have purchased tools to track websites and pro-
vide feedback and statistics on usage. Some of these tools claim to 
provide usability information and are good choices for performing 
quick checks and validation. For example, some tools let you know 
if your alt text tags are missing (accessibility tools) or if your line 
lengths are long. Be wary, however, of tools that track download 
times for a page, the number of users who clicked on a page, or the 
amount of time people spent on a webpage, independent of other 

Data Gathering and Testing Techniques
131
information. While this information can be useful to know, it can 
also be misleading. Why did a user spend only 3 seconds on a page? 
Was it because (1) the page is poorly designed, (2) the page is well 
designed and the user got what he or she wanted right away, or 
(3) the page before the current one was poorly designed, so that the 
user clicked on the wrong link? You cannot determine this underly-
ing rationale just by reading a report on where people went and 
how long they stayed. Nothing can replace a trained usability pro-
fessional for evaluating a screen or page or watching and interpret-
ing users performing a task.
If you are involved in websites, you really should have an A:B test-
ing engine. It is a psychologist’s dream. When I was in graduate 
school, we would run perhaps 30 people through an experiment 
and we were happy to get that amount of testing done within a sin-
gle semester. With A:B testing, you can run a comparison study and 
(for a large site) have 10,000 participants in an hour. The A:B test 
facility randomly sorts customers onto different versions of the site 
and then tracks their behavior, such as how much they purchase. It 
is just a great tool.
Like all tools, however, A:B testing has its limits. The “recipe” you 
are testing is critical. If you do not test a good idea, there is no way 
that A:B testing can magically recommend what to do. Companies 
that rely too heavily on this type of testing may think they are doing 
great work, but they may be uncompetitive in that their designs fail 
to innovate and may just have fragmented good ideas that don’t 
hold together. Also, it is important to remember that with the large 
number of participants in these studies, it is easy to show statisti-
cally significant differences between designs that are in reality so 
small as to be trivial.
Data Gathering and Testing Techniques
Data gathering and testing are some of the most valuable tasks your 
user experience design team can perform. But the phrase “run a 
usability test” is a general one. There is not a single type of testing, 
but rather many different types. There are, for example, tests of 

132
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
branding, early paper prototyping tests for conceptual design, and 
later tests on robust working prototypes. You must select the type of 
test needed for where you are in your development process and 
then create the correct type of test questionnaires to support it.
You can save a lot of money and time by developing an initial set of 
questions and then customizing them as needed for each test. Defin-
ing and creating predesigned templates can save countless hours. 
While no template for a given type of test works for all situations, 
there is certainly value in having a template as part of your infra-
structure. Some example template forms include those listed here:
• The screener is an essential questionnaire used to select par-
ticipants for a study. It can help eliminate participants who 
are too sophisticated or too inexperienced. In some cases, a 
template can be developed and used repeatedly for each 
study that will access those types of users, although typically 
the template must be modified for each test.
• Usability testing routine forms are needed when running us-
ability tests. While not exciting, they are quite necessary. For 
example, you must have an informed consent form to get each 
participant’s agreement to participate. Without this form in 
place, you are in violation of ethics in human research and can 
be sued. You may also need demographics forms and forms to 
acknowledge compensation.
As mentioned, there is more than one type of usability test. Follow-
ing are descriptions of several tests. Which one you use depends on 
what questions you are trying to answer.
• Brand perception tests let you see how the user perceives the 
current site or application. One version of this test is for a sin-
gle design; a variant of the test can compare your design with 
competitors’ designs, or to select the best among suggested 
designs. Such testing can be conducted with designs from dif-
ferent graphic artists or even different agencies. Regardless of 
the scenario, the questionnaire for this test must be custom-
ized to reflect the company’s target brand values. Which ones 
are you looking for, and which do you want to make sure to 

Data Gathering and Testing Techniques
133
avoid: trendy, warm, friendly, sophisticated, “tech-y”? You 
need to tailor the questionnaire accordingly.
• If you ask users if they want a given function, they almost al-
ways say yes. If you give them a list of potential functions and 
ask them to rate how important those choices are, they rate 
most functions as very important. But if you give users a list 
of possible functions and say they can have only three, you 
get interesting results. This test, called a functional salience 
test, is a great way to identify the relative importance of 
functions.
• A test of affordance determines whether users can tell what 
they can select on a page. In this test, you simply give users a 
printed copy of a page and tell them, “Circle the items you 
think you can select and click on.” You will see if there are se-
lectable items that users cannot tell are selectable. You will 
also see if there are nonselectable items that make users think 
they can select them.
• “Think aloud” tests consist of a whole family of tests in which 
the user is told to do a series of tasks, which are observed. Us-
ers are asked to read out loud as they work and tell the facili-
tator what they are thinking. This is a great way to find 
problems in a design. You can also estimate how long it will 
take users to complete tasks.
• The card sort test is a useful method if you are trying to find 
how users categorize the topics in a website or application. 
With this type of testing, you create stacks of cards with one 
item on each card, and then the participants group the cards 
in a way that makes sense to them. Software can help collect 
and analyze the groupings used by different participants. The 
software uses cluster analysis and gives results that can guide 
the information structure of the design.3
• While the card sort test can help guide the design, you can use 
the reverse card sort method to check whether the design 
3. IBM’s EZSort programs are an example of cluster analysis software. For more information, visit 
www3.ibm.com/ibm/easy/eou_ext.nsf/Publish/410.

134
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
worked. With this type of testing, you give the participants a 
list of items and see if they can figure out where to go to find 
them. If they can find the items, the navigational structure is 
self-evident.
• Subjective ratings are a large family of tests that allow users 
to describe how they feel about your site or application. They 
decompose or break down users’ perceptions to help you 
more easily track the cause of problems. For example, you 
might find that people love the colors but feel that the site is 
very slow. These findings need to be carefully considered. 
Many users might say that they want a search facility, but this 
may actually indicate a problem with the structure of the site. 
The stated desire for a search facility is often just a symptom 
of being lost in a poor navigational structure.
Note: While standard tests help you quickly prepare testing, each 
test needs its own set of forms, such as video consent forms, facilita-
tor scripts, task instructions, and so on.
Advanced Methods
In addition to the classic usability analyses, a range of analytical 
methods look at the big picture, meaning the ecosystem of the cus-
tomer. Some of these methods were inspired by ethnographic stud-
ies, such as shadowing. In this approach, researchers quietly follow 
and observe participants. In designing a mobile phone for use in an 
emerging economy, for example, shadowing lets us notice the need 
for much louder, dust-resistant devices to handle the conditions on 
trains (Figure 7-5).
Other methods allow us to probe into the user’s emotional schema. 
When designing for psychological influence, we want to be able to 
model the customer’s drivers, blocks, beliefs, and feelings. The 
more deeply we can understand the user, the more leverage we 
have on influencing conversion.

The Special Needs of International Testing
135
The Special Needs of International Testing
International testing is far more difficult to coordinate and involves 
much more than just arranging for facilities and participants in 
many countries and racking up lots of air miles. Test procedures 
don’t work cross-culturally; therefore, international testing takes 
special capabilities and infrastructure. You need to deal with trans-
lation issues and adjust the testing methodology based on cultural 
differences. For example, in some cultures it is not polite to criticize, 
so the usual methods of asking users to think aloud, expecting that 
they will say what they think is wrong with the product, may not 
work. If you are testing internationally, make sure you leave enough 
time to deal with these different and differing circumstances.
Figure 7-5: A PET analysis (persuasion, emotion, and trust) created after 
in-depth gestalt-style interviews about buying a mobile phone

136
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
The Bollywood Method4
Apala Lahiri, Global Chief of Technical Staff
CEO, Institute of Customer Experience
The main challenge with usability testing in Asia is that it is 
impolite to tell someone they have a bad design. It is embar-
rassing within this culture to admit that you cannot find some-
thing, so it is very hard to get feedback.
I conducted a test on a site that offered airline tickets for sale. 
I used a conventional simulation testing method and got lit-
tle feedback. I could see that users were not succeeding, but 
they would not willingly discuss the problems they were 
experiencing.
I then tried a new method I had developed, called the Bolly-
wood Method. Bollywood is the Hollywood of India and 
makes far more movies each year than Hollywood does. Bol-
lywood movies are famous for having long and emotionally 
involved plots. The movies have great pathos and excitement. 
In applying the Bollywood Method to this testing scenario, I 
described a dire fantasy situation. I asked each participant to 
imagine that his or her beautiful, young, and innocent niece is 
about to be married. But suddenly the family receives news 
that the prospective groom is a member of the underground. 
He is a hit man! His whole life story is a sham, and he is already 
married! The participant has sole possession of this evidence 
and must book airline tickets to Bangalore for himself or her-
self and the groom’s current wife. Time is of the essence!
The test participants willingly entered this fantasy, and with 
great excitement they began the ticket booking process. Even 
minor difficulties they encountered resulted in immediate and 
incisive commentary. The participants complained about the 
button naming and placement. They pointed out the number of 
4. Based on Chavan [2002].

Recruiting Interview and Testing Participants
137
Recruiting Interview and Testing Participants
Usability tests typically require fewer participants than marketing 
research studies because the findings in usability tests are usually 
qualitative, rather than statistically descriptive. In usability testing, 
you are not trying to generalize your results or estimate the num-
bers or percentage of people who feel or would react to a product in 
a certain way. Instead, you are exploring. You are trying to deter-
mine whether there are usability issues, what they are if they do 
exist, and how you might solve them. In doing so, you are trying to 
delve into the psychology of your users. This requires that the par-
ticipants you test be representative of the target population of actual 
users. In other words, you need to find representative users for data 
gathering and usability testing.
In-house users, while easy to find, aren’t usually acceptable partici-
pants because they probably care more about the company than real 
users do. They see the application as being worthy of additional 
effort and might exaggerate its value, or they might not flag aspects 
of the design that make it impractical. They are also familiar with 
the company’s in-house language, concepts, attitude, and mindset, 
and they might even have different aesthetic values and perceptions 
than typical end users.
There is one case in which performing tests with in-house users is 
appropriate: if you are actually building an application for internal 
staff members. Sampling them is usually a very easy and informal 
process; staff members just need to be screened and scheduled.
extra steps in booking. The fantasy situation gave them license 
to communicate in a way they never would have under normal 
evaluation methods.
This method worked well in India and may even be able to be 
generalized to special situations in North America and other 
places where participants may hesitate to communicate freely.

138
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
Many market research and usability testing companies have entire 
staffs of screeners—clerical-level staff who call lists of potential par-
ticipants and ask the questions included in a special questionnaire 
(also called a screener, as noted earlier in the chapter). The staff 
members use the questionnaire to select participants who fit the cri-
teria for the study. Participants are typically offered a fee of $100 to 
$200 each, depending on how stringent the required match criteria 
are. Some of these testing facilities maintain databases of potential 
participants. This can be convenient, but the lists may be overused. 
(Some people seem to make a part-time job out of participating in 
studies!) You may want a fresher list.
To accomplish this, you may need to ask the recruiting firm about 
the people in their databases. You can shop around for databases 
and recruiters, and specify that the participants must not have been 
in any studies during the last 12 months. It may be more challeng-
ing to find these kinds of participants, which may make your 
recruiting more expensive. If you need general participants—for 
example, people between the ages of 20 and 60 who purchase 
goods from the Web at least once every 3 months—it may be rela-
tively easy to find “fresh” participants. If you need people who 
work in a copy center who have never used a particular type of 
software, you will pay more for this type of recruiting. It is useful 
to have relationships established with companies that can help you 
recruit participants.
If your user group consists of current customers, it may be possi-
ble to develop a list of customers and have the staff screeners work 
from that list. This may be easier and more cost-effective than 
using a recruiting firm. In some cases, you can have internal staff 
work temporarily as screeners. This costs very little unless you 
need to hire in-house staff to work as screeners on a full-time basis. 
Using in-house screeners saves money over hiring a screener con-
sulting firm, but the in-house screeners will need to be trained. 
Usability consultants, in contrast, are already trained and just 
charge you per project. In any event, having a smoothly running 
mechanism for obtaining study participants helps keep usability 
work progressing—problems with obtaining participants is the 
single most common source for the delay of usability projects.

Recruiting Interview and Testing Participants
139
A whole series of deliverable documents result from proper usabil-
ity work. Some people approach usability without much of a con-
cept of deliverables, thinking that by simply studying the user, good 
things will happen. That may be true—good things may happen. 
But making usability work efficient and repeatable requires an orga-
nized set of deliverable documents. The deliverables provide a clear 
focus and a set of milestones for usability work. As an example, 
Table 7-1 lists the major deliverables in the Schaffer Method.
It takes time to create good deliverables, but they offer several 
benefits:
• They document that steps in the methodology are actually 
completed.
• They allow work to be communicated to others—for instance, 
key stakeholders and development staff.
• They allow work and processes to be repeated.
Table 7-1:  The Major Deliverables in the HFI Framework Methodology 
(Version 5)
Expert Review Report
Usability Test Report
Kickoff Presentation
Data Gathering Plan
Insight of the Data Gathering
Contract for Design
User Interface Structure
Standards Identification
Custom Standard
Module Definition
Module Requirements
Screen Flow, Functions, and 
Fields
Wireframes
Graphic Treatment
Simulation Test Results
Functional Specification
Developer Briefing
Design Modification Log
Final Usability Test
Plan for Process Improvement
Post Release Evaluation
Localization Assessment
Interface Translation 
Specification

140
Chapter 7    Tools, Templates, and Testing Facilities
Most deliverables require several smaller deliverables to create the 
end product. In the end, there may be hundreds of deliverables. 
Imagine that you needed to create these deliverables from scratch 
for each project, determining the appropriate document structure 
and inventing the style of presentation. The level of investment 
required to achieve this goal would make usability engineering pro-
grams prohibitive in terms of both cost and time. If each of the 
23 deliverables listed in Table 7-1 took just 1⁄2 day to create structur-
ally, for example, then this task would add 111⁄2 days to the proj ect.
If usability is to be routine, standard reusable deliverables are indis-
pensable. They help organize the project and save valuable time. 
Standard deliverables also make it is easier for managers to check a 
project’s progress because they know the full set of deliverables to 
expect. Finally, using standard deliverables makes it easier to get 
oriented with and review an unfamiliar project.
Summary
The value of the tools, templates, and facilities outlined in this chap-
ter lies in their ability to save you valuable time. However, it remains 
crit ical to pick the items most appropriate for your efforts. It is not 
sensible to invest in something just because it is a new technology. 
Refer back to your strategy often, and remember to let your meth-
odology determine your toolkit.

141
Chapter 8
Training and Certification
 
➤Training is an effective way to promote user experience 
design and ensure that key staff members have required 
skills.
 
➤Provide knowledge training to educate most staff members 
about the importance of the process of user experience 
design. It is pos sible to train hundreds of people in just half 
a day.
 
➤Provide skills training to development staff members who 
will be doing interface design work. Instruct them on how 
to do user experience design work throughout the cycle of 
development. It is possible to train dozens of people in 
10–20 days.
 
➤Encourage the most highly trained staff members to become 
certified.
 
➤Use the sample training plan in this chapter as the basis for 
your own plan.
In the institutionalization process, training is a powerful tool, and a 
comfortable one to implement. The power of training is that it 
enables personnel to share insights and achieve shifts in perspective 

142
Chapter 8    Training and Certification
without the expense—and potential embarrassment—of learning 
while performing actual project work. The school of hard knocks is 
a miserable substitute for organized, research-based instruction.
Classes also provide a portal to the literature in the field. There is a 
billion dollars’ worth of research in user experience design, but it 
could take a lifetime to read and digest the material that applies just 
to software design. Usability training, like any other educational 
experience, distills the literature into its key insights, principles, 
facts, and models. If you start the process of institutionaliz ing user 
experience design without training, you will soon find yourself 
back to doing design by intuition—or trial and error.
This chapter describes the types of training available and clarifies 
how training can fit into your overall program. It discusses certifica-
tion programs and outlines a sample training program you can use 
as a basis for planning your own program. The examples in this 
chapter are from HFI, but many other qualified companies and 
schools provide similar classes (e.g., Nielsen Norman Group, User 
Interface Engineering, and Deborah J. Mayhew and Associates).
Types of Training
There are two distinct types of training: knowledge training and 
skills training. In knowledge training, participants gain an appre-
ciation of the need for usability engineering, an understanding of 
what user experience design encompasses, and an ability to identify 
the types of tasks required in the user-centered design process. They 
do not learn to complete a development activity; however, it is in 
skills training that participants learn how to perform actual user 
experience design tasks. Trainees may practice accomplishing eco-
system research, detailed design review, or usability tests. They may 
need some coaching to get comfortable with a task and to fine-tune 
their skills, but skills training will provide them with the basic 
capabilities.

Types of Training
143
The Difference between Knowledge and Skills Training
Dr. Phil Goddard
There are two types of long-term memory: there’s declarative 
memory and there’s procedural memory. Declarative memory 
is a repository for facts—things that you learn about, that you 
can recite—it’s information about things. The other memory re-
pository is procedural memory. Procedural memory stores pro-
cedures or processes that you perform or do, and once learned 
they become automatic and are done unconsciously. In fact, 
you can’t describe them verbally; you often have to struggle to 
describe them and resort to hand waving.
Expertise requires both knowledge and skill. For example, con-
sider riding a bike—with a little knowledge (rest both hands on 
the bars, maintain steady speed, keep your feet on the pedals) 
and lots of practice, you learn how to do it—automatically. 
Once you’ve created the procedure for bike riding, it’s ready 
for use anytime. So at the core, knowledge is often a combina-
tion of factual information and procedural skill that must be 
developed over time to result in expertise.
When developing a training program, we should recognize as 
user-centered designers that we can state factually some things 
we learn about design. For example, left alignment of all field 
labels and edit fields on a screen reduces the visual complexity 
of a page. But there are certain kinds of knowledge that aren’t 
factual; they’re more procedural—like performing a usability 
test. How to perform an effective test that doesn’t give away 
the answer to a specific question, how to actually practice ac-
tive listening—these things need to be learned over a period of 
time and assimilated, and sometimes they’re just things that 
take more time to learn.
You must include both skills training and knowledge training 
if you want your training program to be powerful.

144
Chapter 8    Training and Certification
Knowledge Training
Knowledge training in user experience design does not have to 
take a long time. A single day of training is enough to convey the 
importance of user experience design and the scope of activities 
needed. For example, a half-day knowledge training class on 
Web usability can cover the basics (see Table 8-1). Because knowl-
edge training does not require the level of close interaction and 
mentoring of skills training, large classes can be as effective as 
smaller ones. This is especially important if you need to train 
many people. While the course participants will not be ready to 
complete user-centered design work after knowledge training, 
they will better appreciate its importance, and a broad-based 
appreciation helps the successful implementation of user experi-
ence design.
Table 8-1:  Objectives of the HFI Half-Day “Essentials of Usability” 
Knowledge Training Class
This Topic . . .
Will Help You . . .
Usability—the 
business imperative
Know when to use usability methods and 
how they benefit users 
Information 
architecture
Organize content and functions so users 
will find them
Site and page 
navigation
Select the right site and page navigation 
model for your users
Writing for the Web
Write text that people can scan or will 
enjoy reading
Using color effectively
Add depth to your design by using good 
color principles
Standards and 
consistency
Consider using a standard to increase 
design consistency
Usability step by step
Create a usability project plan
How to keep getting 
better
Increase your skills

Types of Training
145
The best way to ensure a successful institutionalization effort is to 
get organizational support and acceptance. Knowledge training 
directly conveys the value of user experience design and the user-
centered design process and provides a baseline of acceptance 
throughout the organization. Such training does not have to iden-
tify every activity and skill needed. Rather, it focuses on connecting 
with people’s experiences and getting them to see how user experi-
ence design is an essential tool and can be a key competitive differ-
entiator for their organization. A knowledge training class is a very 
efficient, organized, and focused method for conveying this under-
standing. If employees do not have this type of training, the user 
experience design staff must convey the same information and 
understanding on an ad hoc basis. It takes a great deal of time to 
explain this information on an individual basis and is inefficient 
and impractical to do so.
A good knowledge training class identifies the overall process of 
user-centered design and illustrates the value of standards, a good 
navigational structure, and good detailed design. It does not try to 
demonstrate every design principle and research-based recommen-
dation, but rather just enough to ensure that participants under-
stand that user experience design is not just common sense and 
should not be approached with anything less than a professional 
and systematic attitude.
Knowledge training can help make key transitions deep in the 
psyche of the organization. The entire staff needs to learn how user 
experience design is really the way to manifest the strategy devel-
oped by marketing personnel. Everyone needs to learn how UX 
design engineers ensure that the brand values are reflected in the 
design. Knowledge training can dispel myths, such as the idea that 
user experience design engineering goes counter to marketing or 
graphic design goals. Knowledge training can help move the devel-
opment organization from design by opinions and superstitions 
into a systematic and scientific practice.
Who Should Get Knowledge Training?
Three groups especially benefit from this type of training: execu-
tives, members of the systems community, and new employees.

146
Chapter 8    Training and Certification
Executives benefit from knowledge training because while they do not 
need to be able to do a task analysis or complete interviews, they must 
understand what user experience design is about. These managers 
must make informed decisions about funding and support the user 
experience design staff when hard choices have to be made. Without 
this type of training, many executives won’t have a basic understand-
ing of user experience or an appreciation of its importance. While 
knowledge training is not always sufficient to instill a deep, gut-level 
commitment to usability, it should have a meaningful impact. Com-
pared to other participants, executives in many cases require training 
that is shorter, higher powered, and more specific to their organization. 
They need to understand issues of investment and return, as well as 
the challenges of governance that they will be asked to manage.
The second target group is the systems community. Many different 
players are found at this level, including business owners, product 
managers, operations personnel, marketing staff, developers, and so 
on. Different organizations have different types of key staff, so your 
training program should have the goal of creating a core group of peo-
ple who understand user experience design as a primary objective.
Regardless of which group you target as the most crucial, the knowl-
edge must permeate the organization. Once this objective is com-
plete, there will always be a few people in every important design 
meeting who will expect user experience design to be addressed as 
an essential success factor—systematically and scientifically.
It’s also important to make sure that new hires are aware of the 
value of user experience design. Many new staff members may not 
know about UX design, and knowledge training ensures that they 
understand the focus on and the importance of user experience in 
the organization.
Although all these groups need to hear a similar message, it is a 
good idea to customize the presentation to best meet the needs and 
mindset of each group.
Skills Training
If usability testing were the only thing involved in skills training, this 
training would be straightforward. But such training encompasses 

Types of Training
147
much more than simply testing: skills training needs to provide the 
ability to participate in the entire cycle of development. Key user 
experience design initiatives must be completed at every stage, and 
this training must support a range of activities from strategic cross-
channel design through conceptual structure, navigational, and 
detailed design.
When you look at the scope of what must be learned, skills training 
may seem daunting. In fact, it is daunting. Figure 8-1, which out-
lines course topics in the core HFI Web and application develop-
ment skills training classes, gives you a sense of the scope and 
complexity of usability skills. Going through a training program 
provides a foundation, but given real-world constraints, challenges, 
and time requirements it takes more than that for most people to 
become truly competent at all these activities. The best results 
Figure 8-1: Training chart: examples of what is taught in skills classes1
1. Chart developed by Human Factors International.

148
Chapter 8    Training and Certification
generally come from having  support for initial work experience. 
This support may include advanced training or a mentoring pro-
gram for refining skills. Support programs can be completed before 
the start of real-world proj ects, or they can be incorporated into par-
ticipation in showcase projects.
It is also important to have follow-up assistance for newly trained 
staff. It does not matter that the people are dedicated and determined—
it is simply impossible for anyone to get everything right the first 
time. Just as there are residency programs for physicians, so there is 
a need for continued mentoring for newly trained user experience 
design staff.
Who Should Get Skills Training?
While all employees benefit from knowledge training, those who 
will actually perform the user experience design work require skills 
training. In addition, some managers must be able to evaluate the 
quality of designs and the design process in depth, which also 
requires an advanced level of training. While the executives might 
not actually design screens, they must understand the process, phi-
losophy, and design rules to be able to evaluate and support the UX 
design staff. It is wonderful to have managers with very senior 
usability experience, but it is more likely that user experience design 
will be new to the management group. For managers who have not 
had extensive experience, a few days of more in-depth training 
beyond the knowledge training course should be sufficient.
Both small and large organizations need the same types of training, 
but they differ in terms of how many people need to be trained. In 
addition, large organizations need to train staff in the special 
requirements of working in a mature, process-oriented organiza-
tion. This would include, for example, use of standards and knowl-
edge management tools.
People who work closely with the user experience design staff on 
user-related tasks that support the interface design will benefit from 
a few days of skills training. For example, the marketing staff must 
provide strategic and branding direction, the technical staff must 
support the design’s implementation, the graphic art staff 

Certification
149
must create the imagery, and the business analysts must consider 
functionality and business rules. User representatives may provide 
insights and organize data gathering with users, and other individ-
uals may work in functional roles that surround the usability activi-
ties. With a more solid understanding of the design process, all of 
these personnel will be fully helpful, supportive, and aware of the 
importance of usability.
It is useful to pick a few of these individuals and put them through 
the same training that the user-experience design staff receives. 
Although they will not be actually completing design tasks, they will 
then have a clear understanding of what the UX engineers are trying 
to accomplish and will be more effective in working with them.
Some IT staff and developers may be involved in interface design in 
a serious way. They may not be dedicated user experience design 
staff, but often an organization does not have enough specialists to 
perform all the user-centered design work. In such a case, these staff 
members may be asked to perform usability engineering tasks. For 
lower-budget projects, or in smaller companies, they may have to 
handle the entire user experience design effort on their own, or at 
least with limited support. These people need about five days of 
training that provides hands-on skills in user-centered design, 
including user-centered design and analysis, user interface struc-
tures, usability detailed design, and user testing.
Some employees become dedicated user experience design staff and 
spend most of their work time on usability issues. They may not have 
degrees in the field, but they usually care a lot, have industry experi-
ence, and possess political skills. These individuals need a solid set of 
practical training skills. A foundation of a month of training is usually 
justified, and these dedicated user experience design staff should 
have ongoing mentoring and recurrent training every year.
Certification
You may want to consider certification for staff members who have 
received a professional level of training. Having trained staff 

150
Chapter 8    Training and Certification
certified helps instill confidence in them; coworkers will be more 
likely to re spect their insights and decisions, knowing that the staff 
members who are making recommendations have a solid founda-
tion in the field.
Different levels of certification exist in the usability field. There is the 
certification of a university degree, for example. Several universities 
and colleges now offer graduate-level degrees in a human factors 
field, and some of them are specifically for usability and interface 
design. Other colleges may not offer a degree but rather combine 
courses to offer a certificate. This is not the same as certification, 
however; it demonstrates only that the person took some courses.
The Human Factors and Ergonomics Society has spun off a certifica-
tion body called the Board of Certification in Professional Ergonomics. 
This body grants a certification in general human factors engineering 
called either a Certified Professional Ergonomist (CPE) or, in accor-
dance with the certificate candidate’s choice, a Certified Human Fac-
tors Professional (CHFP) or a Certified User Experience Professional 
(CUXP). This thorough and practical certification program is not 
solely focused on software design, but instead includes the whole 
gamut of the human factors engineering practice, from cars and weap-
ons systems to consumer products and power plant controls.
In the last 10 years, a few companies have started industry certi-
fication programs to fill the gap between a graduate degree and 
just taking a few courses. For example, HFI offers the Certified 
Usability Analyst (CUA) program. This certification program relies 
on a test specifically focused on software usability issues. This test, 
which is quite demanding, measures a person’s understanding of 
user-centered design and usability engineering principles. It does 
not test the ability to work in groups or even directly sample design 
skill, but it does validate that the applicant knows many approaches 
to re search as well as a wide range of principles and methods spe-
cific to software usability. The test was constructed systematically 
with item analysis from various test populations. It is available to 
all and does not require the participant to complete HFI courses. 
More than 4000 CUAs have been certified since the inception of the 
program. There is also an advanced certification from HFI called 

Conferences
151
the Certified User Experience Analyst (CXA). This certification can 
be achieved only after getting a CUA, and it includes user experi-
ence strategy, innovation, persuasion engineering, and work within 
a mature practice.
A Typical Training Plan
Every company has its own training priorities and budget limits. 
Table 8-2 outlines a sample plan for the first year; you can use it as a 
starting point. If you work in a large company, you may want to 
offer each class in-house to your own people. If you work in a small 
company, sending a few people to a public course may be a better 
alternative.
Conferences
In addition to foundational knowledge and skills training classes, 
it’s important to keep the usability staff up-to-date on the field as a 
whole. New ideas and insights occur in this field all the time, and 
new methods and technologies are being developed continuously. If 
your company does not gather and disseminate these insights, you 
will not benefit from current best practices. There are two critical 
conferences in the field, and each provides insights that will be 
valuable to your proj ects. Each person on the core usability team 
should attend at least one conference a year.
Each conference is different in terms of the size of the conference, 
the types of people who attend and the types of sessions that are 
offered. Visit their websites to get an overview of what each confer-
ence is like.
• Special Interest Group on Computer–Human Interfaces of the 
Association for Computing Machinery (SIGCHI) (www.acm
.org/sigchi/)
• The Usability Professionals Association (www.upassoc.org)

152
Chapter 8    Training and Certification
Table 8-2: Sample HFI Training Plan
Class
Time 
Commitment
Description
Management 
Briefing
Four hours
In this knowledge training 
class, executives get an 
overview of the basics of user-
centered design and many case 
examples. Class participants are 
acquainted with usability as a 
business imperative, and learn 
about the institutionalization 
effort.
Half-Day of 
Basics
Four hours
This class provides knowledge 
training for the general 
development community. Class 
sizes are large to get training to 
everyone who needs it.
Web Design 
Course
Three full 
days
This skills-level training focuses 
on screen design for usability 
staff, key development staff, 
and a few managers.
User-Centered 
Analysis and 
Conceptual 
Design
Two full days
Moving from initial concept to 
a user interface design is one 
of the most difficult challenges 
usability staff can face. This 
skills course covers how to 
move from concept to design.
Practical 
Usability Testing
Two full days
This class presents a synthesis 
of usability testing techniques 
for the practitioner. This skills 
course teaches you to choose 
the right test for any stage of 
design, from early to advanced 
prototypes and live sites.
Certification 
Track
Twenty days 
training
This training is for practitioners 
who will be the core of the user 
experience design effort.

Summary
153
Summary
Making training an integral part of your institutionalization effort 
not only helps educate your staff, but also provides an invaluable 
level of ongoing consensus and support. Training is one of the most 
effective resources available to enhance the knowledge, skills, 
enthusiasm, and commitment of your organization at the same 
time. The next chapter outlines the essential elements of a user-
centered design methodology.

This page intentionally left blank 

155
Chapter 9
Knowledge Management
 
➤Large-scale user experience design operations are different 
from small ones. The key difference is their knowledge 
management requirement.
 
➤Conventional approaches to knowledge management are 
associated with overwhelming problems.
 
➤Good knowledge management requires object-oriented 
user experience design.
 
➤Linkages are critical to accessing user experience design 
content.
 
➤Putting an industrial-strength user experience design knowl-
edge management facility in place presents challenges.
There is a quantum difference between doing user experience 
design with a small group on a small scale and approaching it with 
a serious, well-staffed team and/or across an enterprise. One of the 
by-products of a greater UX investment is an exponential growth in 
the workload, based on the growing recognition of the value of user 
experience design projects (see Figure 9-1).
When you approach user experience design in the conventional, 
small-team way, each project is represented by a set of documents—

156
Chapter 9    Knowledge Management
that is, you create slide shows and Word documents. At first, it 
might seem as if everything is going fine. But all too soon, you have 
terabytes of materials. Anything you want to know about is effec-
tively lost in the black hole of your document management system. 
For example, you might have 40 projects that involve the “Digital 
Native” user group. If you want to collect what is known about the 
Digital Natives, you would do a search, only to discover that there 
are hundreds of documents to review. You find documents from the 
projects focused on Digital Natives—many of which are peripheral, 
containing perhaps a nugget of information about this user group. 
It becomes so difficult to read all the documents that most teams 
end up doing the research again.
Of course, you could make a special file for Digital Natives and keep 
the contents there—but user experience design work is not just about 
user profiles. It is about users and scenarios, environments and arti-
facts, needs, methods, standards, projects, and designs. You might 
need to know everything about an environment, such as a bank 
branch, or you might need to know about an artifact, such as an eye 
wash unit in a lab. (We call each of these items a UX object.) On top of 
that, you often need to look at the items based on linkages—and 
almost all of them are interlinked in some way.
With a small user experience design team, knowledge of users, sce-
narios, environments, and other UX objects is stored as a shared 
understanding within the team. Yes, the loss of a team member is a 
serious setback, but with just a half-dozen people focused 
Figure 9-1:
Growth of user 
experience project 
load for a large 
pharmaceutical 
company

Why Conventional Knowledge Management Fails
157
on a limited domain, the organizational memory is usually not too 
difficult to retain. You can save methods and standards in physical 
or electronic folders. If the team wants to know something based on 
the linkages, such as which methods have already been applied to a 
given user group, someone probably remembers. If they want to 
find which applications have applied a given standard, they simply 
need to scan through perhaps a dozen different systems.
An organization may distribute the user experience design opera-
tion among a number of small teams, each focused on a single 
domain. The real challenges then come when looking at the way 
methods and standards are applied across the organization. It is a 
rare organization that has truly isolated domains: domain knowl-
edge is so valuable that an organization’s growth will almost always 
be based on an interrelated set of channels and business areas. As 
such, there is no good way to carve up user experience design work 
into small, siloed work teams without overlap—nor is there often a 
good business case to be made for doing so. Your retail and com-
mercial banking operations might be fairly discrete from one 
another, and there is likely to be only modest overlap between the 
personal and business domains (e.g., your businesses owners have 
personal accounts that they would expect to have conventions simi-
lar to their business accounts). When your retail and commercial 
banking operations expand to a level that requires at least 50 user 
experience design professionals for each domain, however, you will 
have gone far beyond that easily managed small team—the one that 
kept all that knowledge in their heads and on their desks.
Why Conventional Knowledge Management Fails
Let’s take a minute to break down the main methods used by con-
ventional repositories to manage access to their terabytes of valuable 
data. Certainly, all repositories allow the author to affix meta-tags 
to each document. For example, you might create a report on mid-
dle market and mass affluent customers, using mobile devices, at home, 
in branches, and while commuting. In such a case, all the words in 
italics can go into the meta-tag. You can then easily find only those 

158
Chapter 9    Knowledge Management
documents that are about middle-market customers using mobile 
devices. To some extent, that could be useful. Nevertheless, your 
search will not have given you a full picture of everything there 
is known about middle-market users or mobile usage. Instead, it 
shows only the documents that refer to both middle-market users 
and mobile usage. For your purposes, however, you might need 
to access the contents of a spiffy study on the emotions of middle-
market users responding to high-pressure sales situations, or ecosys-
tem insights into mobile device usage in emergency situations.
Another problem with meta-tags is that they are very much depen-
dent on the diligence of practitioners in setting them up. To find the 
necessary content, you must resort to keyword searches—which 
finds relevant documents, but also gives you loads of irrelevant hits.
A strategy that many teams try is to set up a folder structure and to 
save documents based on that taxonomy. You can create a set of 
folders around different types of UX objects, for instance. You might 
have a folder of methods, for example, and a folder of standards. 
But what happens when you need to see all the projects that used a 
given method? What happens when you want to see only those 
middle-market user scenarios that take place in a given environ-
ment? When you have a little team and a handful of documents, 
this taxonomic approach works well. Once you begin industrial-size 
user experience design, it fails catastrophically.
The Cost of Failure
Most large-scale user experience design operations are like goldfish: 
they end up with a three-second memory. As a result, new studies 
are commissioned to research areas that have already been studied. 
At HFI, it’s not uncommon to have a large company approach us 
with two or three requests for expensive international research. 
Each study is basically the same; the requests just come from sepa-
rate, uncoordinated teams.
The cost of duplicate research is high, as a serious ecosystem study 
will cost at least $250,000. But that is not the biggest cost. Truly 

Object-Oriented UX
159
catastrophic costs are incurred by making design decisions without 
the power of the knowledge that an organization could apply—
leading to suboptimal strategies, missed innovations, and subopti-
mal designs.
Consider the valuation of an organization. For many companies, the 
real value of the firm is how well it knows its customers. In today’s 
business environment, an organization can no longer rely on the cul-
tural memory of a team, with recollections about working in the field 
or doing projects for the customer segments. The workforce is mov-
ing toward shorter tenure within organizations and more free-lance 
staffing. Consequently, user experience design capabilities need to 
be more organized and sustainable. The result of object-oriented UX 
is a model of the customer, a key intellectual property.
Object-Oriented UX
The software industry went through a transition a few decades ago, 
in which it moved toward object-oriented programming. Originally, 
programs were written in a single flat file. This file mixed up screen 
calls with algorithms and data. Today, no programmer would use 
this method. Instead, programmers write modules of code for dis-
crete tasks, and then call those modules repeatedly, so as to opti-
mize reuse. In the same way, the user experience design field is 
starting to make its own transition to object-oriented design. Instead 
of doing all their work in a “flat file” or a document or slide show, 
UX teams are creating separate objects and then “calling” those 
objects inside of documents. 
To see how it works, consider the UX Enterprise software service 
offered by HFI. To work properly, the user experience design team 
needs to work on the object and then, just as in programming, the 
practitioner calls the object when needed. Thus linkages are inserted 
inside of documents. Figure 9-2 depicts a sample “stamp” that is 
clicked to link to an object, Figure 9-3 shows a project report that 
uses stamps to reference the detailed objects, and Figure 9-4 illus-
trates a user profile object that contains everything that the team 
knows about one type of user.

160
Chapter 9    Knowledge Management
Figure 9-2: A UX Enterprise “stamp.” Clicking on the stamp links directly 
to the object. Inserting the stamp in a project document 
links that project to the object.
Figure 9-3: A project slide deck that uses stamps 
to link to detail UX objects
Of course, many different types of objects are possible—users, sce-
narios, environments and artifacts, designs, projects, methods and 
standards, and various types of training and research. The structure 
of each type of object is different (see Figure 9-5 for an example of 
an artifact), and to some extent the objects need to be customized to 
the domain of the organization (see Figure 9-6 for an example 
involving South African languages).

Object-Oriented UX
161
Figure 9-4: A UX object holds everything the team knows 
about this user profile
Figure 9-5: An artifact is a tool or object that is used, 
but not designed by the team

162
Chapter 9    Knowledge Management
Professionals Don’t Start from Scratch
One great thing about a “design by object” approach is the ability to 
copy objects and edit them, as opposed to creating everything from 
scratch. Why write a methodology when you can copy one and edit 
it? In making user profiles, we find the closest match we can and 
then edit it. For example, we might take an American surgeon pro-
file and import Japanese cultural dimensions. There is no question 
that you can be far more productive when building on previous 
work. At www.uxmarketplace.com, you can find an open market 
for buying and selling all types of UX objects.
Linkages
Once a team starts working on a shared set of objects, instead of flat 
files of documents and slide shows, a valuable cloud of objects will 
grow steadily. But for this set of objects to be useful, the team needs 
to be a way to use the linkages between objects to view the data. For 
example, you might need to find the following:
• The projects that did usability testing on a given user profile
• The scenarios that a user completes in a given environment
Figure 9-6: An object customized for South Africa

Linkages
163
Figure 9-7: An ecos ystem of objects related 
to a bank branch (demo data only)
• The scenarios that have a given need (or problem)
• The designs that apply a given standard
The only way to identify these subsets of objects is to store the 
objects in a relational database, and to create the linkages in as pain-
less a way as possible.
With a relational database that allows you to access your cloud of 
UX objects, you can collect and view an entire ecosystem. Today the 
ecosystem view is critical, because we have to design for multiple 
actors, in complex environments, with embedded and ubiquitous 
digital channels. But what defines an ecosystem from a data struc-
ture viewpoint?
Practitioners draw charts of ecosystems, but charts have different 
centers of focus. They might show the ecosystem around a student, 
for example, or they might consist of the ecosystem around a 
mobile device. They might also depict the ecosystem within a given 
environment—or a single scenario. They can even illustrate the 
ecosystem of a need or strategic challenge (such as everything 
related to transitioning customers to a digital channel). Given the 
many possibilities, we must be able to let the practitioner identify 
the focus of the ecosystem model and then have the system concat-
enate the objects that surround the core focus (see Figure 9-7 for an 
example of an ecosystem model).

164
Chapter 9    Knowledge Management
Summary
If your operation will be bigger than a small, manageable team of 
five to six practitioners, you should consider working in an object-
oriented structure. That means breaking the habit of putting every-
thing into slide shows. It also means having a toolkit that supports 
object-oriented user experience design. The result will soon be a 
valuable cloud of knowledge about your customers—core, corpo-
rate intellectual property that also makes the user experience design 
team stronger, more sustainable, and more valuable.
The transition from programmers coding in flat files and object-
oriented programming took about a decade to accomplish. The 
transition to object-oriented UX poses a challenge as well. We have 
seen serious impediments around long-established habits, patterns, 
and vested interests. Given this reality, you shouldn’t expect to pop 
in a tool and instantly change the way your user experience design 
practitioners function.

165
Part III 
Organization
As the business world better understands and values UX, executive 
championship is becoming increasingly easy to obtain. The infra-
structure can be bought and customized. The Organization phase—
the people side of things—is where you will face the most serious 
challenges in institutionalizing UX. 
No one wants a scenario where an executive wants excellence in 
customer experience and money invested in a UX infrastructure, 
but then finds that there are no people who can actually do the 
work. Having other people in the organization fail to include your 
user experience team in their projects would be equally 
problematic.
In Part III, we will first cover governance, which is how we ensure 
that the UX process is controlled, that user experience work is really 
performed, and that the institutionalization process is growing in 
maturity. It is all too easy to have a UX team sidelined, or called in 
only when it is too late to take advantage of their expertise. UX 
teams can also degrade over time and travel backward on the road 
to full institutionalization. 
Some organizations have poor design quality simply because the 
organizational structure is inappropriate. There is more involved in 
a good UX process than just having a user experience team. The 
team must report to the right part of the organization—and it is 
165

166
Part III    Organization
important that they have the right structure and roles. Only in that 
way can the UX infrastructure be supported, and projects be com-
pleted effectively.
You will find that there is a huge demand for user experience work 
in your organization. But it is fanciful to think it can be done with-
out enough UX practitioners! I recently talked to a major technology 
company. It was doubling their team size, which would give the 
company approximately 1.2% of the people needed to do the work. 
I reminded this company that there is no substitute for trained 
practitioners. 
With the right capabilities in place, UX work can move forward. Ini-
tial showcase projects become large-scale programs that occur on a 
routine basis. Quality designs are produced. Outstanding designs 
may be produced. But the real measure of success and maturity is 
that user-centered design becomes a routine part of the organization.

167
Chapter 10
Governance
 
➤Pay attention to governance; it is likely to be your biggest 
challenge.
 
➤Understand your organization’s culture and remove impedi-
ments to being customer centered.
 
➤Create a meme that resonates with your organization’s 
imperatives.
 
➤Counteract the Dunning-Kruger effect with training.
 
➤Design processes that close the loop so the executive cham-
pion can see if the UX initiative is working properly.
Today, there is rarely a serious problem with executive champion-
ship. Top executives are informed enough to know the value of a 
serious user experience design operation. They help plan the strat-
egy to build an organization’s user experience design capability, 
fund the program, and remove political obstacles that might hinder 
its evolution.
The infrastructure to do good user experience design is rarely a 
problem now. You can buy a coherent set of methods, standards, 
and tools. It is not that difficult to adapt them to your unique needs.

168
Chapter 10    Governance
But risks to implementation of user experience design remain in the 
area of governance. Top management clearly demands great user 
experience design; these executives ask for world-class practices. 
But all too often those practices aren’t put in place, or they are 
implemented inconsistently—that is, there is a degree of user expe-
rience design in some of the organization’s processes, sometimes, 
depending on the charisma of the user experience design leaders. 
How does this happen? And what can you do about it?
The Roots of the Governance Problem
User experience design is reasonably straightforward. It is a practice 
based on a field of research and best practices—but it also repre-
sents a profound shift in the way things get designed. Organiza-
tions start out with a way that things get done. Just as there is an 
established process and established realities of political power, so 
there is an established focus for design (think technology, process, 
product management, or executive fiat). Changing this reality to a 
customer-centered process and focus not infrequently means push-
ing against years of organizational culture. It takes a lot of momen-
tum to make such a change. Even when such a shift is made, there is 
a tendency for processes to snap back to their old configuration: 
take your hand off the design process for a moment—just blink—
and you find everyone has reverted to the non-user-centered 
configuration.
HFI recently worked with a bank that had a long history of process-
driven design, complicated by business staff inserting design ideas 
in a somewhat random and capricious manner. An HFI team spent 
18 months on a showcase program. We developed a very advanced 
UX strategy, and then a solid and validated structural design. After 
just a few weeks away, I returned to find that the detailed design had 
been planned—but the planning process involved business analysts 
only, and the company was back to a process-oriented approach. 
Instead of designing screens that fit into the structural design, mem-
bers of the bank’s staff were picking processes based on a functional 
analysis and were planning to design each in isolation. If you do 
that, then you design recurring payment in isolation—and you tend 

Memes That Kill
169
to make an interface where recurring payment is a menu choice. The 
reality is that customers don’t think of recurring payment, but rather 
see it as just one type of “payment.” So the team had thrown 
18 months of design out the window just in their planning process. 
We had to catch that, reeducate them, and get the design reworked.
Along with the inertia of the old process, vested interests may also 
thwart the transition to a user-centered process. User experience design 
is one of those fields where everyone is an expert. Making random and 
unsupported design decisions will be the highlight of some people’s 
day. Those staff feel quite upset when you switch to an evidence-based, 
process-driven, validated process. In response, they will often work to 
marginalize the user experience design team. Excluding the user expe-
rience design team is one of the most common issues—or at least 
excluding them until the very end of the development process, when it 
is impossible to do much that’s useful.
Memes That Kill
There are always ideas flowing around an organization that have 
the potential to derail a user experience design transformation. 
Organizations vary in their beliefs, but it is worthwhile to diagnose 
the specific, retrograde ideas prevalent within yours. You can then 
attack them as a part of the cultural change.
These memes are diverse (see Figures 10-1 and 10-2), but they share 
a few common roots. The first of these memes is that user experi-
ence design is not really important. People working hard on server 
efficiency may think that success is a function of fast response time. 
When you see everything in terms of milliseconds, user experience 
design objectives seem secondary. “Nothing works if the servers 
don’t function,” they will say. The fact is that all competitors have 
functional servers today—or simply use the cloud. Thus it is pri-
marily user experience design that provides differentiation.
The second cluster of evil memes hovers around the misperception 
that everyone is a user experience design expert. It’s a lot like the 
near-universal expertise in branding. There are numerous corollar-
ies of this fallacy, such as it’s just a matter of common sense! All you 

170
Chapter 10    Governance
Figure 10-1: Example of particularly numerous and problematic memes 
in a bank attempting a user experience design transformation. 
This organization did not create a practice that thrived.
really need to do UX design is the motivation of your employees, 
this line of thinking goes. So the user experience design journey 
devolves into a motivational speech, bonuses around survey scores, 
or a few well-placed KITAs (kicks in the ass). Then there’s the all-
too-common notion that design can be done by senior executives 
based on intuition, anecdotes, and comments from relatives. 
Because being senior means those executives are exceptional peo-
ple, this rationale states, it must also mean they are exceptional 
human factors engineers. For senior executives, it’s a recreational 
break—especially when they are unencumbered by measurable 
assessments of their efforts—or, for that matter, by education, train-
ing, certification, or cracking a serious book.
The third and last meme insists that user experience design is ineffi-
cient and expensive. I like to say that “Usability is free.” And that is 
true—it is the reason that user experience design is becoming so 

Memes That Kill
171
commonplace. But many people have a very different experience: 
immature user experience design is expensive and slow. Taking 
someone with a limited amount of training; tossing him or her into a 
corner of an organization without accepted processes, standards, 
templates, knowledge bases, and team support; and loading that 
person with top-priority projects—that is not a recipe for efficiency. 
In other cases, user experience design consultancies are hired that 
contract for large research projects that yield volumes of shelfware—
or solve the wrong problem altogether—because the organization 
has a culture of Ready, Fire, AIM! When these immature approaches 
characterize the UX effort, management hopes something useful and 
efficient happens. Of course, hope is not a strategy.
It is hardly surprising that many people experience user experience 
design as impractical. Mature user experience design requires that 
all the parts come together. You need an organization in which user 
Figure 10-2: Example of a more typical set of problematic memes 
in a product development company that was attempting a user experience 
design transformation. This organization succeeded nicely.

172
Chapter 10    Governance
experience design work is done on each and every project as a mat-
ter of course, and you need trained and certified staff working in a 
cohesive UX operation. Your staff needs access to methods, tem-
plates, standards, and the history of previous work.
The result of a mature user experience design capability is that the 
work becomes far more efficient than it is in an organization where 
the person making user experience design decisions is just guess-
ing. You save time and money because the process is faster, cheaper, 
and better. You don’t have to redo work. You discover changes that 
are needed early, when making changes is easy. Most importantly, 
you don’t pay the price for failures.
Education Helps
One of the most universal roots of governance problems is the 
Dunning-Kruger effect [Kruger and Dunning 1999]. In the brilliant 
work by Kruger and Dunning, we see that people who know very 
little about a topic tend to substantially overestimate what they 
know. This gives rise to the frustrating and debilitating tendency of 
completely unqualified staff, often with executive positions in the 
organization, to make design pronouncements. A recent example is 
the insistence that the action buttons should be purple because that 
will cause more people to select them.
There is only one antidote mentioned for the Dunning-Kruger effect: 
education. As we make people smarter about a topic, the first thing 
that happens is they get a sense of what they don’t know. Give peo-
ple a day of training on user experience design and they will cer-
tainly not get a solid foundation to do the work. But they will gain 
some level of respect for the fact that UX is not common sense and 
not trivial, and that it cannot be addressed by random guesswork. 
At HFI, we have built training specific to that purpose (Figure 10-3). 
It was a departure for us, as we have generally built professional-
level training to provide a solid set of stills. Nevertheless, we found 
that there was a need for the knowledge training that creates a gen-
eral appreciation for UX, quickly.

Education Helps
173
Figure 10-3: Slides from training specifically geared to educating 
managers, instead of providing usable skills. Such training mostly 
helps executives appreciate what they don’t know.

174
Chapter 10    Governance
Verify That a Methodology Is Applied
It is still common to find organizations with dozens of user experi-
ence design staff working on an ad hoc basis. They dash about, 
reviewing designs when they can find them and have time. They sit 
in group design sessions (which usually have a fancy new name for 
what is, at its core, the old Joint Application Development process). 
This kind of immature process is not any faster, cheaper, or better 
than the past techniques.
The organization must have a set of documented methodologies 
that covers most of the user experience design functions that are 
needed. It is true that user experience design work is not done from 
recipes in a cookbook; these are often big and complex programs. 
Even so, the methodological document provides  real value. In par-
ticular, it acts as a planning guide. When you see what is involved 
in a best-practices structural design program, you are unlikely to 
ask for it to be done in two weeks. These methods concretize what 
has to be accomplished. Consequently, there must be a full set of 
methods that cover most of the user experience design work. The 
methods also make communication far easier. For 20 years at HFI, 
we have just said, “I’m working on a UIS” (user interface structure), 
and everyone basically knows what will happen.
Having a methodology in place is a baseline requirement, but get-
ting a method is straightforward: you can buy one, or buy it and 
customize it. Making sure that the methodology is implemented is a 
more involved process.
Whatever your methodology, the question that should guide it is 
this: “Are the projects following the prescribed user-centered pro-
cess?” Sadly, many professionals don’t even know what that means! 
It does not mean that you care about users, nor does it mean that 
you have user experience design staff employed. It does not even 
mean that you follow your methodology. Instead, it means that the 
first thing you work on is the user’s experience. Having completed 
that step, you then build out the processes, business models, and 
technology to make it happen. In terms of governance of such a 
user-centered design program, you need to have methods in place 

Verify That a Methodology Is Applied
175
so that the first steps deal with defining the needs of the user and 
crafting a planned model of the future user’s experience.
Even if you have a user experience design methodology, your 
approach can shift all too easily to technology-centered design (which 
starts with the database or the technical framework) or function-
centered design (preparing a set of banking methods out of a high 
school textbook, for example, without researching what your cus-
tomers and staff will really do). The staff might keep the user experi-
ence design team in the dark while performing the initial 
“preparatory work,” and then ask for forgiveness for not starting 
with a true, user-centered process. It might not seem a significant 
misstep, but in effect, it fundamentally undermines the whole user 
experience design practice and assures that the user experience 
design team will not be able to succeed. In essence, the “old-timers” 
in staff and management, invested and comfortable with previous 
processes and systems, have consigned the user experience design 
team to screen beautification and cleaning up the mess.
In this scenario, things quickly devolve into a “finger in the dike” 
scenario, in which the user experience design staff dashes about, try-
ing unsuccessfully to manage the cascading effects of a bad design. 
For staff resistant to a transformation toward user-centered design, 
that kind of chaos can be fun to watch. Of course, it might not be so 
fun to have their company fail due to lack of differentiation and a 
poor market position. That happens—and not infrequently.
Once the user experience design team is on board, engaged, and 
involved from the start of the project, it’s essential to make sure that 
the work described in the methodology is the correct level of effort 
and is actually completed. A very general recommendation—the 
user experience practice burns approximately 10% of the budget 
and approximately 10% of the headcount on a given project—is a 
useful rule of thumb. In reality, of course, the question is more 
complicated.
It is difficult to figure out what is really needed to establish a user 
experience practice and transform an organization’s development 
culture so that it is based on user-centered processes. At HFI, the 
people who decide what we bid on a project are highly skilled and 

176
Chapter 10    Governance
receive special training. They have to be tested and certified. I meet 
with them weekly. Even then, they still have to kick ideas around 
with a client organization and ask lots of questions—and they very 
occasionally miss the mark.
Project planning in user-centered design means balancing cost and 
risk. There are risks to quality decisions, and risks to time-to-market 
decisions. The project needs to fit into the development culture and 
strategy of the organization. All the while, it must maintain good 
practices. The stakes for getting this right are very high.
In most cases, you can immediately spot the stupid stuff—for exam-
ple, people wanting to test three subjects, major reliance on focus 
groups or surveys as a way of gathering data or assessing designs, 
projects proceeding without human performance or experience 
objectives, nothing done until a test at the end. Given that you have 
gotten this far in the book, we won’t need to spend any time on 
these very basic mistakes.
The most important foundation for user experience design is a solid 
UX strategy for the overall cross-channel solution. This has two ele-
ments. The first part is the motivational aspect: why customers will 
want to convert and how they will be retained. The second part is 
the overall design and alignment of the multiple channels that cus-
tomers will access (e.g., browser, mobile applications, call centers, 
stores). Without this top-level strategic design, you will almost cer-
tainly create a set of siloed and uncoordinated offerings, whose pur-
pose and position will not align.
Today, many companies try to substitute “be like Apple” for a real 
UX strategy. On the face of it, that is not a bad idea. Apple has done 
a wonderful job at providing an ecosystem solution in which all the 
parts hang together. But Apple also has a unique position and style. 
Would that style be the best choice for a low-cost superstore? No, of 
course not. Thus the first challenge in developing a strategy is 
designing the right emotional schema—that is, understanding why 
people convert and are retained.
The second challenge is to identify how the various channels will be 
understood (Can users even figure out which channel to use?), 
interact (Are there places where the call center appears as a part of 
the Web site?), and align. We need to consider if there is a need for a 

Verify That a Methodology Is Applied
177
pervasive information architecture, where the structure and language 
of offerings and functions align between channels (Figure 10-4). For 
example, do the tabs on the Web site and the signs in the store have 
the same language and same sequence? There is also a need for 
interface standards to maintain consistency. Without a UX strategy, 
then, your methods will not be ideal. You may be designing “usable 
wrong things.”
Once a UX strategy is in place, the key to successful implementation 
is maintaining a continuous thread through the rest of the design 
process. That doesn’t mean simply having a series of user experi-
ence design activities at every stage; it’s essential to uphold the 
innovation and logical progression defined by the UX strategy as 
you move toward increasingly specific and concrete designs. The 
structural design determines the detailed design. In turn, the peri-
odic validation references the human performance and preference 
objectives defined in previous stages. 
Governance means that there are documented methods, and it means 
that those methods provide a solid progression from executive intent 
Figure 10-4: Planning the role of various channels for a bank

178
Chapter 10    Governance
to UX strategy, through the entire design process—a consistent logic 
and intent from which the organization should never stray. Be aware 
that there will be a tendency to marginalize these methods instead of 
making them central to the process. Governance must ensure that the 
organization retains this new user-centered design methodology.
Closing the Loop on Standards
At HFI, we have completed many hundreds of customized user 
interface standards. Today, I never worry about successfully creat-
ing a usable, effective standard. Our generic templates simply 
require adaptation to an organization’s conventions and domain, 
and offer close to 100% reliability. Creating standards from scratch 
can be taxing. It can be an extremely hazardous chore for an organi-
zation to create a massive set of design patterns. Eventually, so 
many of these components are created that the designers can’t really 
find anything. Conversely, organizations may try creating one tem-
plate that will do everything (good luck with that). Outside of these 
odd cases, the main worry is about implementation.
I’ve asked many hundreds of developers how they feel about 
designing under a solid and strict set of design standards. They 
understand the value of those standards in providing consistency 
and speed of design. They understand that coding is faster, as is 
maintenance. Even so, it is the rare designer who really likes stan-
dards. Standards make people feel restricted and less creative. I 
have demonstrations that make it clear that this relationship does 
not hold. Nevertheless, an emotional resistance is still there—and 
you can count on meeting it as you try to apply your UX methodol-
ogy across the organization.
To manage resistance to standards, you need to start with training. 
The design staff, including the user experience design staff, need 
about half a day of training on the standard. This training must 
share the templates, of course, and explain how to design using 
templates. Almost more important is training on why standards are 
really important. HFI uses all sorts of methods to drive this point 
home (see Figure 10-5), and to make clear that standards enable 
more creativity, as designers don’t have to spend time reinventing 

Closing the Loop on Standards
179
the wheel. Yet despite how important and helpful this training is, it 
is rarely enough on its own.
Governance needs to ensure that standards are being followed. Just 
how that is done must be tuned to the organizational culture. In some 
organizations, it’s a straightforward process to enforce standards and 
to require designs to comply with them. In these types of organiza-
tions, a review cycle can be put in place in which quality control staff 
ensure compliance and provide feedback. In other organizations, 
strict enforcement is impossible, because it goes against the culture. 
In such cases, the most that can be done is to provide feedback when 
Figure 10-5: The “Mouse Maze” is the most downloaded offering on the 
HFI site. It is a simple maze with three levels. In the first level, all the keys 
work normally; this maze is easy to get through. In the second level, the same 
maze is much harder, because the keys are switched around (so the left arrow 
goes up, for example). This represents poor design. In the last level, the keys 
are switched around, but also work differently in different parts of the maze. 
This third level is designed to be awful, and it shows what happens then 
there is inconsistency—when standards are not observed. We use this 
demonstration in our standards training classes.

180
Chapter 10    Governance
someone is not following the standards. At that point, compliance 
with the interface standard is the responsibility of the author.
One other cross-check we have started to use at HFI is a counter to 
check whether the online standards are being accessed. It is easy to 
fake access, of course. Even so, if you don’t have anyone looking at 
your standards, it’s an indicator to start worrying.
Checking If the Practice Is Alive
Unfortunately, a user experience design practice is fragile. Once you 
invest in methods and standards and tools, they merely need to be kept 
up-to-date. Other parts of the organization, however, can come apart 
quickly—particularly your staff. There is a strong market for experi-
enced user experience design staff, so staff who have lost faith in your 
operation are likely to leave. Even if they are enthusiastic about your 
practice, they may be pulled away with various incentives (e.g., more 
money, a more important job title). The cost of developing replacement 
staff is substantial, and once you slip under a critical mass of technical 
specialists (generally about seven highly competent practitioners), it 
becomes difficult to bring onboard and integrate new people. Even 
with a mature, well-documented operation, your new staff need guid-
ance from senior established in-house practitioners on where to look 
for materials and how to apply the UX infrastructure and facilities.
Yet even with infrastructure and staff in place, a practice can disinte-
grate. It is not uncommon for user experience design organizations 
that were mature and had sophisticated approaches to design to find 
themselves relegated to ad hoc tactical work because they have a 
new misaligned management. The stream of investment in training 
and evolving the UX practice can quickly shut off—at which point 
the user experience design organization begins to degrade.
How can executive sponsors spot these problems before they send the 
practice into an unstoppable downward spiral? Early detection and 
clear criteria are key elements to sustainability. Detection, however, 
can be difficult. Managers whose lack of understanding is destroying 
your UX investment will tout their improved efficiency. Even the staff 
who are voting with their feet and leaving the organization can seem 

Checking If the Practice Is Alive
181
to be part of normal attrition. For these reasons, it can be impossible 
for an executive champion to really know if the practice is strong. 
While you would think that an involved executive champion would 
quickly notice the downturn, failure to become deeply involved in the 
details of the team and a layer of management or two can combine to 
obscure a serious decline. As a consultant who specializes in institu-
tionalization of user experience design practices, it has often been my 
job to walk into an executive’s office and provide that warning.
You might not have a consultant who will be willing to put his or 
her relationship with the company at risk to protect the practice, 
however. Therefore we will outline three approaches that let an 
executive provide governance for team sustainability: measuring 
progress, tools support, and certification.
Measuring Progress
Metrics provide a classic method of governance. If you want to 
know if your team is alive and functional, you can get an indication 
by looking at customer experience metrics such as your Net Pro-
moter Score, conversion, and customer retention. The only problem 
is that these indicators lag behind the actual UX design process. The 
work that the team does on designs takes time. Once those designs 
are envisioned, created, tested, refined, and documented, they still 
need to be implemented. Sure, some tactical changes may bump up 
your scores in the short run. Nevertheless, even these can mask a 
failure to create a solid strategy, to innovate, or to have holistic 
structural designs that fit into an ecosystem solution. It is not 
unusual to see good numbers for a year while your middle manag-
ers are effectively decimating your practice.
Metrics are a good way to make managers feel accountable and 
under pressure to attend to user experience design issues. Con-
versely, they are a very poor way to get an early warning of a disin-
tegrating practice. The lag time is too long.
Tools Support for Governance
If the user experience design team is operating in an enterprise envi-
ronment (like HFI’s UX Enterprise), this environment is likely to pro-
vide a substantial increase in transparency. An even moderately 

182
Chapter 10    Governance
trained executive is then able to assess the health of a practice in short 
order. The information used in design is instantly accessible, rather 
than hidden in voluminous documents and decks. Figure 10-6 depicts 
three different charts drawn instantly by UX Enterprise. Each chart 
shows the objects linked to a given design (UX specification). The 
number of links gives a good idea of the amount of supporting con-
tent guiding a design. Is the design evidence-based or a wild guess? It 
does not take an in-depth review of the documentation to tell.
HFI has been working on specific, governance-oriented reports and 
displays that let an executive gauge the quality of a user experience 
design practice in about 10 minutes. Certainly, a metrics system can 
be gamed with fake events and data. But if your design team is 
forced to fabricate the implementation of your UX program, it is 
probably running into other, possibly extreme problems that you are 
likely to notice without report—issues that major surgery will be 
required to correct. It is far better to find the problem early. To do so, 
we can check how often staff refer to methods and standards. As 
mentioned earlier, if your team has gotten out of the habit of refer-
ring to these core materials, they have reverted to an ad hoc approach 
to UX design far short of true institutionalization. We can also track 
how much data we have on user profiles, environments, and other 
objects. If objects are rich, based on observation and user research, 
we can be confident that the team is working in a serious way. If 
everything is based on stakeholder opinions, then we can be sure 
that the team is failing, because even the best stakeholders see things 
differently from customers (even if they were customers once).
Using Certification for Governance
It is hard for executives to get time to sit through briefings, monitor 
metrics, and explore data. This fact of life makes certification a great 
way to ensure that your user experience design practice is still oper-
ating effectively. When we created the Certified Practice in Usability 
at HFI, we did not really understand its potential role in gover-
nance; we simply knew that the need existed for solid, objective cri-
teria for the maturity of a practice (Figure 10-7). We offered to police 
compliance with the criteria as well: a failure to renew your certifi-
cation or a drop in certification level should sound a clear alarm 
that your practice is unraveling.

183
Figure 10-6: These 
three charts show the 
users, scenarios, 
environments, and 
other elements that are 
the foundation for a 
given design. You can 
quickly see if a design is 
well supported, or just 
thrown together in a 
wild guess.

184
Chapter 10    Governance
Summary
Today, governance is the challenge most likely to emerge in the 
institutionalization of user experience design. Executives under-
stand that customer experience is a key strategic objective, but mid-
dle management may not share that perspective—and may be quite 
resistant to a transformation toward user-centered design. There-
fore, a combination of measures must be taken to ensure that the 
practice is sustainable: that the customer-centered focus is not side-
lined or the practice itself dissipated. This must include education 
(ideally targeted at specific areas of resistance and misinformation 
in the organization). It also must include practical methods of sur-
veillance to alert the executive champion before reconstruction of 
the practice becomes onerous.
Figure 10-7: The HFI Usability Maturity Model that is the foundation 
of the Certified Practice in Usability

185
Chapter 11
Organizational Structure
 
➤Three types of organizational structures are commonly con-
sidered for the permanent user experience design team.
 
■
Matrix—There is a central user experience design group, 
but rather than doing all the work, it supports user 
experience design practitioners working within differ-
ent project teams. The matrix structure works well for 
medium-sized and large organizations.
 
■
Centralized—All members of the user experience design 
staff are a single team, assigned temporarily to help on 
specific projects as needed. This structure works well 
for small organizations.
 
■
Decentralized—User experience design staff members 
are allocated to specific projects and report up through 
the various lines of business. This structure has some 
inherent flaws; it is not recommended.
 
➤All organizations need a central user experience design 
team. Although this team in reality is often found in many 
parts of the organization, it ideally exists under a chief user 
experience officer (CXO) or the head of marketing.

186
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
 
➤Have an effective escalation pathway in place for problems 
with funding, staffing, and even specific design decisions.
 
➤Graphic artists, writers, and other user experience design-
oriented staff may best be placed in the same organization 
as the central user experience design team.
Once you have a proper infrastructure in place and a full under-
standing of your organization’s needs, it makes sense to build a user 
experience design team. This team can be structured in many ways, 
and it is important to find the right structure to meet these needs 
and to place the people in the correct parts of the overall 
organization.
In the end, the success of the user experience effort depends very 
much on the quality and appropriateness of the staff recruited to do 
the work. Without skilled staff, the infrastructure will be of little 
benefit. Take care in assembling your team.
In the Organization phase, the benefits of user experience design 
begin to accumulate. You can start to make user experience a com-
petitive differentiator and can expect to see well-engineered experi-
ences become routine. The projects can begin in earnest and 
incorporate internal staff. This will, of course, bring new challenges 
in scheduling and resource limitations that will test your organiza-
tion’s ability to work smart within practical limitations.
The single most important organizational principle is that user expe-
rience design does not reside in a single group. Even if you have a team 
with that title, user experience design must permeate the entire 
organization.
Compare this situation with the health care model. In a health care 
organization, there are surgeons, doctors, physician’s assistants, 
and nurses. All these people wear the “health care professional” 
title, have technology and training at their disposal, and are always 
aware of the latest research findings and tools. Although they form 
the official health care organization, everyone in society is a part of 
the larger health care system, because everyone has a basic 

187
Organizational Structure
understanding and a direct appreciation of health issues. Just as 
everyone must be responsible to some extent for his or her own 
health, so all employees should be aware of and feel responsible for 
user experience design issues.
It has been a common strategy to drop a user experience design 
team into an organization and hope for the best—which is about as 
effective as dropping a small group of well-meaning doctors into a 
foreign country where they don’t speak the language. Let’s consider 
the challenges. The user experience design team has its own jargon 
and perspective, which can lead to communication problems with 
the developers. When usability professionals talk about “personas,” 
“scenarios” and “affordance design,” developers won’t have a clue 
what they mean. Those communications problems and different 
perspectives may lead the development community to mistrust the 
user experience design staff.
Interface design has also often become the fun part of the marketing 
specialist’s, business analyst’s, or developer’s day. (And it is a nice 
diversion if you don’t need to be rigorous.) Everyone thinks he or 
she is an expert in interface design, which lays the groundwork for 
a major power and control issue. The user experience design team 
must wrest control from other groups that are large, powerful, and 
entrenched.
Given these communication and control issues , the user experience 
design team often sees problems only when it is too late to fix them. 
This is a universal symptom of an incomplete institutionalization 
program. Developers are not sensitized to user experience design 
issues, so they do not realize that a problem exists until the users 
reject the application—or they  find that the application’s perfor-
mance measurements are dismal. Developers proceed to create 
interfaces without knowing the basics of good design. They don’t 
gather data from users, model and optimize the users’ taskflows, 
apply research-based principles of good design, or begin routine 
user experience design test ing at the early stages of the project.
Given the practices of many development organizations, it is no 
surprise that they build sites that aren’t usable. Usability teams may 
feel helpless and ineffective in the wake of poor designs and end up 

188
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
clamoring for resources to fix broken interfaces. The solution 
requires a proactive approach: routine practices and perspectives 
must change throughout the organization.
The objective of the institutionalization effort is to ensure the user 
experience quality of all new sites and applications. This can be 
achieved only through a user experience design assurance system. 
When you consider implementation of this system, keep in mind 
that it should encompass the entire development organization, just 
as the health care system encompasses everyone in the community. 
Without this perspective, you will not have a successful operation, 
and the user experience design team will be ineffective.
I’ve participated in hundreds of meetings to plan the ideal organiza-
tion for user experience design work. There are many nuances to 
attaining the optimal structure, communication, and task allocation, 
but really only one structure works well for large companies: a 
small centralized user experience design organization that supports 
user experience design practitioners who work in specific lines of 
business and are assigned to specific projects. For smaller organiza-
tions, the central user experience design team may be able to sup-
port the infrastructure and complete all the user experience design 
work itself.
This chapter discusses these organizational structures, the escalat-
ing problems that can occur, and means by which the user experi-
ence design team can work with user experience design-related 
groups.
Organizational Structures for User Experience 
Design Teams
You need to establish a structure for your permanent user experi-
ence design organization. However, the goodwill and the leverage 
of the people involved have as much or more impact than the struc-
ture on the success of user experience design. Air traffic controllers 
manage an amazingly complex task, occasionally handling crises 

Organizational Structures for User Experience Design Teams
189
where lives are at stake. Their systems are often antiquated, but they 
make the process work. Any structure can be made to work: people 
can scavenge resources and work out informal networks of support. 
Any structure can also be made to fail: if people decide not to accept 
the user-centered approach, they will sabotage it—whether will-
fully or inadvertently.
That said, it still makes sense to select an organizational structure 
that makes success more likely. We’ve mentioned three types of 
organizations that are commonly considered for a user experience 
design facility: decentralized, matrix, and centralized structures. 
Let’s briefly review each of them.
Decentralized Structure
The decentralized structure allocates all user experience design staff 
members to specific projects. The UX staff then report up through 
the various lines of business. The benefits of a decentralized struc-
ture would seem to be that staff members become an integral part of 
the design groups. However, without a central group to provide a 
coherent set of methodologies, standards, facilities, and consultative 
support, or to provide a unified message to the executives, this type 
of structure almost always fails in the long run. Unsupported by a 
user experience design-focused leader, practitioners often end up 
doing software testing or some other activity needed to meet a proj-
ect date rather than satisfy UX goals. The user experience design 
effort thus loses focus.
Matrix Structure
A matrix solution works well in mid-sized and large companies. In 
this structure, a small central user experience design team, as well 
as user experience design practitioners, work on projects and report 
to the various lines of business. The user experience design staff 
members are integrated and accepted within the project team, and 
they become deeply aware of the user experience design issues and 
techniques that can be applied to that team’s initiatives. A matrix 
structure can be very effective as long as there is a small, central 

190
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
user experience design team to support user experience design 
practitioners on the project teams.
In the structure depicted in Figure 11-1, as the dotted arrow indi-
cates, the central user experience design group has a reporting 
arrangement with UX practitioners on the project teams. The practi-
tioners have a secondary reporting pathway, with the user experi-
ence design leader providing career counseling and input on 
performance reviews. The central group works with practitioners 
on the project teams. The central team members are responsible for 
methods, tools, facilities, training, and sponsorship. They help select 
new staff, advocate for user experience design practitioners when 
conflicts arise, and provide ongoing consultative support and men-
toring. If the central team is not strong, the institutionalization effort 
will fail.
Figure 11-1: A matrix solution for a large organization

Organizational Structures for User Experience Design Teams
191
The central user experience design team must have an influential 
leader—his or her connections, political skills, and charisma are 
vastly important. In addition, the central user experience design 
staff (see Chapter 12) should include strong technical experts 
who can update standards, coach development teams, and oper-
ate as internal consultants. It is common for organizations with a 
central user experience design group to have three to five people 
working full time to support the methodology and consult with 
project teams. The team may also include a user experience 
design testing group that finds test participants and runs testing 
rooms and equipment. This group would include one or two 
people who can customize this process as well as other staff qual-
ified to run tests.
For a large organization, the matrix structure seems to work well as 
long as the central group maintains momentum and provides a 
cohesive strategy. While the group doesn’t have to be very large, it 
is essential to have one in place.
Centralized Structure
A centralized structure with all the user experience design staff in a 
single organization works well in smaller companies or in compa-
nies that undertake only a few development projects each year. In 
this structure, staff members are assigned to work on specific proj-
ects. It is relatively easy to maintain the user-centered perspective of 
staff members, upgrade their skill sets, and preserve the infrastruc-
ture needed.
In a large organization, however, the central group is likely to 
become disconnected from project teams and lines of business; in 
fact, they are often excluded from project work. Their staff are 
not understood and valued, and there is an unmet expectation 
that practitioners will deeply understand each domain and divi-
sion. This disconnect explains why it is really necessary to have 
staff permanently assigned to design projects or lines of business 
in large organizations. That way, the complex domains can be 
fully understood and there can be solid integration with the 
working teams.

192
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
Placement of a Central Team in the Overall 
Organization
A centralized user experience design team provides central coordi-
nation, infrastructure, and support. This team must reside in a given 
part of the overall organization and report to an executive cham-
pion who will support that group over the long term. I have seen a 
centralized user experience design team placed within the quality 
assurance (QA) unit, the IT department, and the marketing depart-
ment, but none of these solutions seem ideal. Placement directly 
under a CXO is the best positioning within a company. The subsec-
tions that follow briefly discuss these options.
Being on Projects
Colin Hynes, President, UX Inc. 
Former Director of Site Usability, Staples
A lot of making user experience design work is frankly just 
making sure we’re on project teams. We are involved early in 
the process of every project on Staples.com, and part of our 
goal for next year is to do that throughout the catalog, corpo-
rate applications, and retail applications. We are “on the 
streets” with them—whether they’re merchants or marketing 
folks, IS development folks or creative graphics people—show-
ing our value to each project on a day-to-day basis. We don’t 
swoop in and say, “Here’s all the stuff that’s wrong with your 
catalog, your application, your website, and good luck fixing 
it—we’ll see you in another two months when we can do the 
same thing.” We’re integrated as part of the team.
I’m actually a business owner on some of those projects. For 
example, we’re redesigning the registration process on  Staples
.com. I’m the business owner of that—I’m the client of that proj-
ect as well as being the user experience design guy. So the user 
experience design group owns some of the action. We’re not just 
staff advisors; we’re responsible for some of the projects.

Placement of a Central Team in the Overall Organization
193
Placement within Quality Assurance
The quality assurance group usually becomes the home for the user 
experience design team when user experience design primarily has 
a testing function. To ensure that quality is independent and uncom-
promised by the IT group’s tough time constraints, the quality 
assurance team is usually not directly controlled by the IT 
organization.
When the user experience design team resides within the quality 
assurance group, the team functions as an auditor—a real positive for 
the summative user experience design testing process. The group can 
report tests of overall experience and performance with impunity. 
Group members may also be able to do consulting work with the 
detachment characteristic of an auditing organization. While this is 
an attractive solution in some ways, it can also be too removed from 
the organization’s direct business imperatives. Placement within the 
QA group can keep the UX team focused on meeting arbitrary user 
experience design metrics, thereby losing sight of the real business 
objectives (e.g., making money) owing to the obsession with bureau-
cratic requirements. One solution is to have a small, specialized user 
experience design testing group within the quality assurance organi-
zation and then assign the central group elsewhere.
Placement within IT
Many user experience design teams are placed directly within the 
IT organization. It’s a logical placement inasmuch as UX specialists 
are considered systems development staff. User experience design 
team members report to the CIO or more often to a second-level 
executive in the systems development division.
There is a downside to being attached to the IT organization, how-
ever: it makes the user experience design team completely dependent 
on the goodwill of the IT group. If the executive champion of the UX 
initiative works within the IT department, the placement of user 
experience design within IT may work very well. Conversely, if the 
executive champion works primarily in a different department, IT 
may be a tough place for the user experience design team to reside.
The IT organization is often focused on two main goals: meeting the 
schedule and eliminating bugs. IT group members often consider 

194
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
themselves successful if they get the site or application up in the 
time allotted. If the facility does not crash or have major errors in 
calculation, they celebrate a success—and are bewildered by users 
who say, “That may be what we asked for, but it is not what we 
want.” When they hear this complaint, they blame the users. If this 
is the character of the IT group, it’s not the right setting for an effec-
tive user experience design team.
Placement within Marketing
The central user experience design group is also sometimes made a 
part of the marketing organization. The marketing group is focused 
on making money—a goal it accomplishes by satisfying customers. 
Identifying a market niche, a unique selling proposition, and a 
brand, marketing generally has a strategy for moving the company 
forward. User experience design professionals then make sure that 
sites and applications support this strategy. Usability specialists 
en sure that the technology meets users’ needs and accommodates 
their limitations in a practical way.
Marketing staff members quickly realize that the user experience 
design process is the logical continuation of their work. That can 
mean that people in marketing try to take on the role of user experi-
ence design practitioners. If they receive training and certification, 
such an approach works well; without the needed training, how-
ever, success will prove elusive. In the best scenario, the marketing 
organization becomes the greatest promoter of user experience 
design engineering.
Of the current most common options—quality assurance, IT, or 
marketing—the best location for the central user experience design 
organization is usually within marketing. The marketing organiza-
tion has a vested interest in the quality of the user experience, and 
marketing staff members want to ensure that IT provides real value. 
They are determined to use IT expenditures in ways that really add 
value to customers. The user experience design team supports this 
process. In a sense, user experience design engineering is wholly 
focused on realizing marketing’s vision. User experience design 
practitioners ensure that the marketing strategy is carried forward 
through the detailed design of the site or application.

Placement of a Central Team in the Overall Organization
195
Organizations without a formal marketing department, such as 
government agencies, may find their user experience design per-
sonnel distributed among various groups. However, an increasing 
number of these agencies now have entities that are very similar to 
commercial product management or lines of business. Divisions in 
government focused on specific functional objectives are an appro-
priate part of the organization for user experience design staff to 
reside, with the IT department being seen as the last resort.
Placing the user experience design team within the marketing orga-
nization may prove challenging in several ways. First, some mar-
keting organizations are not concerned with customer interactions. 
That is, they are primarily focused on advertising programs that 
create offers for customers, but don’t consider the customers’ task-
flows or process while evaluating their offers or getting them ful-
filled. User experience design work will be a poor fit for the 
marketing organization in this type of environment. Even if the 
marketing team members do have a wider view of interaction, their 
expertise and focus are not usually directed toward design and 
delivery. They may set the direction for the products, but their pri-
mary concern remains getting customers to the point of sale. Prod-
uct setup, normal usage, problem management. and other 
subsequent issues of customer experience are not the main focus of 
most conventional marketing organizations.
In any case, most marketing groups are responsible for more than just 
online customer interaction. They must consider many channels of 
marketing communication as well as the customers’ behavior within 
a store, through the mail, and during interaction with company staff. 
This is, as a general rule, a good thing: usability work should be syn-
chronized with the other modalities of interaction. While usability 
professionals do not design store layouts—marketers and consumer 
psychologists handle this task—synchronization is important. Prob-
lems can occur if sufficient consideration is not given to the online 
experience. Thus, if the marketing organization does not have a sig-
nificant interest in online activities, it is a poor home for the user 
experience design group.
A second area of concern with the placement of user experience 
design teams within marketing groups is that they may not be clear 

196
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
on where marketing expertise stops and where user experience 
design work takes over. This is an understandable problem because 
both marketing and user experience design professionals gather 
data from customers, and both care about customer motivation and 
perspective. The key difference is that the marketing group defines the 
target, and the user experience design group hits it.
When members of a marketing group run group focus sessions, 
they are searching for a good product idea. They gather customer 
data to define the target market for the idea, and work to define a 
precise brand perception and selling proposition. With these ele-
ments defined, the user experience design team does its work with 
the development staff to ensure that the functional specification 
works for the defined user target. The user experience design team 
structures an interface and guides graphic designers to create that 
target brand perception, then engineers a taskflow that fulfills the 
unique selling proposition.
Some overlap may occur within this process. The marketing group 
often provides the logo along with the color palettes and corporate 
typefaces that are known to support the brand and are being used in 
offline channels. The marketing group may also select terms that 
describe a product offering, whether or not these terms mean any-
thing to users. Members of this group provide feature lists that may 
sometimes be a close match for the real user needs. At the same time, 
the user experience design team may discover issues with brand val-
ues or the way the brand is presented. The user experience design 
team may suggest different descriptions of an offering or at least 
highlight those that will not work. It is important to be cautious 
when working in areas of overlap to ensure that the process remains 
smooth: a good user experience design team will be responsive to 
marketing throughout the design and implementation process.
Another challenge with placing the user experience design team 
within the marketing organization is that marketing may have almost 
no interest in systems that are not seen by customers. The user experi-
ence design team should work on the company intranet and cus-
tomer service applications. It is certainly possible to have a separate 
user experience design team for internal applications, but it is a better 
use of resources to have a single user experience design group. This 

Placement of a Central Team in the Overall Organization
197
central group can then work on these projects. There is usually too 
much overlap in the work to be done on methodology, infrastructure, 
tools, and training to maintain separate user experience design teams.
Placement under a CXO
There is an increasingly common best practice (see Outside In: The 
Power of Putting Customers at the Center of Your Business, 2012, by 
Harley Manning, Kerry Bodine, and Josh Bernoff) of placing the 
central user experience design team under the direct supervision of 
a CXO. The CXO is placed high in the organization and has respon-
sibility across every line of business. A single interaction with the 
user may, in fact, involve several different divisions. The CXO has 
the position, power, and responsibility to see that this interaction is 
a coherent success.
An interesting issue is emerging in organizations that have CXOs. 
The CXO focuses on the overall customer experience across all 
touch points. This includes the digital facilities and digitally sup-
ported facilities, of course—but it also includes analog, tactile 
aspects of the business process, such as the layout of stores and 
packaging and marketing materials. This multiplicity of platforms 
creates an interesting organizational dilemma.
Members of the user experience design group that works on digital 
channels must have very different skills than employees who work 
on store layouts. Improving manual workflows is much easier than 
creating digital solutions and can conceivably be done based on 
common sense. Some organizations create multiple groups, often 
with names that actually mean the same thing—for example, a Cus-
tomer Experience Group and a separate User Experience Group. 
Although they have different skill sets, they need the same ecosys-
tem data. Moreover, because all channels of customer interface 
interact, they must coordinate: point-of-sale facilities, for example, 
need to integrate with the store layouts. The central user experience 
design group needs to expand, accommodating somewhat different 
types of staff, to manage that integration.
Once created, the role of CXO becomes one of the key positions in 
an organization’s power structure. It is certainly a position that 

198
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
needs to be filled by an executive with considerable savvy and 
vision. The head of marketing has the responsibility for getting peo-
ple engaged with the organization’s products; the CXO is responsi-
ble for good things happening to the customer throughout that 
engagement. This is a huge responsibility, and one that is best 
placed with a single person who can oversee the entire range of 
engagements. For more information on the role of the CXO, see 
Chapter 12.
Escalation of Problems
When positioning the user experience design team, be sure to con-
sider the chain of escalation for problems. With a new institutional-
ization effort, there are sure to be conflicts and difficulties over 
funding, staffing, and even specific design decisions. There may be 
a stubborn vice president who feels that a wiggly animation will 
really improve sales—especially when accompanied by a short, con-
tinuously looping music track. Project teams can bring these types 
of problems to the central user experience design group, and the 
An Executive Must Champion Usability
Harley Manning, Research Director, Forrester Research
Almost every time we research organizational issues (includ-
ing how the project is run), we find a project owner matrix-
managing a cross-functional team. This project owner needs an 
executive champion who can make sure that he or she gets 
funding and gets support against all the organizational sniping 
that goes on. This executive champion should report to either 
the head of the division or the CEO. If not, the project has the 
potential to get derailed by efforts from other groups.
It’s just as important for the champion to know what not to do 
as it is to know what to do. If you are an executive, it’s impor-
tant not to play other roles.

Graphic Artists, Writers, and Other Usability-Oriented Staff 
199
leader of the central group can try to resolve them. Usually, a com-
posite video of users complaining about download time and 
expressing annoyance with the design is enough to convince the 
well-intentioned executive. This approach does not always work, 
however. What, then, should the appropriate escalation path be? It 
is a critical question.
The CXO is the ideal path for escalation. Only the CXO has unam-
biguous responsibility for the user experience and a position high 
enough in the organization to successfully resolve these types of 
issues. When an escalation path to the CXO is lacking, there is a 
potential for problems to occur. A user experience design group in 
marketing may clash with the senior executive who has strong 
design ideas. A user experience design group in IT may clash with 
the executive who just wants to get the site up and running on time, 
regardless of user issues. A user experience design group embroiled 
in design problems may not get much help from a manager who is 
responsible for writing procedures, best practices, or quality assur-
ance reports. The escalation path will inevitably go up through the 
area where the central user experience design group is situated. No 
matter where it travels, the pathway of escalation must be credible 
and effective.
Although the leader of the user experience design team should 
strive to resolve issues directly, a plausible and effective escalation 
pathway may exist when this approach fails. This is the primary 
reason for the leader to report to a position high in the organization. 
Otherwise, user issues will rarely win out over issues of schedule, 
politics, habit, and preference.
Graphic Artists, Writers, and Other 
Usability-Oriented Staff
A highly diverse family of specialists helps form the actual user 
experience. Graphic artists create icons and other graphical images, 
for example, while technical writers generate content and market 
research groups collect wide and varied data about users. How do 
all these different types of people interact within the organization?

200
Chapter 11    Organizational Structure
If you have a CXO, you have someone in a unified position who can 
coordinate the disparate central groups that focus on user experi-
ence. Market researchers can raise issues to be studied by the user 
experience design team, and the user experience design specialists 
can bring challenges to the graphics team. A powerful creative syn-
ergy may emerge from such interactions. If you don’t have a CXO, 
you need to consider placing these staff members in your central 
user experience design group. Despite the fact that they are not user 
experience design specialists, these other staff members have a criti-
cal role in supporting the user experience design engineers and/or 
creating a positive user experience.
Summary
The single most important organizational principle is that the con-
cern for user experience design should not reside only in a single group. 
There should be a team with that title with primary responsibility 
and serious capabilities, but concern for user experience design 
must permeate the entire organization. The structure you choose 
should be appropriate to the size and goals of your organization, 
and it should take into account the best placement of the central 
user experience design team. The next chapter provides information 
on effective staffing theories and strategies that will help you final-
ize the structure you have established.

201
Chapter 12
Staffing
 
➤The manager of the central user experience design group is 
the day-to-day leader of the central organization, and also 
manages the overall progress of user experience design in 
the company. It is bet ter to have a good manager without 
much user-centered design experience than an expert who 
does not understand management.
 
➤The central user experience design group needs UX profes-
sionals who play a number of types of roles. You may need 
to staff all of these roles and more:
 
■
Infrastructure manager
 
■
Mentor
 
■
Topical specialist
 
■
Ecosystem researcher
 
➤The user experience design manager and practitioners do 
the actual user experience design work—they are general-
ists in user experience engineering and possess a solid skill 
set for the design process. In small companies, they may be 
a part of the central organization. In larger companies, they 

202
Chapter 12    Staffing
should generally report to the project teams within each 
line of business.
 
➤Using an offshore model is potentially a partial solution for 
almost any organization building its user experience design 
staff.
This chapter describes the staff roles needed for the institutionaliza-
tion of user experience design and explains what to look for when 
hiring people to fill them. These roles do not necessarily map 
directly to job descriptions, as one person may fulfill a number of 
roles. Conversely, one role may be filled by several individuals. Mix 
and match them as necessary, but the roles must be staffed. In a very 
large organization, greater specialization is the norm, and it is more 
likely that several people will work on a given role. In smaller com-
panies, a single individual often must handle multiple roles. For 
example, in a very small company with only one user experience 
engineer, that person may need to fulfill all the roles described in 
this chapter (a daunting requirement), while a medium-sized com-
pany might have a specialist in cross-cultural design who also has 
graphic art skills.
Earlier chapters discussed developing the infrastructure of the user 
experience design operation. As a result, you now have the knowl-
edge necessary to create a “user experience design factory” com-
plete with appropriate processes and tools. But the success of that 
factory very much depends on getting the right UX staff in place, 
and this is not an easy task. Only a limited number of educational 
institutions offer graduate programs for user experience design 
practitioners, and many graduates of these programs still need real-
world experience.1 At the undergraduate level, there are some 
courses available in user-centered design but not degrees that focus 
on the necessary skills. Many countries are developing practitioner 
programs to meet this rising demand; thus an offshore model is 
1. For a listing of the current university programs available, see www.humanfactors.com/
downloads/degrees.asp.

The Chief User Experience Executive
203
another potential option for organizations to consider. In this chap-
ter, I share insights gained during two decades of experience with 
hiring user experience design staff.
The Chief User Experience Executive
Once the institutionalization effort has succeeded, a central user 
experience design organization should be in place (as discussed in 
Chapter 11). This organization reports to an executive, who may be 
a chief user experience officer (CXO), the senior vice president of 
marketing, or the head of quality assurance. Whatever the title or 
position, the set of activities and responsibilities this executive must 
fulfill requires no user experience design skill. Understanding the 
field is certainly important—but this job is really about large-scale 
organizational leadership.
It is a common mistake for organizations to put practitioners into 
this position. Teaching a practitioner to be an executive leader is 
asking a lot. Practitioners generally do not know how to direct a 
large-scale organization, setting the stage for things to go very 
badly. Highly skilled practitioners frequently think that to develop 
a user experience design practice, more smart people like them-
selves should be hired. Without leadership experience, they don’t 
understand the need to do large-scale, process-driven work.
In many ways, the user experience executive continues the role of 
the executive champion (refer to Chapter 1 for additional details on 
this role). It is essential to continue chanting the mantra of business 
focus for user experience design work and operating within the pol-
itics of the organization to ensure that support is obtained from key 
players. In some ways, these tasks are much easier to address now 
that the organization has been sensitized to user experience design 
issues and a foundation of support is in place. The initial strategy of 
institutional ization has given way to a far more complex set of proj-
ects and initiatives, and the executive must establish the balance 
among strategic activities, infrastructure, and tactical work. In addi-
tion, he or she needs to monitor progress, solve problems, and cele-
brate success.

204
Chapter 12    Staffing
During times of growth and prosperity, maintaining the user expe-
rience design team is not a problem. In contrast, during difficult 
times, the executive must make a solid case for continuation of the 
team. In the past, the usability organization was often cut early in a 
downturn—a development that can be discouraging for user expe-
rience design staff, and one that has prompted many talented peo-
ple to leave the field. The executive needs to inspire a sense of 
purpose, commitment, and security in the organization. When a 
team is properly integrated and working in a mature way, then it 
will be sustainable through downturns and executive turnover.
No matter if you have just one UX practitioner or hundreds, you 
still need someone at an executive level playing the role of executive 
champion. The executive champion was critical in starting the pro-
cess for institutionalizing user experience design, and a champion 
will be critical for continuing and maintaining user experience engi-
neering practices. If you have a CXO, this person is most likely your 
executive champion. If you do not have a CXO, you need to clarify 
who your executive champion is.
The Central Usability Organization Manager
The executive champion or chief user experience executive provides 
high-level strategy and support. This role is essential, but the daily 
work falls under the supervision of the manager of the central user 
experience design organization, who has a very different job from 
that of the executives. The role of the central usability organization 
manager requires at least an understanding of user-centered design 
technology, along with very good connections in the organization. 
While the executive might spend a small part of his or her time on 
user experience design, the central UX organization manager is 
fully dedicated to the control and promotion of the user experience 
engineering capability within the organization. There is a rapidly 
growing set of skilled job candidates in this area, and an increasing 
body of knowledge about how to do that job well (see User Experi-
ence Management: Essential Skills for Leading Effective UX Teams, by 
Arnie Lund).

The Central Usability Organization Manager
205
The central user experience design group has a whole agenda of 
projects and services for which the executive champion may pro-
vide overall direction, but the manager has to plan, fund, staff, and 
monitor each one. This job is a lot like running an internal consult-
ing group—there is an infrastructure to maintain and a set of project 
offerings to design, create, market, and deliver.
The manager of the user experience design team is sure to spend a 
substantial amount of time addressing personnel issues—hiring 
good usability staff and cultivating them internally. Existing staff 
members also need to be mentored. Consequently, the manager 
should dedicate time to developing career planning and feedback 
sessions for this group.
The ideal qualities of a user experience design manager include in-
depth knowledge of user experience engineering practices, a full 
grasp of the organizational dynamics, and a love of management. 
Such individuals have the ex pertise to chart the course for user-
centered design work and contribute a great deal to the process. 
Owing to their in-depth understanding of organizational dynam ics, 
even if they are not familiar with your organization, they will quickly 
familiarize themselves with it. The ideal manager is fully committed 
to user experience design and won’t get sidetracked easily.
If you cannot find or afford a “walk-on-water” user experience 
design expert with management skills, what should you do? You 
may be tempted to promote a highly skilled user experience design 
specialist who has a deep understanding of the field. After all, he 
or she will understand what needs to be accomplished, will be able 
to assess the quality of work, and can help make wise tradeoffs 
when difficult decisions arise. However, placing a practitioner 
without management experience into a leadership role might lead 
to the collapse of your institutionalization effort. Without a leader 
who has the necessary savvy and political skills, the entire user 
experience design organization may be marginalized and eventu-
ally eliminated. While some cultures can be supportive of a techni-
cal expert placed in a leadership position, the specialist is ill 
equipped to run with the wolves in most organizations—or even to 
run from them.

206
Chapter 12    Staffing
As a second choice, it is better to select a street-smart manager who 
cares about user-centered design issues, providing him or her with 
plenty of training and support. This person’s understanding of the 
management role and channels of communication is his or her most 
important capability, outweighing even limited user experience 
engineering expertise. The professional manager must be dedicated 
to user experience design and have the ability to build a team of 
experts—and then to grow that team and protect it. Ideally, the 
manager can mentor the team members in content as well as clear 
roadblocks for them. If he or she is not equipped to do so, the man-
ager may need to delegate content mentoring to another staff per-
son or an outside mentor.
The management role is the most critical for the team. If you have 
a manager who is not an expert, you will absolutely need one 
very key capability: someone who is able to select the methods 
that will be applied to each program and to estimate the scope of 
effort. This will take someone quite senior in the user experience 
design field.
It is often thought that the manager of the central usability team can 
also complete the work of the executive champion, but that miscon-
ception arises simply because many organizations do not appreciate 
the champion’s critical role. You need a true executive to be the 
executive champion. The role should not be combined with that of 
the central manager. Refer to Chapter 1 for details on the role of the 
executive champion.
The Central Usability Organization Staff
As mentioned in Chapter 11, the central user experience design 
group comprises a small nucleus of staff members with user experi-
ence design expertise who coordinate UX activities for the company 
(Figure 12-1). This central group forms the dissemination point for 
best practices and success stories. It must also manage challenges to 
maintain progress toward an optimized user experience. This group 
rarely includes more than 6–10 people. (In large organizations, addi-
tional staff members are distributed in project teams.) The central 

The Central Usability Organization Staff
207
usability team is essential to keeping the institutionalization effort 
moving forward while remaining coordinated—and dynamic.
We will define seven subroles that may be needed within this team 
to complete its centralized support functions: (1) infrastructure 
manager, (2) mentor, (3) topical specialist, (4) project planner, 
(5) project manager, (6) generalist, and (7) researcher. As with the 
concept of archetypes in mythology, there is usually a bit of each 
role in every user experience professional, although some people 
function well in only a limited set of areas, while others perform 
only one of these roles well.
The Infrastructure Manager
This role is far less proactive than that of the mentor, specialist, or 
generalist. The infrastructure manager spends much less time inter-
acting with the constituent project teams. Instead, he or she is respon-
sible for getting methods, standards, and tools in place—facilities 
Figure 12-1: A large central group supporting project teams

208
Chapter 12    Staffing
that need to be maintained and disseminated as well. This has 
become an increasingly complex process. While the methods might 
not change much, the templates sitting alongside the methods will 
need to be refined and expanded.
There should always be a central facility to field questions about 
interface design standards and gather issues. A repeated request for 
an exception to a screen template, for example, could signal the 
need to add a new template. Tools all need to be administered and 
monitored. In addition, there is often internal training to provide.
The Mentor
People in the role of mentor reach out to guide and evaluate junior 
user experience design staff and provide selective support on many 
projects. Junior usability staff members have a lot to manage. They 
are often performing activities such as data gathering and testing 
for the first time, and they need support and encouragement while 
they build confidence in their abilities. It is hard to walk into a test-
ing facility and face your first test participant—there is always a 
fear that you will not be able to manage the session. This fear is not 
unfounded. Some test participants repeatedly go off on tangents. 
Others harbor resentment about something the company did and 
want to talk about nothing but that one erroneous item on their bill. 
The consultant often accompanies junior usability staff members to 
a few sessions until their confidence increases.
Aside from emotional support, the mentor is there to provide an 
infusion of technical expertise when it is needed. Often, a few 
moments of attention from the consultant—noticing, for instance, 
that the task analysis documentation is too detailed—can help a 
junior professional avoid weeks of unnecessary work, averting real 
dangers to design quality. Seeing that the design concept requires 
impossible technology or could be accomplished with a simple, 
standard page type can also make future rework unnecessary. The 
mentor plays a key role in developing technical expertise through 
his or her guidance.
Fulfilling the requirements of this role can be great fun. A mentor 
gets to make a positive impact in many arenas, but rarely has to stay 

The Central Usability Organization Staff
209
to complete what is sometimes considered difficult and uninterest-
ing detail work. This role is the ideal job for the more aggressive 
and highly skilled usability generalist.
It is essential to have high-quality technical skills for this role. The 
mentor must be able to evaluate processes and designs without 
spending a great deal of time on analysis or reflection. He or she 
must be decisive and definite, and as the final authority in many UX 
issues, cannot afford to be wrong very often.
At the same time, mentors should be emissaries for the user experi-
ence design initiative, constantly educating the organization about 
the value of UX design and the resources available in the 
or ganization. Just like external consultants from a usability ven-
dor’s organization, these internal consultants must create positive 
impressions and bonds.
The Topical Specialist
The need for a specialist role depends on the type of work the com-
pany does. There are many types of specialists in the user experi-
ence engineering field. Software user experience is a specialty 
within the overall field of applied psychology, which includes trans-
portation, military equipment, consumer products, aviation, and 
other subfields. Numer ous subspecialties exist within software 
experience engineering. If your organization’s core competency 
involves one of these subspecialties, it may make sense to hire a 
user experience design professional with expertise in this particular 
area. Following are some of the more common areas of specializa-
tion within the field of user-centered software engineering.
The Technology Specialist
Some user experience design specialists focus on particular types of 
software technology. These experts may specialize in mobile or Web 
applications, graphical user interfaces (GUIs), voice response sys-
tems (both touch tone and voice recognition), phones, and other 
handheld units. There is a lifetime’s worth of detail in each of these 
areas. For example, a good general practitioner or consultant knows 
the basics of a voice response script and knows how to make menus 

210
Chapter 12    Staffing
short and simple. Nevertheless, complex strategies come into play 
when tuning a voice recognition algorithm; even the way that the 
software determines the end of a word is challenging [Kotelly 2003]. 
If the core business of an organization involves voice recognition 
software, it is worthwhile to have staff specialists who understand 
these nuances. If there is only an occasional, specialized area of need, 
however, it is best to find a specialist to hire on a contract basis.
The User and Domain Specialists
Specialists focus on particular domains or user types. Some focus 
just on the design of software for children, on financial applications, 
or on the presentation of graphic models for oil drilling. Every 
domain has its own language, insights, and challenges. While it is 
true that a good consultant can make a positive impact on almost 
any application, there is real value in hiring someone who has expe-
rience in your particular domain. For example, if the company is 
wholly focused on building gaming software, it pays to have a spe-
cialist familiar with the gaming industry, environment, and cus-
tomer populations.
The same developmental activities are needed. You cannot just go to 
the specialist and say, “You have been building gaming applications 
for 30 years, so make one for me.” This approach will at best result 
in duplicating the design, business strategy, unique selling proposi-
tion, and branding of a previous client. Instead, the specialist should 
go through a de novo, full, user-centered design process. This 
ensures the creation of a design that precisely fits your organiza-
tion’s competitive strategy. The specialist’s expertise helps save time 
in understanding the domain and improves the quality of ques-
tions, thereby enabling your organization to avoid pitfalls. He or 
she will likely be able to accommodate design requirements that 
may not be obvious. Nevertheless, the full user experience design 
process is needed to create a competitive design.
The Developmental Activity Specialist
A good general practitioner or consultant in the field can complete 
the full range of developmental activities in the user experience 

The Central Usability Organization Staff
211
design methodology. However, some professionals specialize in a 
limited part of the development life cycle, such as conducting 
usability testing. Developmental activity specialists are often less 
expensive to hire than generalists because their skill set is limited. 
These specialists may be very useful as members of project teams, 
or they may be collected in a service organization within the central 
usability group—which deploys the group’s specialty more cost-
effectively. You can apply their work across many projects through-
out your organization.
Some specialists work on very sophisticated parts of the user expe-
rience design methodology. Developing an appropriate UX strategy 
is both critical and difficult. It requires someone who understands 
how to extract ideas from executives, who is familiar with business 
models, and who can envision large scale, cross-channel designs.
Other practitioners specialize in innovation. Everyone tries to be 
innovative in what they do, and you can certainly be trained to be 
more innovative—but serious innovation programs are entirely 
another matter. These programs are large-scale efforts that under-
stand a business space and generate many ideas about new offer-
ings and business models that are then systematically envisioned 
and evaluated.
Finally, specialists are commonly employed to run controlled experi-
ments. If you need a scientifically valid comparison between designs 
with appropriate statistical treatment, you will need someone who 
has a solid experimental design capability—a characteristic that is 
somewhat uncommon among user experience design generalists.
The Persuasion Engineer
The rationale of making a design that is easy to use is essentially 
accepted everywhere. It is the “table stakes” of design—if you 
intend to be in business, your digital channels should be usable or 
you should not even try to be in the game. Today, however, the 
arena of competition is going well beyond simple ease-of-use. Don 
Norman [2002], one of the great thinkers in the usability field, has 
described how design must go beyond usability. We are now in a 
struggle to make interfaces that are enjoyable and compelling. It 

212
Chapter 12    Staffing
turns out that there is a whole set of research-based models, skills, 
and methods specific to emotional design. From UX strategy, through 
innovation and user-centered design, there are special activities that 
your persuasion engineering expert needs to complete to ensure a 
compelling solution. The design might need impressive graphics 
(we will cover that shortly), but being compelling is not at all syn-
onymous with graphic richness. Consider two of the most persua-
sive interfaces online: those of Amazon.com and Facebook: though 
not graphically rich, they are quite compelling for more fundamen-
tal and powerful reasons.
The persuasion engineer is responsible for using a whole set of 
methods that shape emotion and trigger conversion (Fig-
ure 12-2). Of course, graphics can be part of the solution. Just 
consider two highly successful applications: slot machines and 
World of Warcraft.
Figure 12-2: Persuasion engineering tools from HFI’s basic course 
on persuasion, emotion, and trust (PET design)

The Central Usability Organization Staff
213
The Cross-Cultural Specialist
Cross-cultural experts have a really in-depth understanding of how 
to adapt an application to different cultural contexts. All trained 
user experience design consultants are sensitive to the issues of glo-
balization and localization of software and are aware of the chal-
lenges within this area. For example, a well-trained consultant for 
an American company would never approve the name “Morning 
Mist” for a perfume product destined for sales in Germany, a coun-
try where mist means manure.
A cross-cultural specialist will understand which principles of 
design make translation easier, such as “Do not embed variables in 
a sentence that will be translated because syntax changes will shift 
the order of the variables, making the rendering of translated sen-
tences hard to code and maintain.” Consider the following English 
text: “Thanks, [username]! That is [units bought] [color] [product] 
added to your account.” In Spanish, it would translate correctly as 
follows: “Gracias, [username]! Eso es [units bought] [product] 
[color] agregado a su cuenta.” Thus the programmer would need to 
reverse the sequence of color and product.
The generalist can do a credible job of avoiding many pitfalls in 
cross-cultural design. However, specialists in the field spend their 
professional lives seeking to understand the issues and processes of 
localization and have models that identify key differences between 
cultures that may impact the design. They know the characteristics 
of the target culture that will be of special concern.
If your business is defined by having a certain expertise, you will 
benefit from having at least one of these numerous types of user 
experience design specialists on board. The Social Security Admin-
istration, for example, will have accessibility experts. Large multi-
national organizations will have experts in emerging markets. A 
deep R&D operation will have theoretical cognitive scientists. A 
game company might have a positive psychologist (who studies fun 
and happiness).
Besides the specialists listed here, specialists may focus on areas 
such as multidimensional data, visualization methods, online search 
strategies, security, and font design. While it is important not to 

214
Chapter 12    Staffing
expect a specialist to be able to play a more generalist role within 
the usability team, if your organization is working within a very 
specialized domain, it may make sense to have a specialist on board.
The Ecosystem Researcher
As computers become more ubiquitous, we must consider a far 
more complex context for our designs. We can no longer just look at 
a person using an application. Instead, we have to consider many 
people playing different roles—that is, complex social and physical 
environments. So many of these contextual issues come into play 
that some businesses have started using cultural anthropologists 
and ethnographers to enhance their understanding. These research-
ers see things differently from classic applied psychologists. They 
look at the roles of various actors in a given setting. They are sensi-
tive to the context, communication, values, and rules in a given set-
ting. Their job is to study a given ecosystem, model the ecosystem, 
and then guide development of facilities that will effectively oper-
ate within that context. For many organizations, a central team—
staffed with the right specialists—can perform this research and 
then share the results among many different design teams.
The UX Manager and Practitioners
In small organizations, the central group lends usability specialists to 
projects. In medium-sized and large organizations, practitioners 
work for lines of business and are assigned to specific projects. The 
project team may have only a single user experience design person, 
yet two different roles must actually be provided: a management role 
and a working practitioner’s role. The manager is really the project 
manager for the user experience design activity. Fulfilling this role 
means creating a plan for user experience design work within the 
project. The company methodology lays out a generic project plan, 
but it is up to the manager to mold that plan and designate the spe-
cific activities and resources to make the generic methodology fit the 
project’s time frame, budget, and key objectives. This takes a great 
deal of creativity and experience. It requires a top-level staff person 
with advanced degrees, certifications, and a proven track record. This 
person must address many issues and business decisions.

The Central Usability Organization Staff
215
HFI has seen that an experienced project team manager with good 
planning skills can cut as much as 10–15% from the time and effort 
of the usability work. A poor planning job, in contrast, may make a 
usability project fail. Project planning is not composed of a single 
activity, but rather must be refined and revisited throughout the 
process. Project planning for usability work is mostly about finding 
shortcuts and avoiding traps, and the project team manager is 
instrumental in making such outcomes happen. The following list 
gives a sense of the level of planning considerations required:
• The current application is obviously bad, and everyone knows 
it. The manager decides to skip an initial usability test on the 
current application and go right to the design phase. This 
shortcut saves $60,000 and three weeks of time.
• The manager is told that users are hard to find but still does 
not agree to gather data from internal users. The internal staff, 
interviewed as surrogate users, would be biased by the com-
pany viewpoint, and several additional features might be 
mentioned that are of no interest to the real users. Avoiding 
this trap saves $250,000 in unneeded development and 
coding.
• During a project team discussion about the best width of the 
text, team members say they want to run a study to find the 
answer. The manager recalls seeing research, looks it up and 
makes a clear recommendation for a 100-character-wide dis-
play, thus putting an end to the discussion. This saves the 
team another two days of fighting and prevents an unneces-
sary study—a shortcut that saves three weeks and $30,000 to 
do the research.
• The team immediately wants to begin detailed page designs, 
coding them concurrently. The manager forces the team to 
make standard templates and reusable code. This cuts the fi-
nal development time by three weeks and avoids customer 
complaints due to inconsistent, idiosyncratic designs—saving 
three weeks and $80,000. There are increased sales as well due 
to improvements in customer perceptions.
• The key business objective is to make the site self-evident. 
Rather than employing random or stratified sampling, the 

216
Chapter 12    Staffing
manager decides to just study low-end users. The team can 
test with just 20 users instead of 50, and still get better data. 
It’s a shortcut that saves four days of time and $15,000.
Between avoiding traps and finding shortcuts, a good project team 
manager uses his or her experience to save the company time 
and money.
In the absence of a strong central user experience design manager, 
however, the project team manager may have to build the team. 
This means recruiting and screening the right staff for the group, 
attending to the career development needs and personal motiva-
tions of team members, and mentoring and growing the staff.
Finally, on an ongoing basis, the manager must support the proj ect’s 
progress. He or she must lead difficult negotiations with the other 
developers, track project milestones, unsnarl logistics, and allocate 
staff resources. Constant interactions with the other development 
team members are required, and adjustments in schedule must be 
made to accommodate them.
The project team manager role must be staffed by someone who 
understands the user experience engineering process well. Project 
planning is the toughest part of this role, but it is possible to get 
help for planning from the central user experience design team. 
Nevertheless, even if such assistance is provided for the manage-
ment of the project plan, the execution of the plan requires someone 
who knows the details and vicissitudes of usability work. The per-
son responsible for the usability of the project should complete the 
project planning. This is not the CXO, the executive champion, or 
even the usability team manager. This type of project management 
involves managing a specific project, not the user experience design 
group as a whole.
The Creative Director and the Graphic Designer
Traditionally, user experience engineers seek to make practical, use-
ful, and usable designs. However, achieving these goals is often not 
enough. Designs must be satisfying, pleasant, inspiring, entertain-
ing, and beautiful (Figure 12-3). This is the new frontier of the user 
experience design field. Unfortunately, today’s usability staff 

The Central Usability Organization Staff
217
members are often ill equipped to reach the visual design aspect of 
this goal on their own. Instead, to satisfy this requirement, user 
experience design staff must work with graphic designers.
When the design must appeal to the user’s emotions, creative and 
artistic functional roles must be built into the project along with 
user experience design roles. Their degree of involvement and 
importance varies. If the site is an online brochure, the usability staff 
may have little to do, while the graphic design staff may need to do 
quite a bit of work on the creative design and presentation. Con-
versely, within a human resources site designed for an intranet, very 
little creative work may be required. For example, users of this site 
may want to see only their 401(k) account and benefits. While an 
appealing graphic skin on the site needs to be designed to support 
the company’s brand, expenditures on aesthetic work should be 
limited. In most projects, however, there is a balance of these two 
perspectives. Public sites and shrink-wrap applications are two 
examples of projects that need a wise balance between user experi-
ence engineering and creative design.
To make a site beautiful, you need to bring in skilled people. There 
must be functional roles for both the creative director and the 
graphic designer. These people come from visual arts and design 
backgrounds, and many have also joined the interactive design field 
Moving toward Cool and Usable
Ad Agency
Approach
No 
Ad Agency
Approach
No Usability
Approach
Usability
Approach
Cool but
Confusing
Cool and
Usable
Boring and
Confusing
Boring but
Usable
Figure 12-3: Dr. John Sorflaten’s matrix of usability and creativity

218
Chapter 12    Staffing
from advertising backgrounds. The creative director generally 
develops the concepts for the design, while the graphic designer 
does the physical drawing as well as creates alternative designs to 
meet the objectives of the creative director, and is responsible for 
decisions such as regarding color palettes and font families.
Integration of the user experience design and creative design efforts 
is some times tricky. These groups have different perspectives and 
methods, and they may not agree on the design. In a worst-case sce-
nario, both groups want to control the interface structure, standard 
templates, and final page designs.
When bringing together these two separate viewpoints, you need to 
manage the situation. Each side needs to become sensitive to what 
the other is trying to accomplish. It is imperative to negotiate clear 
boundaries and roles to make this collaboration succeed. The right 
solution depends on the type of application being designed. To see 
how this plays out, let’s examine in greater depth two of the exam-
ples mentioned earlier in this chapter.
If your organization is designing an online brochure, there is little 
need for complex interactivity; user speed and accuracy are also of 
less importance. In such a case, you can hire a creative director to run 
the project. The UX team can check the designs to make sure there are 
no obvious points of confusion and perhaps run a usability test to 
confirm that there are no places where the user gets lost or frustrated. 
Nevertheless, the focus of the project is really on its creative design.
Building a site for employees to set up benefit elections on the intranet 
poses a very different challenge, one that requires greater interaction. 
Users are not interested in being entertained by the site—they just 
want to get the job done quickly. In this case, let the user experience 
design team determine its process, and have a graphic artist complete 
a basic treatment of the design—there is little creative work to do.
You should also consider setting up an interdisciplinary team in 
which a user experience engineer, a graphic designer, and perhaps a 
technical writer work together as equals. The UX engineer will be 
responsible for navigation and interaction, the graphic designer for 
the graphical elements, and the technical writer for writing and 
editing content.

What to Look for When Hiring
219
Outside Consultants
It may seem odd to hear this from a vendor, but the best practice in 
the UX design field is not to rely on vendors to solve your user expe-
rience design problems. Many companies have tried bringing in a 
bunch of brilliant consultants, with each creating a brilliant design. 
Everyone is impressed and applauds, and the vendors go home—
but then the designs steadily become degraded over time. Most 
critically, the diverse vendors create a diverse set of misaligned 
solutions. While each solution might be lovely, collectively they 
don’t fit together as a whole. It is essential to have a strong internal 
group to avoid these pitfalls. This group might contract for some 
work, but it controls the strategy, processes, and standards.
Vendors are quite useful in helping to set up a mature practice (after 
all, you set up the practice only once). They can also be a source of 
staff working for the central group. And there is one unique role 
that can be filled only by a vendor: because the outside consultant is 
not a part of the organizational structure, he or she can act as impar-
tial arbiter and facilitator. This type of consultant can offer a unique 
set of services, and his or her impartiality can help break logjams 
while “saving face” for the internal staff.
The outside consultant can also communicate at any level of the 
organization. Within an organization, strong protocols usually pre-
vent a staff member from walking into the CEO’s office and raising 
difficult topics and concerns. The consultant, in contrast, is permit-
ted and encouraged—and paid—to be critical. This type of service 
is an important part of the institutionalization solution.
What to Look for When Hiring
Hiring your first user experience design staff can be tricky. The mar-
ket for UX personnel is poorly defined, and the people responsible 
for recruiting and hiring in your organization may not have experi-
ence or guidance in what to look for.
An organization hiring senior people for the first time may have a 
difficult time finding them. Senior practitioners in the user 

220
Chapter 12    Staffing
The Social Security Administration’s Usability Team
Sean Wheeler, Lead Usability Specialist, 
Social Security Administration
We currently have 18 people on the Usability Center staff at the 
Social Security Administration (SSA). Half of the staff members 
have their master’s degrees, and one holds a Ph.D. More im-
portant than title, their training is consistent in areas directly 
related to usability. In addition to academic credentials, they 
typically brought 7 to 10 years of experience in usability when 
they joined our team.
We are a rather strange lot because our team is a well-integrated 
mixture of federal employees and contractors. Because the con-
tractor staffing mechanism is available to us, the SSA Usability 
Center has team members with skills that would be impossible 
for us to obtain otherwise. As an example, we are able to do 
electronic prototyping within the Usability Center so we can get 
a reading on the accessibility of our designs early in the soft-
ware development process—a high-value contribution to proj-
ect teams within the federal government. Our federal staff 
members bring many years of experience as employees from 
SSA field offices with the corresponding knowledge of the laws 
and procedures of the agency, as well as the needs and expecta-
tions of our customers that comes only from direct public con-
tact work. This combination of skills has served us very well.
We are really expanding our scope now. We’re a much different 
organization now than we were a few years ago. Today, most of 
our staff has been involved in user interface design and human 
factors work for 10 to 15 years, with much of that experience 
taking place in the private sector. The team’s skills allow us to 
support agency-wide process changes that put early focus on 
user needs and design rather than on the late-in-life-cycle us-
ability testing we started with. This rapid infusion of skills al-
lows us to support project teams in ways that would have been 
impossible when the center was established in 1996.

What to Look for When Hiring
221
experience design field are still a small group, and they tend to be 
networked together through professional groups such as the ACM 
SIGCHI and the User Experience Professionals Association.2 In 
terms of more junior staff, there are thousands of people in the field 
(and many thousands more who claim to be).
Most companies have a very limited number of user experience 
design experts on staff; many companies do not have one person 
with the entire user experience design skill set described here. In 
many cases, the bulk of the UX staff may have to come from outside 
hires, though this practice has its pitfalls. It is important for the user 
experience design team to be an integral part of the organization, so 
it helps to have team members come from within the organization. 
If most of the UX staff members are outsiders, it may be very hard 
for the team to be fully accepted. Insiders understand the organiza-
tion better and may fit in better than new hires.
That said, collectively the pool of insiders from whom you are 
recruiting probably have very few user experience engineering skills. 
Consequently, these people will need a strong management commit-
ment for their training, mentoring, and consultative support.
If your organization is new to user experience design, consider 
using recruiters who specialize in user experience design staff. They 
will be familiar with the best people in the field and will know when 
someone is ready to move. They can also help screen more junior 
staff. Your recruiter should have extensive technical expertise and 
testing methods to make sure you get the people who best meet 
your needs. Once you have a core of experts in your organization, 
you may be able to have them work their own networks and go to 
user experience engineering trade shows to track down potential 
new staff members.
Hiring user experience design staff is a big step that involves a huge 
investment in the form of salaries, benefits, management, facilities, 
and training. But these elements form only a small part of the risk. 
The far larger risk is in the opportunity cost for designs that are not 
competitive. A new employee will be at least in part responsible for 
2. For more information on ACM SIGCHI, visit www.acm.org/sigchi/. For more information on 
the Usability Professionals Association, visit www.upassoc.org.

222
Chapter 12    Staffing
the quality of the user experience and performance of many appli-
cations over time. If this staff member is a poor practitioner, these 
costs can easily dwarf his or her loaded labor rate. The necessary 
skills to look for and selection criteria you should employ, based on 
HFI’s many years of experience in hiring user experience design 
staff, are discussed in the following subsections.
Selecting and Training Skilled Professionals
As mentioned earlier in the book, user experience design work is 
not just common sense. If it were, you could simply tell your staff to 
pay attention, and the resulting designs would be successful. (Many 
executives have tried this with very limited success.) Without con-
crete user experience design skills, however, we consistently get 
designs that are suboptimal—or worse. To avoid this problem, you 
bring in professionals and train internal staff. But first let’s explore 
what to look for.
A core philosophy and feeling for design is perhaps the most impor-
tant prerequisite for a good user experience design professional. Spe-
cifically, the practitioner’s philosophy should be user oriented. This 
doesn’t mean simply asking the customers what they want and giv-
ing it to them—that is a sign of an immature or ill-trained practition er. 
Rather, you should hire someone who sees the user’s needs and 
psyche as something to understand, to design for, and to support.
The user experience design practitioner needs to focus on the practi-
cal viewpoint of the user and systematically bring technology to the 
user’s service. To test for this orientation, check out how specialists 
react to the idea of a cool new technology that is clearly impractical 
for users. They may be polite about it, but they should exhibit a feel-
ing of disdain. User experience design practitioners should act as a 
protective shield against flashy ideas that don’t help people use 
your sites, applications, and software effectively and enjoyably. A 
bit of jaundiced skepticism goes a long way.
User experience design staff must understand human behavior and 
be able to predict how users will react to and operate sites, applica-
tions, and software. In a good training program, students read 
research articles and predict the results from the methodological 

What to Look for When Hiring
223
description. They view designs and predict their success. In time, 
they should become adept at prediction, developing a sense for 
what will confuse users and which physical manipulations are awk-
ward. They should understand what makes users uncomfortable or 
angry, and be able to predict the time it takes to complete an opera-
tion or learn a procedure. While these predictions may not be exact, 
when created by an experienced user experience practitioner they 
should be fairly accurate.
Many design decisions are based on the ability of the user experi-
ence design specialist to estimate user consequences quickly. To get a 
sense of this, it is beneficial to have prospective staff members review 
some page designs to determine whether users can quickly see the 
things that matter most. I have often used a terrible clothing site 
design for this purpose. The site is organized by brand; thus, while 
shopping, the user has to identify the brand and then see all the dif-
ferent types of clothes from that manufacturer. Good prospective 
employees immediately see that the user needs the site to be orga-
nized by male and female categories and then by types of clothes.
Potential candidates need to have a good overall knowledge of UX 
research and models within the field. Any good candidate should 
probably have a foundation of “top of mind” user experience design 
facts. He or she should immediately know, for instance, that about 7% 
of men and 0.4% of women have some color weakness [Goldberg et al. 
1995], or that all displays can be seen as a competition between the sig-
nal the user should perceive and the surrounding noise [Rehder et al. 
1995]—and that the work of a user experience designer is to maintain a 
signal-to-noise ratio that gets the message through.
User experience design practitioners should know that there are 
population stereotypes for how things work, and that they differ 
between user populations (e.g., pushing a light switch up in the 
United States to turn on the lights versus pushing the light switch 
down in the United Kingdom to do so). Practitioners should know 
that users see things in context and can make mistakes as a result. 
For example, if users expect to see a letter, a handwritten “13” can 
look like a “B.” Users also make common keying errors, such as hit-
ting the letter “o” instead of the number “0.” Looking up each issue 
becomes tedious in practical circumstances. When he or she has a 

224
Chapter 12    Staffing
solid foundation in UX design, the practitioner already knows the 
answers to many common questions—as well as some that others 
may not think to ask.
Staff members also need to be able to find answers when they 
encounter things they do not know. It is not acceptable for a user 
experience design practitioner to simply make up recommenda-
tions out of thin air. There is a time to hunt for the right answer, and 
practitioners need to be willing to check the research. They also 
have to know how to use it. Research in the UX field is spread across 
more than a hundred different sources, so the practitioner needs 
online and print resources he or she knows well, and must know 
how to find other studies when required.
The good practitioner regularly reads the literature to learn from 
new research studies. Sometimes he or she needs to retrieve studies 
to determine the best design decision. Understanding research 
papers is not easy, however. Research can provide invaluable 
insights, but it must be evaluated with great care. The practitioner 
must understand enough about experimental design and statistics 
to be able to interpret the research correctly. Not every staff member 
needs to have this capability, of course—a practitioner can ask for 
help. Nevertheless, having the skill set readily available within your 
organization is quite useful.
It is important to be familiar with a methodology so that the design 
process can be approached systematically. Ask potential employees 
what they would do to ensure that a site is usable and persuasive. It 
is worrisome if they do not have a systematic methodology with 
clear activities and deliverables that build toward a solution. Any 
activity such as “We will listen to the users” is suspect. What comes 
out of that listening? How does it really help the design? If they can-
not talk their way through a systematic approach, practitioners are 
unlikely to follow one—even if you hand them a copy of your 
methodology.
The development process requires a whole string of user experience 
engineering activities. The usability practitioner must know how to 
complete tasks like expert reviews, usability tests, in-depth inter-
views, task designs, wireframe designs, detailed designs, and func-
tional specifications. Each of these tasks requires numerous 

What to Look for When Hiring
225
subskills. For example, being able to “do” an interview includes the 
ability to stratify user segments, develop target user types, and 
develop a recruiting strategy—and that is just one small part of the 
overall process. It is worthwhile to inventory the applicant’s experi-
ence with these activities and ask some questions about his or her 
approach to specific tasks. However, because it is difficult to really 
get a good sense of the quality of an applicant’s work without direct 
experience, consider having potential employees work through a 
set of examples and evaluate the results of their work.
Being a user experience engineer is not easy. As outlined here, gen-
eral practitioners need to know a lot, but beyond the core skills and 
knowledge, user experience engineers need to have a passion for 
crafting a customer’s experience. They need to have communica-
tions skills such as the ability to excel in team interaction, and a sense 
of charisma that they can draw on when evangelizing usability.
Education
Although some highly skilled and effective people have a less formal 
education in UX design, most user experience practitioners have at 
least a master’s degree in the field. Having a solid educational back-
ground is important. Many colleges and universities now offer usabil-
ity programs. The Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (www
.hfes.org) currently lists 72 graduate programs in the field in the 
United States, including all kinds of user experience design work. 
The professors in these programs may specialize in factory work-
spaces, consumer products, the biomechanics of heavy lifting, or mil-
itary equipment, however, so you must check carefully to see which 
program actually provides appropriate skills for software design.
Senior usability people may have been in the field long enough to 
predate specific degree programs. Many of these people have mas-
ter’s or doctoral degrees in psychology instead of human factors, 
usability, or user experience.
Of course, a master’s degree or higher does not indicate that the 
practitioner has a full set of skills. In fact, most programs typically 
cover basics such as general design principles or ways to read 
research. Some courses may provide experience in usability testing. 
Keep in mind, however, that education is truly only the beginning 

226
Chapter 12    Staffing
of the process of becoming an expert practitioner. Experience is a 
critical factor—and it cannot be learned in the classroom.
Another, perhaps more useful validation to consider is certification. 
Several certification programs exist. For example, the Board of Cer-
tification in Professional Ergonomics provides a very good certifica-
tion with requirements for education, experience, and testing (there 
are three alternative certification types based on the certificant’s 
preference: CPE, CHFP, and CUXP). In addition, HFI’s certification 
program is currently used by approximately 10% of the world’s UX 
design professionals. In either case, the certification gives you quick 
assurance of proven expertise.
Experience
In looking at applicants’ experience, start with an assessment of the 
quality and range of their past work activities. There are obvious 
limitations to having worked on just a single application, particu-
larly given that the applicant may have had a very limited role such 
as just running usability testing. Someone who has worked on a 
number of sites and applications has gained a wider perspective. 
Unless you are seeking someone with a limited and specific scope, 
look for a candidate who has completed many different user experi-
ence design activities. Once the new practitioner is on board, he or 
she can easily be drafted to work on the development team for a 
critical project. It is helpful if applicants have a wide spectrum of 
capabilities because—even though you may have hired them for a 
particular expertise such as usability testing—it is likely that they 
will be called upon to perform other tasks as well.
It is also worthwhile to consider the quality of the project experi-
ence. While it is not particularly important that an applicant has 
worked on “name-brand” projects, he or she should have worked 
on projects where user experience was valued and given a signifi-
cant role. Some practitioners spend years in a reactive mode—they 
essentially sit in their offices and review designs, reacting to aspects 
of the design that are so obviously awful that they can be discerned 
without having to gather data or complete a user-centered process. 
These people do not have much experience in supporting a solid 
process and appropriate methodology.

What to Look for When Hiring
227
While one can get a degree and read many books, maturity of skills 
within the user experience design field really requires explicit men-
toring, so it is important to acquire staff members who have worked 
under a good mentor. Perhaps the least organized aspect of the 
industry, mentoring is critical nonetheless. A mentor can help a prac-
titioner develop many different professional skills—team interac-
tion, presentation style, and good writing, for example—as well as a 
fundamental design approach and the ability to perform specific 
user experience design tasks. If you are not familiar with specific 
mentors whom applicants have had, it can be difficult to determine 
whether the potential employees have been well taught. The best 
thing, if you have the resources to do it, is to set up your own men-
toring program, either in-house or with an outside consultant.
A Background That Includes Design
User experience design work requires many analytical activities. 
The professional must be able to run studies, compile results, and 
make recommendations. There is research to be reviewed and 
assimilated, and valuable insights to be gained about user psy-
chology and be havior. These activities, however, are very different 
from the synthesis necessary for actual design. It is common to 
find skilled analysts who cannot design well. They may be famil-
iar with the theory of design and be able to make contributions, 
but they will not be able to synthesize their knowledge to generate 
good interfaces.
In evaluating staff candidates, questions about design principles 
may evoke excellent theoretical responses from analytically ori-
ented people with no design capabilities. The individual may have 
worked on very successful design teams. However, other practi-
tioners may have completed the actual design work. Thus it is 
essential to see each applicant do some design work yourself, and to 
evaluate the results.
There is a science to quality user experience design work—to the 
research, the methodology, and the many hundreds of design prin-
ciples. But such work also has an intuitive side. The practitioner 
must pull these insights together in a “moment of magic.” There is a 
huge disparity in candidates’ abilities to perform this type of 

228
Chapter 12    Staffing
integration. Ideally, the practitioner should maintain a clear focus on 
the business goals and the overall context of the design. He or she 
must have a high-level model of the user’s characteristics, limita-
tions, and taskflow, and must generate the interface so that it fits the 
shape of those activities and needs. This is not to say that someone 
can do good design by pure intuition—process and science are 
needed. But there is indeed a step beyond the science. If you want 
staff members who are designers, look for the ability to take that 
intuitive step in synthesizing the results and creating the right 
solution.
Specialist versus Generalist
You might find someone with a doctorate in applied psychology 
who has a respected academic position, a long list of publications, 
and many years of successful experience working in a large com-
pany. This person may be the world’s foremost expert in the psy-
chological refractory period (the reaction time delay in stopping an 
action) as ap plied to handwriting errors. None of this background, 
however, guarantees that the candidate can do routine user experi-
ence design work. If handwriting is core to the business, this person 
may be a worthwhile specialist to add to your central usability 
team. Nevertheless, you should not expect him or her to be able to 
complete general usability activities, such as mentoring staff in 
development activities or developing quick tactical interface solu-
tions under pressure.
It may be the case that specialized expertise in the field translates 
to general user experience design skill, but more often no such 
connection exists. Rather than making assumptions based on 
someone’s CV, test applicants carefully for both general skills and 
design skills.
Real Skills and Knowledge
This chapter has discussed the skills and knowledge essential for 
effective practitioners. These essentials are not necessarily agreed 
upon, however, or even well known by those who consider them-
selves specialists.

What to Look for When Hiring
229
Some people believe that if they have interviewed users one time 
before writing HTML code, they have done user experience design. 
Others feel that if they have gotten feedback from users about their 
design—or have read books and even attended conferences—they 
are experts. If you ask these people questions, they may be able to 
provide a strong series of impressive responses. They may tell you 
that they “weave a tapestry of user experience,” provide examples 
of data gathering with users, and perhaps offer up a few buzzwords 
like “ethnographic research” and “user journey” from the latest 
magazine articles. However well-intentioned and forward-looking 
these people may be, they do not possess the skills, knowledge, 
methods, tools, and resources to deliver on their promises. Put in a 
position of control, they will create flashy sites with unusual 
designs. They seem to be plausible candidates, but their work will 
confuse and frustrate users. Their designs are likely to fail, creating 
a big loss for your organization and your user experience design 
department. Unfortunately, this lack of skills is often not evident 
until it is too late.
There are a few easy ways to detect this type of unqualified appli-
cant. First, these candidates will rarely make any reference to 
research or describe how to access studies in the field. Second, 
they will rarely have a systematic methodology. They will talk in 
glowing terms of understanding users, but they will not have a 
process with clear activities and deliverables. Pay special attention 
to the lack of deliverables. Without concrete deliverables, it is very 
difficult to determine whether user experience design is being 
practiced properly. (While some tout “bargain” methods that are 
agile and drop the need for deliverables [c.f., Gothelf and Seiden 
2013], these approaches are plausible only for  very small pro-
grams. In almost all other cases, mature and systematic user expe-
rience design is faster, cheaper, and better for serious design work.) 
Finally, these applicants will rarely discuss concrete metrics. Good 
usability work is done to reach specific objectives. These results 
may take the form of a drop-off rate, efficiency, reduced training 
costs, and so on. Instead of describing the need for these kinds of 
results, this type of candidate will most likely offer flowery 
descriptions of a good user experience.

230
Chapter 12    Staffing
Interpersonal Skills and Level of Expertise
User experience design specialists depend on good relationships 
with the development team to perform their work effectively. A spe-
cialist may have deep knowledge, good insights, and a vast capacity 
for efficient design, as well as a thorough and systematic approach 
to his or her work. If he or she lacks good interpersonal skills, how-
ever, the organization will actually receive little value.
It seems almost unfair—there are so many requirements for good 
practitioners. They need knowledge of the literature, methodology, 
and design sense. On top of that, they must work well with others 
in a team. New recruits face real challenges in being accepted. If 
you bring in an experienced, high-powered practitioner whose 
expertise is far beyond that of other team members, he or she may 
be marginalized by the team as a defense tactic. Having a really 
brilliant professional on a mediocre team often makes other team 
members feel inadequate. What is the answer to this dilemma? The 
best solution is to ensure that you have a top-quality staff through-
out your team.
In some cases, however, you will be hiring specialists for a team that 
is less than world class. They may be building fairly routine appli-
cations, or their work may be less than mission critical. In this type 
of scenario, consider recruiting a good, solid professional whose 
skills are not too advanced beyond those of the other developers. A 
mismatch in expertise relative to the rest of the team can cause prob-
lems, which may then be blamed on poor interpersonal skills. 
Remember that matching levels of expertise and good interpersonal 
skills are both important.
An Offshore Model
Given all the challenges that may prevent organizations from locat-
ing and hiring high-quality user experience design staff, other 
options may need to be explored. Once the benefits of good experi-
ence design are understood, its use may spread in a viral fashion. 
There is likely to be a rapid, project-level increase in demand for the 

An Offshore Model
231
application of user-centered engineering practices, which often puts 
unmanageable pressure on the user experience design staff.
The inability of the internal usability staff to keep up with the demand 
for support is a choke point. The model does not scale up easily.
Such understaffing typically occurs because, as mentioned previ-
ously, well-trained user experience design specialists are difficult to 
find or very expensive. Ramping up the expert internal staff 
required to meet the increasing demand can be prohibitively expen-
sive and time consuming. Consulting companies may provide sup-
port for overstressed internal staff, but the cost of using 
consultant-based support for routine and sustained user experience 
design activities is prohibitive. The need, however, is critical. With-
out sufficient staff to do the work, institutionalization will falter. 
Companies could continue to apply user-centered design principles 
to a small range of projects, but the lost opportunity cost of such a 
strategy is huge. Finding cost-effective staff offshore can provide a 
scalable solution.
The Challenges and Success Factors of Offshore Staffing
HFI has been running large-scale offshore teams since 2000. Off-
shore staffing works well when you have a mature operation that 
follows systematic practices. It is necessary to have the offshore 
team properly trained and managed—and you must know what the 
team can do and how much it needs to travel.
You can avoid many of the communication challenges that can be 
experienced with an offshore model when you establish an organi-
zational structure that meets the four core requirements for project 
success:
1. Effectively managing remote resources (both people and 
technology)
2. Ensuring an accurate and shared understanding of conventions, 
assumptions, and project goals
3. Maintaining quality of work standards
4. Delivering on schedule

232
Chapter 12    Staffing
Today’s offshore models include components designed to help meet 
those requirements. Some elements relate directly to the specific 
development process and are explored in depth in other chapters of 
this book:
• A systematic, trackable methodology ensures that projects pro-
ceed smoothly.
• Process-specific tools reinforce correct use of the methodology.
• Technical certification through training ensures an understand-
ing of the methodology and tools.
Factors unrelated to the specific development process are equally 
important:
• The technical infrastructure is secured with sufficient redun-
dancy (e.g., backup generators and multiple internet access 
providers).
• Bidirectional cross-cultural education is designed to address 
both day-to-day interactions and critical escalation paths.
Communication between local and remote team members is 
improved when the project team includes the following roles:
• A single company-resident project contact point
• An offshore project team leader sensitized to native interaction 
styles
Communication between local and remote team members is not 
limited to interactions between these two individuals, but they 
should be aware of all communications flowing back and forth 
between various points of contact. This oversight ensures that col-
laboration is integrated and that the priorities and efforts of the 
remote team stay focused. An object-oriented approach and a tool-
set that manages document sharing and will make communication 
more efficient.
At HFI, we have been able to demonstrate that offshore teams can 
successfully complete all of the following user experience 

Summary
233
engineering activities (there are a few points where staff will need to 
travel to complete key tasks):
• Expert reviews
• Usability testing (in person and remote)
• User interface structure design
• Standards development
• Prototype development
• Graphical treatment
• Detailed page design and layout
• Graphic library development
• Implementation/508-compliant3 coding
Integrating a well-trained, well-managed remote usability team sig-
nificantly increases the productivity of the organization as a whole. 
Furthermore, creating and training a remote usability team provides 
a cost-effective release for the staffing chokehold.
The Limits of Offshore Usability
Despite all the benefits that can accrue from use of effective offshore 
teams, they cannot maintain the internal momentum for user expe-
rience design work. These practitioners can carry much of the devel-
opment load, but they are not in a good position to be evangelists. 
There must be internal staff to maintain momentum and ensure that 
user experience design is not marginalized.
Summary
This chapter outlined a few of the roles important to the ongoing 
efforts of your central user experience design team, and offered 
3. “508” refers to Section 508 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act. Section 508 mandates certain acces-
sibility guidelines for federal agencies. For more information, visit www.section508.gov.

234
Chapter 12    Staffing
strategies regarding what to look for when hiring staff. For organi-
zations committed to making user-centered design central to the 
development cycle, a well-trained and -managed remote team can 
provide the capacity to scale internal resources while establishing 
an institutionalized operation that is practical, successful, and cost-
effective. The quality of your staff will play a big part in determin-
ing the success of your efforts and the reputation of your team. The 
next chapter provides specific information on strategies that will 
help you manage increasing demands across a variety of projects.

235
Chapter 13
Projects
 
➤With a solid infrastructure and good staff, user experience 
design work will be effective.
 
➤All project directors will want user experience design work, 
so you will quickly be short of trained staff.
 
➤Prioritize projects by criticality (gold, silver, bronze, and tin).
 
➤Put the best people on the high-priority projects, and place 
new user experience staff on less critical jobs.
 
➤Use developers and others trained in user experience design 
to help, if necessary.
 
➤For critical projects, get contract staff from user-centered 
design consultancies.
 
➤Use some top user experience design staff as consultants to 
help the newer staff (especially on higher-priority projects).
 
➤Cut corners when planning user experience design work.
 
➤Cut out functions.
 
➤Focus user-centered design work on just the critical mod-
ules (forget the administrative interface).

236
Chapter 13    Projects
 
➤Carefully scale back data gathering and usability testing.
 
➤There are several ways to estimate your requirements for 
user experience design staff. Make an effort to get close to 
the required level, or the entire institutionalization effort 
may be wasted.
With a mature practice in place, user experience design work will be 
quite different: it will be faster, cheaper, and better. The time in 
which the user’s needs were not formally addressed in the develop-
ment process will be over. User experience design staff will no lon-
ger run about wildly trying to make ad hoc improvements to 
projects that are in flight (the “finger in the dike” approach). Meth-
ods will be selected and assigned with an appropriate amount of 
time allocated to allow success. This is the efficient, effective way to 
do the work. Perhaps surprisingly, the very success of your institu-
tionalization initiative means that you will run into another 
problem.
When user experience design has been instilled in the development 
culture of an organization, lines-of-business managers begin to look 
routinely for a user-centered process for their projects—and for 
skilled practitioners to do the work. The result will be a severe 
shortage of user experience design staff.
There is a natural tendency to react to the shortage of practition-
ers by spreading people thin and giving each practitioner many 
projects. This approach will cause their work to become less effec-
tive, with the result that personnel up and down the organization 
will wonder whether there is much value to this highly-touted 
user-centered initiative. Resist the impulse to overextend your 
staff! This chapter explores better ways to use a limited number of 
practitioners to good effect, assuming that your organization is 
unable to explore an off shore model similar to that mentioned in 
Chapter 12.

Managing by Project Importance
237
Doing It Right
Assuming you have established the methodology, infrastructure, 
organization, and staffing—and have gained organizational accep-
tance of user-centered design—it is now time to begin the routine 
application of user experience design in your projects.
A mature user experience design process has many hallmarks. The 
work starts automatically, very early in the development cycle, as 
soon as the business need and the strategy are identified. Trained 
and certified  practitioners—the leads on the project during the early 
stages—ensure that the strategy is refined and fully reflected in the 
actual site or application. The user experience design staff harmo-
nizes the needs of the organization with the realities of user needs 
and limitations, creating a user interface (UI) structure that makes 
the navigation simple and straightforward. Because the UI is not 
developed or tested by untrained staff, there is no need to make 
frantic attempts to repair a flawed design.
Managing by Project Importance
Any site or application worth building is worth making usable, but 
there are differences in the criticality of user experience design 
work. An intranet facility that will be used by a few internal staff to 
maintain management accounting information is simply not as criti-
cal, from an experience engineering viewpoint, as an e-commerce 
application that will be the company’s sole channel for sales. Under 
the pressure of insufficient time and resources, it makes sense to do 
a bit of triage based on such priorities. You can assign a level to each 
project—gold, silver, bronze, or tin—and then give the most crit ical 
projects the highest level of attention.
• Gold—Give the most user experience design attention to proj-
ects that are mission critical to the company—projects that 
will make a big difference to the ongoing success of your 

238
Chapter 13    Projects
organization. These gold projects have a lot riding on the user 
experience and performance. Usability may be important be-
cause there are many users, the users are difficult to serve, or 
the performance stakes are very high—large amounts of 
money or even lives may be at stake.
• Silver—It is likely that the bulk of your projects will be im-
portant but not wholly critical to the organization. These are 
usually not publicly sold applications or websites accessed by 
customers; instead, they might be extranets used to access 
vendors or internal systems used to track and manage work. 
For each high-profile public site operated by a company, there 
are probably 10 supporting applications (ordering, shipping, 
inventory, and so on). While these are not examples of 
mission-critical programs, basic user-centered design issues 
matter. You might apply performance engineering methods 
(which ensure that the application is easy to use) without at-
tending to emotional design or persuasion engineering. The 
resulting ease-of-use may support the ability of hundreds of 
users in the organization to perform efficiently; improvements 
in such areas can limit the need for training, reduce task time, 
and control errors. Many projects also have an impact on the 
company’s vendors, such as widely used accounting and 
management information systems, and need serious user ex-
perience design support. Nevertheless, they are less critical 
than your gold projects.
• Bronze—Many projects do not really need a major user-
centered design process. They are simple facilities—perhaps 
an informational site with only a few users, where user expe-
rience and performance are not really in jeopardy. (A very 
simple site is harder to make incomprehensible than a com-
plex site.) It is not worthwhile doing much user experience 
design work on these projects, even when more resources be-
come available in the future.
• Tin—User experience design practitioners should probably 
do no work at all on some projects. Occasionally, a project has 
almost no user interactions to worry about because it is en-
tirely focused on internal database processing. In addition, 
there may be some legacy “disaster” projects that have been 

Who Will Do the User Experience Design?
239
poorly managed, have not had user-centered design methods 
applied, and are in trouble. You can decide to intervene and 
try to save the project; however, it is often wiser to let it go 
without completing it because the chances are good that the 
project will be scrapped.
Who Will Do the User Experience Design?
Ideally, all user-centered design activities can be completed by fully 
trained, experienced practitioners from the central team (in small 
companies) or by practitioners reporting to lines of business (in larger 
firms). There are some alternatives to these approaches, however. If 
the quality and timeliness of work cannot be allowed to lapse even 
briefly, consider using contract staff from user experience design ven-
dors. This is the common solution for an insufficiently staffed gold 
project. Contractors may not know much about your organization, 
but they are experienced with design activities, can adhere to your 
specific customized standards, and should do a good job.
For silver projects, trained staff members who are not professional 
user experience design practitioners can complete the user-centered 
design activities. While it is not an ideal situation, business analysts, 
systems analysts, programmers, and user representatives may per-
form credibly in this role. The usability of the site or application is 
likely to suffer to some degree, but you can take measures to mini-
mize the problem.
If other staff members stand in for user experience design practi-
tioners, they should have solid training. Without it, progress will be 
slow, and the work will likely be of poor quality. This training can 
and should take place both in the classroom and on the job. Practi-
tioners with more experience and training can act as guides or men-
tors for newer individuals as they work on projects. This ensures 
that the work does not stray far from the chosen path. Even a few 
days of mentoring from an experienced consultant can prevent 
well-intentioned teams from taking expensive detours.
For bronze and tin projects, less investment is justified. You might 
have project staff members undergo a few days of training in basic 

240
Chapter 13    Projects
usability design, but the project is unlikely to merit much consulta-
tive support. Developers must then make do with their training and 
the organization’s overall user-centered design infrastructure.
Different Strategies for Practitioner Involvement
Some companies advocate that the best way to deploy practitioners is 
to make them part of a development team that designs by committee. 
If this is your corporate design process, it will prove helpful to have a 
user experience design professional in the mix. For significant devel-
opment efforts, however, designing the user interface by committee is 
remarkably inefficient. User-centered design work is best done in 
cycles of data gathering and quiet work. While it is important that this 
work involve others (e.g., developers, graphic designers), for signifi-
cant development efforts, the user experience design practitioner 
must be able to complete design work without interference by 
committees—that is, by studying users and finding out how they 
react, digesting these insights, and then making design changes indi-
vidually or in a very small group. It is painful to see committees dis-
cuss the wording of a link for a full hour. With 15 people working, that 
link costs 15 person-hours to draft! It is fine to have a committee par-
ticipate in a walkthrough, but this approach is a poor way to do 
design, even if plenty of experience design practitioners are available.
It is also unlikely that a good UX strategy and interface structure 
will evolve through the scrums and sprints of a rapid development 
process (such as Agile). It is imperative to do your structural design 
before beginning the rapid development process. With this 
approach, the chances are far better that the detailed design can be 
executed within the rapid development process.
When working on a silver or bronze project with limited resources, 
the user experience design staff can take an evaluative role. In other 
words, the project team creates designs, and the user experience 
design staff reviews the work and provides feedback. The project 
team analyzes the feedback, makes changes to the designs, and 
returns them for another usability review if necessary. This process 
involves risks, however, and it may be inefficient. For example, if 

Different Strategies for Practitioner Involvement
241
the data gathering with users is poorly done, the staff might spend 
valuable time on unneeded or incorrectly structured screens. Many 
review cycles may be needed to reach a good design, which can be 
frustrating and even a bit adversarial. (In time, the developers will 
flinch just seeing the user experience designers.)
While this is not an ideal strategy, limiting his or her involvement to 
evaluation of the project team’s work does use less of the experience 
engineer’s time: you can support an entire project with just a few days 
of help from a practitioner. Although this approach may be feasible for 
a silver or bronze project, it is not acceptable for a gold project.
For silver and some lower-end gold projects, one alternative often has 
great success: the user experience design practitioners take full con-
trol and responsibility for the development of the user interface struc-
ture only. This means that they do not design every page or screen, 
but simply the critical structure. To accomplish this, they may have to 
review or test the original application or site. The practitioners use 
data gathered from users to structure a site that is practical, simple, 
and efficient to navigate. They then test this design to confirm that it 
is self-evident and that the graphic treatment supports the brand val-
ues of the organization. At that point, the design can be given to per-
sonnel with basic training (e.g., business analysts), who can use the 
standards to proliferate the detailed pages needed under the struc-
tural design. The user experience design staff can provide coaching 
and review the detailed designs created by the developers. This 
approach brings scarce practitioners in only for the most critical work.
Recall that 80% of usability is determined by the structural design.1 If 
the structure is right, not much can go seriously wrong with your 
detailed design. This is particularly true if the work is done under 
standards. The detailed design requires less demanding work (but 
often takes 80% of the time), and it can be completed by staff members 
who are more numerous and may actually be more familiar with the 
detailed requirements than new user experience design practitioners.
For high-end gold projects, there is no alternative except to employ 
skilled and experienced practitioners. They must certainly do the 
1. This figure is based on HFI’s 20 years of experience with hundreds of clients, across thousands 
of user-centered design projects.

242
Chapter 13    Projects
structural design work, and it is also advisable to have them 
complete—or at least lead—the detailed screen design and usabil-
ity testing. This yields the best-quality designs in the shortest time.
Working Smart
When the shortage of user experience design practitioners is acute, 
a number of strategies can help alleviate the pressures on those per-
sonnel. While it is easy to become alarmed by the magnitude of the 
problem and frantically try to do everything at once, this is the time 
to get organized and plan carefully. Staying up late on the project 
just makes you inefficient; you will have to fix fatigue-induced 
errors in addition to handling the onslaught of new work. Instead of 
panicking or pulling all-nighters, work smart.
• Trim unnecessary functions. User experience design practition-
ers can often identify functions that are not needed at all or 
are at least secondary. It is often possible to trim the size of the 
deliverable and still end up with a useful offering; many proj-
ects benefit from having excess features trimmed, in fact.
• Focus the experience design on important modules of the interface. 
You can apply the same project triage principles discussed 
earlier to the modules of an application, rating them as gold, 
silver, bronze, or tin. For example, you might find that the 
product display and checkout pages are gold, whereas a 
whole set of administrative screens will be seen only by a few 
highly trained, motivated internal systems administrators. 
Thus you can rate the administrative module as a bronze proj-
ect and not worry too much about it. You can use the same 
schemes to assign personnel within the project as we have 
suggested for whole projects. A systems analyst might design 
the administrative module; the user experience design practi-
tioner reviews this module, but is otherwise busy perfecting 
the checkout process essential to the project’s success.
• Use an effective but scaled-back testing strategy. For example, you 
would not want to eliminate data gathering and testing early 
in the process—these tasks are essential and relatively inex-
pensive. You might be able to test fewer participants, 

Working Smart
243
however, or test in fewer locations. If pressed for time, you 
could eliminate the final usability testing; it is expensive and 
tends to merely fine-tune the design.
• Consider using remote testing. Being face-to-face with users dur-
ing data gathering offers real value, as the nuances of facial 
ex pressions can give user experience design specialists impor-
tant insights into directions of inquiry. Nevertheless, remote 
testing is often a viable alternative. Remote testing methods 
may even help cut the time required for simple testing. The 
methods themselves can be very simple as well. For example, 
you can simply send an image or questionnaire to the partici-
pants and then talk to them by phone.
• Consider the possibility of sharing testing sessions between projects. 
If more than one project is targeted at a given user population, 
it may be possible to test both projects at once. The main cost 
of a data gathering or usability test relates to getting the par-
ticipants in the room, so extending a test session from an hour 
to 90 minutes may let you gather data to support two pro-
grams in a single session. Beyond 90 minutes, participants 
will be too fatigued to yield good results.
• Scale back the number of participants in studies and the number of 
geographies tested. You can get good usability testing data from as 
few as a dozen people, and testing in many different regions of 
the United States, for example, tends not to yield many new in-
sights. These are reasonable areas in which you can scale back. 
Do not scale back by using internal staff members as stand-ins 
for actual users in data gathering and testing, however. Internal 
staff members are almost always different from typical users, 
and their input can lead you astray. It is also not recommended 
to reduce the number of participants to fewer than a dozen, be-
cause it is too easy to be overly influenced by an unusual person 
who just happens to show up in a small study. You’ll also really 
know there’s a problem only when you encounter the same fail-
ures repeatedly. If you test five people and one makes an error, 
you can’t tell if it is a fluke or a significant problem.
• Have a single practitioner work on a number of different projects. 
This can be a great way to stretch your scarce user experience 
design resources. Having one user practitioner working on 
several different projects can pose challenges, though, and not 

244
Chapter 13    Projects
all practitioners can juggle projects well. A practitioner in this 
role should be providing guidance/advice only.
Efficient Project Planning
Much can be done in the project planning stage to make the work 
faster and more efficient.
• Use standard project planning techniques to track phases and 
activities.
• Watch for cases where a critical path can put the whole schedule in 
jeopardy. For example, when working on an interface struc-
ture, start working out the details of participant acquisition 
for the data gathering sessions the day the project is approved. 
Although data gathering is the third or fourth activity in the 
sequence of user experience design steps, lining up partici-
pants can take weeks. If this task is not started immediately, 
filling your sessions could delay the whole project.
• Work concurrently. Experience design work often allows for con-
current activities. For example, graphic artists can be working on 
designs while user experience design practitioners are writing 
questionnaires. Similarly, results can be tabulated for the first 
day of testing while the second day of testing is in progress.
• Be ready to make adjustments. User experience design work is 
often influenced by outside factors such as developer activi-
ties and business needs. Be prepared to review your project, 
plan often, and make adjustments.
• Hold firm. People tend to think that experience design is an 
area to modify or cut back when time is limited. Do not let 
others force you into agreeing to perform a task in less time 
than it will take. Produce less if you must, but make sure each 
deliverable demonstrates that value of the field.
Estimating Experience Design Work
As you plan and manage the flow of projects given a limited set of 
practitioners, it helps to accurately estimate the requirements for 

Estimating Experience Design Work
245
Organizational Support for Usability
Dana Griffith, CUA, Web Consultant—Interactive Media, 
American Electric Power
The people at the highest level in my group believe in usability. 
For them, it has become part of the process of creating a new 
site or revising a site, so we probably have a little different ap-
proach to the question of institutionalizing usability. Because 
we manage the corporate website and the company intranet, 
we are able to address usability at the point when design deci-
sions are being made, without holding up the project for any 
measurable length of time.
different projects. This information allows better allocation of the 
resources available and can provide a good estimate of the number 
of user experience design staff members you will eventually need 
within your organization.
For gold and silver projects, you can usually get a good idea of the 
level of effort needed for user experience design work by gauging the 
percentage of the overall project effort represented by that work. Very 
small projects end up with large percentages of usability work 
because there is a limit on the amount you can reduce the interface 
development effort. No matter how simple the project, for gold and 
silver projects, you need to access data from users and test the design 
concepts. That said, you are likely to see a maximum of perhaps 25% 
of the project effort spent on user experience design. With larger 
projects—say, a typical e-commerce site costing $5 million—you 
might spend 10% of the budget on user experience design. As proj-
ects become larger, you may be able to take advantage of economies 
of scale for a further reduction—down to about 7%. If your plan for a 
gold or silver project has allocated less than 5% of the budget for user 
experience design work, you are probably making a mistake.2
You can also make estimates based on the type of experience design 
work being completed, as shown in Table 13-1. This approach is more 
2. The figures in this paragraph are based on HFI’s experience with its customer base. In addition, 
the 10% figure is cited in a report by Nielsen and Gilutz [2003].

246
Chapter 13    Projects
ac curate than taking a simple percentage, but it is still an estimate; 
your results may vary. For example, an inexperienced team may take 
a much longer time to complete a task than a seasoned one. Other fac-
tors can affect boilerplate estimates, such as the complexity of the 
application or product, the number of different users, and the need to 
develop a product for use across different languages or cultures.
Summary
The efforts you have made to build an effective infrastructure with 
high-quality staff are sure to bring you a certain amount of success. 
However, managing projects carefully is still an imperative. By fol-
lowing the tips and strategies in this chapter, you should be able to 
maintain a good level of momentum. The next chapter elaborates on 
some of the ongoing activities and responsibilities of the established 
usability group.
Table 13-1: Estimated Time Frame for Usability Activities
Activity
Elapsed Time
Practitioner 
Person-Days
Usability test of the current 
design
3 weeks
12–20 days
Expert review
2 weeks
10–20 days
User interface structure
6–10 weeks
45–65 days
Draft detailed page design 
(very roughly)
1 day per page 
1 day per page
Quick, formative usability tests
7 days
7 days
Final usability test before release 
(one country)
4 weeks
40 days
Final usability test before release 
(five different languages and 
countries)
8 weeks
120 days

247
Part IV 
Long-Term Operations
In building a practice, we must always think about sustainability. In 
the words of Bob Dylan, “He not busy being born is busy dying.” 
We have to design an organization that constantly moves forward—
that constantly proves its economic value, and that protects its qual-
ity and capabilities.
The UX field will always keep growing. People are complicated, 
and their expectations and needs keep changing. Push your team to 
expand their skills and knowledge. A business needs to provide a 
better customer experience than the competition, and a mature UX 
practice is a key differentiator.
There is a whole set of new frontiers that our field will face. The 
globe is large and cultures are diverse, so we need to manage our 
design of international delivery. And the future will bring a whole 
set of new realities, new frontiers, and new technologies, to which 
we will need to adapt a human body and nervous system that 
evolved for life in the savannah. 
247

This page intentionally left blank 

249
Chapter 14
Long-Term Activities 
of the Central Team
 
➤The central user experience design group is responsible for 
the overall corporate initiative toward user-centered design. 
Keep the user-centered viewpoint vibrant, effective, and 
respected.
 
■
Don’t be marginalized, ignored, or diverted back to a 
technology focus.
 
■
Maintain momentum by building excitement and visi-
ble progress into your development and design plans.
 
■
Evangelize user-centrality by frequently hosting events 
to share lessons learned and convey excitement about 
the value of experience design.
 
■
Train new personnel to keep the knowledge of user- 
centered design in your organization. Also, enhance and 
update the skill sets of existing staff.
 
■
Mentor staff working for project teams.
 
■
Update the design standard and provide consultation to 
help developers follow the rules.
 
■
Form a community of interest. Support formal activi-
ties, such as information-sharing sessions, that provide 
mutual support.

250
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
 
■
Conduct usability tests objectively, as outsiders to the 
project team.
 
■
Measure the value of user experience improvements to 
show your investment is working and to highlight areas 
for improvement.
 
■
Take responsibility for experience quality throughout 
the organi zation.
 
■
Report your progress and achievements to executives.
In the Long-Term Operations phase, the full infrastructure and the 
central team become operational. User experience design is now a 
routine part of every project.
• You have a solid UX strategy that describes what will moti-
vate users to engage with your organization and how the var-
ious channels will align effectively into a coherent overall 
experience.
• You no longer build a site or application first and then merely 
hope it will be what users actually need.
• You do not let the technical design of a system alone drive the 
selection of controls for ease of use.
• You will be ahead of your competitors if they have not com-
pleted their own experience design efforts—this is a signifi-
cant benefit to your brand and corporate efficiency.
The organization is working effectively at this point, but there must 
be an on going process of renewal, evaluation, and enhancement. 
User-centrality is not such a simple issue that the organization will 
continue to flourish without attention from the executive level and 
ongoing excellence from within the user experience design team.
Once you get the infrastructure in place and the organization built, 
the central group must maintain and grow the user experience 
design process, continuously reinforce the value of good experience 
design, and integrate the user-centered methodology. While work-
ing on projects, practitioners follow the methodology, use the best 

Maintaining Respect and Negotiating Effectively
251
research and principles available at the time, call internal consul-
tants and specialists from the central usability team for support, and 
occasionally demonstrate and promote the success of the user-
centered perspective.
The executive responsible for the central group may provide 
re sources and encouragement and may clear obstacles from the 
pathway to growth, but the heavy lifting of the continued user 
experience design process falls to the central team. This chapter 
focuses on the most important activities the central usability team 
can perform to keep the institutionalization current and vibrant.
Maintaining Respect and Negotiating Effectively
User experience design practitioners usually face some degree of 
resistance on an ongoing basis—it is the nature of the development 
process. User experience design groups need to maintain respect so 
that they can ensure that users’ needs take precedence over priori-
tized technology or design function lists—and avoid being margin-
alized themselves.
For example, a user experience designer may tell a developer that 
users need a display that collects all their data in one place. The 
developer quickly sees that this display will require a lot of work to 
support: it will be necessary to link calls to a number of databases, 
and will require greater processing power. The developer wonders 
whether this practitioner knows what is going on. Will this feature 
really make a difference to the user? Will it benefit the business?
First, the practitioner and the developer should need to agree on a 
solution based on a mutual understanding of the user issues and 
technical constraints. If they cannot come to an understanding, a 
consultant from the central group needs to review the conflict and 
quickly decide whether the user needs are, in fact, critical. If they 
are not, the central team needs to be realistic and negotiate some-
thing different.
The central team may occasionally correct a recommendation from 
a practitioner on a project team. Once reviewed and confirmed by 

252
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
the central team, the recommendation must be supported with 
research studies or examples from the literature that demonstrate 
the effect. Usually, coming up with just a few studies earns the team 
a reputation for making research-based recommendations—so that 
eventually it will not have to defend many of its decisions.
Of course, that does not change the fact that practitioners will need 
to step in at various times and push the user’s perspective against 
coding convenience throughout the organization. As such, the abil-
ity of the practitioners to manage claims about technical feasibility 
takes on particular importance. Developers commonly claim that a 
recommendation is not feasible when it is, in fact, possible to imple-
ment. The practitioner needs enough technical savvy to understand 
both sides of the interface. The user experience design staff should 
get in the habit of digging deeper into claims of infeasibility. What 
does “That will take too long” really mean? Does it refer to coding 
time, response time, or something else?
When the technical staff attempts to overpower a less experienced 
practitioner, the central consultants must step in. They must know 
enough about the technology to be able to accurately assess the situ-
ation. The practitioner might need a course in technical limitations 
so he or she will make fewer infeasible recommendations in the 
future. More often, however, technical staff members need to be 
shown that “technobabble” will not be accepted as a substitute for 
the hard work needed to meet the user’s needs.
Respect is important for the competitive health of the user experi-
ence design or ganization. Organizations that marginalize user expe-
rience designers in favor of coding ease eventually get nasty 
wake-up calls.
Maintaining Momentum
It is critical to keep the momentum going to motivate the user expe-
rience design staff and the development team. The user-centered 
effort does not need to be too aggressive—companies that mandate 
an optimized user experience design and try to implement it 

Maintaining Momentum
253
The Value of a Research-Based Approach to Usability
Janice Nall, Managing Director, Atlanta—Danya International, Inc. 
Former Chief, Communication Technologies Branch, 
National Cancer Institute
At the National Cancer Institute (NCI), we needed a research-
based way to make decisions about the way we design Web sites.
We developed research-based guidelines, and that was the 
turning point. With guidelines in place, it’s not a manager say-
ing what to do, and it’s not the head of the Institute saying it. 
It’s the users saying it, and it’s the research—the literature. In 
our culture, that’s what it’s all about. So it’s making what we 
do work within the culture here that’s important.
I think the guidelines have given us a much more powerful voice 
than we expected originally. We developed them from a research-
based approach because we thought it was the right way to do it. 
We truly underestimated the power of having the data and hav-
ing the user’s voice represented. Very few people aren’t willing to 
make changes based on the evidence-based guidelines.
The largest amount of hard-core resistance we see tends to 
come from programmers and some graphic designers. That’s 
why we try to get them to attend training or observe testing. If 
we sense any resistance to usability from developers or design-
ers, we test the current site or some other site and force them 
into the observation room so they can see people struggling, 
and it helps them understand the process. We try to do it in a 
very nonthreatening way so that they’re part of the team help-
ing us try to make it better.
instantly do not do well. Yet while disseminating a user-centered 
perspective throughout the organization takes time, there must be 
forward movement.
One trick to gain initial momentum is to stay focused on smaller 
projects as you begin your UX effort. Even if your resources are 

254
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
Roadblocks in the Path to Good Usability: 
The IT Department
Harley Manning, Research Director, Forrester Research
One change that has to happen to make usability part of the 
culture is to get your IT act together. Otherwise, even if you 
design a great product, it won’t materialize.
The IT department can be a big impediment to getting more 
usable digital channels. It’s not intentional; rather, it’s that 
“easy” means something very different for them. If you’re an 
application developer, for example, you probably know three 
or four different programming languages and maybe have a 
good grasp of systems architecture—even the most opaque 
user interface looks easy to you.
So the IT folks are not exactly your typical business user, nor 
are they necessarily sympathetic to your typical business user. 
And they’re not typically evaluated on how well they deliver 
usable software, either. They are—to steal a phrase—“the in-
mates running the asylum” [Cooper 1999]. They have different 
goals and different things they’re trying to optimize.
We did a survey in this area a few years back, and you know 
what? The number one consideration for IT managers buying 
enterprise software was whether it was compatible with the 
rest of their architecture. Usability was near the bottom of their 
decision criteria.
Today IT leaders are shifting their focus from reducing costs to 
improving business agility, and from developing back-end 
“systems of record” to creating customer-facing “systems of 
engagement.” But these trends are dangerous unless IT depart-
ments develop sound usability practices and engage with their 
business stakeholders.
The bottom line is that business leaders are not going to have 
good usability if they don’t engage with their IT counterparts 

Evangelizing
255
limited, you can turn one or two projects into showcases. In this 
way, even a small commitment becomes visible and motivating. 
After that percolation period, you can start to tackle larger projects. 
Make sure you don’t have practitioners trying to work on too many 
projects simultaneously. If you have a small number of staff servic-
ing a huge organization, your efforts will be invisible and you will 
lose momentum. The practitioners will find themselves dashing 
from one design session to another, making wild guesses, yet letting 
everyone feel that user experience design has been executed.
Evangelizing
The central group must provide information and share lessons 
learned on the value of user-centered design, which means making 
pre sentations on a regular basis. These presentations can share proj-
ect examples, new research findings, and progress in the metrics of 
user performance and conversion. Beyond formal presentations, it 
is necessary to have a process for constant communication with 
individuals and small groups, including quiet lunches and personal 
exchanges at social gatherings. Practitioners need to exploit every 
possible venue for communication and sharing. Most importantly, 
team members need to convey their excitement about and commit-
ment to the user experience design effort—they need to evangelize!
in a meaningful way—and that way is not the old “waterfall” 
approach, where they would send their prototype off to be 
coded, and it came back working differently and looking dif-
ferently than what they sent in.
Orchestrating that level of collaboration leads inevitably back 
to the top of the organization. Because who is the common 
manager of IT, marketing, and the customer experience or user 
experience group (if one exists)? It’s someone with a title like 
COO or CEO.

256
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
When missionaries travel to new countries, they translate their 
beliefs into the local language, making their ideas and value sys-
tems fit with local traditions and needs. In a similar way, the user 
experience design evangelist must speak the business language of 
the organization. He or she needs to translate the value of user-cen-
tered design so it meets the objectives of development teams and 
other groups. Dropping UX terms such as “cultural dimensions,” 
“scenarios,” and “function allocation” can be impressive, but par-
ticularly at the beginning of the institutionalization process, it’s 
important to couch user-centered design ideas in the local language. 
With business people, for example, you should talk about conver-
sion rates and call time.
The Role of the Central Usability Team
Arnold Lund, Connected Experience Labs Technology Leader, 
Human–Systems Interaction Lab Manager—GE Global Research 
Former Director of Design and Usability, Microsoft
My design and usability team should be a place where we learn 
and build our intellectual capital around good design. It should 
be where we abstract from the many projects we’re doing those 
lessons and insights that cut across releases and products. The 
resulting intellectual capital should make us more and more 
effective over time, and I would hope that eventually what we 
learn would work its way outside of Microsoft and into the 
broader user experience field.
One goal we have in Microsoft is to build community across 
the corporation and then advance the community. As Micro-
soft design and usability managers, we are creating a long-term 
plan for the company about where the user experience prac-
tice within Microsoft should be heading. The plan is based on a 
view of where the company is going, how technology is evolv-
ing, which user experience methods and tools are emerging, 
and what that means for a vision of design and usability five 
years out. We are trying to figure out where we need to be to 

Evangelizing
257
maximize our contribution to the business and to our custom-
ers in that time frame. We will then draw out the implications 
for career growth, for skills growth, for new tools that we need 
to develop, for design and usability, for techniques and meth-
ods, for hiring, for internal training—indeed, all the things 
we believe we will need to do to advance the community and 
practice of design and usability within Microsoft.
As I think about promoting an understanding of the impor-
tance of design and usability within Microsoft, I think about 
what we do already and what we can do in the future. There is 
a corporate newsletter, of course, where stories about product 
suc cesses and individual usability group case studies appear. I 
think we can leverage that more. Design and usability are built 
into the corporate training that all new employees go through, 
into individual internal courses, and into corporate events. We 
had a Design Day a couple of months ago that a lot of manag-
ers attended (along with the design and usability communi-
ties). Several of us spoke, there were panels, and there were 
booths. We were able to play an educational role and network 
in ways that helped grow our impact. There are many opportu-
nities to do the public relations that opens doors.
One of the results of the focus on personas within Microsoft is 
that the personas get turned into posters that are mounted on 
walls. They direct people’s attention to the users and heighten 
awareness of the research behind the personas. Here in our or-
ganization we are talking about creating design walls and user 
experience walls to surround the project teams with informa-
tion about the users and the emerging designs. It keeps them 
focused on the users and what we do, and it engages them in 
where we are going and how we are thinking about it. It invites 
their input. We always try to get people involved in lab testing. 
We have even been taking advantage of the ability to stream 
the video from the testing over the intranet so product teams 
can participate from their desks without having to travel to the 
lab. The goal is to get as many people on the teams as possible 
engaged in the user-centered design process.

258
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
It is hard to estimate the time required to evangelize. It is closer to a 
lifestyle than a specific task, but certainly there are presentations to 
prepare and meetings to organize. The concrete elements of the 
evangelization role probably add up to a half- or full-time position 
in a large organization. The manager of the usability team often 
assumes much of this responsibility.
Evangelists must have a certain charisma that expresses itself as a 
burning desire to share the knowledge of user-centered design. 
They must create excitement as they show how user experience 
design can directly transform the listener’s life. The commitment of 
an evangelist is contagious—and it’s very necessary: if the central 
group staff becomes complacent and bored, the whole effort is likely 
to flounder.
Training
During the initial phases of your institutionalization program, a 
series of training classes probably brought people up to speed and 
conveyed essential skills. While this training was imperative, train-
ing is never completely finished in a competitive organization. The 
internal user-centered design team should take charge of the ongo-
ing training program. The team may not need to be responsible for 
all training, however—in most organizations, it doesn’t make sense 
to maintain the more complex and infrequently used courseware, 
nor are there enough presentations of most training classes to keep 
trainers fully occupied or their memory of the course material fresh. 
Nonetheless, the central group must assume overall responsibility 
for the training program.
User experience design training should be a part of the orientation of 
new staff. If not, the user-centered perspective—and its benefits—
may be slowly diluted by new staff members who have not received 
a solid UX orientation. In addition to the basic orientation, some new 
members need to learn specific skills to work on particular types of 
projects or particular user experience design activities. You may 
need someone to specialize in wireless devices, for example, or per-
suasion engineering or usability testing.

Mentoring
259
Over time, your ongoing skills training will probably need to cover 
the full range of user experience engineering capabilities as new 
staff members come on board. That includes initial orientation to 
the user-centered perspective—including skills training, training on 
standards, and training on aspects of user experience design engi-
neering specific to the organization’s domain—as well as training 
on new and special topics.
Existing staff members also need continuous training and professional 
development. Personnel in the central group may benefit from attend-
ing technical conventions, where they can learn about new research or 
methods and share problems and tips with colleagues in other indus-
tries. User experience design staff can also benefit from taking 
advanced courses. These courses may cover such topics as research 
updates and new usability methodologies (e.g., remote testing).
It is motivational for team members to see that the process is work-
ing. It also motivates them to have a growing set of credentials 
showing their competency. Many benefits accrue when staff mem-
bers gain advanced degrees and certifications: coworkers in other 
groups develop more respect for the user experience design team; 
the field stays new and interesting to UX staff members and their 
skill sets increase. Credentials are also a confidence builder—even 
certificates of completion can build confidence.
Mentoring
User experience design staff members working on project teams 
have a “dotted line” relationship with the central group: the central 
group cares about them, advocating for them in political and policy 
matters and helping to handle problems. Most directly, however, 
the central group should be available to mentor usability staff on 
the project teams. Depending on the corporate culture, this could be 
either a very formal process or an informal one.
Mentoring is challenging because there is no single path to follow. 
Some staff members need insights into data gathering methods; 
some need to build confidence so they can run their first solo usabil-
ity test; others need help interacting with developers.

260
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
Mentoring may be only one part of a person’s job, and it generally 
requires a different perspective than a practitioner has while work-
ing on projects. The mentor should attend to the growth of the prac-
titioner without worrying about meeting deadlines and ensuring 
the efficacy of design on a project at the same time.
Supporting Standards
In the Setup phase of UX design institutionalization, the organiza-
tion created a set of methodological standards and interface design 
standards. Developing these standards required a big investment, 
but the standards will not endure or even be used unless they are 
supported.
Standards are living documents. New and improved procedures 
will be added to the methodology, and new page types and addi-
tional rules will be added to the design standards. The user experi-
ence design team must constantly monitor the design process and 
find opportunities for improvement. Innovations rarely come from 
theoretical analysis of existing standards; instead, they emerge 
from observations of the direct contact between the standards and 
the design work. Necessity spawns invention, and the user-
centered design team must gather these inventions and add them 
to the standards.
The time required to collect new methods and add them to the stan-
dards varies based on the complexity of the design challenges 
involved, as well as the process required for getting consensus and 
approval for changes. At HFI, for example, we have four cycles of 
upgrades to our methods and templates each year. The GUI stan-
dards require fewer changes by now, but the browser standards are 
still growing. The time required to collect enhancements and facili-
tate the approval process might amount to a half-time job.
There is little value in having a methodology or a design stan-
dard if there is no one to go to with questions. No document is so 
thorough that issues will never crop up regarding the design deci-
sions. Inevitably, special needs emerge based on users, taskflows, 

Supporting Standards
261
environments, technologies, and business strategies. Sometimes 
design teams need someone to talk to—someone with wider experi-
ence and the ability to provide definitive guidance on methods and 
design. Team members need a consultant—and they can talk to one 
on the central team.
Advocating Usability through 
a Strong Sense of Community
Feliça Selenko, Former Principal Technical Staff Member, AT&T
I think one of the most important ways to share an under stand-
ing of usability is to do it one person/one project at a time. 
Usabil ity experts need to take the time to look for and take 
advan tage of every opportunity to advocate usability, its 
bottom-line cost benefits, and the respective user performance 
research. They need to have their “soapbox” and a usability 
road show ready to go at all times, so as to support any and all 
requests for information about usability and its benefits. This 
creates a strong network of supporters and “prophets” to help 
spread the word.
Colleagues have said that my enthusiasm and consistent com-
mitment throughout the years have kept the team going 
through any hard times experienced by the telecommunications 
industry. The words that come to mind that create a sense of 
community are enthusiasm, camaraderie, empathy, dedication, 
sincere support, responsiveness, optimism, and fun—really be-
lieving in the value of the usability discipline and treasuring the 
community we have. Logistically, we have a grassroots, com-
mitted, cross-organizational team that meets monthly on a two-
hour conference call. We discuss everything: project dilemmas, 
rumors, industry articles/conferences, organizational issues, 
usability tools and standards, as well as personal changes and 
triumphs. Because we keep it practical, focused, and fun, we all 
look forward to maintaining our connection.

262
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
It is important to have consistent guidance from the central group 
regarding standards issues. This is not a call for rigidity—standards 
need to be interpreted in each context—but a recognition that there 
must be coherence to the answers that teams get from their stan-
dards consultants. Therefore, it is best to charge just one or two peo-
ple with handling this task. If two people are assigned to fill this role, 
they should work closely together. For most organizations, however, 
a single person can answer standards questions, and in smaller orga-
nizations this might be half of one person’s responsibilities.
In addition, tools need to be supported. This may include getting 
the best software and usability testing equipment to be used in the 
methodology, or working with systems staff to select content man-
agement systems and other productivity-enhancing ap plications to 
ensure that the user-centered design process is supported. This will 
be a half- to full-time job in most organizations.
Supporting the Community
Often, user experience design practitioners will quickly form a com-
munity of interest within their company. Even if they are not for-
mally connected within the organization, they have traditionally 
banded together. In the past, the user experience design team typi-
cally consisted of a small group of people who were undervalued 
and often under attack. Developers saw UX practitioners as an 
annoyance, obsessed with a “soft,” unimportant area, and tried to 
marginalize them. Generally, a persecuted minority clings together, 
and user-oriented staff members were no exception. That mutual 
support—often all that sustained the effort—provided a conduit of 
information and resources as well as a source of mutual emotional 
support. Alone, surrounded by people with a system-centered view, 
it was easy to start thinking you were crazy and to lose the will to 
keep working. That small circle of colleagues made all the differ-
ence in keeping the momentum going.
Fortunately, user experience engineering communities are seldom 
the same small, surrounded groups today. The user-centered focus 
is more likely to be accepted and routine. Even that cultural change 

Performing Usability Testing
263
poses its own challenges, however: we need to work to keep the UX 
community’s identity, mission, and spirit lively.
The simple act of working together increases group cohesiveness, 
creates relationships, spurs on the institutionalization effort, and 
increases the transfer of information and support. For this reason, 
the central group should engineer shared projects that can bring 
practitioners together. These projects may include standards, tools, 
or collective presentations to management.
Another powerful method is the project-sharing presentation. Peri-
odically, practitioners can share presentations with one another to 
recount the best insights and breakthroughs from their projects. 
These aren’t long-winded process discussions or explanations of the 
whole project—each project team has only a short time, perhaps 
15 minutes, to share major insights and innovations. Teams can even 
present skits or interactive demonstrations. Concrete before/after 
examples, preferably with metrics of success, are a quick, powerful 
way to share lessons learned among the community of practice.
Performing Usability Testing
Practitioners on project teams can certainly do all their own usabil-
ity testing and other types of evaluations. There are two major rea-
sons to have some of the testing done by the central group. 
The first reason is the ability to economize. You can easily and prac-
tically maintain a small pool of usability testing staff members who 
are not experienced or trained in a complete range of user-centered 
design tasks but are knowledgeable about running usability tests. 
Running A:B tests, surveys, and other metrics is primarily a techni-
cal task (once those tests are set up).
The second reason to have the central group support assessments is 
objectivity. Some practitioners, while good designers, have trouble 
accepting the idea that users might find problems with their designs. 
Some will even argue with usability testing subjects to try to con-
vince them that the de sign makes sense. Once, I watched a devel-
oper try to explain to a participant the difference between the OK 

264
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
and Apply buttons. With enough explanation, the participant 
seemed to agree that there was a difference (more likely, he was 
bored by the discussion and just wanted to move on). In such a case, 
it helps to have someone else run the test.
Focusing on Metrics
A common management principle advises, “If you can’t measure it, 
you can’t manage it.” By measuring user experience, you can deter-
mine whether your investment is working. You can tell which areas 
need more work and can improve your process. The central team 
needs to create and maintain the usability metrics that make sense 
to your business.
One type of metric describes the process of user-centered design. For 
example, it is a good idea to track the number of staff hired and 
trained, the number of people working on user-centered issues, and 
the number of projects that do or do not apply the user-centered 
methodology. The main purpose of these metrics is to validate that 
user experience design work is actually being done, and to show the 
growth and stability of practice within the organization. Such metrics 
are basically means of cost accounting. Although you may be happy 
to see a solid investment in the UX design process, it does not really 
measure anything valuable from the perspective of the organization. 
With an indication of the costs in hand, there had better be a solid 
improvement in the business results to justify these expenditures.
Given this fact, it is helpful to have periodic, empirical demonstra-
tions of the value of user-centered work. These focused studies gen-
erally look at a very specific before/after design scenario. For 
example, the site may have a point of high drop-off. If user-centered 
design work can reduce this drop-off, you may be able to attribute a 
significant improvement in sales to that change. If specific functions 
in an application can be improved, those improvements can be mea-
sured and reported.
Be wary of being satisfied simply by hearing that “the users liked 
it.” This kind of anecdotal feedback is better than nothing—and 

Focusing on Metrics
265
certainly better than being told the users have created their own 
system on Excel as an alternative to your dysfunctional design. 
Nevertheless, it is far better to have specific data and surveys show-
ing a specific movement in the rating for the site or application. 
Even more encouraging would be a 25% drop in the time needed to 
complete a checkout process. But the most compelling information 
is directly tied to the business needs—how much money the usabil-
ity effort makes, how much money it saves, and how customers 
have responded (i.e., a specific, quantifiable increase in customer 
satisfaction).
If you do not know where you have been, it is hard to demonstrate 
progress. A summative usability test at the end of the design pro-
cess reporting that applications for insurance are completed in 
2.5 minutes is rather difficult to interpret. It seems like a reasonable 
time, but is it an improvement? This is the reason you need bench-
mark testing. In a benchmark test, participants complete a set of 
representative tasks, and usability testing staff measure time, error 
rate, and subjective ratings. A similar group of participants com-
pletes the same testing with the same tasks every 6 or 12 months. By 
examining these results periodically over time, you can see whether 
your changes have affected the user experience or performance. 
This practice also allows you to benchmark the time required for 
expert users to complete the representative tasks. Collectively, this 
combination of data gives a very good indication of progress.
Many metrics look at user performance and subjective reports from 
customers. These kinds of metrics are interesting, but can be mis-
leading. Jared Spool, founding principal of User Interface Engineer-
ing, had the following insights on privacy and the Internet, 
demonstrating that you cannot rely only on what users say:
In April of 2002, Princeton Survey Research Associates sur-
veyed 1,000 adult Internet users about their concerns with 
privacy on the Internet. In the survey, only 18% said they 
never read privacy policies when shopping online; 57% said 
they check the privacy policy most of the time, or every time 
they shop.
Yet, in our study of more than 1,000 shopping sessions, where 
we actually observed what users did while shopping, we 

266
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
noticed that only two users ever checked the site’s privacy pol-
icy. And for those two users, it had no effect on their shopping 
behavior. This is yet one more case of users doing something 
different from what they say they do.1
Different business models require different objectives to measure the 
metrics directly connected to the success of the site or appli cation. It 
could be the sale of an application, conversion of site visitors, size 
and breadth of the shopping basket, cross-sell volume, average call-
handling time, or qualified leads generated and resulting sales. 
There are potentially hundreds of useful metrics. In the end, how-
ever, they need to be tied firmly to business results. While it might be 
encouraging to learn that 92% of cus tomers responding on a ques-
tionnaire say they would purchase something on a Web site, it is 
much more meaningful to see how many actually make a purchase.
Having Responsibility
The central group takes responsibility for user experience through-
out the organization. This responsibility includes an attitude of 
involvement and concern, as well as a set of specific activities. The 
central group should watch for projects that need user-centered 
design help and areas of the company business that will benefit 
from such work. The central group needs to make sure that the proj-
ects get the attention they need. We must drive for routine inclusion 
of user-centered design methods in every design program.
Ensuring that there are user experience design practitioners working on 
every important project is the primary goal of the central team. After 
assigning a practitioner to a project, the organization must provide 
the necessary skills, methodology, standards, tools, and channels of 
communication to that project. In addition to a constantly review of 
the internal process, the central group must consider the lessons 
learned and opportunities uncovered.
It is challenging to quantify the time it takes to do this type of man-
agement work, but it should be noted that much of the work occurs 
1. From a letter to Human Factors International, September 2003. Reproduced with permission.

Reporting to Executives
267
in the context of other activities. For example, a central group consul-
tant reviewing a voice response system might hear about issues on a 
new project or might find a new menu type such as “Skip and Scan” 
that applies to all voice systems throughout the organization. If this 
new menu reduces drop-through to a human operator by 5%, the 
 modest savings seen from a single, small application can be vastly 
multiplied if applied throughout the organization. The central usabil-
ity team is the only group likely to be a good conduit for such insights.
Reporting to Executives
Adopting a user-centered perspective is one of those challenging, 
yet valuable initiatives that does not happen on its own. In addition 
to ensuring that user experience design is taking place within the 
company, the central team must maintain a usability presence 
within the executive suite.
Such an initiative will include many different elements, and few 
you can afford to forget. You must address complex issues of change 
management and acceptance. Management will eventually under-
stand that user experience metrics are as critical to the business as 
gross sales and support costs. The executive champion helps deliver 
this message, but the content of the message comes from the central 
group. The members should have examples that demonstrate how 
user experience design makes a difference and the metrics to prove 
it. This group must understand the champion’s strategic perspec-
tive and move forward on that track, improving the process and 
ensuring its continuation.
Some of the central group’s attention must always be focused on the 
executive champion and the other key executives in the organi-
zation. The amount of time required for that effort varies depending 
on the dispersion of the executive team. A closely knit team, all in 
one location, is easy to manage. Doing so takes only a few days of 
effort each month. Once key people are properly briefed, there is 
 little more to do. By comparison, with a more complex executive 
team, it can be nearly a half-time job keeping everyone apprised of 
the progress, value, and needs of the user experience effort.

268
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
My Nine Principles to Keep 
Institutionalization Motivated
Colin Hynes, President, UX, Inc. 
Former Director of Site Usability, Staples
1. Go deep first and that will help you go wide later. Get the solid 
gains first and don’t try to sell yourself too thin. If you work 
on 10 different projects with three usability experts, you 
won’t do any of them well. Then you’ll just be perceived as 
a veneer on the process instead of having real impact. When 
we started this group, I knew we needed to get some solid 
wins in a very deep and effectual way. We did that, and 
then we went on to other projects that helped us spread our 
influence as we built the group.
2. Quantify gains made from projects that were led or deeply im-
pacted by usability and translate that into ROI. We have 
held up the improvements that usability made to the 
Staples.com registration process as one of our hallmark 
projects. We improved the drop-off rate—the percentage of 
users leaving our site—in that area by 72%. As I speak 
about the usability group, I constantly reference that num-
ber and say, “Look what happens when you include usabil-
ity and then tie that back to numbers.” The business folks 
listen when they see these types of gains.
3. Create a selling document with video clips and numbers that 
resonates with budget owners. I spent a lot of time putting 
together a usability document a while back. One high-level 
goal of the document was just teaching people what usabil-
ity is and why it’s important. However, the document also 
gets into the deep details of how we use usability at Staples 
relative to our structure and how it has produced measur-
able gains. I structured the document so it could be dis-
cussed in about an hour, so that it could be scheduled more 
easily into the calendars of busy senior executives. Some 
video clips show folks struggling with applications. When-
ever somebody says, “What is usability and how does it 

Reporting to Executives
269
work?” I use that document to educate them and get the 
point across.
4. Speak the language of science, technology, and business. I think 
that that’s a really important one—it’s that “chameleon” 
idea. You need to be able to go into these people’s “dens” 
and say, “I understand what you’re going through. I under-
stand why we can’t use JavaScript on this page, but think 
about the ROI from a business perspective.” You really 
need to speak in a language they understand. You should 
not approach it as some Ph.D. scientist in an ivory tower 
saying, “We should do this because it’s right for the user,” 
without really thinking about why it’s important to the 
business or considering it from a technology perspective.
5. Create a differentiated team. For example, all my permanent 
employees and consultants have a master’s degree or above 
in human factors, cognitive psychology, or a related disci-
pline. Many people with great talent in usability do not 
have these academic credentials. However, having staff 
with these backgrounds has helped me greatly in selling 
the usability competency as science throughout the com-
pany. Also, I started building the team with the hope that 
someday we’d move from our original Staples.com roots 
into other areas of the organization. So I hired folks with 
backgrounds in retail environments, back-end applications, 
marketing materials, and paper catalogs. They also had 
dot-com experience so that until we expanded past dot-
com, they would be able to fill the immediate need. As we 
have grown to support the paper catalog, retail environ-
ment, AS-400, and so on, these key folks have been able to 
grow into other areas of the company.
6. Tie the group’s performance reviews to measurable business met-
rics. In the annual performance reviews of my group, I ask 
them to meet certain measurable criteria. For example, how 
are we going to increase the conversion rate or decrease 
drop-off in Checkout or BizRate Ease of Order survey 
(continues)

270
Chapter 14    Long-Term Activities of the Central Team 
My Nine Principles to Keep 
Institutionalization Motivated (continued)
scores? By tying the group to these metrics, I’m making the 
statement, “I am a business owner.” It helps socialize the 
idea of usability as a business group. In addition to keeping 
the usability group focused on business goals, it’s a great 
supplement to having actual profit and loss responsibility.
7. Work closely with PR to tell the story. A lot of people may say, 
“Instead of spending time talking to the media, you should 
be doing project work.” While I agree that spending too 
much time at conferences and in interviews takes you away 
from core responsibilities, press coverage has been ex-
tremely valuable for us for two reasons. First, it helps get 
out the positive customer message, which is core to Staples 
values. Second, publicity is extremely valuable in hiring—
we have a great PR halo over the usability group. We do 
good work, but we also talk about the good work that we 
do. I hope that it helps the usability industry as a whole, 
but it certainly helps us in hiring. When people say, “Wow, 
there’s a job opening at Staples. Those guys are so focused 
on usability—I would love to work there,” it helps us build 
a great group.
A couple years ago, I was fortunate enough to take a taxi 
back from a store to the airport with Tom Stenberg, who 
was our CEO at the time and is the founder of the office 
supply superstore concept and of Staples. He said to me, “I 
read something the other day about the good work your 
usability team is doing. It must be gratifying to see all the 
visibility that usability is getting in the press.” So when 
people who are this high up in the organization read the 
stories, they internalize the ideas. It really helps the internal 
communication about usability and certainly the external 
communi cation about customer focus.
8. Join professional groups and leverage free advice. There’s lots of 
free advice out there, from people going through the same 

Summary
271
2. The Special Interest Group on Computer–Human Interfaces of the Association for Computing 
Machinery (SIGCHI), the Usability Professionals Association (UPA), and the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society (HFES).
things we are, whether it’s SIGCHI, or UPA, or HFES,2 or 
other groups. There’s a lot of good information you can get 
from picking those brains, and lots of value you can add in 
return by sharing your own experiences.
9. Pick your spots. Speak with passion when necessary—but 
know when something is good enough. That’s a hard thing 
for a lot of people, especially usability perfectionists. But 
you need to embrace “good enough.” You can’t be someone 
who cries, “Wolf!” all the time. Not everything is the big-
gest issue to ever happen to the site or the product. You 
have to keep a sense of perspective. Is this a page that’s go-
ing to be out there for two days and 10 people are going to 
see it? Or is it something that’s going to live with us for 
years so that millions of people will see it? Pick your spots 
and don’t be a “Chicken Little” whose sky is always falling. 
It’s a basic engineering principle, too. “The perfect is the 
enemy of the good” [Rubinstein and Hersh 1984]—if you 
try to do everything, you can’t get anything done. You have 
to be a pragmatist.
Summary
The level of effort and commitment displayed by the central user 
experience design team will pay off in the long term only if team 
members allow time for maintenance, reinforcement, demonstra-
tion, and integration. Together, the team must continue to focus on 
these goals to keep user-centered design a vital focus of the 
organization.

This page intentionally left blank 

273
Chapter 15
The Future
 
➤The field is now mainstream, with ease-of-use being recog-
nized as a basic business requirement.
 
➤The new market differentiators will be UX strategy, system-
atic innovation, and persuasive design.
 
➤The field will mature in process and capabilities.
 
➤The field will mature in staffing.
 
➤We will adapt to new technologies—which is not that 
difficult.
Today, if you want to be in business, you have to be able to make 
digital experiences easy and efficient. Usable digital channels and 
efficient, staff-facing systems are expected by the market. If you 
don’t provide them, your competitors will.
No matter which industry or vertical market you are in, a substan-
tial component of your digital business will have to be optimized. 
And basic usability is no longer enough—the future will require 
strategic work, innovation, and persuasion engineering.

274
Chapter 15    The Future
Symptoms of Leaping the Chasm
In the past, early adopters applied usability work. Following the 
model of technology adoption created by Geoffrey Moore [1999], 
usability has clearly leapt the chasm and become a generally 
accepted approach: most organizations are engaging in some sys-
tematic usability efforts, and the laggards are at least interested in 
doing so. Even the most unintelligible applications are touted as 
“usable” and “easy.” The reality may not always match the market-
ing, but the motivation is there.
At HFI, we have witnessed years of early adoption behavior. 
Aggressive and visionary managers have completed thousands of 
isolated user experience design projects, usually with good results. 
It is common to encounter organizations that are interested in how 
to make user-centered processes a part of their routine practices. 
Experimentation is typical for early UX adopters. But while experi-
mentation has played an important role in the development of user-
centered design, UX is transitioning to a mainstream practice now. 
It is becoming large scale, process driven, repeatable, and supported 
with a solid infrastructure.
In general, when a technology takes the jump to wide usage, it is met 
with a tornado of interest. The mass market suddenly wants the tech-
nology, and there is not enough of it to go around. A bit of frenzy 
occurs until the market supply ramps up to meet this demand. We 
saw this kind of tornado in the late 1990s. The bursting of the dot-com 
bubble put a damper on the excitement, yet in the years that followed 
we saw a “usability tornado”—a period during which both excellent 
and weak usability companies were overwhelmed with projects and 
requests. Unfortunately, the recession in recent years has again slowed 
progress. As of today, however, we can clearly see renewed focus on 
user-centered design. Interestingly, there is a shift toward stronger 
internal user experience design teams. The global best practice is no 
longer having a bunch of vendors doing the work; it is now widely 
understood that bringing in outside contractors for individual projects 
results in a hodgepodge of impressive but incoherent designs. In 
response to this realization, almost every organization is building an 
internal user experience design capability of some kind.

Symptoms of Leaping the Chasm
275
Usability Trends
Harley Manning, Research Director, Forrester Research
I haven’t noticed that people in general are getting smarter. I 
think what we’ll see is the continuation of the old story of the 
human race, which is that some people will get it and some 
people won’t.
We do a lot of website reviews—heuristic evaluations—and we 
meticulously track both the scores per question and the total 
scores over time. This is one way to approximate an average 
“goodness” number for websites of major corporations. And 
the average score has not been going up. Now, this could be a 
statistical anomaly because even 1500 sites is a small sample. 
Part of the analysis, then, is looking at the sites and asking, 
“Does this look like an improvement to you?” For the most 
part, we are still seeing some incredibly basic errors—even at 
companies that claim to be putting a lot of effort into improv-
ing usability.
For example, text legibility is criminal on many sites, just aw-
ful. And yet it’s so easy to understand what causes poor legibil-
ity, and it’s so easy to fix it. It costs nothing; it doesn’t require 
you to be a great designer. There’s little debate—nobody would 
argue that it’s a good idea to make your customers squint or 
make it hard to read some marketing communication that 
you’ve spent a fortune writing.
Clearly, no one would argue that poor legibility is a good thing, 
and very few people are stumped by the fact that the cure for 
poor legibility is increasing type size and increasing foreground/
background contrast. But legibility problems don’t get fixed, 
even when you point them out to people.
Some companies really do get it; they do take usability into ac-
count and make very serious efforts to improve it on an ongo-
ing basis. So, while the average website is not getting better, 
there are leaders who really are ahead of the pack and pulling 
farther ahead.

276
Chapter 15    The Future
Maturity
As user-centered design becomes even more mainstream, it is rap-
idly becoming mature.
The maturity of the software industry is something to envy. When 
coding began 40 years ago, the programming process was primar-
ily an individual activity, completed by unique people who stayed 
up late and struggled to debug their creations. Their work was a 
function of flashes of insight and unique, elegant solutions. In 
a few decades, however, the industry has completely changed in 
character.
The Future of Usability within a Government Agency
Sean Wheeler, Lead Usability Specialist, 
Social Security Administration
I think the recognition of and need for usability services will 
continue to grow. I believe that as we improve the business 
case for positive, powerful user experiences and then deliver 
that kind of experience, the public use of our website will in-
crease. This is a critical part of the challenge for agencies like 
the Social Security Administration if we want more people to 
choose the information technology channel to contact us.
Quite simply, we must provide a Web experience that meets or 
exceeds the quality of the experiences that people get when 
they call our 800-number service or visit their local Social Secu-
rity office. This was the challenge that our 800-number people 
faced when we first initiated that service. They had to answer 
those tough questions about how you communicate that sense 
of friendliness and provide service on the telephone when you 
can’t see the public visitors face-to-face and share documents 
with them across a desk. We learned a lot from that channel 
shift, and we are just now learning what the shift to Web-based 
service delivery means.

Process, Capabilities, and Staffing
277
Today, software companies have well-documented pro cesses, 
defined skill sets and programs to teach their methods to new 
employees, and tools and re usable object code to make the process 
faster and more consistent. They know how to accurately estimate 
and track the development effort for a coding project. They can 
assure the quality of their projects, and they continuously improve 
their process.
User experience design is making a similar transformation. While it 
is fun to be unique, user-centered design has to be made more uni-
form and manageable to be part of the business solution. You can-
not rely on having one of the superstars in the field at your disposal: 
user experience design must become institutionalized.
Your Organization’s Maturity
There are many dimensions of maturity in user experience engi-
neering, and organizations take many different pathways to reach 
them. However, over the years, we at HFI have discovered typical 
maturity levels for companies climbing the gradient to institutional-
ized proficiency. We developed a model that we use to help grow an 
organization’s user-centrality and to certify the level of its user 
experience design practice (Figure 15-1).
We are happy to report that these objective criteria tell us that many 
organizations are steadily increasing their UX maturity. The future of 
the field, it seems, is to have a mature practice in which user experi-
ence design work is routinely applied to projects, with resources 
being made available to do everything that needs to be done.
Process, Capabilities, and Staffing
As user-centricity becomes routine, there will be a growth in the 
field’s capabilities. We will see a shift to process-driven user experi-
ence design. In other words, the quality of design will no longer be 
dependent on the particular practitioner assigned to it. Certainly, 

278
Chapter 15    The Future
there will always be elements of creativity and art in the field, but 
we will have a solid, repeatable process. This in itself is ground-
breaking. Ad hoc user experience design, in contrast, will make it 
difficult for us to get better in creating user-centered processes.
Think of shoes. At one time, shoes were made by cobblers. Shoe 
repair shops could be found everywhere because the soles would 
inevitably come loose. Today, however, soles don’t come loose—
industrial operations have been refined to make sure of that. In the 
same way, the repeatability of industrial-strength user experience 
design will allow us to refine the process of UX. Thousands of 
small improvements will accumulate and result in a seriously 
improved operation.
The refinement of processes will drive the development of a more 
extensive UX design toolkit. We will improve our efficiency through 
reuse, remote operations, and investigative tools, and will find 
Figure 15-1: HFI’s Maturity Model

Process, Capabilities, and Staffing
279
many opportunities to repurpose devices from other applications, 
such as sports cameras for observational research.
There will also be a major shift in staffing. A class of executives will 
emerge whose profile makes them candidates for the CXO position. 
While they will not necessarily be practitioners with deep skills in 
applied psychology, they will be leaders, with leadership training, 
equipped to deal with the strategic issues around optimizing an 
internal user experience design practice. The growth of the field will 
A Vision of the Future of Usability
Aaron Marcus, President, Aaron Marcus and Associates
I believe that usability groups will try to grow their organization 
and undertake new initiatives through some of the umbrella de-
velopments happening in the corporate world. One of these is 
the growth of user experience design and user experience engi-
neering. Another growth area is universal design and universal 
access. A third is cross-cultural usability and the globalization of 
usability. All of these new concepts lead to new attention and 
new energy. Whenever paradigms change, it’s an appropriate 
time to move in quickly to obtain additional funding and human 
resources and to strengthen one’s core concerns.
By the way, to clarify: User experience design refers to making 
products and services that are not only usable, but also useful 
and appealing. Universal design refers to developing products 
and services that also meet the needs of the disabled and the 
elderly. Globalization refers to developing products and services 
that take into account localized needs and desires of a more 
diverse set of users. Users from different cultures may have 
very different values for and concepts of power struggles, gen-
der roles, individuality, ambiguity, long-term time orientation, 
and so on. All of these differences have an impact on what 
makes products and services usable.

280
Chapter 15    The Future
also certainly be fueled by increasingly focused and effective educa-
tional programs.
The staffing of user experience design work will continue to rely on 
generalists who have master’s degrees and certifications. In addi-
tion, the field will include a growing body of specialists, such as 
persuasion engineers, cross-cultural specialists, and domain/
technology experts. For example, whole careers may become 
focused on optimization of the customer experience in call centers.
Strategy, Innovation, and Persuasion
Basic ease-of-use will most certainly not be enough for the user 
experience design practice of the future. Currently, most teams 
focus on usability: getting the detailed human–computer interface 
design right. They spend all their time on wording, layout, color, 
highlighting, and control selection—but they really don’t look at the 
bigger picture. Are you designing a usable wrong thing? It is com-
monplace to find a siloed team working on a mobile application 
that does not fit with the rest of the channels the customer sees. For 
example, one bank offered customers “telephone banking,” “cell 
phone banking,” and “speech banking.” Without a comprehensive, 
cross-channel design, the customer is presented with a confusing 
mess. It might be a usable mess, but it is a mess, nonetheless.
Designers need to avoid being tasked with the design of a wrong 
thing. In addition, practitioners should find new, innovative, correct 
things to design.
The pace of change has been accelerating exponentially in recent 
years. In turn, that means the old strategy of being a “fast follower” 
will no longer offer a path to business success. Failure to innovate 
can put the entire organization at risk.
In the arena of innovation, there are really three distinct approaches. 
First, there is the technology approach, in which new capabilities 
are developed in the hope that someone will want to buy them. Sec-
ond, there is the business approach, in which we look at the busi-
ness models that will be profitable. Third, there is the user experience 

New Technologies
281
design approach, in which we study the customer’s ecosystem and 
invent what the customer needs. Ideally, all three methods should 
be functioning simultaneously, in a synergistic and systematic oper-
ation. This is very different from asking individuals to “be innova-
tive.” There is nothing wrong with that vague direction, of course, 
but a serious organization needs serious, industrial-strength inno-
vation. The user experience design team gathers models of the cus-
tomer and the customer ecosystem. This knowledge then defines 
the opportunity points that can be addressed with the innovation 
work. Finally, the user experience design team helps assess the 
value of each innovative concept based on the customer’s needs 
(both task based and psychological).
Aside from strategy and innovation work, the user experience 
design team will often need to carry out persuasion engineering 
tasks. Team members will need to develop a persuasion architec-
ture, defining the overall plan for how to motivate customers to 
convert and to return. They will need to apply persuasion tools to 
create the desired emotional response, trigger conversion, and 
develop habits. The importance of persuasion varies, depending on 
the type of organization that is being supported. In an extreme 
example, companies that make slot machines really deliver nothing 
more than customer experience; not surprisingly, slot machine com-
panies invest heavily in user experience design [Schüll 2012]. In 
other cases, there is much less focus on persuasion—in a company 
that delivers bulk chemicals to business buyers, for example. How-
ever, even those buyers will be susceptible to methods of persua-
sion. Consequently, virtually all teams will eventually have to 
demonstrate some level of persuasion engineering capability.
New Technologies
As the information age progresses, the user-centered design field 
will encounter new challenges. There will be a wave of wearable 
information appliances, including those that are physically embed-
ded in users (under the skin or in a tooth). Information technology 
will be applied to new domains and user populations. Each of these 

282
Chapter 15    The Future
domains will present new and interesting challenges. While user 
experience design professionals will continue to use the same basic 
methods and insights, they will have to master some new 
challenges.
The user experience design field will also speed the progress of 
technology evolution. No longer will we create new offerings, only 
to have them rejected as impractical and awkward. User experience 
design work will soon smooth the introduction of new ideas.
Looking forward a decade or two, user-centered design will become 
so routine that it will no longer be a differentiator because all com-
panies will apply a solid process. Today, users do not really clamor 
for software that performs calculations correctly. Instead, they 
expect software to work correctly the first time and every time—
and if the software does not calculate correctly, they are furious. The 
same dynamic will occur with user experience design in the future. 
Users won’t clamor for products that are usable because they will 
expect them to be usable. If products fall short of this expectation, 
customers will be furious. The interface quality today will draw 
derisive laughter from customers in the future. They will expect 
usability; it will just be one more requirement to stay in business.
The time for this transformation, this maturing of user-centered 
practice, is now. For-profit companies and nonprofit organizations 
alike are making the serious investment to build such a practice and 
integrate it into their very DNA.

283
Chapter 16
Design for Worldwide 
Applications
Apala Lahiri is the CEO of the Institute for Customer Experience (ICE) 
and an expert in cross-cultural design. With ICE, a not-for-profit initiative 
by HFI, Apala has been working with her team to investigate practical 
approaches for institutionalized user experience design practices to create 
sites and applications that will be used in countries around the world. It is 
a problem that many multinational organizations face, yet one of such 
complexity and scale that few have even attempted a solution.
Do International Markets Really Matter?
Is there a compelling reason for organizations that build facilities 
for domestic use to be concerned about usage in other countries—or 
around the world? If I had been asked this question 10 years ago, I 
would not have been able to give a definitive answer. In today’s 
globalized market, however, the answer is a resounding yes.
The shift in focus to the new consuming class in emerging countries 
accompanies a transformation as significant as that brought about 
by the Industrial Revolution. According to McKinsey & Company, 
annual consumption in emerging markets is expected to reach 

284
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
$30 trillion by 2025—“the biggest growth opportunity in the history 
of capitalism.”
For organizations to survive and grow, they have no option except 
to make their products and services attractive and persuasive to 
users from the emerging markets. Emerging markets that might 
once have been concentrated in East Asia are now spread around 
the world. Concern about global usage is now an imperative.
McKinsey Quarterly’s 2010 article, “Winning the $30 Trillion Decath-
lon: Going for Gold in Emerging Markets,” observed that
CEOs at most large, multinational firms are well aware that 
multinational markets hold the key to success. Yet those same 
executives tell us they are vexed by the complexity of seizing 
this opportunity.1
How Does Bad Cross-Cultural Design Happen 
to Good Organizations?
With English increasingly becoming the language of the Internet and 
China’s heavy investment in having Chinese students and business 
people learn English, it might seem as if the efficient solution were 
for everyone to use the same site and applications. Alternatively, it 
might seem logical to translate the English-language sites directly, 
changing units such as currency denominations where necessary.
The essence of localization extends far beyond language and for-
mats, however. Making local language content and formats avail-
able is a very good start, but much more needs to be done.
Marketing and consumer psychologists have shown that “culturally 
congruent” Web content leads to decreased cognitive effort for cat-
egorizing, processing, and interpreting information on the site, cre-
ating in turn a more positive attitude toward the website.2 Culturally 
1. https://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Winning_the_30_trillion_decathlon_Going_for_
gold_in_emerging_markets_3002.
2. Luna, D., L. A. Peracchio, and M. D. de Juan. 2002. “Cross-Cultural and Cognitive Aspects of 
Web Site Navigation.” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 30(4), 397–410.

285
Internationalization, Localization, and Challenges
congruent content/communication, built upon a foundation of cul-
tural schemas shared by users, requires less cognitive processing 
and generates a feeling of “flow” and satisfaction in the user 
experience.
In The Culturally Customized Web Site, Arun Pereira and Nitish Singh 
describe cultural schemas as “simple elements or conceptual struc-
tures which serve as prototypes for underlying real world experi-
ences. . . The cultural schemas we develop are a result of adaptation 
to the environment we live in and the way we have been taught to 
see things in our culture.”3 Since cultural schemas consist of much 
more than language and formats, it is unlikely that a single solution  
would resonate with everyone in the world even if they were able to 
read it in their own language and interact with familiar currency 
and date formats.
Cultural schemas are likely to vary widely among users from, for 
example, a high-power-distance, collective, long-term-oriented cul-
ture that values restraint over indulgence and users from a very low-
power-distance, highly individualistic, low-uncertainty-avoidance 
culture that values indulgence. How users from these two very dif-
ferent cultures interact with a banking site—what they expect to find 
on the site and their expectations of the bank itself—will differ sig-
nificantly. Understanding this difference in underlying cultural sche-
mas informs the design of local sites that users will adopt and use.
Internationalization, Localization, and the 
Challenges of Current Practice
Internationalization (I18n) and localization (L10n) have been cor-
nerstones of cross-cultural UX concepts for over a decade, particu-
larly in the software development world. Looking back at the 
experience HFI has had with large corporations delivering products 
and services around the world, it is clear that most corporations 
3. See Casson 1983; D’Andrade 1992; Quinn and Holland 1987; and Singh 2004 for extended dis-
cussion of schemas and cultural models.

286
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
have adopted some aspects of internationalization practices. Most 
of them make it possible for the base product/website design to 
accommodate local language scripts, images, formats for currency 
and dates, and other factors. From the perspective of more than a 
decade of cross-cultural UX advocacy, however, there has been 
much progress beyond that—not in terms of organization structure 
or process, and certainly not in a consistent manner.
Microsoft, for example, strongly advocates product-centered 
groups (often based in Redmond, Washington) rather than global 
and local teams:
Putting together an efficient product team is a challenge 
that can make a significant difference to your bottom line—
“throwing headcount” at your international editions is not 
an efficient use of resources. If your entire team, including 
developers, designers, testers, translators, marketers, and 
managers, is committed to all language editions of your prod-
uct, and if management holds them responsible for all lan-
guage editions, you won’t have to hire a lot of extra people.4
On the other hand, Infosys, one of India’s largest systems integra-
tors, emphasizes the major role of software productivity tools in its 
internationalization process:
Staffing for i18n/L10n projects is normally done by bringing 
in people who have prior experience of internationalization 
along with a team which is well versed in the technology 
underneath (Java, C++, etc.). In these cases, there is gen-
erally the overhead of training the team on i18n and L10n 
concepts. Unless the whole team fully understands the inter-
nationalization process, they will not be very productive. In 
the real world, it is almost impossible to get a perfect team 
which has good internationalization experience in addition 
to the required technical skills. Also, with tight deadlines 
looming over us, most of the time it is not possible to invest 
a lot of time in training the team on i18n/L10n concepts. So 
the best way to execute the project is to improve the produc-
tivity of the team by using software productivity tools and 
4. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc194771.aspx.

The Criteria for Success
287
in turn enhance the productivity of the internationalization 
process itself.5
In addition, organizations such as Facebook, YouTube, and Google 
are considered models for internationalization owing to the speed 
of their crowdsourced language translation and local content.
Organizations in domains other than technology, such as retail, logis-
tics, banking, health care, and appliances must grapple with the 
same issues. They must balance the time and cost involved in pro-
viding the most culturally appropriate design/products/services to 
local customers across the world.
Between the Idea and the Reality Falls the Shadow
While the intent is to provide localized solutions, in a majority of 
cases the result is quite different. The outcome usually ends up 
being a solution or a set of solutions that is created in the country 
of origin and then internationalized in terms of its language and 
unit measurements. The blame can be laid squarely on the absence 
of a practical, cost-effective of a process that goes from under-
standing the local ecosystem through design and validations of 
the application.
The amount of time and cost involved is really the “shadow” that 
falls between the intent of providing localized solutions and the 
reality of researching and understanding many local ecosystems 
throughout the world.
The Criteria for Success
The test for globalized design is, of course, how much adoption and 
usage of localized websites, products, and services occur. Nothing 
succeeds like successful conversion.
5. http://www.infosys.com.

288
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
The challenge lies in balancing the optimal “fit” of a solution to the 
local ecosystem with the cost and time required to deliver it. Our 
group, ICE, has been giving this topic a great deal of thought as it 
explores different possibilities for global corporations to deliver 
local solutions in a realistic, cost-effective time frame.
A New Global Delivery Model for Local 
User Experience
To create a set of localized solutions that delivers the necessary level 
of quality for adoption without serious damage to the bottom line, 
ICE has a draft model in place based on two key concepts.
Foundational Ecosystem Model
We believe that the creation of a foundational ecosystem model of 
its customers is a key first step that a global organization needs to 
take in its journey to provide local UX solutions. This model will in 
many ways approximate the current internalization (I18n) template 
for software, but features placeholders for deeper cultural factors in 
addition to formats, colors, language, and images (Figure 16-1). This 
ecosystem model will typically be based on previous primary and 
secondary research, marketing data, and Big Data insights—and, in 
the future, on data gathered increasingly by the Internet of Things 
and crowdsourcing.
This foundational model can then be used for creating first an inter-
nationalized, and then a localized, set of ecosystem models—the 
“cultural” equivalent of the L10n process. The localized ecosystem 
models can be iteratively edited, enriched, and tested by local, in-
country professionals.
These models can grow over time, in both the range of data they are 
built on and the depth of their understanding. They can also grow 
in the number of regions and countries that are separately included.

A New Global Delivery Model for Local User Experience
289
“Cultural Factors” Training
Where would an organization embarking on its multicountry local-
ization journey ideally find and hire large numbers of UX profes-
sionals in every country? Aside from the logistical challenges that 
this approach presents, the primary problem has been the dearth of 
UX professionals across the world.
We suggest a different approach to solve this problem, one that lever-
ages remote training on “cultural factors”—a blend of human factors, 
cultural anthropology, and social psychology—as well as on how to 
conduct usability testing, to those who want to be certified in cultural 
factors and/or usability testing. Those taking the certification courses 
do not necessarily have to be UX professionals, but rather could be 
local staff of the organization or even local free-lancers.
Figure 16-1: Example of an ecosystem model

290
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
Being able to access a large pool of certified professionals in cultural 
factors and usability testing across the world would enable multina-
tional corporations to take a quantum leap in developing localized 
solutions in an accurate, efficient, and cost-effective manner.
Critical Tools
Even a good process will be useless if appropriate tools are not 
available to support the process. To build a foundational ecosystem 
model to support delivery of localized solutions, one that can be 
enriched over time in a cost-effective manner, it is essential to have 
a tool capable of breaking down the user data into components or 
objects (e.g., personas, scenarios, needs and opportunities, core val-
ues, artifacts) (Figure 16-2). This object paradigm will allow reuse of 
user data—adding, copying, and combining objects—rather than 
having to start from scratch as new user insights become available.
Figure 16-2: Parts of the user’s ecosystem: scenarios, artifacts, 
environment, needs, and opportunities

Local Understanding, Global Success
291
In addition, the tool should allow objects to be linked in a myriad of 
ways. With the progress of time, as additions are made to the foun-
dational ecosystem model, new objects can be linked to older ones, 
and new insights/hypotheses can be inferred.
Finally, the tool should allow for seamless collaboration among 
everyone populating and adding to the foundational ecosystem 
model across the world.
This tool will serve as the corporate memory of an organization’s 
global user segments (Figure 16-3).
Local Understanding, Global Success
For most organizations, this kind of object-oriented localization will 
represent a profound shift in approaching global markets. Can it 
Figure 16-3: Corporate memory of all user segments

292
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
produce designs that will compete with local companies, or succeed 
in diverse environments around the world?
I have always said, “Think globally; lose locally.” There are very 
compelling reasons why paying attention to local needs can not 
only be very competitive, but also serve as a vital differentiator.
A look at India’s smartphone usage landscape says it all. Goliaths 
such as Apple and Samsung are being overtaken by local Indian 
smartphone manufacturing Davids; local OEMs like Karbonn and 
MicroMax are on a roll.
A combination of low prices and “smart” features is fueling the 
local companies’ rapid growth. Businessweek6 notes that Karbonn, 
MicroMax, and other Indian hardware firms offer smart phones that 
are cheaper than the least expensive iPhones or even the Android 
models offered by U.S., Korean, and Taiwanese manufacturers. 
Considering that approximately 800 million people in India live on 
less than $2.00 per day, many of whom are hungry for new technol-
ogy, this seems like a winning formula.
It is not just Apple and Samsung that have been affected by these 
local Davids. In the early 2000s, Nokia’s early-mover advantage had 
allowed this firm to capture India’s cellphone market. As Nokia 
stopped looking deeply at local needs, however, it ceded some of its 
dominance to new competitors, unheard-of local entrants in the 
Indian market.
What had seemed impossible had suddenly happened—a powerful 
multinational, considered a pioneer in the space, ousted by an 
unknown newcomer. That newcomer was MicroMax. Started by 
four friends in 2008, MicroMax used a “deep understanding of . . . 
consumer needs and the ability to swing their supply chain”7 to 
become the largest mobile phone manufacturer in India by 2012.
6. Mehrotra, Kartikay. April 11, 2013. “iPhone Outpaced in Surging India by Less Costly Rivals.” 
Businessweek.
7. http://micromaxcentral.com/micromax-company-profile/.

Local Understanding, Global Success
293
The contextual innovation that comes from understanding local 
users can lead to success far beyond the local market, reversing the 
traditional flow of products and services from mature markets to 
emerging ones (Figure 16-4). Increasingly, designs created for 
emerging markets set a trend in mature markets (Figure 16-5).
The business case for investing in localization just got a whole lot 
stronger. When an organization creates localized products and ser-
vices, the entire world becomes a potential market.
Figure 16-4: Reversing the flow of products and services—from emerging 
markets to mature ones8 
First published: February 2010
FUNCTIONALL | Captures the phenomenon of simple, small and/or cheap products and services 
designed for low(er)-income consumers in emerging markets, with cross-over appeal to consumers 
in mature consumer societies.
8. Source: Trendwatching.

294
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
Are There Populations We Cannot Reach?
Businesses and designers, particularly those outside emerging mar-
kets, can be hesitant about designing for users of very limited 
means, particularly those in cultures that differ radically from their 
own. Yet poorer population segments constitute a significant pro-
portion of the emerging markets. This approach to localization will 
actually make innovation for bottom-of-the-pyramid (BOP) seg-
ments around the world more likely, as well as more successful.
Ever since C. K. Prahalad’s paradigm-shifting book The Fortune at 
the Bottom of the Pyramid was published, organizations have shown 
a considerable interest in servicing the BOP segment and “fighting 
poverty with profitability.” Some major success stories have 
Figure 16-5: Emerging markets are the source, increasingly, of innovation9 
9. Source: Trendwatching.

Are There Populations We Cannot Reach?
295
emerged as well. Consider the shampoo sachet (Figure 16-6; the 
forerunner of seemingly everything in sachets!), missed-call-based 
service models, and the distribution network (shakti ammas) cre-
ated by Unilever in India and by MPesa in Kenya.
What made these ventures successful? The creators of these innova-
tive bestsellers had their ears to the ground and made sure they 
understood the local ecosystem of the BOP population very well 
(Figure 16-7). Rather than simply “poorify” existing products and 
services, they started with a clean sheet of paper—and no assump-
tions. Intensive research yielded critical “cultural factors” such as 
the resonance of the “pay as you use” model—the preferred pattern 
of infrequent but regular consumption of a small quantity. And so 
came the shampoo sachet, one of the most successful innovations in 
recent times.
In short, a robust local ecosystem model helps an organization serve 
all its user segments, rich or poor, in an optimal manner.
Figure 16-6: A shop in Pondicherry, India, sells sachets of various products

296
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
Can We Look Forward to a Unified Globe?
There are those who say that the logical end of the information age 
is homogenization, a time in which there is enough commonality 
among people of the world that localization is unnecessary. I don’t 
share that view—certainly not with the entire population of the 
world in mind. Of course, the miniscule 2–3% of the population that 
sits at the very top of the income pyramid in every country has 
always been rather homogenous across the world (Figure 16-8). 
With access to the abundance of global resources and exposure over 
several generations, this segment tends to speak of their motiva-
tions and needs in a common language.
The other 98% of the population—especially in the emerging 
countries—have not had shared in those resources or had the 
same access to information and global markets until very recently 
(Figure 16-9). This rising middle class tends to stick closer to its 
roots—it is open to using Western-style products and services 
but with a local flavor. For this segment, unlike earlier genera-
tions of consumers, foreign (read Western) products/services do 
Figure 16-7: Apala Lahiri gathering ecosystem data in Africa

Can We Look Forward to a Unified Globe?
297
Figure 16-8: Incomes and the growth period10
Figure 16-9: The surprising wealth of emerging economies11
10. Source: McKinsey Global Institute, “The Bird of Gold: The Rise of India’s Consumer Market,” 
May 2007.
11. Source: McKinsey Global Institute, “The Bird of Gold: The Rise of India’s Consumer Market,” 
May 2007.

298
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
not necessarily have an advantage over local ones. Given that this 
segment is likely to continue to grow throughout emerging econ-
omies, the demand for that “local flavor” will only increase.
According to leading market research consultant Rama Bijapurkar:
It is interesting to note that between 1995–96 and 2005–06 
the shape of income distribution in urban India changed from 
the traditional poor country shape of a triangle or pyramid 
(indicating far more people at the bottom than in the middle 
and even fewer at the top) to a diamond, with less people at 
the top and the bottom but many more in the middle.
Projections are that the shape will change to that of a cylin-
der standing on a narrow base, with equal numbers in the 
top four income groups and very few at the lowest income 
group.12
Emergence of the “Third China”
The same trend is evident in China. Hitherto peripheral Chinese 
population segments are becoming significant consumers. Their 
emergence constitutes a significant new market segment in a coun-
try historically represented by a relatively elite sliver consuming 
goods like computers, washing machines, and cars, with the vast 
majority of the population lacking access to those goods. Now there 
are about 45 cities in China with a population of at least 1 million, 
and they are growing fast in terms of buying power (Figure 16-10). 
Yet the requirements of this “Third China” are also very much medi-
ated by local preferences.
With the rise of new consuming classes in emerging countries, it 
cannot be assumed that those groups reaching certain income lev-
els will have needs and preferences equivalent to those who have 
enjoyed the benefits of being at that income level for a much lon-
ger period.
12. Bijapurkar, Rama. 2008. We Are Like That Only. India: Penguin Books.

Emergence of the “Third China”
299
It is important to understand that simply looking at income 
levels may not always provide a real and clear picture of the 
consumer and his/her motivations and buying behavior. It is 
very common to find two people with the same income BUT 
with very different socio-economic environments behaving 
very differently as consumers.
Figure 16-10: Understanding affluence in the “Third China”13 
13. Source: Gallup, “Still ‘Two Chinas’—But a Third Is Being Born,” February 8, 2005.

300
Chapter 16    Design for Worldwide Applications
14. Bijapurkar, Rama. 2008. We Are Like That Only. India: Penguin Books.
For example: Television buying is more income-driven, but 
the programs watched are socio-economic class driven. Sev-
eral computing products fall in this category, where income 
is not the best predictor of consumer behavior.14
The future, in sum, will present us with quite the opposite of a 
homogenous world. Likewise, the profile of the “typical” global 
consumer will very soon be very different from those of the past. 
Without a “template” of this emerging consumer, understand-
ing this new consumer ecosystem at the local level becomes 
essential.

301
References
Bernard, Michael. 2002. “Examining User Expectations for the Location 
of Common E-Commerce Web Objects.” Usability News 4.1. Accessed 
November 2003 at psychology.wichita.edu/surl/usabilitynews/41/
web_object-ecom.htm.
Bias, R. G., and D. J. Mayhew. 1994. Cost-Justifying Usability. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press.
Bijapurkar, Rama. 2007. We Are Like That Only. New York: Penguin 
Books.
Brooks, Frederick P. 1995. The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software 
Engineering, Anniversary Edition (2nd ed.). Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Card, Stuart K. 1982. “User Perceptual Mechanisms in the Search of 
Computer Command Menus.” In Proceedings of Human Factors in 
Computer Systems (New York: Association for Computing 
Machinery), 190–196.
Casey, Steven. 1993. Set Phasers on Stun: And Other True Tales of Design, 
Technology, and Human Error. Santa Barbara, CA: Aegean.
Chavan, Apala L. 2002. The Bollywood Technique. Unpublished paper 
presented at User Needs Research Special Interest Group, CHI 2002: 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (April 20–25, 
Minneapolis, MN).
Cooper, Alan. 2004. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High-Tech 
Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity. Indianapolis, 
IN: Sams Publishing.
Earthy, J. 1998. “Usability Maturity Model: Human Centredness Scale.” 
Telematics Applications Project IE 2016, Report from the European 
Usability Support Centres, WP 5, Deliverable D5.1.4(s), Version 1.2. 
Accessed November 2003 at www.ipo.tue.nl/homepages/mrauterb/ 
lecturenotes/USability-Maturity-Model%5B1%5D.PDF.

302
References
Ergonomics of Human–System Interaction: Specification for the Process 
Assessment of Human–System Issues. ISO/TS 18152. First published 
in 2010.
Goldberg, Jeff, Geoffrey Montgomery, and Maya Pines. 1995. Seeing, 
Hearing and Smelling the World: New Findings Help Scientists Make 
Sense of Our Senses. Chevy Chase, MD: Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute.
Gothelf, Jeff, and Josh Seiden. 2013. Lean UX: Applying Lean Principles to 
Improve User Experience. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
Kotelly, Blade. 2003. The Art and Business of Speech Recognition: Creating 
the Noble Voice. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2003.
Krug, Steve. 2000. Don’t Make Me Think: A Common Sense Approach to 
Web Usability. Indianapolis, IN: Que Publishing.
Kruger, Justin, and David Dunning. 1999. “Unskilled and Unaware of 
It: How Difficulties in Recognizing One’s Own Incompetence Lead 
to Inflated Self-Assessments.” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 77(6), 1121–1134.
Lund, Arnie. 2011. User Experience Management: Essential Skills for 
Leading Effective UX Teams. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Mayhew, Deborah. 1999. The Usability Engineering Lifecycle: The 
Practitioner’s Handbook for User Interface Design. San Francisco, CA: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Miller, George A. 1956. “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus 
Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information.” 
Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.
Moore, Geoffrey. 1999. Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling High-
Tech Products to Mainstream Customers (rev. ed.). New York, NY: 
HarperBusiness.
Najjar, Lawrence J. 1990. Using Color Effectively (or Peacocks Can’t Fly) 
(IBM TR52.0018). Atlanta, GA: IBM Corporation.
Nielsen, Jakob. 1994. Usability Engineering. San Francisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.
Nielsen, Jakob, and Shuli Gilutz. 2003. Usability Return on Investment. 
Fremont, CA: Nielsen Norman Group.

References
303
Nielsen, Jakob, and Marie Tahir. 2001. Homepage Usability: 50 Websites 
Deconstructed. Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
Norman, Donald. 2002. “Emotion and Design: Attractive Things Work 
Better.” Interactions Magazine, 9(4), 36–42.
Norman, Donald. 1988. The Design of Everyday Things (originally pub-
lished as The Psychology of Everyday Things). New York, NY: Basic 
Books.
Paap, Kenneth R., and Renate J. Roske-Hofstrand. 1986. “The Optimal 
Number of Menu Options per Panel.” Journal of the Human Factors 
Society, 28(4), 377–385.
Quinn, N., and Dorothy Holland, eds. 1987. Cultural Models in Language 
and Thought. London, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rehder, Bob, Clayton Lewis, Bob Terwilliger, Peter Polson, and John 
Rieman. 1995. “A Model of Optimal Exploration and Decision 
Making in Novel Interfaces.” In Proceedings of CHI Annual Meeting. 
Accessed November 2003 at www.acm.org/sigs/sigchi/chi95/
Electronic/documnts/shortppr/br_bdy.htm.
Rubinstein, Richard, and Harry Hersh. 1984. The Human Factor: 
Designing Computer Systems for People. Burlington, MA: Digital Press.
Schaffer, Eric. 2001. The Institutionalization of Usability [white paper]. 
Fairfield, IA: Human Factors International.
Schaffer, Eric, John Sorfaten, Glenn Miracle, and Meena Venkateswaran. 
1999. “Interactive Voice Response (IVR) Case Study: Testing Your 
Telephone-Based e-Commerce.” Journal of Electronic Commerce, 12(2), 
78–84. www.humanfactors.com/downloads/ivr.asp.
Schroeder, Will. September/October 1998. “Testing Web Sites with 
Eye-Tracking.” Eye for Design. Accessed July 2003 at www.uie.com/
eyetrack1.htm.
Schüll, Natasha Dow. 2012. Addiction by Design: Machine Gambling in 
Las Vegas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Singh, N. 2004. “From Cultural Models to Cultural Categories: A 
Framework for Cultural Analysis.” Journal of American Academy of 
Business, 5(1–2), 95–102.
Singh, N., and Arun Pereira. 2005. The Culturally Customised Website. 
Oxford, UK: Routledge.

304
References
Tinker, Miles A. 1965. Bases for Effective Reading. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Tinker, Miles A. 1963. Legibility of Print. Ames, IA: Iowa State University 
Press.
Waite, R. 1982. “Making Information Easy to Use: A Summary of 
Research.” In Proceedings of International Technical Communication 
Conference (Washington, DC: Society for Technical Communication), 
120–123.
Ward, Toby. 2001. “Measured Intranet ROI Benefits.” TrendMarkers 
Newsletter, 3(7). Accessed November 2003 at www.techmetrix.com/
trendmarkers/publi.php?C=2IOFO.

305
Index
A
AAMI (Association for the 
Advancement of Medical 
Instrumentation), 10
Aaron Marcus and Associates, 279
A:B test engines, 131
Abbott Laboratories, 10
ACM SIGCHI (Special Interest Group on 
Computer-Human Interfaces), 221
Actors, in ecosystem models, 112
Adams, Scott, 6
A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc., 5, 81
American Electric Power, 18, 245
“ANSI/AAMI HE 74:2001 Human 
Factors Design Process for Medical 
Devices,” 10
Apple smartphones in India, 292
Assessing operational health
certification, 182–184
maturity model, 182–184
metrics for, 181
overview, 180–181
tools for, 181–182
Assessing usability. See Usability 
testing.
Assessment methods, 76–77. See also 
Controlled experiments; Expert 
reviews; Usability testing.
Association for the Advancement of 
Medical Instrumentation 
(AAMI), 10
AT&T, 61, 261
B
Basic interface design standards, 94
Bijapurkar, Rama, 298–300
Board of Certification in Professional 
Ergonomics, 150, 226
Bollywood testing method, 136–137
Books and publications   
The  Usability Engineering Lifecycle: The 
Practitioner's Handbook for User 
Interface Design (Mayhew), 35
Cost-Justifying Usability (Bias and 
Mayhew), 36
The Culturally Customized Web Site 
(Pereira, Singh), 285
Emotional Design: Why We Love (or 
Hate) Everyday Things (Norman), 
15–16
“Ergonomics of Human-System 
Interaction . . . ,” 36
The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid 
(Prahalad), 294–295
Gould and Lewis (1985), usability 
methodology, 36
Innovative Solutions: What Designers 
Need to Know for Today's Emerging 
Markets (Lapari), xl
“The Institutionalization of Usability” 
(Schaffer), 5
Institutionalization of Usability: A Step-
by-Step Guide (Schaffer), xxxii
Manter and Teorey (1988), usability 
methodology, 36
Mayhew (1992), usability 
methodology, 36
Nielsen (1992), usability 
methodology, 36
Outside In: The Power of Putting 
Customers at the Center of Your 
Business (Manning, Bodine, 
Bernoff), 197–198
Predictors of Successful Arcade Machines 
(Schaffer), 15
“ROLTA India Accelerates on 
Receiving HFI Level V 
Certification,” 6
Schneiderman (1992), usability 
methodology, 36

306
Index
User Experience Management: Essential 
Skills for Leading Effective UX Teams 
(Lund), 204
“Winning the $30 Trillion Decathlon: 
Going for Gold in the Emerging 
Markets,” 284
BOP (bottom-of-the-pyramid), reaching, 
294–296
Brand perception tests, 132–133
Bronze projects, 238, 239–240, 241
Budgets. See Costs.
Business case for localization, 293
C
Card sort tests, 133
Centralized organizational structure
best location for, 194–197
under a CXO, 197–198
definition, 185
executive championship, 198
within IT, 193–194
within marketing, 194–197
placement options, 192–198
within quality assurance, 193
for small companies, 191
staffing. See Staffing.
Certification. See also Training.
assessing operational health, 182–184
Board of Certification in Professional 
Ergonomics, 150, 226
Certified Practice in Usability, 182–184
CHFP (Certified Human Factors 
Professional), 150, 226
CPE (Certified Professional 
Ergonomist), 150, 226
created by Eric Schaffer, xl
CUA (Certified Usability Analyst), 150
CUXP (Certified User Experience 
Professional), 150, 226
CXA (Certified User Experience 
Analyst), 151
effect on share price, 6
HFI Framework, 150, 226
levels of, 150
overview, 149–151
during Setup phase, xxxiv
Certified Human Factors Professional 
(CHFP), 150, 226
Certified Practice in Usability, 182–184
Certified Professional Ergonomist 
(CPE), 150, 226
Certified Usability Analyst (CUA), 150
Certified User Experience Analyst 
(CXA), 151
Certified User Experience Professional 
(CUXP), 150, 226
Champions for usability. See Executive 
champions.
Change management
criteria for UX consultants, 42
definition, 42
Changing mindsets
feature-centered design, xxi–xxii
graphics-centered design, xxiv–xxv
process-centered design, xxiii–xxiv
technology-centered design, xxii–xxiii
Charles Schwab, 25
CHFP (Certified Human Factors 
Professional), 150, 226
Chief user experience officer (CXO)
centralized organizational structure, 
197–198
hiring, 203–204
long-term operations, xxxvi–xxxvii
responsibilities, xxxvi–xxxvii
China
Chinese testing facility, 117
the Third China, 298–299
Code, reusable, 9. See also Patterns; 
Templates.
Community support, Long-Term 
Operations phase, 261–263
Completeness of solution, criteria for 
UX consultants, 33–34
Conferences, 151–152
Consistency, interface design 
standards, 99
Consultants. See UX design, 
consultants.
Controlled experiments, 77–78
Conversion. See Persuasion engineering.
Corporate cultural match, criteria for 
UX consultants, 39
Cost-Justifying Usability (Bias and 
Mayhew), 36
Costs, of usability programs
cost of ownership, 21

Index
307
developing interface design 
standards, 100–102
ecosystem research, 113
establishing a UX design group, 65
expert reviews, 65
initial setup, 65
justifying. See Usability, value of.
knowledge management failure, 
158–159
levels of investment, 65
paying test participants, 138
as percentage of overall project 
budget, 6
of poor usability, 26
retrofitting a user interface, 7
setting up a UX design practice, 1, 
6–7, 30
tools, 127–128
turning a blind eye to, 6
usability tests, 65
worker efficiency, 26
Costs, strategic planning
establishing a UX design group, 65
expert reviews, 65
initial setup, 65
usability tests, 65
CPE (Certified Professional Ergonomist), 
150, 226
Creative directors, hiring, 216–218
Criteria for UX consultants, 31–32
Cross-cultural design, 284–285. See also 
Internationalization; Localization.
Cross-cultural specialists, hiring, 
213–214
CUA (Certified Usability 
Analyst), 150
Cultural factors training, 289–290
Cultural schemas, localization, 285
The Culturally Customized Web Site 
(Pereira, Singh), 285
Customer comments, in product design, 
xxi–xxii
Customer motivation. See also 
Persuasion engineering.
governance, 176
HFI Framework, 74
Customer profiles. See User profiles.
Customers, as usability test 
participants, 138
CUXP (Certified User Experience 
Professional), 150, 226
CXA (Certified User Experience 
Analyst), 151
CXO (chief user experience officer)
centralized organizational structure, 
197–198
hiring, 203–204
long-term operations, xxxvi–xxxvii
responsibilities, xxxvi–xxxvii
D
Data gathering, usability testing, 
131–134
Day In the Life Of (DILO) models, 111
Decentralized organizational structure, 
185, 189
Declarative memory, 143
Deliverables, usability testing, 139–140
Design cycles, reducing, 7
Design standards. See Interface design 
standards.
Design teams. See UX design teams.
Design tools, 125–129
Development activity specialists, hiring, 
210–211
Die-low. See DILO (Day In the Life Of) 
models.
Dilbert comic strip, 6
DILO (Day In the Life Of) models, 111
Disseminating interface design 
standards, 102–104
Domain expertise, criteria for UX 
consultants, 34–35
Domain specialists, hiring, 210
Dorman, Dave, 61
Dunning-Kruger effect, 172–173
E
Early adopters, 60, 274
Ecosystem models. See also Personas; 
User profiles.
accessing via relational database, 114
actors, 112
evolution of UX, 11–12
HFI Framework, 77–78
organic, 115–116

308
Index
overview, 112
research costs, 113
static, 115–116
and user profiles, 113–115
Ecosystem researchers, hiring, 214
Education. See also Certification; 
Training.
governance, 172–173
graduate programs, 225
Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) 
Everyday Things (Norman), 15–16
Emotional schemas, 176
Enforcing interface design standards, 
102–104
“Ergonomics of Human-System 
Interaction . . . ,” 36
Escalating problems, 198–199
“Essentials of Usability” class, 
objectives, 144
Evangelizing, 255–258
Evil memes, 169–173
Executive champions
advocating for the process, 18
criteria for, 22
duties of, xxxii–xxxiii
governance, 167–168
identifying, xxxii–xxxiii
keys to success, 24–27
organizational structure, 198
role of, 22–24
strategic planning, 48
support from senior management, 25
Executive intent statements, 73–74
Executives
middle management values, 
xxvii–xxix
senior management support, 25
support for strategic planning, 60–62
support for usability, xxv–xxvii
Expert reviews
cost, 65
HFI Framework, 76–77
Eye movements, tracking, 123
F
False assumptions about governance, 
169–173
Feature-centered design, xxi–xxii
Feedback
criteria for UX consultants, 42–43
HFI Framework, 80, 82
Forrester Research
advice for new practitioners, xxviii
correlation between usability and 
stock price, 6
cost of ownership, 21
executive champions, 198
IT department as roadblock, 254–255
support from senior management, 25
usability trends, 275
The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid 
(Prahalad), 294–295
Foundational ecosystem model, 288–289
Functional salience test, 133
Functional specifications, 70
Function-centered design, 175
Future of usability
capabilities, 277–280
globalization, 279
with a government agency, 276
innovation, 280–281
international unification, 296–298.  See 
also Internationalization; 
Localization.
maturity, organizational, 277
maturity, software industry, 276
new technologies, 281–282
overview, 273
persuasion, 280–281
processes, 277–280
staffing, 277–280
strategy, 280–281
symptoms of change, 274
universal design, 279
usability trends, 275
UX design, 279
G
Generalists vs. specialists, 228
Globalization, future of usability, 279. 
See also Internationalization.
Goddard, Phil, 143
Gold projects, 237–238, 239, 241–242, 245
Good intentions, pitfalls, 17
Gould and Lewis (1985), usability 
methodology, 36

Index
309
Governance
customer motivation, 176
Dunning-Kruger effect, 172–173
education, 172–173
emotional schemas, 176
evil memes, 169–173
executive champions, 167–168
false assumptions, 169–173
function-centered design, 175
pervasive information 
architecture, 177
project planning, 176
roots of the problem, 168–173
during Setup phase, xxxv
technology-centered design, 175
usable wrong things, 177
user interface standards, 178–180
UX design strategy, 175–178
verifying applied methodologies, 
174–178
Governance, assessing operational 
health
certification, 182–184
maturity model, 182–184
metrics, 181
overview, 180–181
tools for, 181–182
Government agencies, future of 
usability, 276
Graphic artists
hiring, 216–218
in the organizational structure, 
199–200
Graphics-centered design, xxiv–xxv
Griffith, Dana, 18, 245
Gross, Todd, 54–55
H
Help, contact for, 103–104
HFI (Human Factors International). See 
also HFI Framework; Methodology.
banking processes, redesigning, 
168–169
certifications offered by, 150–151.  See 
also Certification; Training.
Certified Practice in Usability, 
182–184
CUA (Certified Usability Analyst), 150
CXA (Certified User Experience 
Analyst), 151
early adoption behavior, 274
founder, xl
Global Chief of Technical Staff, xl
increasing leads, 26
internationalization, 285–287
medical device evaluation, 109
migrating customers online, 26
Mouse Maze, 179
offshore staffing, 230–233.  See also 
Staffing.
paper documents vs. online, 102
PET (persuasion, emotion, trust), 16
sales increase through website 
redesign, 90
smartphone study, 77–78
upgrading methods and 
templates, 260
Usability Maturity Model, 182–184, 
277–278
UX Enterprise software, 159–160.  See 
also Object-oriented UX.
HFI Framework. See also Methodology; 
User-centered methodology.
assessment methods, 76–77
certification, 150, 226
comparing designs, 77–78
continuous UX measurement, 80
controlled experiments, 77–78
customer motivation, 74.  See also 
Persuasion engineering.
definition, xxxix
detailed design, 79–80
ecosystem research, 77–78
“Essentials of Usability” class, 
objectives, 144
executive intent statements, 73–74
expert reviews, 76–77
feedback, 80, 82
improvement, 80, 82
innovation, 73–76
interface structure, 78–80
mental models, 79
overview, 73–74
PET (persuasion, emotion, trust), 
77, 78
research methods, 77–78
screen design, 79–80

310
Index
strategy, 73–76
Task Modeler tool, 130
training plan, 152
Usability Maturity Model, 184, 278
usability tests, 76–77
user-centered design, 78–80
UX Enterprise software service, 
159–162
UX validation, 80
Hiring usability professionals. See 
Staffing; UX consultants, hiring.
Human factors. See Usability.
Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society, 225
Human Factors International. See HFI 
(Human Factors International).
Hynes, Colin, 268–271
I
Improvement, HFI Framework, 80, 82
India
BOP (bottom-of-the-pyramid), 
reaching, 294–296
smartphone competition, 292
Infosys, 286–287
Infrastructure, strategic planning, 64
Infrastructure managers, hiring, 207–208
In-house users, as usability test 
participants, 137–138
Innovation
evolution of UX, 14
future of usability, 280–281
HFI Framework, 73–76
Innovative Solutions: What Designers Need 
to Know for Today's Emerging Markets 
(Lapari), xl
Institute of Customer Experience, 136
Institutionalization, criteria for UX 
consultants, 33
“The Institutionalization of Usability” 
(Schaffer), 5
Institutionalization of Usability: A Step-by-
Step Guide (Schaffer), xxxii
Institutionalizing the user experience. 
See also Interface design standards.
certification, xxxiv
CXO (chief user experience officer), 
xxxvi–xxxvii
developing projects, xxxvi
executive champion, identifying, 
xxxii–xxxiii
flowchart, xxxii
governance, xxxv
Long-Term Operations phase, 
xxxvi–xxxvii
methodology, developing, xxxiii
at the National Cancer Institute, xxx
Organization phase, xxxv–xxxvi, 
165–166
planning. See Strategic planning.
process description, xxxi–xxxvi.  See 
also specific phases.
Schaffer vs. Spool on, xiv
Setup phase, xxxiii–xxxv, 45–46
showcase projects, xxxiv–xxxv
staffing, xxxv
Startup phase, xxxii–xxxiii, 1
strategy, developing, xxxiii
templates, xxxiv
testing facilities, xxxiv
tools, xxxiv
training, xxxiv
user experience design, spreading, xxxv
user experience design consultant, 
selecting, xxxiii
Intent vs. reality: The shadow area, 287
Interface design. See also User interface.
changing the process, xxix–xxxi
comparing alternatives, 77–78
detailed design, HFI Framework, 
79–80
iterative processes, xxix–xxxi
Interface design standards. See also 
Patterns; Templates.
basic, 94
consistency, 99
creating unified brands, 99–100
development costs, 100–102
disseminating, 102–104
enforcing, 102–104, 178–180
help, contact for, 103–104
in the institutionalization 
process, xxxiv
maintenance and upgrades, 99
methodological, 90
optional, 94
patterns, 94–95

Index
311
phasing in, 58–60
scope, 96–98
screen design templates, 92–94
software, 90
standard research principles, 8
style guides, 90, 96
support during Long-Term 
Operations phase, 260–262
training, 102–103
types of, 91–92
verifying use of, 180
Interface structure
determining the interface design, 7
HFI Framework, 78–80
Internationalization. See also 
Globalization; Localization.
challenges of current practice, 285–287
Chinese testing facility, 117
criteria for success, 287–288
cross-cultural design, 284–285
cross-cultural specialists, 213–214
future of unification, 296–298
importance of international markets, 
283–284
Infosys, 286–287
intent vs. reality: The shadow 
area, 287
Japanese website, 109
Microsoft, 286
population stereotypes, 223–224
the Third China, 298–299
translation, 213–214
usability testing, 135–137
Internet, privacy, 265–266
Interviewers, recruiting, 137–140
Israelski, Ed, 10
IT department
centralized organizational structure, 
193–194
as roadblock, 254–255
J
Japanese website, 109
K
Karbonn smartphones in India, 292
Keystrokes, counting, 130
Knowledge management. See also 
Object-oriented UX.
cost of failure, 158–159
failure of conventional methods, 
157–158
meta-tags, 157–158
overview, 155–157
Knowledge training, 142–146
L
Lahiri, Apala
about the author, xl
Bollywood testing method, 136–137
gathering ecosystem data in 
Africa, 296
global design, xv
Linkages, object-oriented UX, 162–163
Local understanding, global success, 
291–294
Localization. See also 
Internationalization.
Apple smartphones in India, 292
business case for, 293
challenges of current practice, 
285–287
criteria for success, 287–288
critical tools, 290–291
cultural factors training, 289–290
cultural schemas, 285
culturally congruent Web content, 
284–285
foundational ecosystem model, 
288–289
intent vs. reality: The shadow 
area, 287
Karbonn smartphones in India, 292
local understanding, global success, 
291–294
MicroMax smartphones in India, 292
MPesa in Kenya, 295
Nokia smartphones in India, 292
reaching the BOP (bottom-of-the-
pyramid), 294–296
Samsung smartphones in India, 292
smartphones in India, 292
think globally; lose locally, 291–294
Unilever in India, 295
Long-term memory, 143

312
Index
Long-Term Operations phase, activities
central UX team, role of, 255–258
community support, 261–263
evangelizing, 255–258
IT department as roadblock, 254–255
maintaining momentum, 252–253, 255
maintaining respect, 251–252
mentoring, 259–260
metrics, focusing on, 264–266
motivational principles, 268–271
negotiating effectively, 251–252
ongoing training, 258–259
overview, 249–251
reporting to executives, 267
responsibility, assuming, 266–267
standards support, 260–262
usability testing, 263–264
Long-Term Operations phase, overview, 
xxxvi–xxxvii
Lund, Arnold, 256–257
M
Mainstream developers, in strategic 
planning, 63
Maintenance, value of interface design 
standards, 99
Malecek, Pat, 5, 81
Management. See Executives.
Manning, Harley
advice for new practitioners, xxvii
correlation between usability and 
stock price, 6
cost of ownership, 21
executive championship, 198
IT department as roadblock, 254–255
support from senior management, 25
usability trends, 275
Manter and Teorey (1988), usability 
methodology, 36
Marcus, Aaron, 279
Marketing, centralized organizational 
structure, 194–197
Matrix organizational structure, 185, 
189–191
Maturity, future of usability
organizational, 277
software industry, 276
Maturity model, 182–184, 277–278
Mayhew (1992), usability 
methodology, 36
Measurements. See Metrics.
Medical industry, usability, 10, 109
Medtronic MiniMed, 54–55
Memory, long-term, 143
Mental models, HFI Framework, 79
Mentoring, Long-Term Operations 
phase, 259–260
Mentors, hiring, 208–209
Menu size, optimal limits, 43
Meta-tags, 157–158
Methodological interface design 
standards, 90
Methodology. See also HFI Framework; 
User-centered methodology.
at A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc., 81
criteria for UX consultants, 35–36
current, evaluating, 82
developing, xxxiii
functional specifications, 70
overview, 67–68
strategic planning, 64
Usability Quotient, 82, 83–85
user-centered, 68–72
Methodology, retrofitting a development 
life cycle
with added user-centered activities, 86
common scenarios, 85–87
overview, 82
spiral method, 86
usability testing only, 86–87
using classic methodologies, 86
waterfall method, 86
Metrics
continuous UX measurement, 80
focusing during Long-Term 
Operations phase, 264–266
quantifiable user characteristics, 4
Usability Quotient, 82, 83–85
usability value, 4
Metrics, assessing operational health
certification, 182–184
maturity model, 182–184
metrics for, 181
overview, 180–181
tools for, 181–182
Micro Saint, 130
MicroMax smartphones in India, 292

Index
313
Microsoft, 256–257, 286
Mindsets, changing
feature-centered design, xxi–xxii
graphics-centered design, xxiv–xxv
process-centered design, xxiii–xxiv
technology-centered design, xxii–xxiii
Modeling test results, 124–125, 130–131
Momentum, maintaining, 252–253, 255
Moore, Geoffrey, 274
Motivational principles, 268–271
Mouse Maze, 179
Mouse movements, counting, 130
MPesa in Kenya, 295
N
Nall, Janice, xxx, 72, 253
National Cancer Institute, xxx, 72, 253
Naysayers, 62–63
Negotiating effectively, 251–252
New technologies, 281–282
Nielsen (1992), usability methodology, 36
Nokia smartphones in India, 292
Norman, Don, 15–16, 211
O
Object-oriented UX. See also Knowledge 
management.
criteria for UX consultants, 37–38
linkages, 162–163
overview, 159–162
starting from scratch, 162
types of objects, 160
UX objects, 156
Offshore staffing, 230–233. See also 
Staffing.
Ongoing support, criteria for UX 
consultants, 34
Operational health, assessing
certification, 182–184
maturity model, 182–184
metrics for, 181
overview, 180–181
tools for, 181–182
Optional interface design standards, 94
Organic ecosystem models, 115–116
Organization phase, xxxv–xxxvi, 
165–166
Organizational structure
criteria for UX consultants, 40–41
decentralized, 185, 189
escalating problems, 198–199
graphic artists, 199–200
large companies, 189–191
matrix, 185, 189–191
mid-sized companies, 189–191
most important principle, 186
overview, 185–188
project teams, 192
small companies, 191
usability-oriented staff, 199–200
for UX design teams, 188–191
writers, 199–200
Organizational structure, centralized
best location for, 194–197
under a CXO, 197–198
definition, 185
executive championship, 198
within IT, 193–194
within marketing, 194–197
placement options, 192–198
within quality assurance, 193
for small companies, 191
Outside consultants. See UX design, 
consultants.
Outside In: The Power of Putting 
Customers at the Center of Your 
Business (Manning, Bodine, 
Bernoff), 197–198
P
Participants, usability test
current customers, 138
in-house users, 137–138
paying, 138
recruiting, 137–140
scaling back, 243
screeners, 138
vs. test subjects, 120
Patterns, 94–95. See also Interface design 
standards; Templates.
Paying usability test participants, 138
Pereira, Arun, 285
Personas. See also Ecosystem models; 
User profiles.
on posters, 257

314
Index
quality, 111
thin, 110
Personnel. See Staffing.
Persuasion engineering
customer motivation, 74, 176
description, 15–16
evolution of UX, 15–16
future of usability, 280–281
PET (persuasion, emotion, trust), 16, 77
tools for, 212
Persuasion engineers, hiring, 211–212
Pervasive information architecture, 177
PET (persuasion, emotion, trust)
HFI Framework, 77, 78
persuasion engineering, 16
usability testing, techniques, 135
Pitfalls in user experience design
good intentions, 17
new UX staff, 20–21
projects by ad agencies, 19
repair jobs, 19
testing, 17
training, 17–19
UX consultants, 19–20
Planning. See Project planning; Strategic 
planning.
Population stereotypes, 223–224
Posters of personas, 257
Power structure, in strategic planning, 
60–62
Practitioners, in user experience. See UX 
practitioners.
Prahalad, C. K., 294–295
Predictors of Successful Arcade Machines 
(Schaffer), 15
Privacy on the Internet, 265–266
Procedural, 143
Process-centered design, xxiii–xxiv
Processes, future of usability, 277–280
Profiles. See User profiles.
Project planning
governance, 176
guidelines for, 244
organizational support, 245
resource requirements, estimating, 
244–246
team managers, importance of, 
214–216
time frame, estimating, 246
Projects
by ad agencies, pitfalls, 19
bronze level, 238, 239–240, 241
deploying practitioners, 240–242
efficient testing strategies, 242–243
focusing on important modules, 242
geographies, number of, 243
gold level, 237–238, 239, 241–242, 245
hallmarks of maturity, 237
levels of importance, 237–239
overview, 235–236
participants, number of, 243
percentage of budget for usability, 6
remote testing, 243
scaling back, 242–244
during Setup phase, xxxiv
sharing practitioners, 243–244
sharing testing sessions, 243
showcase, xxxiv–xxxv, 65
silver level, 238, 239, 241, 245
structural design, 241
tin level, 238–239, 239–240
triaging, 237–239
trimming unnecessary functions, 242
UX designers, selecting, 239–240
working smart, 242–244
Prototyping, tools for, 129
Q
Quality assurance, centralized 
organizational structure, 193
Quality control, criteria for UX 
consultants, 42–43
Quality personas, 111
R
Rawlins, Michael, Sr., 125–129
Reacting to past events, 56–57
Recording testing sessions, 122–124
Recruiting usability test participants, 
137–140
Remote usability testing, 118, 243
Repair jobs, 19
Reporting to executives, 267
Research principles, standard, 8
Research tools, 125–129
Respect, maintaining, 251–252

Index
315
Responsibility, assuming, 266–267
Retrofitting a development life cycle
with added user-centered activities, 86
common scenarios, 85–87
overview, 82
spiral method, 86
usability testing only, 86–87
using classic methodologies, 86
waterfall method, 86
Retrofitting a user interface, 7
Reusable code and templates, 9
Reverse card sort tests, 133–134
“ROLTA India Accelerates on Receiving 
HFI Level V Certification,” 6
S
Sales, increasing through usability, 
8–9, 90
Samsung smartphones in India, 292
Scenarios, definition, 11
Schaffer, Eric, xxxix–xl
Schneiderman (1992), usability 
methodology, 36
Schwab, Charles, 25
Screen design
HFI Framework, 79–80
templates. See Interface design 
standards; Patterns; Templates.
Screeners, 138
Screening questionnaires, 132
Selenko, Feliça, 61, 261
Setup phase, xxxiii–xxxv, 45–46. See also 
Strategic planning.
“Shoebox” usability equipment, 122–123
SIGCHI (Special Interest Group on 
Computer-Human Interfaces), 151
Silver projects, 238, 239, 241, 245
Singh, Nitish, 285
Skills training, 142–143, 146–149
Smartphones
in India, 292
study of, 77–78
Social media channels, sharing tools, 129
Social Security Administration, 220, 276
Software design standards, 90
Software tools, 124–125, 130–131
Sorflaten, John, 217
Specialists vs. generalists, 228
Specializations, criteria for UX 
consultants, 40–41
Spiral development method, 86
Spool, Jared, viii, 265
Staffing. See also UX consultants, hiring.
background in design, 227–228
coordinating with consultants, 53–55
coordinating with UX design 
consultants, 53–55
creative directors, 216–218
criteria for UX consultants, 32–33
cross-cultural specialist, 213–214
CXO (chief user experience officer), 
203–204
development activity specialists, 
210–211
domain specialists, 210
ecosystem researchers, 214
educational requirements, 225–226
essential skills and knowledge, 228–229
future of usability, 277–280
graphic artists, 199–200
graphic designers, 216–218
hiring criteria, 219
infrastructure managers, 207–208
interpersonal skills, 230
mentors, 208–209
offshore, 230–233
Organization phase, xxxv–xxxvi
outside consultants, 219
overview, 201–203, 219, 221–222
persuasion engineers, 211–212
pitfalls, 20–21
practitioners as CXOs, 203
relative levels of expertise, 230
selecting professionals, 222–225
specialists vs. generalists, 228
technology specialists, 209–210
topical specialists, 209–214
training internal staff, 222–225
unqualified applicants, detecting, 229
usability manager, 204–206
usability-oriented, in the 
organizational structure, 199–200
user specialists, 210
UX experience, 226–227
UX managers, 214–216
UX practitioners, 214–216
writers, 199–200

316
Index
Standards. See Interface design 
standards.
Staples, 268–271
Startup phase, xxxii–xxxiii, 1
Static ecosystem models, 115–116
Stock price, correlation with usability, 6
Strategic planning. See also Setup phase.
best practices, 53
common questions, 52
description, 45
detailed write-up, sample, 50
executive champion, 48
executive support at AT&T, 61
infrastructure, 64
internal staff, coordinating with 
consultants, 53–55
key considerations, 51–52
levels of investment, 65
methodology, 64
pace of development, 58
phasing in interface design standards, 
58–60
proactive efforts, 52–53
reacting to past events, 56–57
roadmap, sample, 49
Seeing benefits from, 51
sequence of events, 54–57
showcase projects, 65
strategy, sample, 48
tactical opportunities, 57–58
time required, 50, 58
training, 63–64
Strategic planning, costs
establishing a UX design group, 65
expert reviews, 65
initial setup, 65
usability tests, 65
Strategic planning, key organizational 
groups
early adopters, 60
mainstream developers, 63
naysayers, 62–63
power structure, 60–62
Strategy
evolution of UX, 12–14
future of usability, 280–281
HFI Framework, 73–76
sample, 48
Setup phase, xxxiii
Structural design, importance of, 241
Style guides, 90, 96
Subjective ratings tests, 134
Sun Microsystems, 25–26
SWOT analysis, tools for, 125–127
Symptoms of change, future of 
usability, 274
T
Task Modeler, 130
Teams. See Staffing; UX design teams.
Technology specialists, hiring, 209–210
Technology-centered design, 
xxii–xxiii, 175
Templates. See also Interface design 
standards; Patterns; Tools.
criteria for UX consultants, 36–37
example, 88
overview, 87
reusable, 9
screen design, 92–94
usability testing forms, 132
Test subjects. See Participants, usability 
test.
Testing. See Usability testing.
Testing facilities. See also Usability 
testing.
Chinese, 117
examples, 121
overview, 119–122
“Think aloud” tests, 133
Think globally; lose locally, 291–294
The Third China, 298–299
Time frame for projects, estimating, 246
Tin projects, 238–239, 239–240
Tools. See also Templates.
A:B test engines, 131
for assessing operational health, 
181–182
creating your own, 130
criteria for UX consultants, 36–37
for localization, 290–291
Micro Saint, 130
modeling test results, 124–125, 130–131
for persuasion engineering, 212
software, 124–125, 130–131
Task Modeler, 130
tracking websites, 130–131

Index
317
Tools, selecting
acquisition strategies, 126–129
cost considerations, 127–128
for design and research, 125–129
for innovation, 125
learning curves, 128
for prototyping, 129
sharing over social media 
channels, 129
SWOT analysis, 125–127
Topical specialists, hiring, 209–214
Tracking
eye movements, 123
websites, 130–131
Training. See also Certification.
candidates for, 145–146, 148–149
conferences, 151–152
criteria for UX consultants, 43–44
cultural factors, 289–290
“Essentials of Usability” class, 
objectives, 144
on interface design standards, 
102–103
knowledge, 142–146
Long-Term Operations phase, 258–259
on new tools, 128
pitfalls, 17–19
skills, 142–143, 146–149
strategic planning, 63–64
types of, 142–148
a typical plan, 151–152
Translation, 213–214
Triaging projects, 237–239
U
U-group listserv, xxx
Unified brands, with interface design 
standards, 99–100
Unilever in India, 295
Universal design, definition, 279
Universal design, future of usability, 279
Unmoderated remote usability 
testing, 118
Upgrades, value of interface design 
standards, 99
Usability. See also UX (user experience).
central UX team, role of, 255–258
community support, 261–263
correlation with stock price, 6
as craftsmanship, viii
evangelizing, 255–258
evolution to UX, 11
institutionalizing, xiii
integrating into the development 
cycle, 72
IT department as roadblock, 254–255
maintaining momentum, 252–253, 255
maintaining respect, 251–252
managers, hiring, 204–206
within the medical industry, 10
mentoring, 259–260
metrics, focusing on, 264–266
motivational principles, 268–271
negotiating effectively, 251–252
ongoing training, 258–259
overview, 249–251
reporting to executives, 267
research-based approach, 253
responsibility, assuming, 266–267
standards support, 260–262
trends. See Future of usability.
usability testing, 263–264
Usability, value of
correlation between usability and 
stock price, 6
decision making, expediting, 8
disasters, avoiding, 9
metrics, 4
quantifiable user characteristics, 4
reducing design cycles, 7
reusable code and templates, 9
sales, increasing, 8–9
standard research principles, 8
unnecessary functions, avoiding, 7–8
The Usability Engineering Lifecycle: The 
Practitioner's Handbook for User 
Interface Design (Mayhew), 35
Usability Maturity Model, 182–184, 
277–278
Usability Professionals Association, 221
Usability programs, initial setup 
costs, 65
Usability Quotient, 82, 83–85
Usability teams. See UX design teams.
Usability testing. See also Templates; 
Testing facilities; Tools.
auto manufacturer, sample results, 15

318
Index
Bollywood method, 136–137
by the central group, 263–264
costs, 65
data gathering, 131–134
deliverables, 139–140
efficient strategies, 242–243
focusing on important modules, 242
geographies, number of, 243
HFI Framework, 76–77
international issues, 135–137
interviewers, recruiting, 137–140
keystrokes, counting, 130
Long-Term Operations phase,
263–264
mouse movements, counting, 130
participants, number of, 243
pitfalls, 17
recording sessions, 122–124
remote, 118
remote testing, 243
scaling back, 242–244
screening questionnaire, 132
sharing practitioners, 243–244
sharing sessions, 243
“shoebox” equipment, 122–123
template forms, 132
tracking eye movements, 123
trimming unnecessary functions, 242
unmoderated remote, 118
video editing, 123
working smart, 242–244
Usability testing, facilities
Chinese, 117
examples, 121
overview, 119–122
Usability testing, participants
current customers, 138
in-house users, 137–138
paying, 138
recruiting, 137–140
screeners, 138
vs. test subjects, 120
Usability testing, techniques
advanced methods, 134–135
brand perception tests, 132–133
card sort tests, 133
functional salience test, 133
PET analysis, 135
reverse card sort tests, 133–134
subjective ratings, 134
“think aloud” tests, 133
Usable wrong things, 12, 177
Use cases, definition, 11
User experience. See UX (user 
experience).
User Experience Management: Essential 
Skills for Leading Effective UX Teams 
(Lund), 204
User interface. See also Interface design.
retrofitting, 7
standards, 178–180
User profiles. See also Ecosystem models; 
Personas.
ands ecosystem models, 113–115
example, 114
importance of, 109
User specialists, hiring, 210
User types. See Actors.
User-centered design
criteria for UX consultants, 34
HFI Framework, 78–80
User-centered methodology, 68–72. See 
also HFI Framework; Methodology.
User-centered size and stability, criteria 
for UX consultants, 38–39
UX (user experience). See also Interface 
design; Usability; User interface.
design groups, cost of establishing, 65
design strategy, 175–178
designers, selecting for projects, 
239–240
managers, hiring, 214–216
UX (user experience), evolution of
ecosystem viewpoint, 11–12
innovation, 14
persuasion engineering, 15–16
strategy, 12–14
from usability, 11
UX consultants, hiring
change management ability, 42
completeness of solution, 33–34
corporate cultural match, 39
domain expertise, 34–35
feedback, 42–43
methodology, 35–36
object-oriented approach, 37–38
ongoing support, 34
ongoing training, 43–44

Index
319
organizational structure, 40–41
overview, 29–32
pitfalls, 19–20
quality control, 42–43
setup costs, 30
specializations, 40–41
staffing, 32–33
during the Startup phase, xxxii
support for institutionalization, 33
tools and templates, 36–37
user-centered design, 34
user-centered size and stability, 38–39
weighted criteria, 31–32.  See also 
specific criteria.
UX design. See also Usability.
costs of setting up a practice, 1, 6–7
definition, 279
future of usability, 279
National Cancer Institute, xxx
spreading through the 
organization, xxxv
trends. See Future of usability.
validation under HFI Framework, 80
UX design, common pitfalls
good intentions, 17
new UX staff, 20–21
projects by ad agencies, 19
repair jobs, 19
testing, 17
training, 17–19
UX consultants, 19–20
UX design, consultants
benefits of, 53–55
coordinating with internal staff, 53–55
hiring, 219
UX design teams, placement
best location for, 194–197
central UX team, role of, 255–258
under a CXO, 197–198
definition, 185
executive championship, 198
within IT, 193–194
within marketing, 194–197
organizational structure, 188–191
placement options, 192–198
within quality assurance, 193
UX Enterprise software service, 159–162
UX objects
definition, 156
types of, 160
UX practitioners
as CXOs, 203
deploying on projects, 240–242
hiring, 214–216
in leadership roles, 203, 205
sharing across projects, 243–244
V
Validating the UX, 80
Value of usability. See Costs; Usability, 
value of.
Vendors. See UX design, consultants.
Video editing, 123
W
Waterfall development method, 86
Websites
categorizing topics on, 133
culturally congruent Web content, 
284–285
tracking tools, 130–131
usability vs. creativity, 216–218
Wheeler, Sean, 220, 276
“Winning the $30 Trillion Decathlon: 
Going for Gold in the Emerging 
Markets,” 284
Worldwide applications. See 
Internationalization.
Writers, in the organizational structure, 
199–200

