INSTALL GUTTERING 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Care is needed in setting out the guttering accurately, but 
actually fitting it is relatively easy. 
  
 
 
Before you climb a ladder, make sure it is stable and fixed 
securely to the structure of the house. Don't allow children 
to play under ladders or scaffold towers. 
  
 
 
Changing your own guttering can be a simple and 
straightforward exercise when you have the right products 
and you know how to select the few simple tools required 
  
Two sizes of guttering cover most domestic situations:  
• 
75mm half-round gutters and 50mm circular 
downpipes for sheds, greenhouses and small 
detached garages.  
• 
112mm half-round gutters and 68mm circular 
downpipe for houses and large detached garages.  
If you live in a large house or in an area of high rainfall, you 
may need a gutter which has a greater capacity - either 116 
x 60mm 'square' guttering (used with 65mm square 
downpipe) or 120 x 75mm 'ogee' guttering (used with 
square or round downpipe). 
 
2  - Planning the work 
Whether you are planning to replace the entire guttering on a 
house, or just one side of a garden shed, following these few 
simple tips will make the job much easier.  
 
 
Make a sketch plan of the house or outbuilding, and write down 
all the relevant dimensions. Work in metric units as this is how 
guttering is sold. 
 
 
If you have difficulty measuring the height of a house, simply 
count the number of brick courses from the ground to the eaves 
and divide the answer by 13 to get the length of downpipe you 
need in metres. 
 
 
Work out the lengths of guttering and downpipe you need 
(different standard lengths of both are available), and fill in a 
checklist for the necessary components (1).  
 
 

 
 
Some gutter fittings (for example, union clips) need to be fitted 
with a separate strap to make the joint between the fitting and 
the gutter (these should be fitted before you start); other types 
have integral straps. 
 
 
Fascia brackets should be placed no more then 1m apart; 
stopend outlets, running outlets, union clips, angles and 
stopends need a supporting fascia bracket within 150mm of the 
fitting. Some running outlets, union clips and stopend outlets 
are designed to be screwed directly to the fascia, but also 
require support brackets within 150mm.  
 
 
Some 'ogee' guttering fittings are 'handed' - for internal or 
external corners or to fit on to the left- or right-hand end of the 
gutter.  
 
 
Always over-estimate when ordering. It is better to have too 

much rather than too little.  
 
 
3  -  Remove the old guttering  
Unless you are fitting guttering to a new building, you will 
need to remove the old guttering. Old plastic guttering is 
simple to remove, but you should take great care with cast-
iron guttering as it is extremely heavy, and can have sharp 
edges. Wear stout gloves to handle it and lower it to the 
ground with a rope.  
 
 
 
If the screws holding the old gutter or gutter brackets to the 
fascia have rusted in place, saw through them with a padsaw
fitted with a thin metal-cutting blade. To remove brackets 
secured to the rafters, you may need to lift the edge of the 
roof covering.  
 
 
 
If the bolts holding cast iron 
guttering together are rusted 
in place, saw them off with a 
hacksaw (2).  
 
Take the opportunity to 
refurbish the existing fascia 
board, filling all screw holes, 
stripping off flaking paint a
re-painting or re-staining as required. 
nd 
very 
 
 
4  - Fitting the outlet and brackets  
Start by fitting the outlet 
(running outlet in the middle 
of a gutter run, stopend 
outlet at the end of a run) 
directly over the drain 
position - use a plumbline to 
check this (3). 
 
Using 25mm x 5mm (1in x 
No. 10) screws, fix the outlet 
to the fascia, allowing for the 
fact that the far end of the 
gutter must be higher than 
the outlet by 10mm for e
6m of gutter (a fall of 1:600).
 
 
 
Now fit the end fascia bracket furthest away from the outlet, 
allowing for the required 1:600 fall. Check that the fascia 
board itself is level (it should be) and then use this as a 
reference line to position the bracket. Repeat with the other 
end fascia bracket if the outlet is in the middle of the gutter. 
 
 
 

Tie a string line tightly from 
the end fascia bracket(s) to 
the outlet and use this as a 
guide for installing the 
remaining fascia brackets, 
which should be placed no 
more than 1m apart, w
outwards from the outlet. 
Screw each bracket to the 
fascia with two or three 
screws (4).  
orking 
 
s 
 
 
5  - Installing the gutter 
Once all the brackets are in place, you can install the main 
guttering.  
 
 
 
Push the first gutter length 
into the outlet and then clip it
into its fascia brackets. Thi
is done most easily by tilting
the gutter to fit under the 
back clip and then 
straightening it under the 
front clip. To allow for 
expansion in hot weather, 
care should be taken to 
ensure the gutter end is in 
line with the insertion depth 
mark (5).  
 
 
 
All fittings provide for expansion and contraction of the 
gutter. When installing the gutter, make sure it does not go 
past the insertion depth mark in the fitting.  
 
Use a union clip to join the first and second lengths. The 
joint is made by clipping the two ends into the union clip, 
which is also secured to the fascia with a single screw (5).  
 
 
 
At a corner, hold a 90º angle 
(or 45º angle for a bay) in 
place to mark where the 
gutter is to be cut before you 
fit the angle (6). 
 
Cut the last length of gutter 
to the correct size. At the end 
of the gutter run, fit an 
external stopend, clipped in 
place in the same way as 
outlets, angles and unions. If 
the new guttering has to join 
up with an existing gutter, fit 
the appropriate ogee or half-
round adaptor.  

 
6 - Fitting the downpipe  
 
The distance between the 
gutter and the wall is b
by an offset. This consists of 
two 67.5º offset bends and 
an appropriate offcut of 
downpipe cut to size (7), 
(with 65mm square 
downpipe, a ready-made 
50mm offset is available). 
The offset bends can be 
push-fit or solvent-weld; if 
push-fit, ensure a pipe clip is 
fitted under the socket on t
pipe immediately below the 
offset. When using solven
cement, follow the safety instructions on the tube.  
ridged 
he 
t 
t 
 
 
 
To keep the cut square, wrap 
a piece of plain paper round 
the downpipe at the place to 
be cut, and use this as a 
guide for a hacksaw. Clean 
up the cut edges with a file. 
 
Fit the first length of 
downpipe with its socket 
uppermost, securing it to the 
wall with a socket pipe clip a
the top (8) and one-piece 
barrel clips (where available) 
for holding the pipe to the 
wall. For masonry walls, use 
an electric drill fitted with an appropriate bit to make holes 
to take wallplugs for the securing screws. The maximum 
spacing of pipe clips is 1.8m (6ft).  
 
 
 
Continue to fit the remainder of the pipe in the same way, 
fitting the open end of one pipe into the socket of the pipe 
below, allowing a 10mm gap between the end of the pipe 
and the bottom of the socket for expansion in warm 
weather. 
 
Some downpipes are fitted with a hopper head to receive 
waste from another pipe. Secure the hopper head to the 
wall. Adaptors are available for square downpipes.  
 
 
 
If necessary, the downpipe can be run at an angle across the
wall, using pairs of 45º, 67.5º or 87.5º bends. On angled or 
near-horizontal runs, fit pipe clips every 1m (3ft).  
 
 
 
Where the downpipe from a second gutter (around a bay, for
example) joins the main downpipe, use a 67.5º branch pipe. 
If you need to cut both ends of a pipe, fit a loose pipe socket

(available with wall-fixing lugs for 65mm square pipe) to the 
end of the pipe. 
 
 
 
With 65mm square and 68mm circular downpipe, you can fit 
an access branch into the downpipe. This makes future 
downpipe cleaning easier.  
 
 
 
At the bottom of the 
downpipe, fit a downpipe 
shoe if the water is to 
discharge onto a flat surface 
or into an open gully (9). 
Downpipe shoes on round 
pipe need supporting with 
pipe clips.  
 
 
 
For direct connection to the underground drainage, ensure 
that you have the correct connector (or adaptor for 65mm 
square pipe); to connect to a back inlet gully, remove the 
old mortar and replace with fresh mortar with the pipe in 
place.  
 
 
 
 
7  - Fitting extras  
There are extras you can buy for your guttering system, 
available through B&Q  
 
 
 
A gutter guard comes in 10m lengths and is fitted to the top 
of a gutter to keep leaves out. It simply clips into place once 
you have cut it to the required width and length. 
 
 
 
Similarly, a leaf guard fits into the top of a 68mm circular 
downpipe and will keep leaves out of the downpipe. It also 
prevents birds making nests there. 
 
 
 
A drain cover keeps leaves out of an open gully. You need to 
cut a hole in the cover to allow the downpipe to pass 
through.  
 
 
 
A rain diverter allows rainwater to be collected in a water 
butt - the cunning design allows surplus water to flow down 
the remainder of the downpipe once the water butt is full. 
Instructions are supplied: the rain diverter simply fits into a 
68mm circular or 65mm square downpipe at an appropriate 
point, and is connected to the water butt by the flexible pipe 
supplied. A second water butt can be connected to the first, 
using a water-butt connector.  

 

