
Internet Censorship

Recent Titles in the
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Series
Child Soldiers: A Reference Handbook
David M. Rosen
Medical Tourism: A Reference Handbook
Kathy Stolley and Stephanie Watson
Women and Crime: A Reference Handbook
Judith A. Warner
World Sports: A Reference Handbook
Maylon Hanold
Entertainment Industry: A Reference Handbook
Michael J. Haupert
World Energy Crisis: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Military Robots and Drones: A Reference Handbook
Paul J. Springer
Marijuana: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Religious Nationalism: A Reference Handbook
Atalia Omer and Jason A. Springs
Rising Costs of Higher Education, The: A Reference Handbook
John R. Thelin
Vaccination Controversies: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
The Animal Experimentation Debate: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, business-people,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary
source material, a forum of authoritative perspective essays,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series
will ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.

This page intentionally left blank

CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Internet Censorship
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
Bernadette H. Schell

Copyright 2014 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review,
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schell, Bernadette H. (Bernadette Hlubik), 1952–
Internet censorship : a reference handbook / Bernadette H. Schell
pages cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–61069–481–0 (hardback) — ISBN 978–1–61069–
482–7 (ebook) 1. Internet—Censorship. 2. Internet—Access
control. 3. Internet—Government policy. 4. Cyberspace—
Government policy. 5. Internet—Law and legislation—United
States. 6. Freedom of information. 7. Cyberspace—Social aspects.
8. Internet—Social aspects. I. Title.
ZA4201.S34
2014
004.6708—dc23
2014005277
ISBN: 978–1–61069–481–0
EISBN: 978–1–61069–482–7
18 17 16 15 14
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface, xiii
1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY, 3
Internet Censorship Deﬁned, 3
Censorship versus National Security, and Why
There Will Never be Total Freedom of the Press or a
Total Lack of Press and Internet Censorship, 4
Adequate Information Release by Governments versus
Internet Censorship: WikiLeaks, Manning, and
Snowden, 6
What the Internet Is as Compared to an Intranet, 14
The Internet’s Colorful History: Internet Development,
Hacking Exploits, and (Eventually) Concerns about
Internet Censorship, 17
The Global Growth of Internet Usage, 37
Gaining Authorized and Unauthorized Access to the
Internet—and How Hacking May Be Related to Internet
Censorship, 42
Online Users’ Concerns about Censorship and the
General State of Online Censorship in 2012, 51
Conclusion, 56
References, 57
vii

2
PROBLEMS, CONTROVERSIES, AND SOLUTIONS, 65
A Look at PC, Mobile Phone, and Internet Usage
Globally, 68
Cultural and Legal Jurisdictional Factors Inﬂuencing
the Digital Divide, 71
The Differences between Freedom of Information,
Internet Freedom, and Internet Censorship, 81
Recent Trends in Internet Censorship According to the
Freedom on the Net 2012 Report, 90
Online Activities in Jurisdictions “Under the
Microscope”: Their Strong Support for Internet
Openness and Their Hard-Core Tactics Used to
Reinforce Internet Censorship, 94
The Role of Web Filters and Firewalls, Business-
Government Policies, and Laws Aimed at Internet
Censorship, 100
The Internet’s Continuing Evolution: A Comparison of
Internet Censorship in 2005 and 2012, 106
Key Tactics That Have Restricted Free Speech and
Encouraged Internet Censorship in Countries in Recent
Years, 109
How Can Progress Continue to Be Made in Reducing
Internet Censorship? 118
Conclusion, 120
References, 121
3
PERSPECTIVES, 127
Hacktivism, Cyber Warriors, and Censorship,
Thomas J. Holt, 127
viii
Contents

Internet Censorship and the European Union:
External Cohesiveness versus Internal Disharmony,
Michael Johns, 133
30 Years after Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four:
Pseudo-Privacy Online, Michael Bachmann, 138
Cybersecurity Is Not Censorship,
Dorothy E. Denning, 144
Between Liberty and Harmony: Philosophical
Perspectives on Censorship in the Age of the Internet,
Alanda D. Theriault, 147
4
PROFILES, 159
2600: The Hacker Quarterly, 159
American Civil Liberties Union, 160
Anonymous, 162
Julian Assange (1971–), 164
Black Hat and DefCon Hacker Conferences, 167
The Page-Brin Google, Inc. Team, 169
Canada’s Copyright Modernization Act of 2012
(Formerly Bill C-11), 171
Cran Campbell (1949–), 172
Center for Internet and Society, 173
Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto, 174
Copyright Armageddon: 3D Printers, 175
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 176
Freedom House, 177
William H. Gates (a.k.a Bill Gates) (1955–), 178
Contents
ix

Iceland’s Planned Internet Porn Ban, 179
Steve Jobs (1955–2011) and Steve Wozniak
(“The Woz”) (1950–), 180
Liu Xiabo (1955–) and Liu Xia (1959–), 182
Bradley Manning (a.k.a Chelsea 1988–), 183
OpenNet Initiative, 185
Psiphon Software, 186
Public Knowledge, 187
Reporters Without Borders, 188
Neda Salehi (1983–2009), 188
Yekaterina Samutsevich (1983–), 189
Edward Snowden (1984–), 191
Aaron Swartz (1987–2013), 192
The Censorware Project, 195
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement, 196
WikiLeaks, 198
Malala Yousafzai (1998–), 199
Bassem Youssef (1975–), 201
References, 202
5
DATA AND DOCUMENTS, 209
Statistics on Internet Usage Worldwide, 210
A Closer Look at the Freedom on the Net 2012
Findings, 210
x
Contents

Internet Legislation in the United States Related to
Privacy, Security, Trust, and Censorship, 213
18 U.S.C., 213
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996, 216
Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, 218
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act of 1999 (Financial Services
Modernization Act), 220
Trademark Law, Patent Law, and the
U.S. Anti-cybersquatting Consumer Protection
Act of 1999, 223
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 and PATRIOT
Act II, 224
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2002 or
Homeland Security Act of 2002, 225
PROTECT Act of 2003, COPPA of 1998, and
CIPA of 2000, 226
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, 228
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2005/2002, 231
Recent Internet Laws Not Passed in the United States
Related to Privacy, Security, Trust, and Censorship:
CISPA, SOPA, and PIPA—and Why, 231
SOPA and PIPA, 234
Internet Legislation Attempts Globally Related to Privacy,
Security,Trust, and Censorship: The Budapest
Convention on Cybercrime, 235
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, 237
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement, 237
The United Nations: Unprecedented Power over
Web Content and Infrastructure? 240
Contents
xi

Conclusion, 242
References, 245
6
RESOURCES, 251
7
CHRONOLOGY, 297
Glossary, 311
Index, 323
About the Author, 335
xii
Contents

Preface
This book takes a novel approach to the presentation and
understanding of a controversial topic in society: Internet cen-
sorship. When mainstream society heard about the Internet in
the earlier stages of its development, there was much jubilation,
because this “Information Superhighway” was supposedly cre-
ated to help citizens around the world to have fast access to
nearly an endless amount of information—without leaving
their homes and just by clicking the mouse on their computers.
However, in recent times, there has been growing concern
expressed by individuals in the online global society about
Internet censorship—whereby governments are increasingly
trying to control citizens’ online activities, restrict the free ﬂow
of information, and infringe on the rights of online users.
Stated simply, the battle over maintaining Internet freedom is
heating up. Moreover, the methods used to control Internet
content by governments are also becoming increasingly sophis-
ticated. At a time when about a third of the world’s people are
actively engaged online, tactics previously employed by
extremely repressive regimes are now being employed by gov-
ernments once considered to be more open and supportive of
Internet freedom. Some of these tactics involve causing pre-
meditated connection disruptions or paying professional com-
mentators to consciously manipulate online discussions.
There is little doubt that most countries restrict access to
content on the Internet at some basic level, such as restricting
access to Web pages with offensive content or preventing chil-
dren from viewing content that could result in psychological
xiii

or physical harm. According to Reporters Without Borders, an
organization formed to promote free expression and the global
safety of journalists who are committed to freedom of informa-
tion, some countries such as Belarus, China, Cuba, Egypt, and
Iran have very strong censorship policies, while other countries
like the United States and Estonia are quite open to the concept
of freedom of information.
This book explores the various levels of Internet censorship,
from the usage of Web ﬁlters to national policies or laws aimed
at preventing the ﬂow of information. Also, two sides of the
controversy over Internet censorship are explored in depth.
First, there are those who believe that some amount or consid-
erable amounts of censorship are acceptable. Second, there are
those who believe in and actively play the role of information
freedom ﬁghter—with some being more credible in society’s
eyes than others.
This book has seven chapters, containing the following
points of interest. Chapter 1 provides basic background and
history on what is meant by Internet censorship, broadly speak-
ing. The chapter opens with an interesting discussion on cen-
sorship versus national security—and why there will never be
total freedom of the press or a total lack of press and Internet
censorship. The discussion then moves to the controversies
around adequate information release by governments versus
Internet censorship, with a focus on the present-day headline-
making cases of WikiLeaks, Private Manning, and Edward
Snowden. The main differences between the Internet and intra-
nets are then described. The remainder of the chapter details
the growth of the Internet in the United States—from its rather
humble beginning to its rapid growth in the 1990s and beyond.
The chapter closes with present-day concerns about Internet
censorship.
Chapter 2 outlines the unique problems, controversies, and
solutions regarding information freedom ﬁghters and Internet
censorship. The chapter opens with a quote from Reporters
Without Borders regarding the important point that freedom
xiv
Preface

of information is the foundation of any democracy, yet almost
half of the world’s population is still denied it. The discussion
then moves to a more fulsome exploration of the countries gen-
erally having strong censorship laws and policies—and why
they can justify doing so—compared to those countries advo-
cating for a more open system of information sharing and dis-
closure, such as the United States and Estonia. Next, the
discussion covers the important concept of cultural and legal
jurisdictional factors inﬂuencing the digital divide, with a par-
ticular emphasis on criminal liability on the coincidence of four
key elements. The chapter closes with a review of global trends
in Internet censorship, with a summary of expert opinions on
the factors that may be involved in the next phase of the
Internet’s evolution in terms of equalizing rather than empha-
sizing a universal digital divide.
Chapter 3 continues on this expert opinion discussion on
Internet freedom and censorship, with views expressed by
experts in the ﬁelds of criminology, political science, philoso-
phy, and psychology.
Chapter 4 provides sketches on contributors to both the
Internet freedom ﬁghters and the Internet censorship sides of
the
debate.
Concepts
covered
include
the
hacker
cell
Anonymous, WikiLeaks and its founder Julian Assange, the
hearing and sentencing of U.S. private Bradley (a.k.a.
Chelsea) Manning, and the activities of controversial whistle-
blower Edward Snowden. Also included are proponents of the
freedom of speech in its many forms, including the American
Civil Liberties Union, the Citizen Lab at the University of
Toronto,
the
Electronic
Frontier
Foundation,
Freedom
House, the OpenNet Initiative, Reporters Without Borders,
and The Censorware Project.
Chapter 5 provides a series of annotated tables, graphs,
charts, and ﬁgures regarding the trends in types of Internet cen-
soring that have occurred in the recent past and the present.
There is also a discussion of the geographical differences in
trends, such as those found in the United States, as compared
Preface
xv

to those in China and Iran. Special topics in this chapter
include an overview of Internet usage and penetration rates by
region, a closer look at the Freedom on the Net 2012 ﬁndings,
tactics used by the highly censoring countries, and special forms
of legislation passed in the United States and elsewhere for deal-
ing with emerging trends in the Internet’s evolution as they
relate to critical privacy, security, trust, and censorship issues.
Chapter 6 provides an annotated bibliography of print and
nonprint resources for further research, including books dealing
with information freedom and censorship and the Internet’s
evolution shakers and movers, as well as short videos made in
recent times to capture special events and topics pertaining to
Internet censorship.
Chapter 7 summarizes some key events associated with the
Internet’s evolution, starting with its humble beginnings, moving
into its adolescent years, and culminating in its adult years—from
1990 through to the present.
The book closes with a glossary containing brief deﬁnitions
of key terms on Internet censorship, freedom ﬁghting, and
Internet evolution.
xvi
Preface

Internet Censorship


1
Background and History
You have no moral right to rule us, nor do you possess any
methods of enforcement that we have true reason to fear.
—John Perry Barlow, “A Declaration of the Independence
of Cyberspace,” at the World Economic Forum,
Davos, Switzerland, 1996
Internet Censorship Defined
Internet censorship, at a basic level, occurs when governments
try to control citizens’ online activities, restrict the free ﬂow of
information, and/or infringe on the rights of online users.
Stated simply, since about 2005, the battle over maintaining
Internet freedom versus censorship of perceived offensive on-
line content has been heating up worldwide. Each year, the
government attempts to control Internet content. Annually,
the means that governments use to control Internet content
are becoming more and more sophisticated. Furthermore, tac-
tics once used by repressive regimes are now being used by gov-
ernments deemed to be more prone to content openness and
Internet freedom. Some of these more aggressive means include
causing planned connection disruptions or giving monies to
3
Apple president John Sculley, ﬂanked by Apple co-founders Steve Jobs (left)
and Steve Wozniak (right), unveils the new Apple IIc to more than 3,000
dealers and software sector representatives in San Francisco, California on
April 24, 1984. (Bettmann/Corbis)

professional commentators to sway discussions in particular
directions in chat rooms. (Freedom House, 2013).
Censorship versus National Security, and Why There
Will Never Be Total Freedom of the Press or a Total
Lack of Press and Internet Censorship
In the developed nations, there has been an ongoing tug of war
over time between a government’s allowing for censorship in the
media (and more recently online) when concerns arise about
national security, and giving the press full freedoms to publish in
the media (and more recently online) what they deem ﬁt for public
consumption without recognizable censorship rules in place.
For example, in the First Amendment to the U.S. Consti-
tution, a number of freedoms are cited, most notably freedom
of the press. Clearly, in an effort for the founders of the United
States to distinguish their new government from that of England—
where there was a long history of censorship of the press in order
to defend national security—the First Amendment was often
referred to as the creation of a “fourth institution” outside the
government as an additional check on the three ofﬁcial branches—
the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary. The latter was
created to maintain checks and balances between those advo-
cating for more freedoms compared to those who saw threats
to national security, particularly in times of war—when this
freedom is often set aside for what government ofﬁcials say is
clearly a means of defending national security (Goodale, 1997).
Up until the Korean War and later (including the War in Iraq),
the media and press were perceived to be helpful in educating citi-
zens in the United States and elsewhere in understanding the basic
conﬂict issues between the warring nations. In recent years, how-
ever, scholars have raised a very basic question regarding what is
appropriate information sharing with “Joe public”; namely, how
much censorship is deemed to be appropriate in defending
national security while still permitting adequate freedoms to
reporters in support of the First Amendment (Ingle, 2007)?
4
Internet Censorship

Academic Doris Graber (2003), for example, noted that jus-
tifying press censorship can be especially difﬁcult, labeling it
“the high-stakes dilemma.” She went on to say that in one
sense, press freedom is particularly important in times of
national crisis like a war or a terrorist attack, but that the risks
to security can result when, say, there is a “leak” of information
that was intended to be strictly conﬁdential. Thus, restrictions
on what reporters can share with others have developed over
time, increasing with recent developments in technology, like
mobile phones and the Internet.
Accepting that technology has advanced world culture and
narrowed the gap between the haves and have-nots along the
access digital divide, Graber forcefully argues that in today’s
world, the reality is that there is someone—such as a reporter
or a hacker group or some business—who will go against the
moral grain, depart from established military protocols, and
share sensitive information either in print or over the Internet
for the whole world to see.
One such historic case making global news occurred in
March of 2003, when Geraldo Rivera allegedly engaged in
rogue reporting, thus endangering U.S. soldiers in Iraq.
Apparently, Rivera told his photographer to tilt his camera
downward in the sand so that he could draw a map of both
Iraqi and U.S. military movements (Plante, 2003). Sadly,
Rivera took the conﬁdential information he was privy to and
intentionally tried to transmit that information live to Fox
News in the United States, but unintentionally, he shared it
with the rest of the world because of technology advancements
at that time. U.S. government ofﬁcials took a hard line on
Rivera’s action, maintaining that what he did could have caused
great harm to the troops. He was escorted out of Iraq and
immediately lost contact with the 101st Airborne Division,
with whom he had been stationed in trust.
However, censorship was targeted not only at the press
during the Iraq war (or other recent wars), for U.S. troops
themselves have been under tight disclosure rules in the ﬁeld.
Background and History
5

Apparently, Internet “kill switches” (mechanisms used to shut
down or disable machinery, programs, or devices to, say, protect
data on a mobile device from being altered or stolen) were utilized
on U.S. military information networks in Iraq so that if there was
an attack on the forces there, or if there were a number of casu-
alties or some other newsworthy events, a senior military ofﬁcer
had the jurisdiction to literally “pull the plug” on the communica-
tions networks so that soldiers and reporters alike could not trans-
mit conﬁdential information outside of the zone. However,
military ofﬁcers realized that cell phones in the ﬁeld were more
difﬁcult to control, because the phones sent signals through local
Iraqi communication networks—which fell outside of the domain
of the kill switches (Wielawski, 2005). Imagine the horrors if the
very personal information about a dead soldier was shared with
the world before it was communicated with family members.
Adequate Information Release by Governments versus
Internet Censorship: WikiLeaks, Manning, and Snowden
The other side of the coin, of course, is acknowledging the
adequate amount of information that the U.S. government
actually allows to be disclosed to the public, at the time of war.
While information freedom ﬁghters (reporters, hackers, dissidents,
or others) tend to view any kind of censorship as evil, the U.S.
government has stated openly that it intends to be fair and reason-
able to reporters embedded with soldiers in the ﬁeld. Business
press releases are written ahead of the time that they are actually
transmitted to the public; an analogy exists in the battle zone.
In the Iraq War, as a case in point, a military ofﬁcer could
share with reporters planned attacks in any given region—but
it was stipulated conclusively that the information cannot be
released to the public until a stated time, such as after a said cri-
sis or battle had transpired. Sometimes, this directive can be
especially challenging, given increased access by many to the
Internet—including reporters in the ﬁeld. Consequently, rules
for censorship and disclosure that may have been constructed
6
Internet Censorship

within the past ﬁve years must be continually revised in the
United States and elsewhere to reﬂect emerging developments
in global military confrontations on land and through the
Internet (known nowadays as cyber wars). To be sure, censor-
ship both on land and online is a subject that whenever addressed
in any public debate will have clear supporters as well as clear
opponents (Ingle, 2007).
WikiLeaks and Information Freedom
Fighter Julian Assange
As the Internet continues to evolve and as military conﬂicts
continue to emerge in various parts of the world, the debate
between the freedom ﬁghters and the “appropriate censorship”
of harm-inducing highly secret information rages on. Over the
past seven years such a debate has continued regarding the con-
cerns over the leaking of secret U.S. military documents and the
role of the hacker activist group WikiLeaks. Julian Assange
founded this group back in 2006 to provide an outlet to cause
regime change and open information sharing to expose injus-
tice and abuses of power (Greenberg, 2010). The Web site
has published materials related to the Church of Scientology,
Guantanamo Bay, military strikes, and classiﬁed documents
around the world. The Web site is perhaps most famous for
the acquisition and publication of 251,000 American diplo-
matic cables that range from unclassiﬁed to secret documents
(Greenberg, 2010). A U.S. Army soldier named Bradley
Manning, who downloaded the materials while stationed in
Iraq, obtained this information. He then provided the materials
to WikiLeaks, who chose to release these materials in batches
over two years with the cooperation from major news outlets
like The New York Times and Der Spiegel (Harrell, 2010).
The release of these cables caused massive controversy and
embarrassment for the U.S. government, due to the sensitive
nature of the information. In fact, a distributed denial of service
(DDoS) attack (hack) was launched against the WikiLeaks
Background and History
7

Web site shortly after the ﬁrst release—taking it off line.
Subsequently, the companies that provided funding and infra-
structure for WikiLeaks, such as PayPal, pulled their support.
As a consequence, hacker cells worldwide began DDoS hack
attacks against the ﬁnancial service providers to punish them
for their actions. The controversy over these documents led
some in the United States to call for the arrest of Assange, and
even his execution in some cases (O’Brien, 2010).
But Julian Assange, forever the man seeking headlines globally
as an information freedom ﬁghter, was himself “on the lam” in
2012 and remains there in 2013. The WikiLeaks founder took
refuge in the Ecuadorian embassy in June 2012, to avoid extradi-
tion to Sweden, where he is wanted for questioning by authorities
about sexual assault allegations. His real fears, it seems, stem from
the fact that Assange thinks Sweden would extradite him to the
United States to face charges related to WikiLeak’s disclosure of
the huge treasure of the classiﬁed U.S. military and diplomatic
documents associated with Manning (Paramaribo, 2013).
But, it seems, while Assange remains on the run, his online
rants have now moved jurisdictions. Deciding that he would
run for a Senate seat in his homeland of Australia in
September 2013—but lost by 3,000+ primary votes—while still
being “holed up” at his place of refuge in Ecuador, Assange set
up a WikiLeaks party and released onto the Internet a video mak-
ing fun of Australian politicians. In response, Ecuadorian
president Rafael Correa chastised Assange, noting that as a matter
of courtesy, Ecuador would not bar Assange from exercising his
right to be a candidate in Australia, so long as he didn’t make
fun of Australian politicians or its people over the Internet
(Paramaribo, 2013).
Information Freedom Fighter U.S. Private Bradley
Manning
The case of U.S. soldier Bradley Manning illustrates the del-
icate relationship between national security during war and the
8
Internet Censorship

role of the Internet and hackers in overriding established rules
of information disclosure to the public. On day one of the trial,
which began in the United States on June 4, 2013, Private
Manning confessed to being the source for the vast archives of
secret military and diplomatic documents made public by
WikiLeaks. An ofﬁcial with the military argued on that day that
Manning systematically harvested hundreds of thousands of
classiﬁed documents and then dumped them onto the
Internet—into the hands of the enemy as well as Joe public—
material that he knew would put the lives of fellow soldiers at
risk. Manning’s defense lawyer told the judge that Private
Manning had, in fact, tried to ensure that the several hundred
thousand documents that he released would not cause harm;
he was, after all, selective about what he gave to WikiLeaks.
Manning’s motivation? Apparently, to make the world a better
place, his defense lawyer argued (Savage, 2013).
On day two of the trial, the link between hackers and the
release of conﬁdential information during war—and, in fact,
the biggest leak of classiﬁed information in U.S. history—
became even more explicit. Military prosecutors called to the
witness stand an admitted computer hacker named Adrian
Lamo, who had befriended Manning and then turned him over
to army investigators. Lamo, who at age 22 was charged at the
Manhattan Federal Court in 2004 with cracking into the inter-
nal computer network of The New York Times (see Schell and
Martin, 2004), said that Manning had contacted him online
in May 2010, from his base in Iraq, seeking guidance from
Lamo on encrypted online chats. Lamo said that in his view,
Manning saw him as a kindred “idealist” who believed in free-
dom of information and free speech. Manning apparently
wanted to show the American public the reality of war in
Afghanistan and Iraq. During these early days of the trial, the
prosecution said that there apparently was nothing on
Manning’s seized laptop that indicated he had a hatred of
America (Simpson, 2013).
Background and History
9

These disparate views at both ends of the continuum of the
freedom ﬁghter and the need for censorship and information
sharing underscore the oddity at the heart of the trial, which
was projected to last as long as three months. Early on in
Manning’s trial, the press underscored that if found guilty of
violating the Espionage Act and aiding the enemy, Manning
could serve a life sentence (Savage, 2013).
By mid-June 2013, prosecutors presented evidence that
Private Manning’s leaks compromised sensitive information in
a range of categories—including techniques for neutralizing
improvised explosives, the naming of an enemy target, and the
naming of criminal suspects, as well as troop movements.
Equally as interesting at this time was the argument made
by U.S. First Amendment lawyer James Goodale, author
of Fighting for the Press: The Inside Story of the Pentagon
Papers and Other Battles, that a Manning conviction on
any one of the eight espionage counts he was facing or on a
federal computer fraud charge would in many ways enable the
U.S.
government
to
charge
other
information-freedom-
ﬁghting civilians like WikiLeaks founder Assange (Dishneau,
2013).
By mid-August 2013, when Private Manning himself took
the stand, he began with an apology to the American people,
noting (Dishneau and Jelinkek, 2013, p. A14): “I’m sorry that
my actions hurt people. I’m sorry that it hurt the United
States.” While he admitted that he understood what he was
doing and the decisions that he made, he afﬁrmed that he did
not believe at the time that his actions would cause harm. In
his defense, an Army psychologist noted that Manning’s private
struggle with gender identity in a hostile workplace put incred-
ible pressure on the young solder. Consequently, Private
Manning’s gender identity disorder, along with narcissistic per-
sonality traits, his post-adolescent idealism, and his lack of
friends in Iraq, caused him to “reasonably conclude” that he
could change the world—positively—by leaking classiﬁed
information over the Internet.
10
Internet Censorship

Then on Wednesday, August 21, 2013, a military judge sen-
tenced Private First Class Bradley Manning to 35 years in
prison for providing more than 700,000 government ﬁles
to WikiLeaks—the longest sentence handed down in a case
involving a leak of U.S. government information released to
the public. Though Manning could have been sentenced for
up to 90 years in prison, he was spared. Despite the fact that
Manning could be eligible for parole in as few as eight years,
as he stood in the courtroom dazed, a handful of supporters in
the room labeled Manning as “a hero” in the war for informa-
tion freedom ﬁghting (Savage and Huetteman, 2013).
NSA Contractor Edward Snowden
On Sunday, June 9, 2013, a 29-year-old past undercover
CIA employee named Edward Snowden announced that he
was the main source of recent disclosures in the United States
about top secret National Security Agency (NSA) surveillance
programs that track phone and Internet messages around
the globe with the objective of thwarting terrorist threats.
Snowden, a tech specialist who was contracted for the NSA
and was also employed by the consulting ﬁrm Booz Allen
Hamilton, afﬁrmed to the press that he disclosed secret docu-
ments in The Washington Post and The Guardian because of
the unfairness of the systematic surveillance of innocent citizens
by the U.S. government, noting that President Barack Obama
failed to follow through on his pledges of transparency.
Fleeing the United States and taking refuge in Hong Kong,
Snowden said in June 2013 that allowing the U.S. government
to intimidate its people with threats of retaliation for revealing
wrongdoing is clearly contrary to the public interest. He pub-
licly announced that he would seek asylum from any country
that believed in free speech and was opposed to victimizing
global privacy (Blake, Gellman, and Miller, 2013).
Within 24 hours of Snowden’s public confession, Dianne
Feinstein of California, who heads the Senate Intelligence
Background and History
11

Committee and supports the notion of Internet surveillance,
potentially including phone numbers, email messages, images,
video, and online communications transmitted through U.S.
providers, accused Snowden of committing an “act of treason,”
positing that he should be prosecuted accordingly—amidst
German- and European-expressed concerns about the U.S.
government’s surveillance practice. At this point, Snowden told
the media that he may seek asylum in Iceland, known for its
strong free-speech protections and having a penchant for pro-
viding safe headquarters for the outspoken and the outcast.
Furthermore, privacy rights advocates argued vehemently that
President Obama had gone too far, while The American Civil
Liberties Union and the Yale Law School immediately ﬁled
legal action to force a secret U.S. court to make a public disclo-
sure of its justiﬁcation for the scope of the surveillance, calling
the programs “shockingly broad” (Jakes, 2013).
On June 11, 2013, bothered by allegations that Britain col-
luded with the U.S. intelligence agencies to collect data on its
citizens, the British government stayed silent on the suggestion
that it had been given information from the U.S. surveillance
program called Prism that was collected on foreigners abroad
from high-tech companies like Google, Facebook, Microsoft,
Apple, and Yahoo! Meanwhile, the Hong Kong government,
acknowledging that Snowden was staying in a hotel safely
within their jurisdiction, said that his case would be handled
in accordance with the laws of Hong Kong—which meant that
Edward Snowden would probably be able to delay extradition
to the United States to face some serious charges but not avoid
it altogether (New York Times Service, 2013).
Then, on Sunday, June 23, 2013, a global cat-and-mouse
game involving Snowden and the U.S. authorities ensued, as
the latter tried to catch “the leaker” before he reached what
many thought would be his next safe haven: Ecuador. It was
on this day that Snowden unexpectedly left Hong Kong and
took a ﬂight to Moscow (Barrett and Chen, 2013). And on
12
Internet Censorship

July 1, 2013, Ecuadorian president Rafael Correa said that
even if Snowden wanted to seek asylum in Ecuador, he was
under the care of the Russian authorities, admitting that the
fugitive could not leave the Russian airport without consent of
the Russian government (Weissenstein, 2013). By July 2,
2013, Russian president Vladimir Putin said that “if Snowden
wanted to go elsewhere, and that country wanted him, then
maybe Snowden could eventually leave—but only on the con-
dition that he must cease his work at inﬂicting damage to our
American partners, as strange as it may sound from my lips”
(Roth and Barry, 2013, A3).
On August 13, 2013, Edward Snowden thanked the Russian
government after being granted temporary asylum for one year.
He was able to work in Russia during this time period and was
safely out of the reach of U.S. prosecutors—at least for a year.
Immediately, U.S. lawmakers called for some form of tough
retaliation against Russia, perhaps a boycotting of the Winter
Olympic Games to be held in Sochi. Meanwhile, the politicians
in the United States were still hoping to put Snowden in prison
for espionage (Myers and Kramer, 2013).
But the story does not end here. By October 8, 2013,
the Snowden connection had brought into the fray new
government players. On this day, the president of Brazil
accused Canada of cyber war, after allegations that Canadian
hackers hired by their government tried to steal state secrets
from the South American country’s mining and energy minis-
try in 2012—a disclosure that threatens to create a lasting rift
between Canada and Brazil, now the world’s sixth-largest
economy and a crucial bilateral partner for Canada.
Here’s the interesting likely link between the latter case and
Snowden. Journalist Glenn Greenwald is an American journal-
ist based in Brazil. During the summer and fall of 2013, he
publicized over the Internet and through media-leaked docu-
ments the extent of the electronic eavesdropping campaign
under the code name Prism that is being conducted by the
Background and History
13

U.S. NSA. Apparently, the bulk of top secret documents given
to this journalist and ﬁlmmaker Laura Poitras in Hong King
was provided by Edward Snowden.
Now comes “the rub.” One of the NSA’s closest allies is
Canada’s electronic eavesdropping agency, known as Com-
munications Security Establishment Canada (CSEC)—which
has remained relatively unscathed in terms of international
scandals to this point. Then on October 6, 2013, Brazil’s top
news program Fantastico, in partnership with Greenwald,
featured on their show CSEC-stamped documents from
June 2012 (likely leaked by Snowden?), suggesting that
Canadian government hackers used a program called Olympia
to hack into smart phones and computers afﬁliated with staff
at Brazil’s Ministry of Mines and Energy to steal proprietary
information. As a result, Brazil ofﬁcials said, not surprisingly,
that they are proposing new laws aimed at more state control
of resources. This case links the critical elements of security,
trust, privacy, and censorship in a networked world (Nolen,
Freeze, and Chase, 2013).
What the Internet Is as Compared to an Intranet
Generally speaking, an internet (lower case) is a network
connecting computer systems. “The Internet” that we are all
familiar with today dates back to 1969, when it was pioneered
in the United States. Then, the Internet was a high-speed net-
work built by the U.S. Department of Defense as a digital
communications experiment that linked hundreds of defense
contractors, universities, and research laboratories. This power-
ful computer network belonging to the U.S. Advanced
Research Projects Agency, or ARPA, allowed for highly trained
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) researchers in dispersed locations to
transmit and exchange critical information with incredible
speed. (AI is a branch of computer science; AI experts have
been known for making computers behave as if they were
human beings, by modeling computers on human thoughts.
14
Internet Censorship

AI is also related to the solving of complex problems using
computers.)
To keep the United States and its citizens physically safe,
especially in times of crisis, government agents working in iso-
lated pockets could continue to transmit critical information
over the ARPAnet rather than to have agents physically move
from one geographic location to another to have an informa-
tion exchange. This “networked” tribe arrangement that was
developed back then continues to exist in the more sophisti-
cated online world today, allowing people to connect remotely.
Nowadays, the Internet refers to a collection of networks
connected by routers. The Internet is the largest network
in the world and comprises backbone networks such as
MILNET, mid-level networks, and stub networks (Schell and
Martin, 2006). Though the pioneering ARPAnet was dedicated
to the U.S. military and selected contractors and universities
partaking in defense research, without question, the ARPAnet
hugely advanced the emerging ﬁeld of information technology
(IT) (Holt and Schell, 2013).
No single factor produced the powerful Internet that
society enjoys today. Groundbreaking events in hardware (the
mechanical parts composing the computer and computer net-
works) and in software (the programming language running
the network and doing the necessary computations) were neces-
sary for progress on this front to be made.
As noted, right from the beginning, the Internet has been
designed to be a huge network interconnecting many smaller
groups of linked computers. The Internet never had a physical
or tangible entry, such as a door on a house that provides entry
to the rest of the building. Even in 1969, the Internet was
designed to be a decentralized, self-maintaining group of
redundant links between computers and computer networks.
The beauty of the Internet even at its infancy was that it was
able to send data rapidly without human intervention and with
the unique capability to reroute data if one or more links were
damaged or unavailable. Therefore, from a military defense
Background and History
15

perspective, even if a portion of the network were to be
destroyed during a war or through an act of terrorism, with a
redundant system, critical data could still reach its intended
destination (Holt and Schell, 2013).
By design, data travel along networks not as “whole” infor-
mation or messages but as very small information packets.
Even in ARPAnet’s early days, the Internet used packet-
switching protocols to allow messages to be subdivided into
smaller packets of information. These packets could be sent
rather independently to the required destination and be auto-
matically reassembled by the destination computer. Although
packets containing information for a larger message often travel
along the same path to get to the ﬁnal destination, some of
them could be rerouted along a different path if one or more
routers along the route became overloaded. In addition, com-
puters can communicate with one another through the use of
a common communication protocol known as the Internet
protocol (IP). All applications utilized on the Internet are
designed to make use of this protocol and have been since the
mid-1960s (Holt and Schell, 2013).
Large research-intensive universities were the early adopters
of the Internet, but soon technical wizards with an entrepre-
neurial spirit realized that online advertising, commercial soft-
ware applications, and vastly marketable hardware could
generate services and tools desired by the general public. This
was made manifest though the emergence of the World Wide
Web. Though the term Web is often used by those in main-
stream society to signify the Internet, the World Wide Web
(WWW) is just one of the applications using the Internet as a
base infrastructure (Schell and Martin, 2006). The www proto-
col became immensely popular after Tim Berners-Lee devel-
oped the HTTP, or hypertext transfer protocol, in the early
1990s, allowing users to access and link information through
a simple and intuitive user interface known as the Internet
browser.
16
Internet Censorship

Readers may often hear about intranets, which should not be
confused with an internet. By deﬁnition, an information sys-
tem internal to an organization or institution that is con-
structed with Web-based technology is known as an intranet.
The primary usage of an intranet is to keep employees informed
about upcoming events; to post online company policies and
procedures, including proper online etiquette; and to distribute
software or application updates to employees (Holt and Schell,
2013).
Often termed a portal, intranets were initially commonly
found in large ﬁrms having in excess of 15,000 employees, so that
employees could access the intranet Web site using a browser.
(Technically speaking, a browser interprets HTML—also known
as hypertext markup language—the programming language used
to code Web pages into words and graphics so that online users
can view the pages in the intended layout and rendering.) With
improved and more affordable intranet software designed by the
Microsoft Corporation and other ﬁrms since about 2005, intra-
nets are nowadays found in small- and medium-sized companies
as an effective, cost-saving means of communicating online with
employees. Moreover, intranets are typically run on a private local
area network (LAN) instead of on public servers.
The Internet’s Colorful History: Internet Development,
Hacking Exploits, and (Eventually) Concerns about
Internet Censorship
The Internet’s Humble Beginnings: The 1940s through
the 1960s
The Internet that we know and admire today started from
very humble beginnings and had little to do with issues sur-
rounding censorship. In the late 1940s and 1950s, computers
were made with about 10,000 vacuum tubes, and they occu-
pied over 93 square meters of space. Given this reality, com-
puters back then were prone to overheating and exploding.
Background and History
17

Moreover, the vacuum tubes could leak, the metal-emitting
electrons in the vacuum tubes burned out, and the thousands
of vacuum tubes required huge amounts of energy to function.
As a result of signiﬁcant improvements in computer hard-
ware technology—especially with the development of transistors
by John Bardeen and Walter Brattain in 1947 and 1948—and
with the development of integrated circuits by Jack Kilby and
Robert Noyce in 1958 and 1959—many of the problems with
vacuum tube technology were resolved and led the way to the
development of smaller computers with greater power. With
the development of integrated circuits, instead of making
transistors one by one, several transistors could be made at the
same time and on the same piece of semiconductor. Since
the 1960s, the number of transistors per unit area has been
doubling about every one-and-a-half years—thus increasing
computing power signiﬁcantly. This huge progress in circuit
fabrication is called Moore’s law, named after Gordon Moore,
a pioneer in the integrated circuit ﬁeld and the founder of the
Intel Corporation (Schell, 2007).
Back in the 1960s, the question of how to hook up and share
the data between computers remained. The revolutionary
packet-switching technique invented by Leonard Kleinrock
gained popularity among the increasing number of computer
users, and Paul Baran at the Rand Institute began researching
how to use packet switching for secure voice over military net-
works. Another critical event occurred in 1969, when Dennis
Ritchie and Ken Thompson developed the computer software
standard operating system known as UNIX. Back then—as it
is now—UNIX was considered by IT folks to be a thing of
beauty, for its standard user and programming interfaces
advanced computing, word processing, and networking.
The Internet’s Adolescent Years: The 1970s and 1980s
Back in 1970—when the civil rights and women’s rights
movements were in full steam in the United States—only an
18
Internet Censorship

estimated 100,000 computers were in use there, and only a few
of them were “networked.” Most were found in large compa-
nies,
government
ofﬁces,
or research-driven
universities.
Unlike today, when one can do a lot with a tablet, computer
users then had to keypunch data cards, carefully carry them in
boxes to maintain the data card order, and then dump them
into the computer for processing. In 1971, Ray Tomlinson,
one of the forefathers of the Internet, who worked on
ARPAnet, gave to society one of the greatest online communi-
cations gifts in Internet history: email. He also chose the @
symbol for email—and this was exciting for the few “con-
nected” netizens (citizens on the Internet). In the Internet’s
adolescent years, however, there was little talk, if any, about
the perils of Internet censorship. Most media headlines focused
more on the development of the Internet and on the early
exploits by hackers.
In
1972,
the
National
Center
for
Supercomputing
Applications created the telnet application for remote login,
making it easier for users to log into a remote machine. This
same year, David Boggs and Robert Metcalfe invented
Ethernet at the Xerox Corporation in California, making it pos-
sible to connect computers in a LAN. In 1973, the ﬁle transfer
protocol (or FTP) was developed, simplifying the transfer of
information between networked machines. Also in this time
frame, American computer hardware specialists still believed
that the bigger the computer, the more powerful it would be.
But Canadian mathematician Mers Kutt had an innovative
thought that went against the tide; he argued that smaller is bet-
ter! In 1973, he founded Micro Computer Machines, releasing
onto the North American market the world’s ﬁrst personal
computer (PC). Holding only 8 kilobytes of memory, this pio-
neering PC cost $5,000 and got its power from a small chip
rather than from vacuum tubes (Schell, 2007).
In 1975, Americans Steve Jobs, Ronald Wayne, and Steve
Wozniak founded the Apple computer company, using the
simplistic and user-friendly BASIC computer language in their
Background and History
19

machines—and setting the footprint for the soon-to-blossom
home use computer market. Also in 1975, Americans Bill
Gates and Paul Allen founded the Microsoft Corporation, pro-
ducing innovative software products that would quickly capital-
ize a global market. A year later, secure transactions using the
Internet had their roots planted when Whitﬁeld Difﬁe and
Martin Hellman created the Difﬁe-Hellman public key algo-
rithms, used in many secure protocols on the Internet (Schell,
2007). (An algorithm is a set of rules and procedures for solving
a mathematical or logic problem, much like a cookbook assists
cooks in solving meal preparation problems; thus, a computer
program is actually an elaborate algorithm.)
Though many inventions in the 1970s pushed the Internet
into its adolescent years, what was still missing in the virtual
world was a networking “social club.” To this end, in 1978,
two men from Chicago—Randy Suess and Ward Christensen—
created the ﬁrst computer bulletin board system, serving as the
forerunner to Internet chat rooms. Also by the end of the
1970s, the transmission control protocol (TCP) was split into
the TCP and IP.
The start of the 1980s marked the beginning of the afford-
able PC era. IBM marketed their stand-alone PC, and the
Commodore 64 computer (known to many computer hackers
as “the Commie 64”) was released for public consumption.
Also, the TRS-80 computer was released at this time—when
fewer than 300 computers were linked to the Internet!
In 1982, California IT pioneers Scott McNealy, Bill Joy,
Andy Bechtolsheim, and Vinod Khosla started the Sun
Microsystems company, based on the assumption that UNIX
running on relatively inexpensive hardware would be a grand
solution for a wide range of applications. The simple mail trans-
fer protocol was published—which relates to how email is
transmitted between host computers and users. In 1983, the
Telnet protocol was published, allowing individuals familiar
with UNIX to log onto other computers on the Internet
(Schell, 2007).
20
Internet Censorship

In 1984, computer hacker Eric Corley (with the online
moniker Emmanuel Goldstein) started the still hugely popular
2600: The Hacker Quarterly (an exciting medium for hackers
interested in technical and political issues in the virtual world).
Also, Fred Cohen introduced the term computer virus into the
mainstream to indicate a cyberspace vandal that could corrupt
or erase information stored on computers.
In 1985, the ﬁrst Web site domain name was registered and
assigned (known as www.Symbolics.com). Also, the Free
Software Foundation (FSF) was started by Richard Stallman;
then and now, FSF members—strong advocates for infor-
mation freedom—have been committed to giving computer
users permission to use, study, copy, change, and redistribute
computer programs to promote the development of free
software. In 1985, the term hacker was introduced into the U.S.
mainstream to indicate a tech-savvy individual who enjoyed
learning the details of computer systems and how to stretch their
capabilities; there was no negative or criminal meaning attached
to the term hacker at this time. One year later, the term criminal
hacker was alluded to in the British press, when Robert
Schifreen and Steven Gold broke into a text information retrieval
system operated by BT Prestel and left a message for his Royal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh on his network mailbox; from
that time onward, reporters have latched on to the negative
connotation (Schell, 2007).
In 1986, U.S. Congress passed the controversial Computer
Fraud and Abuse Act, meant to prevent fraud and associated
criminal activities aimed at or completed with computers. In
1998, the world ﬁrst realized the kind of damage that Internet
worms could cause when a U.S. graduate student by the name
of Robert Morris Jr. accidentally unleashed onto the Internet
a worm that he developed while studying at Cornell
University; this malware later became known as “the Morris
worm.” In 1988, largely as a response to the Morris worm,
the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) and the
CERT Coordination Center were created at Carnegie Mellon
Background and History
21

University, with the function of coordinating communications
among homeland security experts during emergencies. In
1988, Kevin Mitnick, a famous U.S. hacker, was imprisoned
and then a number of times afterward for his hacking exploits
into various business networks. In 1989, Herbert Zinn
was the ﬁrst minor to be convicted for violating the U.S.
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, after he cracked the
network at American Telephone and Telegraph and that of the
U.S. Department of Defense, destroying ﬁles estimated to be
worth about $175,000 (Schell, 2007).
The Internet’s Adult Years: 1990 to the Present
1990 to 1999
The period from 1990 through 1999 was marked by
Internet adult-like issues such as a recognizable increase in the
variety and damages caused by cybercrimes, threats to Internet
freedoms and free speech, and the censorship of content
appearing on Web sites. Indeed, the year 1990 was a very sig-
niﬁcant one in terms of the Internet’s reaching adulthood, pri-
marily because of its development on a worldwide scale—and
because concerns began to emerge globally not only about vari-
ous cybercrimes but about threats to freedom on the Internet
and the expression of free speech.
On the technical side, in 1990 Tim Berners-Lee and Robert
Cailliau developed the protocols that became the World Wide
Web, and in the early 1990s, the Internet growth on a “home-
owner” scale could be attributed to the fact that an increased
number of tech-savvy individuals could afford to buy PCs sim-
ilar in power and storage to those of the clunky and easily over-
heated computer systems of the 1980s. The bad news for home
PC owners was that the software was still quite expensive, for
the products sold by Microsoft to businesses and government
ofﬁces tended to be beyond the price point of most homeown-
ers in the United States (Schell, 2007).
22
Internet Censorship

By 1993, more than 1 million computers were linked to the
Internet. In 1994, two Stanford University students named
David Filo and Jerry Yang created the now-popular search engine
Yahoo!—meaning “Yet Another Hierarchical Ofﬁcious Oracle.”
One year later, political activism using the Internet—known as
hacktivism—became real to those in mainstream American soci-
ety after hacktivists squashed the U.S. government’s highly con-
troversial Clipper proposal, which would have placed strong
encryption (the technical process of scrambling information into
something unintelligible) under the government’s control.
In 1995, Jeffrey Bezos launched the ﬁrst online bookstore—
the now incredibly successful and more broadly based elec-
tronic online store named Amazon. This same year, Microsoft
released its Windows 95 software product—making it more in
the affordable range for home PC owners (Schell, 2007).
In 1996, the World Wide Web had grown to 16 million
hosts, and in this year, the National Information Infra-
structure Protection Act was enacted in the United States,
amending the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986,
which enhanced the powers of the state. In 1997, ARIN, a
for-proﬁt organization, began to assign IP address space for
North America, South America, sub-Saharan Africa, and the
Caribbean. In 1998, many entrepreneurs launched Internet
service providers (ISPs) to sell or give online access to many
around the world—a business endeavor that has created some
of the world’s wealthiest individuals. Also in 1998, the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act was passed in the United States as
a means of coping with emerging digital technologies and their
unlawful disabling or bypass by tech-savvy individuals (Schell,
2007).
The year 1998 was important from a censorship point of
view as well, for a number of Web sites were developed in the
ﬁght against Internet censorship. Hatewatch members moni-
tored the activities of groups advocating “hate speech” on the
Internet in the United States and England (arguing that the
Background and History
23

best means to control bigotry was to expose it), and the Citizens
Internet Empowerment Coalition, owned by U.S. Internet
publishers, online users, and Internet service providers, fought
for—as the CIEC Web site suggests—“the future of the First
Amendment and the future of free expression in the
Information age.” Furthermore, EPIC, or the Electronic
Privacy Information Centre, a large U.S.-based public interest
research centre, was formed to have the public become attentive
to emerging civil liberties related to new technologies.
On the other side of the coin, the Web site linked to the
content-censoring Internet Watch Foundation, belonging to
an industry-led group, addressed the problems of what they
deemed to be “illegal, harmful” material on the Internet, espe-
cially that involving child pornography (Barkham, 1999).
In 1999, the Melissa virus was created by David Smith and
released on the Internet, infecting millions of computer systems
in the United States and Europe and is said to have caused
$80 million in damages to computers worldwide. Also, the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 was passed in the United
States to provide limited privacy protection against the sale of
individuals’ private ﬁnancial information.
In April 1999, Malaysia, in a move that promoted Internet
censorship, made front-page headlines after its government passed
the controversial Communications and Multimedia Act, believed
to be the ﬁrst law in the world attempting to impose blanket con-
trol over the broadcasting, IT, and telecommunications indus-
tries. In short, this law regulated any information that could be
seen on television screens or computer screens. Opponents feared
that the new law would restrict freedom of speech, for any person
providing offensive or false material in these media could be put
behind prison bars for up to a year (Harrison, 1999).
2000 to 2009
In the 2000 to 2009 period, as more home users were able to
purchase PCs, words like computer “viruses” and “worms”
24
Internet Censorship

became familiar to citizens connected to the Internet. Also neti-
zens began to realize that not only were females active online
but they had the advanced capabilities to create viruses from
computer languages like C sharp. And by 2005, intense fears
of Internet censorship surfaced when Chinese authorities
started closing over 10,000 Internet cafes to safeguard their citi-
zens from viewing material deemed to be offensive or harmful.
By 2009, not only was cyber warfare a virtual world reality, but
U.S. president Obama himself faced censorship when he visited
Shanghai to talk to students about free speech and the costs of
censoring the Internet.
In 2000, the virtual world became obsessed with data losses
feared to result from Y2K computer glitches—which, in the
end, were proved foundationless. Also in this year, Canada’s
“Maﬁaboy,” Michael Calce, became a familiar hacker family
word in North America after he admitted to exploiting
Internet servers on the high-proﬁle Web sites of Amazon,
eBay, and Yahoo!, causing legitimate online purchasers to be
unable to access these sites to complete their transactions—
and causing tons of harm to the businesses.
In 2000, Outcast, a radical Internet magazine, seen as a
threat to freedom of speech on the Internet, was declared the
ﬁrst victim of a libel case. Then, Outcast, a “queer affairs”
online publication, had its Web site closed by its ISP
(Netbeneﬁt) after a complaint about inappropriate material
posted there, although the ISP later remarked that they had
closed the Web site with great reluctance. A week earlier,
Demon Internet, a British ISP, had agreed to pay hefty dam-
ages and legal costs to Laurence Godfrey, a physicist who
claimed that he had been defamed by two anonymous messages
posted on the Web site. Consequently, ISPs in the United
Kingdom and elsewhere became concerned about the opera-
tional implications of these two cases. If the latter case had
not been settled out of court, it could have set a legal precedent
about whether ISPs are subject to the same libel laws as other
media (Wells, 2000).
Background and History
25

In 2001, computer viruses and worms virtually crawled into
the mainstream news, because so many home, ofﬁce, and
government agency computers and networks were invaded.
The Code Red worm compromised several hundred thousand
computer systems worldwide in less than 14 hours, overloading
the Internet’s capacity and costing an estimated $2.6 billion in
damages. Also, a Los Angeles Times article spread fears about an
imminent cyber apocalypse after mal-inclined hackers attacked
a computer system controlling the distribution of electricity in
California’s power grid—a cyberattack that was said to origi-
nate in China’s Guangdong province and routed through
China Telecom.
The year 2001 also brought global controversies on the
Internet censorship front. Many theorists argued that while
one of the greatest assets of the Internet is that it provides an
open forum for users anywhere in the world to state their views,
supposedly free from censorship by governments, businesses, or
institutions, the Internet is, nevertheless, a freedom forum that
should not be abused by some to serve a particular purpose that
poses harm to others. Such were the arguments that arose fol-
lowing the decision of a federal appeals court in San Francisco
that upheld the right of anti-abortion groups to publish online
what many netizens believed was a “hit list” of physicians per-
forming abortions. These theorists argued that while the ﬁrst
amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees free speech,
it does not mean that online users can say anything without
reference to the consequences. The case in question involved
3 of 7 doctors murdered in the previous 10 years who were
cited on the “hit list,” along with 17 attempted murders of doc-
tors who were known to terminate unwanted pregnancies.
Many reporters did not support the actions of the online
“pro-lifers” who published the list, because their actions could
potentially lead to the deaths of fellow humans. They con-
cluded that while the U.S. Constitution does give “the right
to bear arms,” there appears to be too much emphasis on
26
Internet Censorship

“online freedom to” and not enough emphasis on “online free-
dom from” (Keegan, 2001).
In 2002, female cyber criminals started making media head-
lines; for example, a 17-year-old female hacker from Belgium,
known by the online moniker Gigabyte, claimed to have writ-
ten the ﬁrst-ever virus in the programming language C# (pro-
nounced “C sharp”).
The year 2002 was important regarding another issue regard-
ing Internet freedom of expression and censorship. Google took
on Chinese authorities after they tried to limit media coverage
of a horrible disaster: the mass poisoning of more than 200 stu-
dents and workers in Nanjing, China. Chinese authorities
attempted to put ﬁlters on online posts related to the disaster
for about 10 days, and Google fought back by allowing the
posts—a move perceived worldwide as a “defeat” for Internet
censors. However, this was only a partial victory for Google
and the online freedom ﬁghters, for if Chinese online users
attempted to search for anything related to “Falun Gong” or
“Falun Dafa”—the names for the spiritual sect that Chinese
authorities banned in 1999—the Google search would come
back empty (Gittings, 2002).
In 2003, stronger legal measures were passed in the United
States as a means of combating online child pornography.
President George W. Bush passed the PROTECT (Pros-
ecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to End the Exploitation of
Children Today) Act of 2003, which implemented the AMBER
alert communication system for kidnapped children and rede-
ﬁned child pornography to include images of children engaging
in sexually explicit conduct with adults, as well as computer-
generated images indistinguishable from those of real children en-
gaging in such acts.
Also
in
2003,
the
U.S.
government,
through
the
Department of Homeland Security, advanced steps to tighten
security in cyberspace, when it strengthened the role of the
U.S. Computer Emergency Response Team, or U.S.-CERT.
Background and History
27

In 2003, the U.S. Senate passed the CAN-SPAM Act to regu-
late interstate commerce, which placed limitations and penal-
ties on the transmission of spam (deﬁned as junk mail,
delivered to online users without their permission).
Elsewhere around the globe, Internet “control” by govern-
ment authorities continued to be called into question—even
in jurisdictions believed to be favorable to Internet freedom
ﬁghters. For example, on September 12, 2003, British minis-
ters moved forward with plans to ensure that communications
companies—including ISPs—retained records of every tele-
phone, Internet, and email user—despite strong opposition
from industry and civil liberties groups. The data to be retained
included the names and addresses of subscribers, calls made and
received, Web sites visited, sources and destinations of emails,
and mobile phone data—even information determining the
whereabouts of individuals. U.K. government ofﬁcials argued
that because the “voluntary” code of practice had been delayed
for about 18 months owing to opposition from the communi-
cations industry, it felt compelled to push forward with tough
legislation. The Home Ofﬁce’s new list of public bodies given
access to the data included those with serious crime-ﬁghting
roles, such as the U.K. Atomic Energy Constabulary, the
Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, the Maritime and
Coastguard Agency, the Financial Services Authority, the
Police Ombudsmen in Northern Ireland, and the Police
Ombudsmen in Northern Ireland. (Millar, 2003).
In 2004, some large U.S. companies like the Recording
Industry Association of America began legally pursuing citizens
for swapping songs using the Internet without paying royalties
to the artists; more worms like MyDoom were released on the
Internet, causing losses estimated to be about $2 billion world-
wide. In 2004, the Computer Industry Almanac estimated that
the worldwide number of Internet users topped 1 billion, with
the United States alone accounting for about 185 million
online users (Schell, 2007).
28
Internet Censorship

In late 2004 and early 2005, fears of Internet censorship
began to appear when Chinese authorities, apparently worried
about online content perceived by them to be “immoral” or
“violent” in nature, closed more than 12,000 Internet cafes to
prevent their citizens from viewing the offensive material. Also
in 2005, a Chinese entrepreneur named Robin Li took on the
Western value search engine businesses like Google and built
a search engine named Baidu.com, which retained the strong
censorship values of Chinese authorities in a jurisdiction that
clearly allows for a fresh mix of capitalist economics with
authoritarian communist politics. In just four years, Li grew
his market share to such a degree that his site rapidly overtook
Google and Yahoo! as the leading Chinese search engine.
Baidu’s Web site was navigated by 90 million online users daily
from a Chinese online population of 100 million (Watts,
2005).
In 2005, under pressure from U.S. citizens, the FBI aban-
doned its custom-built and highly controversial Internet sur-
veillance technology named Carnivore, designed to read email
and online communications of suspected terrorists and cyber
terrorists. The year also saw the breakout of cyber wars (an
information war launched in cyberspace; see also Schell and
Martin, 2006).
For example, in March 2005, a cyber war started between
Indonesia and Malaysia over a dispute regarding the Ambalat
oil ﬁelds in the Sulawesi Sea. Ofﬁcials in Kuala Lumpur were
apparently upset over an intrusion into its waters by an
Indonesian naval vessel after Indonesian president Yudhoyono
ordered the military to present itself in the Sulawesi Sea juris-
diction under dispute. Just 24 hours later, the Web site of
Universiti Sains Malaysia was under cyberattack and plagued
with aggressive anti-Malaysian messages having an Indonesian
twist. Two days after this cyberattack, documents seized from
members of the Lashkar-e-Toiba terrorist group killed in an
encounter with Indian police indicated that they had planned
Background and History
29

a suicide hack attack on the network of companies producing
software and computer chip design outlets in the Karnail
Singh area of the Indian city of Bangalore—which houses
high-proﬁle companies like Intel, Texas Instruments, and
IBM. Their motive was to cyberattack these companies to hin-
der the economic engine of India. The companies said that they
have not only tight entry requirements in these highly secure
environments but also well-designed disaster recovery plans in
the event of such an attack (Schell, 2007).
The year 2006 began with headlines talking about the emer-
gence of botnets—large numbers of computer programs com-
mandeered by hackers and marshaled for personal gain.
Botnets now—just as back then—are often used to overwhelm
Web sites with streams of data by feeding off vulnerabilities in
computers running Microsoft Windows operating systems.
Machines vulnerable are generally those whose owners did not
install security ﬁxes or patches for the vulnerabilities, and “zom-
bie” machine owners are typically unaware that malicious pro-
grams have been installed on their computers and that they
are being “owned,” or controlled by crackers in a remote fash-
ion (Schell, 2007).
By year-end 2006, there were more Internet censorship sto-
ries. Iran shut down citizens’ access to some of the world’s most
popular Web sites, like Amazon, YouTube, Wikipedia, and
The New York Times. ISPs followed the Iranian government’s
instructions to ﬁlter these sites. The clampdown was demanded
by senior judiciary ofﬁcials in a campaign to impede “cor-
rupting” foreign ﬁlms and music and to purge Iran of
Western cultural inﬂuences. Attempts by online users to open
the ﬁltered Web sites were met with a page, “The requested
page is forbidden.” In 2006, Iran was among 13 countries
branded “enemies of the Internet” by Reporters Without
Borders, citing state-sanctioned blocking of Web sites and the
widespread intimidation of and imprisonment of bloggers by
government authorities (Tait, 2013).
30
Internet Censorship

In September 2007, reports of Internet censorship surfaced
in other parts of the globe. The Burmese junta tried to shut
down Internet and telephone links to the outside world after a
stream of blogs and mobile phone videos captured dramatic
scenes on the streets of Burma. Immediately, cyber cafes were
closed by the authorities, and mobile phones were discon-
nected. Less than 1 percent of the Burmese population had
access to the Internet then, and only 25,000 people had email
addresses, but some clever citizens capitalized on loopholes by
evading the ofﬁcial ﬁrewalls and sought access to “connected
and relatively open” embassy, foreign business, or non-
governmental organization networks where Internet access was
not so controlled (Pallister, 2013).
In June 2006, Google continued a freedom ﬁghter online bat-
tle with China, after Sergey Brin, cofounder of the company, said
that company ofﬁcials admitted compromising company princi-
ples by accepting the censorship policies of China, though only
after Chinese authorities had blocked the company’s service.
Brin noted that though the company had compromised their
principles, they could, by complying with the rules, provide
needed information to Chinese netizens—thus making a positive
difference by narrowing the digital divide between the haves and
the have-nots. Part of the routine agreed to by Google was to
omit politically sensitive information that could be retrieved
during searches, such as details of the June 1989 suppression of
political unrest in Tiananmen Square (Associated Press, 2006).
In May 2007, an attempt to force Google to stop censoring
search results of users in repressive countries was rejected by
its shareholders. A proposal submitted to the shareholders
called for Google to disclose to users when their search results
were being censored and to inform users about data that was
being retained. Amnesty, a human rights group that had criti-
cized Google a year earlier for bowing to pressure from the
Chinese government to censor search results, supported this
measure. The proposal also suggested that action should be
Background and History
31

taken against censorship in Belarus, Burma, Cuba, Egypt, Iran,
North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, and Vietnam—other countries where the govern-
ments restrict content on the Internet (Wearden, 2013).
In 2008, the world heard loudly and clearly about
Anonymous, a nebulous collection of hacker cells and splinter
groups that seemed to coordinate their hacktivistic efforts with
hackers around the globe. The operations commonly used in
hacktivism include browsing the Internet for information, con-
structing Web sites and posting information of a political
nature on them, and using the Internet to discuss controversial
issues, form coalitions, and plan and coordinate activities
(Schell and Martin, 2006).
One particular media-worthy occasion saw Anonymous tar-
geting the Church of Scientology. Besides attacking the
church’s servers, Anonymous arranged for the church’s ofﬁces
to be surrounded by masked protestors and for a large number
of pizzas to appear on the church’s doorstep. Apparently, the
church’s secretive, controlling nature ran counter to the hacker
collective’s freedom ﬁghter views and values. Of signiﬁcance to
this chapter, the work of Anonymous seems to sit on the some-
what odd Venn diagram overlap of hacking and online freedom
ﬁghting (Tossell, 2012).
By 2008, with the Internet’s amazing potential and powers,
cyber warfare had become a reality. Georgia and Russia brieﬂy
went to war online when DDoS attacks brought down
Georgian Web sites and caused considerable economic damage.
Even to this day, it is not clear who the perpetrator of the
cyberattacks actually was; in the media at that time, however,
Russia was the obvious target. These attacks have been analyzed
by IT experts, and it seems that they likely came from around
the world, not just from Russian hackers. Thus, it seems that
rather than acting alone, a loose coalition of third-party actors
(not unlike Anonymous)—and likely a diaspora—achieved
Russia’s ends of causing harm to Georgia. A key point that is
becoming increasingly clear globally is that the line between a
32
Internet Censorship

digital war and a land-based war is difﬁcult to differentiate.
Moreover, instead of acting directly, governments are likely hir-
ing talented hackers from within or outside their jurisdictions
to produce results that can build extreme chaos and unpredict-
ability in targeted nations or businesses (Tossell, 2012).
In 2009, Microsoft ofﬁcials said that they were stunned
that hackers had ﬁnally found a ﬂaw in their Explorer that
had been “in hiding” for almost 10 years; it was exploited to
steal online users’ passwords, highlighting the biggest fear
that software-producing companies have—zero-day attacks or
exploits, named such for the number of days a software com-
pany has to prepare before a hack attack of signiﬁcant harm
occurs (Tossell, 2012).
In 2009 Internet censorship continued to be a concern. U.S.
president Obama criticized, speaking to students in Shanghai,
the Internet censorship that was taking place in China since at
least 2005. He also spoke about the value of freedom of expres-
sion and political participation by netizens—wherever they
reside. At the time, Chinese ofﬁcials rejected the U.S. request
that about 1,000 students should attend President Obama’s
speech and that it be broadcast live nationwide. In the end,
only about 400 students were in attendance; also, the speech
was streamed only on the White House Web site and broadcast
live in China on only a local Shanghai television station. Most
Chinese citizens were probably allowed to see only brief extracts
of the president’s speech, absent of his remarks on Internet cen-
sorship (Branigan, 2013).
2010 to the Present
From the period 2010 to the present, the Internet continued
to manifest adult-like issues like battles occurring between
multi-nationals pushing for Internet freedoms in jurisdictions
where repressive governments engaged in a combination of
Internet censorship and hacking. Also, previously unheard of
hacker cells like Anonymous started making mainstream media
Background and History
33

headlines by exposing conﬁdential governmental information
online for netizens around the world to view.
In 2010, a Facebook virus known as Koobface showed the
world that social media are also vulnerable to hack attacks.
After Koobface infected a computer, it sent a lurid message to
the computer owner’s Facebook friends, tricking them into
downloading malware. Rumor has it that the virus produced
over $2 million by commanding infected computers to send
clicks, as it were, elsewhere. Also in 2010, a virus called
Stuxnet spread around the world through the Internet, but IT
experts believe it was created to do one key political job: destroy
centrifuges in Iran employed in the country’s nuclear program.
Actually, the virus caused the centrifuges to shake apart while,
on the surface, looking as though they were working normally.
Though no country or hacker group has come forward accept-
ing credit for designing this dangerous malware, reporters have
widely speculated that the Israeli and American governments
were the joint suspects (Tossell, 2012).
In 2010, a major battle began to brew once more between
Google and China—this time on the Internet censorship and
hacking fronts. On January 14, 2010, Google expressed openly
in the media that in China they had only 31 percent of the mar-
ket share, while the Chinese Baidu search engine had a whop-
ping 69 percent. If that wasn’t a large enough concern for
Google’s top executives, the reality that Google’s networks
had been hacked was. Google executives were worried that tal-
ented Chinese hackers had gained entry into the bowels of their
network and got hold of the code and secret algorithms that
made the company so successful. In fact, Google’s chief execu-
tive Eric Schmidt had dinner with U.S. secretary of state
Hillary Clinton and three other U.S. high-tech executives
regarding the dangers of doing business with China, especially
if the Internet were involved. The following week, Hillary
Clinton made a major speech extolling the virtues of Internet
freedom, and President Obama openly addressed in the media
34
Internet Censorship

citing Internet security as a key national security concern
(Fenby, 2010).
On January 14, 2010, VeriSign iDefense Labs, a U.S.
Internet security ﬁrm, reported that they had traced back the
sophisticated cyberattacks against Google’s networks and those
of about 30 other U.S. high-tech companies to the Chinese
government or its proxies (Branigan, 2010). Meanwhile,
China denied Google’s hacking claims, and by January 25,
2010, Chinese authorities, in an apparent bid to prevent fur-
ther fallout, declared their willingness to cooperate with the
international community to combat crimes in cyberspace
(Romana, 2010).
In 2011, Google reportedly had another major cyber prob-
lem not necessarily linked to the Chinese government.
Hackers had determined how to produce a nasty Trojan horse
that fooled Android mobile phone users into thinking that they
were installing a regular application but were installing malware
that released personal information to a remote server and gave
hackers substantial “control” over the phone. From this inci-
dent and others that have arisen since 2011, it is clear that
new targets have become available for hackers, with the con-
stantly emerging forms of hardware and software technologies.
Google responded quickly by sending out a so-called clean-up
piece of software, but after noting the “hype” generated around
the patch issued by the company, hackers then created a fake
clean-up tool that, when installed by Android users, infected
their phones with more malware. With smart phone shipments
exceeding PC shipments in 2012, there is little mystery in
understanding why hackers are keen to target Android phones,
which are hugely popular worldwide, with users being able to
download applications from anywhere in the world (Tossell,
2012).
January 18, 2012, saw the largest online protest in the his-
tory of the Internet. Small and large Web sites “went dark”
in protest of two pieces of proposed legislation before the
Background and History
35

U.S. House and Senate that could profoundly change the
Internet. The two bills—SOPA in the House and PIPA in the
Senate—were designed to stop the piracy of copyrighted
material on Web sites based outside of the United States.
Once word got out about these two bills, many of the
Internet giants like Google, Wikipedia, and Twitter argued that
the bills, if passed, would stiﬂe innovation and investment in
the Internet. Although President Obama’s administration had
issued public statements with some criticism of these pieces of
legislation, the fears among online citizens remained, for they
feared that these laws would eventually be passed in some shape
or form (Goodman, 2013).
Finally, consistent with the notion that online users would
capitalize on the Internet’s global potential by pairing hacking
with claims of Internet freedom ﬁghting, Anonymous, on
February 6, 2013, was back in the news, this time again said
to be on the side of Internet freedom ﬁghters. They hacked into
the U.S. Federal Reserve networks on Super Bowl Sunday and
released the login credentials and personal information belong-
ing to over 4,000 U.S. banking executives—a newsworthy
event that the Anonymous hacker cell announced on Twitter.
Anonymous said that they launched Operation Last Resort in
honor of Aaron Swartz, a bright young U.S. technologist and
Internet freedom ﬁghter who committed suicide before he was
to appear in court on hacker-related charges. Operation Last
Resort was supposedly an effort by Anonymous to force the
U.S. government to reform computer law, especially regarding
the disproportionate prosecution and imprisonment practices
levied against hacktivists and other Internet freedom ﬁghters
(Stone, 2013).
Summary
From its humble beginnings to its continuing evolution in
adulthood, it is clear that the Internet has made tremendous
changes in citizens’ lives around the globe. On the positive side,
36
Internet Censorship

governments can transmit their most critical services over the
Internet so that citizens do not have to leave their homes to
get important information. Businesses can convert their intel-
lectual property, business processes, and assets into data that
can be sent over the Internet. Citizens can communicate in
social networks or buy things over the Internet without leaving
their homes, and their smart phones can seamlessly track their
whereabouts. And as world crises occur “in the ﬁeld,” reporters
embedded on the battle grounds can communicate online with
citizens around the world to help them get a clearer under-
standing of the root causes of the military engagement.
On the negative side, netizens as well as government agents
can bring down targeted Web sites, and perhaps cause consider-
able harm to targeted nation’s economies. Hacker cells like
Anonymous can crack government or business networks to
unleash nation safety–critical information or industry’s propri-
etary secrets—all in the name of Internet freedom ﬁghting.
And governments determined to maintain control over
Internet content can place stringent “rules of engagement” on
businesses wanting to build market share within their jurisdic-
tions. It is 2013–14, and it is an unpredictable but wonderfully
evolving cyber world.
The Global Growth of Internet Usage
Adoption of the Internet in Developed Nations
In just over 40 years since the ARPAnet was invented and
the seeds of the Internet were planted, there is little question
that the developed world has become totally dependent on the
Internet for routine daily activities. Almost all the nations of
the world, whether developed or emerging, are aware of the
Internet’s value for growing and maintaining their economies
and for potentially safeguarding their citizens. Think for a
moment about all that is done on the Internet—paying bills,
ﬁling tax returns, playing games with players around the globe,
reading electronic books, communicating with friends through
Background and History
37

social networking sites, and buying things like vacation tickets,
all without leaving home.
The use of technology has had a substantive impact on
how individuals spend their time and interact with others.
According to 2012 estimates, from ComScore, Inc., Cana-
dians are spending more time online than any other country,
including highly wired societies like the United States, China,
and South Korea. According to these estimates, the average
American spends about 38.6 hours a month online, while the
average Canadian spends about 45 hours a month online, with
the majority of time spent on social networking sites like
Facebook (Holt and Schell, 2013).
More recent Canadian online activity trends indicate that
about 75 percent of the households use paid Internet services,
almost 60 percent of working Canadians ﬁle their personal
taxes electronically rather than through land mail, and about
67 percent of Canadian adults bank online. Canadian busi-
nesses rely heavily, as well, on the digital infrastructure; cur-
rently, about 87 percent of businesses use the Internet—with
online sales in Canada totaling about $63 billion in 2011.
The Canadian federal government is also reliant on the
Internet to “stay connected” with its citizens; in 2011, they
offered at least 130 online services to assist consumers and busi-
nesses, including such diverse services as taxes, Employment
Insurance, and student loans (Comrie, 2011).
This voracious hunger for all things Internet has had a positive
impact on advertisers and media companies as well—with digital
advertising spending targeted toward Internet-active Canadians
alone surpassing $2.5 billion in 2011 (Ladurantaye, 2012).
The massive revenue generated online, coupled with citizens’
dependence on the Internet, suggests that if our digital infra-
structure were unavailable or compromised by malicious actors
or hackers, society may grind to a halt. All of these services
would become inoperable, which is frightening especially given
that critical infrastructures like public transportation, health
care, and public safety are operated, in part, by the Internet.
38
Internet Censorship

But before going too far down this dark path, let’s continue to
examine the growth of the Internet in recent years in develop-
ing nations (Holt and Schell, 2013).
Adoption of the Internet in Developing Nations and the
Emergence of Internet Censorship
The Internet has clearly had a tremendous economic and
political impact on the developing nations, particularly in
China, India, Russia, and Pakistan. Compared with the devel-
opment of the Internet in developed nations—where compa-
nies, like Yahoo!, succeeded because they got involved early
on in the Internet’s history, had plenty of ﬁnancing to hire
top professionals in research and development, and had sup-
portive governments—the “buy-in” in developing nations came
later and with signiﬁcantly less government encouragement.
In China, for example, Baidu, which emerged as a growing
success story in 2005, had been at odds with the Chinese
government during the early years about censorship issues
enforced by the government on search engines. Today, how-
ever, Baidu implements China’s rigorous censoring schema to
stay active and in business. Although relatively unknown out-
side of China until 2005, Baidu was founded by two Chinese
gurus who had previously worked for U.S. technology ﬁrms.
By 2012, Baidu dominated China’s search engine market, with
nearly 80 percent of the market share in China, compared to
Google’s 17 percent (Tsuruoka, 2012).
Also by 2012, China had an estimated 1 billion cell phone
users and 550 million Internet surfers. In March of that year,
a Chinese news Web site reported that highly successful Apple
plans to introduce Baidu as a search engine option for all
Apple devices using its mobile operating system in China as
early. Considering the large market share in China for anything
online and high-tech, this decision, if true, would provide for a
lucrative business opportunity for foreign companies like Apple
to expand their huge proﬁts even more using its mobile
Background and History
39

operating system in China, which occurred in June, 2012
(Tsuruoka, 2012).
Other developing nations have gone after Web site compa-
nies on their soil that they consider to be violating their laws.
In February 2012, Google India said that they removed Web
pages deemed to be offensive to Indian political and religious
leaders to comply with a court verdict that raised censorship
fears in the world’s largest democracy. This action followed
government pressure for 22 Internet giants to remove from
their Web sites photographs, videos, and text deemed to be
“anti-religious” or “anti-social”—such as pictures showing
Congress party leader Sonia Gandhi and pigs running through
Mecca, Islam’s holiest city. A New Delhi court gave
Facebook, Google, YouTube, and Blogspot, as well as other
Web sites, two weeks to present plans for policing their net-
works. The government also alleged that for India’s 100 million
Internet users, U.S. Internet standards are just not acceptable.
This case highlights the anxiety India faces in balancing reli-
gious and political sentiments with their hope that the
Internet will help spur the economy and increase the standard
of living for 1.2 billion people (Associated Press, 2012).
Assessing the Present-Day Internet Economy
on a Global Scale
In March 2012, the authors of the Boston Consulting
Group report (Boston Consulting Group, 2012) attempted to
estimate the present-day value and positive impact of the
Internet on the global economy. While continued Internet
growth in most advanced nations’ economic sectors has been
projected to be “slow to no growth” now and in the years to
come, an Internet-powered economy represents a bright light
that needs to be capitalized on by developing nations, in par-
ticular. The Internet sector offers one of the world’s few unfet-
tered growth areas, according to this report. While policy
makers often cite gross domestic product (GDP) growth rates
40
Internet Censorship

of about 10 percent per year in developing markets, across the
G20 nations, the value of the Internet economy is projected
to almost double, to $4.2 trillion, over the next four years, from
$2.3 trillion in 2010–2011, representing a compounded
annual growth rate of 10.8 percent over 2010–2016. Though
tracking the value of the Internet on developed and developing
economies is, indeed, a complex and difﬁcult task, the report
attempted to measure the Internet economy by incorporating
key variables like online consumption, investment, government
spending, and net exports of all Internet-related goods and serv-
ices (Grant, 2012).
Using this quantiﬁer, the Internet is said to have contributed
about $49 billion to Canada’s GDP in 2010–2011, representing
about 3 percent of the country’s economic growth. The Internet’s
contribution is projected to grow to $76 billion by 2016,
representing a compounded annual growth rate in Canada of
7.4 percent during the 2010–2016 time period. If the Internet
were currently a measured sector in Canada, it would be viewed
as being a greater contributor to the Canadian economy than
agriculture, utilities, or hospitality (Grant, 2012).
Other developed nations are projected to have slower
Internet growth by 2016—as in the United States, which,
according to the report, is projected to have a compounded
annual growth rate of 6.5 percent. In contrast, Italy is projected
to have a compounded annual growth rate of 11.5 percent.
With a ramping up of efforts by governments and small and
medium businesses, afﬁrm the authors, the projected com-
pounded annual growth rates for the Internet sector may touch
very high levels in many of the developing nations. For exam-
ple, the projections for Argentina, India, and Mexico are
estimated to be 24.3 percent, 23 percent, and 15.6 percent,
respectively. The projection for China is estimated to be
17.4 percent over this period (Grant, 2012).
What is more, according to the Boston Consulting Group
report, using the Internet is not only good business for compa-
nies, but it intensiﬁes sales growth rates. In multiple countries,
Background and History
41

including China, Germany, Turkey, and France, small and
medium enterprises (SMEs) that have chosen to engage actively
with clients on the Internet have reported three-year sales growth
rates that are up to 22 percentage points higher than those of
companies with low or no Internet presence. There is little ques-
tion, the authors concluded, that, globally, SMEs that embrace
and capitalize on the Internet are not only growing faster than
SMEs that choose to do otherwise but also creating more jobs
compared to the SMEs that do not. In short, by encouraging
businesses to turn to the Internet to stimulate transactions, devel-
oping and developed nations can improve their competitiveness
and growth prospects (Boston Consulting Group, 2012).
Moreover, the authors give some insights regarding the value
placed by online consumers on Internet usage; they asked con-
sumers how much they would have to be paid to live without
Internet access. In the G-20 countries, consumers said that they
would need to be paid $1,430 each. However, the “to-be-paid”
value did tend to vary among consumers by country: in
Turkey, the value was $323 each; in South Africa, $1,215 each;
in Brazil, $1,287 each; and in France, $4,453 each. The aggre-
gate value across 13 of the G-20 countries was found to be
$1.9 trillion, or approximately 4.4 percent of their GDP.
Indeed, these results are highly revealing, given that they dem-
onstrate how intensely connected the Internet consumers’ daily
lives have become almost everywhere around the globe (Boston
Consulting Group, 2012).
Gaining Authorized and Unauthorized Access to the
Internet—and How Hacking May Be Related to
Internet Censorship
Authorized Access and Various Modes of Communication
Given that the Internet has no entry door, per se, how do
Internet users gain access legally? A number of ways exist.
One of the earliest ways was through a computer network
42
Internet Censorship

linked directly to the Internet at an educational institution,
business, or government ofﬁce. The IT department would issue
account numbers and passwords to legitimate users.
As more citizens purchased PCs during the 1990s—which
had become moderately priced by then—and beyond, users
commonly paid a fee to an ISP. In exchange, the user received
a software package, a user name, a temporary password, and
an Internet access number. Equipped with a modem, the user
logged on to the Internet, browsed Web sites, bought things
online with the click of a mouse, watched movies online, and
sent and received electronic mail (email). In recent years, ISPs
have offered high-speed Internet services using DSL (a general
term for any local network loop digital in nature) or cable-
modem technology. ISPs are connected to one another through
network access points.
The most common ways to communicate legally and legiti-
mately with other Internet users include the following (Holt
and Schell, 2013):
• Email: Here, online users can send messages to one another
in real time. Compared to encrypted email, which is secure,
unencrypted email is not secure, meaning that its contents
may be accessed, viewed, and even altered by someone with
computer access.
• Listserv: A Listserv is like an online subscription to some
topic of interest to users. Registered users receive messages
posted by others and post messages for others to read. The
kind of software managing Listserv is known as a mail
exploder, a program that runs on the server where the list
resides. This program also gives instructions to online users
about how to automatically unsubscribe. A Listserv may be
classiﬁed as open access or restricted access. A moderated
Listserv has someone who actually approves of (read censors)
the messages posted before sending them on to registered
users.
Background and History
43

• Newsgroups: These provide Internet users with articles
posted to multitudes of discussion groups. Articles are
arranged by topic and distributed through an electronic bulle-
tin board system called Usenet. When a user having access to a
Usenet server posts an article, the server forwards the article to
adjacent Usenet servers, making the article available to all
Usenet sites having access to that newsgroup. While some
Usenet newsgroups are moderated, others are not.
• Internet Relay Chat: These are servers running software
known as Internet relay chat, allowing multiple users to “talk
online” and in real time by choosing from many activated
discussion channels. The message typed on one user’s com-
puter will appear almost immediately on another user’s com-
puter monitor. To maintain privacy and to keep real
identities unknown to those in chat rooms, users will often
go under a false name (known as a moniker), like Fishgirl.
• Social Networking Web Sites: By connecting to these sites
using the Internet, users can share in an online environment
their ideas, events, photos, and activities of personal interest
across political, economic, and geographic borders. The
technology used to support social networks via computer-
mediated communications was utilized in early online serv-
ices like America Online and was also involved in Usenet,
ARPAnet, and Listserv. Now, these programs may utilize
various algorithms and are potentially integrated into power-
ful and very popular search engines like Google or Baidu.
A study completed on 2009 by the Pew Internet and
American Life Project found that interest in social networking
sites grew exponentially post-2000 during the adulthood phase
of Internet development, and that the number of adults using
social networks had quadrupled between 2005 and 2009.
About 90 percent of adults using social networking sites do
so to remain in touch with people that they already know,
whereas about half of teenagers and adults are looking for
new friends (Leggatt, 2009).
44
Internet Censorship

• Telnet: This is a terminal emulation program, or one based
on that protocol, allowing users to log on to the Internet.
Put simply, Telnet is an Internet application permitting a
user’s PC to act as a terminal to a remote system. Many users
connecting to the Internet, however, do not use Telnet
because it requires knowledge of the UNIX operating system.
For example, a professor at one university can use Telnet to
make use of the extraordinary computing power of a super-
computer at some other university or a string of universities
if that professor is familiar with UNIX. A real-world example
is Canada’s Shared Hierarchical Academic Research Com-
puting Network—the largest high-performance computing
consortium in Canada, now comprising 17 universities, col-
leges, and research institutes (SHARCNET, 2012).
• Remote Retrieval: This pertains to how Internet users search
for and retrieve information located in remote computers.
There are several ways that this process can be completed.
One way is to use the FTP to transfer ﬁles between systems
over the network, particularly from a host (a server) to a
remote computer (client). Another way to search and retrieve
is to use the gopher protocol, released in 1991 and designed
to share documents online. The third way is to use HTTP.
Although information is stored in individual HTTP servers
worldwide, the connection of these computers to the
Internet through W3C, or World Wide Web Consortium,
protocols (those used to exchange information) allows the
linked information to become part of a single body of informa-
tion. In other words, the Internet describes a network of
HTTP servers using hypertext links to ﬁnd and access ﬁles.
For this reason, all Internet site addresses begin with http://.
Unauthorized Access to Networks and the Types of
Harm Caused by Hack Attacks
Given the massive amount of information that may be gen-
erated by the citizens of Internet-embracing nations, coupled
Background and History
45

with the huge number of devices presently connected to the
Internet, chances are there is somebody connected to the
Internet who wants to “bend” it to meet one’s own selﬁsh
needs. In the section on the history of the Internet, there are
numerous examples of network attacks conducted for selﬁsh
and self-promotional reasons, as well as for acts of retaliation.
Nowadays, when we hear about online users getting access to
data or information on the Internet for which they do not have
authorization, the label hacker immediately comes to mind.
The ability to hack is a skill, involving the manipulation of
technology in some way, shape, or form—and that this skill
set can range from rudimentary to advanced.
The term hacker has taken on many different meanings in
the past 25 years, ranging from computer-savvy individuals
professing to enjoy manipulating computer systems to stretch
their abilities to the malicious manipulators bent on breaking
into computer systems through deceptive or illegal means with
the intent to cause harm (Steele et al., 1983). Both deﬁnitions
are correct, as the term hacker has been applied to both mali-
cious and benevolent online users, alike. This confusing reality
is a consequence of the evolution of hacking in tandem with
the technological development of the Internet over several
decades.
To differentiate between malicious and benevolent hackers,
individuals within the hacker community—known as the
Computer Underground (CU)—began to use the term cracker
to recognize individuals who engage in criminal or unethical
acts using hacking techniques. This term was meant derisively,
suggesting that a cracker is different from a hacker and should
be treated accordingly. The use of the term cracker is not
common outside of the hacker culture or the CU, but it is
extremely important to our understanding of hacking and
cracking, the abuse of the Internet’s privileges and opportuni-
ties by those connected in the virtual world, and the way in
which cracking, in particular, is viewed by those who use their
46
Internet Censorship

tech-savvy skills to cause harm to others, motivated largely by
personal gain or revenge.
Black hat hacking, or cracking, is commonly viewed as a
crime committed against a computer or a network using
another computer for hacking exploits, which often result in
deception or in harm to property or data owned by govern-
ments, businesses, or individuals. Cracking can fall into various
forms of cybercrime, based on the target of the attack and the
outcome it produces for the victim in terms of property dam-
age, economic loss, or personal harm.
Hacker exploits that target computer systems or data can be
viewed as acts of trespass, deception, or theft through a variety
of cracking techniques such as the following (Schell and
Martin, 2004; Holt and Schell, 2013):
• Flooding: A form of cyberspace vandalism resulting in
denial-of-service (DoS) to authorized users of a Web site or
system.
• Virus and Worm Production and Release: A form of
cyberspace vandalism causing corruption, and possibly eras-
ing, of data.
• Spooﬁng: The cyberspace appropriation of an authentic
user’s identity by non-authentic users, causing fraud or
attempted fraud in some cases and critical infrastructure
breakdowns in other cases.
• Phreaking: A form of cyberspace theft or fraud (or both)
consisting of using technology to make free long-distance
telephone calls.
• Infringing Intellectual Property Rights and Copyright: A
form of cyberspace theft involving the copying of a target’s
information or software without consent.
• Phishing: A form of fraud where the offender sends pro-
spective victims an email from a ﬁnancial institution or ser-
vice indicating that the user will be cut off from services if
Background and History
47

the user does not respond in a timely fashion. The informa-
tion provided is then stolen and used by the offender.
In recent years, as noted in the section on Internet evolution,
hacking exploits have resulted in harm to persons or govern-
ments. During the adult phase of Internet development, there
were a number of cases cited where harm was perceived to be
caused by cyber wars, even though the perpetrators may have
argued that their motivations were positive and not destructive
(Brenner, 2008; Denning, 2011). When Indian border guards,
for example, tortured a Bangladeshi cowherd who had crossed
territorial lines in December 2011, the Dhaka government
issued an ofﬁcial protest to the incident. In today’s high-tech
world, there is actual video footage of this incident, apparently
taken by one of the guards. The video went “viral” through
the Internet. When the Dhaka government later continued to
play down the incident, patriotic young citizens took matters
into their own hands. They launched what they labeled a
“cyber war” aimed at ofﬁcial and commercial Web sites in
India. The hackers claimed to have hit more than 30,000
Web sites in 10 days, defacing them with Bangladeshi ﬂags,
images of civilians killed or tortured by Indian border forces,
and lists of demands for the Indian government. The
government and businesses claimed signiﬁcant economic and
social upheaval harms.
Indian hackers began to retaliate, and at this point, the cyber
war became the headline focus in the Bangladeshi media. The
media generally treated the cyber war as being caused by a bold
civilian response to the lack of appropriate government action,
likely motivated by a fear of its more powerful neighbor. Web
experts have stated that the hacking war actually began three
or four years ago, with occasional ﬂare-ups caused by tech-
savvy citizens in India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan (Nolen,
2012).
By law, some acts of online protest, such as hacktivism, tend
to be categorized as technical non-offenses, even though, as we
48
Internet Censorship

have seen from the examples cited above, harm can be caused
(Schell, 2007). There is little question that in recent times, gov-
ernments worldwide seem to be taking hacktivism very seri-
ously. Since ﬁrst recognized for their hacktivism around 2008,
when they targeted the Church of Scientology, Anonymous,
in 2013, as a case in point, has become a national security con-
cern as recognized openly by the U.S. government and others
(Blue, 2013).
How Hacking May Be Related to Internet Censorship
Though in April 2010 world leaders met in Washington,
D.C., to discuss the dangers of nuclear war, the present-day
reality is that, as the world—developed and developing—
becomes increasingly reliant on the Internet and connected to
it and through it, cyber war is another real threat that is more
security compromising than nuclear war. What’s more, when
high-tech giants like Google are likely targets of cyberattacks
(witness those in 2010), how safe is the United States, or any
country, for that matter, from large-scale cyberattacks? While
in 2010, possible Chinese hackers attacked Google’s servers in
the name of political activism, what will happen tomorrow?
Will the targets of hack attacks actually become networked
critical infrastructures that are so essential to keeping the world
economy and society running smoothly (Lynch, 2010)?
Beyond the anxieties around cyber wars and threats to criti-
cal infrastructures now and in the future, might there somehow
be a link between hacking and Internet censorship—such that
perpetrators of hacking may often profess that they are com-
pleting their exploits because they are in favor of freedom of
information and opposed to Internet censorship. First, we need
to acknowledge that all countries, not just China or Russia, are
engaged in cyber espionage—including NSA’s Prism program—
either to gain military advantage over another nation or to steal
some proprietary information belonging to industry. Even on
the domestic front in China, government agencies and industry
Background and History
49

networks are being hacked so that the perpetrators can spread
malware to try to steal identity numbers and virtual money
from various targeted online venues, such as multiple-player
games. Because of China’s dependency on Microsoft products
(about 90 percent of the Chinese government ofﬁces uses
Windows)—and given that a lot of this software is pirated (so
that vulnerabilities are not patched)—Chinese government net-
works are, indeed, vulnerable to hack attacks. Hacking net-
works occur all over the world, even if legislation is in place to
act as a deterrent. Despite what the media says about China,
the fact is that like the United States and Canada, China, too,
has anti-hacking laws. There, it is not uncommon for hackers
to spend three years in prison and be ﬁned tens of thousands
of dollars for illegal hack attacks (Lynch, 2010).
From a pragmatic and theoretical point of view, clearly
deﬁning the link between hack attacks and Internet censorship
in countries is very challenging. Maybe the logical way to
approach this challenge is to accept that what in one jurisdic-
tion (say, in China) is a hacktivistic act (technically, a criminal
non-offense) may in another jurisdiction be perceived as a
criminally motivated targeted hack attack (say, by Google exec-
utives or government ofﬁcials in the United States). Thus, the
United States would likely argue that the perpetrators should
be subject to criminal sanctions.
This variation in interpretation of online exploits also helps
explain how some ofﬁcials in one jurisdiction can feel justiﬁed
about censoring content on the Internet, while ofﬁcials in
another jurisdiction may be opposed to such online censorship.
Put another way, what is perceived to be an expression of
freedom of speech in one jurisdiction may be perceived as a
violation of community standards of tolerance in another
jurisdiction—thus, the need for enforcement of Internet cen-
sorship rules and regulations.
And on a sobering closing thought, we need to accept that
hackers—whether they live in China or the United States—
are not all cut from the same cloth or have the same
50
Internet Censorship

motivations for hacking. In all jurisdictions worldwide, there are
the script-kiddies—typically teens hacking for fun or to see what
they can accomplish. There are also cyber criminals—those who
hack networks for ﬁnancial gain. Then there are the patriotic
hackers—those who hack targeted Web sites for political motiva-
tions. Finally, there are hackers in the military who are hired to
think about how they can use their skills effectively in an actual
military exercise or conﬂict as a means of safeguarding their coun-
try and its citizens (Lynch, 2010).
Online Users’ Concerns about Censorship and the
General State of Online Censorship in 2012
Concerns by Global Citizens about Online Censorship
As noted at the start of this chapter and as was evident from
the section on the adult phase of Internet development, in par-
ticular, governments (some more than others) are increasingly
trying to control citizens’ online activities, restrict the free ﬂow
of information, and infringe on the rights of online users—all
in the name of keeping the country and its citizens safe from
various harms—morally, politically, or otherwise. These efforts
by governments around the world—as manifested in China
and Iran over the last decade, in particular—have contributed
to present-day concerns of online users regarding excessive on-
line censorship by certain governments and their strong push
for compliance to “rules of engagement” by ISPs.
Moreover, there is a digital divide between those who are
wealthy enough to obtain access to the Internet and those
who cannot afford to do so—a form of unintentional censor-
ship. Even in developed nations, there is a portion of the poor,
and particularly those who live in the inner cities, whose access to
the Internet is limited because of lack of affordability. In fact, in
2013, it is estimated that about 21 percent of Canadian house-
holds do not have access to the Internet, the cost of service and
computer purchase often cited as major barriers. Current ﬁgures
show that only slightly more than half of the poorest Canadian
Background and History
51

households—those with incomes of $30,000 or less—have
Internet access, according to Statistics Canada (Trichur, 2013).
Let’s be clear: besides these ﬁnancial barriers separating the
Internet haves from the have-nots, not every government is
agreeable to having its citizens roam the Internet freely, because
there are alleged moral or political concerns and harms that
must be accounted for. Consequently, some government ofﬁ-
cials feel an ethical and moral need to censor Web sites and
the content contained therein. And when ofﬁcials decide what
online content needs to be viewed and, when necessary,
blocked as a means of reducing harm, they typically call on
ISPs and forms of legislation to assist in this regard.
Early in 2010, when President Obama was in Shanghai to
speak out against online censorship, Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton gave a now-famous speech about the importance of
Internet freedom and of telecommunications industry freedom
ﬁghters. She called on them to help balance the fragile freedom
ﬁghter versus censorship scales worldwide, as noted in her
words below (Masnick, 2010, 1):
For companies, this issue is about more than claiming the
moral high ground. It really comes down to the trust
between ﬁrms and their customers. Consumers every-
where want to have conﬁdence that the Internet compa-
nies they rely on will provide comprehensive search
results and act as responsible stewards of their own per-
sonal information. Firms that earn that conﬁdence of
those countries and basically provide that kind of service
will prosper in the global marketplace. I really believe that
those who lose that conﬁdence of their customers will eventu-
ally lose customers. No matter where you live, people want
to believe that what they put into the Internet is not going
to be used against them. And censorship should not be in
any way accepted by any company anywhere. And in
America, American companies need to make a principled
stand. This needs to be part of our national brand. I’m
52
Internet Censorship

conﬁdent that consumers worldwide will reward companies
that follow those principles.
The General State of Online Censorship by Governmental
View: Placements on the Freedom Fighter versus
Censorship Scales
What could be said about the countries ﬁltering online con-
tent? What are the various means by which country ofﬁcials
require ISPs to do the job for them? Perhaps the easiest way
to ﬁnd out is through the OpenNet Initiative, which docu-
ments attempts by nations to mold the Internet. That institu-
tion lists IP blocking, domain name system tampering,
uniform resource locator blocking using a proxy, keyword
blocking, and DoS attacks as the most frequent kinds of ﬁlter-
ing employed by censorious countries and enforced by ISPs
wanting a piece of the online market share. (See Schell and
Martin, 2006, for further deﬁnitions of these technical terms.)
State-directed censorship, as we have discussed throughout
this chapter, is occurring heavily in countries like China and
Iran, and it is conducted at the Internet backbone (deﬁned as a
high transmission line providing networking opportunities to
high-speed Internet service providers globally)—thus adversely
impacting open access for online users throughout these coun-
tries. China’s powerful Internet restrictions, for example, are gen-
erally called the Great Firewall, because they are installed on the
international Internet gateway of mainland China. As a result,
“troublesome” IT invaders with questionable Western values—
such as Google+, Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube—are banned.
Nonetheless, clever hackers have found vulnerabilities even in the
Great Firewall and have exploited them to help online users not
only transmit but receive information perceived to be not accept-
able by government authorities. A case in point would be
President Obama’s Google+ account, which was hit with various
online posts from Chinese Internet users in February 2012,
after vulnerabilities in the Great Firewall were discovered and
Background and History
53

exploited, thus permitting netizens to access the Google+ social
network and send important messages to President Obama
(Karasidis, 2012).
Back in 1993, Internet pioneer John Gilmore remarked, “The
net interprets censorship as damage and routes around it,” and,
says IT security writer Bruce Schneier (2008), we believed
Gilmore. Three years later, cyber libertarian John Barlow pro-
claimed a declaration of the independence of cyber space at the
World Economic Forum at Davos, Switzerland. At that time,
Barlow said to governments, “You have no moral right to rule
us, nor do you possess any methods of enforcement that we have
true reason to fear.” And back then, many people in the room
shared his sentiments, for, in their view, the Internet empowered
people, giving them access to an information highway that could
not be stopped, blocked, or ﬁltered. Give online users access to
the Internet, it was believed, and they could, virtually, have access
to every piece of information. Back then, it was also thought that
the governments that relied on censorship to control their citizens
were, for all intents and purposes, doomed. Fast forward to 2008.
Things were very different then from how they were back in
1996. At least 26 countries—primarily in the Middle East,
North Africa, Asia-Paciﬁc, and the Soviet Union—chose to selec-
tively block their citizens’ Internet access. Equally as depressing, a
signiﬁcant number of countries legislated control over what could
be said or not said online or downloaded (Schneier, 2008).
When it comes to Internet openness or censorious behavior
by government agencies, countries generally place a three-
pronged information-censoring continuum, and ISPs wanting
to get, grow, or maintain market share within these jurisdic-
tions must comply to
• closed networks,
• some surveillance of Web site content because of existing
legislation,
• transparency regarding requests to ISPs for removing con-
tent on Web sites.
54
Internet Censorship

Going by this continuum, Iran is clearly a closed network. In
2012, this country decided to literally cut itself off from the
global Internet, claiming that foreign powers are intentionally
trying to arrest its closed network development, citing the real-
ity that in 2010 there was a computer worm that caused Iran’s
centrifuges to fail at its main uranium enrichment facility—
likely planted by Israel and the United States. However, despite
Iran’s best intentions to develop a closed network, reporters at
Al Jazeera have said that Iran’s proposal may actually ﬁnd pro-
ponents in some rather odd corners. Given that Iran’s supreme
leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, for example, has his own Web
site in 13 languages and his own personal accounts on Twitter
and Instagram (a photo-sharing Web site), he may take extreme
offense to any interruption to Iran’s global Internet access—for
lack of access is very likely to cause harm regarding his commu-
nications with followers (Karasidis, 2012).
Freedom House, an independent watchdog organization
monitoring online freedom and censorious geographic loca-
tions worldwide, has, for example, cited South Africa as a min-
imal Internet surveillance location because political content
online tends not to be censored and bloggers tend not to be
jailed for what they say. However, this status may change if
the proposed Protection of State Information Bill is passed,
making it illegal to publish on paper or online particular state-
owned conﬁdential information. Furthermore, if the General
Intelligence Laws Amendment Bill is passed in South Africa,
bulk online content monitoring could become legalized, thus
hampering freedoms currently allowed to bloggers, Internet
users, and online whistle-blowers.
Finally, government agencies have not been transparent in
their requests to ISPs and search engine companies to censor
“offensive” or “politically sensitive” content. For example,
though seeing themselves as a solid freedom ﬁghter corporate
citizen, in September 2012, Google ofﬁcials temporarily
blocked the ﬁlm Innocence of Muslims in Libya and Egypt.
Legal experts have suggested that, like other censorious
Background and History
55

governments for restricting Web site content, Libya and Egypt
ofﬁcials had concerns about the harm caused by defamation,
pornography, hate speech, threats to national security, religious
offence, and infringement of copyright and trademark law.
Within the past decade, Google’s decisions regarding online
censorship have clearly indicated that though the company is
not a court the legal authority to decide what information
should be allowed or not be allowed to online viewers, com-
pany ofﬁcials decide ofﬁcials decide whether to comply with a
government’s request taking into account the said country’s
rules (Karasidis, 2012).
In closing, it is clear that online censorship is growing in scale,
scope, and sophistication around the world. Without doubt, the
regulation of the Internet has continued to grow over time—a
reality that is not surprising, given the importance of this
medium economically and socially. As John Palfrey of the
Berkman Center for Internet and Society afﬁrmed back in
May 2007, “As Internet censorship and surveillance grow, there’s
reason to worry about the implications of these trends for human
rights, political activism, and economic development around the
world” (Berkman Center for Internet and Society, 2007, 1).
Conclusion
This chapter detailed the humble beginnings of the Internet in
the United States and then discussed the good things and the
bad that have occurred once the Internet reached its adolescent
and adult phases of development. The endorsement of the
Internet by businesses, government agencies, and citizens grows
even more intense annually, making it a major revenue-
generating machine on a global basis. Yet, despite all of the
opportunities for citizens globally that have resulted from the
Internet’s growth—from buying airline tickets to watching
movies or social networking with friends without leaving
home—for every opportunity ﬂagged with good intentions,
there are opportunities ﬂagged with mal-intentions and harms
56
Internet Censorship

to society. The balance of the chapter described legitimate ways
to gain access to the Internet as well as illegal ways, as well as
the prevailing debates between the online freedom ﬁghters
and the Internet content censors.
References
Associated Press. “Google ‘compromised principles’ over China.”
2006, http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2006/jun/07/
news.searchengines (accessed June 7).
Associated Press. “Google’s following of India’s standards hikes
fear of censorship.” The Globe and Mail, February 7, 2012,
p. A10.
Barkham, P. “Censorship on the Internet links.” 1999, http://
www.guardian.co.uk/technology/1999/feb/03/freespeech.
internet (accessed February 3).
Barrett, D., and T.-P. Chen. “U.S. scrambles to snare Snowden
as he ﬂees Hong Kong.” The Globe and Mail, June 24, 2013,
pp. A1, A11.
Berkman Center for Internet and Society. “Survey of government
Internet ﬁltering practices indicates increasing Internet
censorship.” 2007, http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/newsroom/
ﬁrst_global_ﬁltering_survey_released (accessed May 18).
Blake, A., and B. Gellman. “NSA secrets leaker revealed.” Las
Vegas Review-Journal, June 10, 2013, pp. 1A, 4A.
Blake, A., Gellman, B., and G. Miller. (2013). “NSA secrets leaker
revealed.” Las Vegas Review-Journal, June 10, pp. 1A, 4A.
Blue, V. “Anonymous re-hacks US sentencing site into video
game asteroids.” 2013, http://www.zdnet.com/anonymous
-re-hacks-us-sentencing-site-into-video-game-asteroids
-7000010384/ (accessed January 28).
Boston Consulting Group (BCG). “Clicks grow like BRICS:
G-20 Internet economy to expand at 10 percent a year
through 2016.” 2012, http://www.bcg.com/media/
Background and History
57

PressReleaseDetails.aspx?d=tcm:12-100468 (accessed
March 19).
Branigan, T. “Google attacks traced back to China, says US
Internet security ﬁrm.” 2010, http://www.guardian.co.uk/
technology/2010/jan/14/google-attacks-traced-china
-verisign (accessed January 14).
Branigan, T. “Barack Obama criticizes internet censorship at
meeting in China.” 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/
world/2009/nov/16/barack-obama-criticises-internet
-censorship-china (accessed January 25).
Brenner, S. W. Cyberthreats: The Emerging Fault Lines of the
Nation State. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Comrie, G. R. “Cybersecurity: Protecting digital infrastructure
through CIE.” Engineering Dimensions, 32 (2011): 41.
Denning, D. E. “Cyber-conﬂict as an Emergent Social
Problem,” In T. J. Holt and B. Schell (Eds.), Corporate
Hacking and Technology-Driven Crime: Social Dynamics and
Implications (pp. 170–186). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global, 2011.
Dishneau, D. “Leaks revealed tactics, evidence suggests.” Las
Vegas Review-Journal, June 12, 2013, p. 8A.
Dishneau, D., and P. Jelinkek. “WikiLeaker sorry ‘actions hurt
people.’ ” The Globe and Mail, August 15, 2013, p. A14.
Fenby, J. “Google blazes a trail with China rift.” 2010, http://
www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2010/
jan/13/google-china-politics-censorship (accessed
January 13).
Freedom House. “New Report: Governments grow increas-
ingly repressive online, activists ﬁght back.” 2013, http://
www.freedomhouse.org/article/new-report-governments
-grow-increasingly-repressive-online-activists-ﬁght-back
(accessed January 22).
Gittings, J. “Sense and censorship.” 2002, http://www
.guardian.co.uk/technology/2002/sep/17/news.china
(accessed September 17).
58
Internet Censorship

Goodale, J. C. “The ﬁrst amendment and freedom of the
press.” Issues of Democracy, 2 (1997): 4.
Goodman, A. “The Sopa blackout protest makes history.”
2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/
cifamerica/2012/jan/18/sopa-blackout-protest-makes
-history (accessed January 29).
Graber, D. A. “Styles of image management during crises:
Justifying press censorship.” Discourse & Society 14 (2003):
539–557.
Grant, T. “Canada lags peers in ‘Internet economy.’ ” The
Globe and Mail, March 19, 2012, p. B3.
Greenberg, A. “An interview with WikiLeaks’ Julian Assange.”
2010, http://www.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2010/
11/29/an-interview-with-wikileaks-julian-assange/5/
(accessed December 16).
Harrell, E. “Defending the leaks: Q&A with WikiLeaks’ Julian
Assange.” 2010, http://content.time.com/time/world/
article/0,8599,2006789,00.html (accessed December 1).
Harrison, F. “Malaysia casts legal eye over Net.” 1999, http://
www.guardian.co.uk/technology/1999/apr/02/freespeech
.internet (accessed April 2).
Holt, T. J., and B. Schell. Hackers and Hacking: A Reference
Guide. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2013.
Ingle, T. “Censorship vs national security.” 2007, http://voices
.yahoo.com/censorship-vs-national- security-686138.html
(accessed December 3).
Jakes, L. “U.S. spying raises fresh anger.” Las Vegas Review-
Journal, June 11, 2013, pp. 1A, 6A.
Karasidis, A. “Online censorship in 2012.” 2012, http://mg.co
.za/article/2012-11-20-looking-back-on-2012-online
-censorship/ (accessed November 28).
Keegan, V. “Caught in freedom’s net.” 2001, http://www
.guardian.co.uk/technology/2001/mar/30/news.freespeech
(accessed March 30).
Background and History
59

Ladurantaye, S. “A country of clickers: Canada tops in Web
usage.” The Globe and Mail, March 2, 2012, pp. B1, B5.
Leggatt, H. “Number of adults using social networks quad-
rupled since 2005.” 2012, http://www.bizreport.com/2009/
01/number_of_adults_using_social_networks_quadrupled
_since_2005.html (accessed March 30).
Lynch, E. M. “Adam Segal discusses US-China relations in a
cyber world.” 2014, http://chinalawandpolicy.com/tag/
patriotic-hackers/ (accessed January 29).
Masnick, M. “Hillary Clinton: Then and now on Internet
freedoms and censorship.” 2010, http://www.techdirt
.com/articles/20101207/12043712168/hillary-clinton
-then-now-internet-freedoms-censorship.shtml (accessed
December 7).
Millar, S. “Blunkett revives plan to let agencies trawl phone and
net users’ records.” 2003, http://www.guardian.co.uk/
technology/2003/sep/13/freespeech.politics (accessed
September 13).
Myers, S., and A. Kramer. “Snowden thanks Russia after being
granted temporary asylum for a year.” The Globe and Mail,
August 2, 2013, p. A3.
New York Times Service. “Hong Kong not the safe harbor
Snowden expects, expert says.” The Globe and Mail, June 11,
2013, p. A11.
Nolen, S. “Torture spurs India-Bangladesh hacker war.” The
Globe and Mail, March 2, 2012, p. A11.
Nolen, S., C. Freeze, and S. Chase. “ ‘Cyberwar’ threatens Brazil
rift.” The Globe and Mail, October 9, 2013, pp. A1, A16.
O’Brien, M. “Republican wants WikiLeaks labeled as a terrorist
group.” The Hill.com, November 29, 2010.
Pallister, D. “Junta tries to shut down Internet and phone l
inks.” 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2007/sep/
27/burma.technology (accessed January 25).
60
Internet Censorship

Paramaribo, S. “Ecuador rebukes Assange for mocking
Australian politicians in video.” The Globe and Mail,
August 31, 2013, p. A20.
Plante, C. “Military kicks Geraldo out of Iraq.” 2003, http://
www.cnn.com/2003/WORLD/meast/03/31/sprj.irq.
geraldo/ (accessed March 31).
Romana, C. “China denies Google hacking claims.” 2010,
http://abcnews.go.com/International/china-google-hacking
-claims-groundless/story?d=9654628 (accessed
January 25).
Rosencrance, L. “Spammer sentenced to nine years in jail.”
2004, http://www.pcworld.com/article/118493/article.html
(accessed November 5).
Roth, A., and E. Barry. “Russia denies Snowden extradition.”
The Globe and Mail, July 2, 2013, p. A3.
Savage, C. “Leaker portrayed as ‘good-intentioned’ and a
traitor.” The Globe and Mail, June 4, 2013, p. A3.
Savage, C., and E. Huetteman. “Manning’s 35-year sentence
‘the longest in a leak case.’ ” The Globe and Mail, August 22,
2013, p. A3.
Schell, B. Contemporary World Issues: The Internet and Society.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2007.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. Contemporary World Issues:
Cybercrime. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. Webster’s New World Hacker
Dictionary. Indiana: Wiley, 2006.
Schneier, B. “Schneier on Security: Internet Censorship.”
2012, (accessed April 7).
SHARCNEC. “FAQ.” 2012, https://www.sharcnet.ca/my/
help/faq (accessed March 29).
Simpson, I. “Witness at Manning trial focuses on motives.”
The Globe and Mail, June 5, 2013, p. A11.
Background and History
61

Steele, G, Jr., D. R. Woods, R. A. Finkel, M. R. Crispin, R. M.
Stallman, and G. S. Goodfellow. The Hacker’s Dictionary.
New York: Harper and Row, 1983.
Stone, M. “Anonymous hacks Federal Reserve in ﬁght for
Internet freedom.” 2013, http://abcnews.go.com/
International/china-google-hacking-claims-groundless/story?
d=9654628 (accessed February 6).
Tait, R. “Censorship fears rise as Iran blocks access to top
Web sites,” 2013. http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/
2006/dec/04/news.Iran (accessed January 25).
Tossell, I. “The ABCs of cybersecurity.” The Globe and Mail
Report on Business 28 (10) (May 2012): 55–60.
Trichur, R. “Helping the poor catch the net.” The Globe and
Mail, June 3, 2012, p. B3.
Tsuruoka, D. “Apple said using Baidu as search option in
China.” 2012, Investor’s Business Daily, Inc., http://
news.investors.com/articleprint/605708/201203
271250/aapl-reportedly-adds-bidu-search.aspx (accessed
March 27).
Watts, J. “The man behind China’s answer to Google: Accused
by critics of piracy and censorship.” 2005, http://www
.guardian.co.uk/technology/2005/dec/08/piracy.news
(accessed December 8).
Wearden, G. “Google sticks by censorship policy.” 2013,
http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2007/may/11/
searchengines.newmedia (accessed January 25).
Weissenstein, M. “Ecuador President says Snowden can’t leave
Moscow.” The Globe and Mail, July 1, 2013, p. A7.
Wells, M. “Freedom fear on Web site closure.” 2000, http://
www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2000/apr/03/freespeech.
internet (accessed April 3).
Wielawski, I. M. “For troops, home can be too close.” 2005,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/15/health/psychology/
15fami.html?r=0 (accessed March 15).
62
Internet Censorship

This page intentionally left blank


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
Freedom of information is the foundation of any democracy.
Yet almost half of the world’s population is still denied it.
Reporters Without Borders (2012)
As the Reporters Without Borders Web site acknowledges, in a
democracy, freedom of expression and open access to informa-
tion will likely always be perceived by citizens to be one of their
greatest freedoms. What would the world be like, for example,
if journalists—who are bent on ﬁnding and sharing the truth
with citizens of the world—were not allowed to report facts
on global incidents in the making, abuses against women and
children in various societies, or environmental issues related to
saving our planet? The positive reality is that in some countries
where such abuses occur, the perpetrators halt their heinous
acts once these facts are revealed to the world by reporters—
commonly over the Internet as well as in print. The negative
reality is that in some countries where such abuses exist, the
way government in power copes is to severely restrict access to
the Internet or shut it down altogether.
There is little doubt that most countries restrict access to
content on the Internet at some basic level, such as restricting
citizens’ access to Web site pages with what is deemed by
65
The WikiLeaks homepage, featuring a picture of founder Julian Assange,
on December 24, 2010. (Jjspring/Dreamstime.com)

government ofﬁcials to be “offensive” content that exceeds com-
munity standards or preventing children from viewing certain
Web site pages that parents feel might be harmful. According to
Reporters Without Borders (2012), the organization formed to
promote free expression and the global safety of journalists who
are committed to freedom of information, some countries such
as Belarus, China, Cuba, Egypt, and Iran have very strong
censorship policies, while other countries like the United
States and Estonia are quite open to the concept of freedom of
information—whether in print or over the Internet.
After the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States, some
IT-enabled stealth surveillance and censorship issues have sur-
faced. For example, on June 7, 2013, a leaked document (later
linked to Edward Snowden) published in the media indicated
monumental U.S. government surveillance of Americans’ tele-
phone records—hundreds of millions of calls, actually—in the
ﬁrst apparent hard-core evidence of massive data collection
with the goal of combating terrorism under powers granted by
Congress after the 9/11 attacks. The legal issue at the center
of the controversy was a court order in Britain, requiring the
communications company Verizon to hand over on a daily
basis the records of all landline and mobile telephone calls of
its customers, both within the United States and in other coun-
tries. Also publicly announced was that the National Security
Agency and the FBI tapped directly into Google, Facebook,
and Apple servers—under a code name Prism—to extract a tar-
geted user’s emails, chats, ﬁle transfers, and even search histor-
ies. Apparently, targets of Prism include major global players
like Microsoft, Yahoo!, Google, Facebook, Paltalk, AOL, and
Apple. The program, started in 2007 under President George
W. Bush, has grown tremendously during President Barack
Obama’s presidency (Cassata and Benac, 2013).
Within 24 hours of this news release, President Obama
assured Americans that no government agency was “listening”
to their telephone calls, and that only non-U.S. citizens were
targeted—which certainly suggests that Canadians and the
66
Internet Censorship

Chinese are a potential target of IT surveillance, censorship,
and data analysis. Information gathered in such surveillance
programs—as in the case of the Verizon warrants—is known as
metadata, which by deﬁnition means information about informa-
tion. Using metadata, intelligence agencies can, for example, try
to pinpoint fraud by looking at connections between customers
and, say, ﬁled claims for unusual patterns (Clark, 2013).
On the eve of a two-day California summit in early June 2013,
the primary agenda for the meeting—President Obama was
to meet with Chinese president Xi Jinping to talk about
Chinese cyber spying on U.S. business and government agency
networks—took second-place priority relative to the questions
raised about the extent of the U.S. government’s domestic and
non-domestic surveillance and data-spying efforts. The major
U.S. tech companies afﬁrmed, however, that they do not provide
any government agency with “direct access” to their servers
(Holland, Spetalnick, and Ruwitch, 2012).
Moreover, as noted in Chapter 1, in recent times, there has
been a growing concern among individuals in the online global
society about Internet censorship—whereby governments are
increasingly trying to control citizens’ online activities, restrict
the free ﬂow of information, and infringe on the rights of on-
line users. Stated simply, since about 2005, the battle over
maintaining Internet freedom has been heating up practically,
legally, and morally. Moreover, the methods governments use
to control the Internet are becoming increasingly sophisticated.
At a time when about a third of the world’s people are actively
engaged online, tactics previously employed by extremely
repressive regimes are now being employed by governments
once considered to be more open and supportive of Internet
freedom. Some of these tactics involve causing premeditated
connection disruptions or paying professional commentators
to consciously manipulate online discussions. As noted in
Chapter 1, restrictions on Internet freedoms are frequently
strengthened during times of war or terrorist attacks, even by
more open-policy governments such as the United States.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
67

Chapter 2 opens with an overview of what the Computer
Industry Almanac says about PC, mobile phone, and Internet
usage for various countries over the past few years. Next, we
discuss cultural and legal jurisdictional factors inﬂuencing the
digital divide, along with some additional legal insights into
the handling of the controversial Internet-related Manning-
WikiLeaks case. Following a discussion of this case, I outline
the important differences between the concepts of information
freedom and Internet censorship, along with jurisdictional
issues pertaining to criminal liability on the coincidence of four
key elements. The discussion then moves on to recent trends in
Internet censorship (as noted in the Freedom of the Net 2012
report) that seem to support online global citizens’ fears and
concerns regarding Internet censorship. Next, there is a more
fulsome discussion on various online activities that are continu-
ally under the microscope of government authorities—either
because of their strong support for Internet openness or because
of their tactics used to reinforce Internet censorship; the juris-
dictions discussed include the United States, Azerbaijan,
Russia, China, Iran, Pakistan, and Egypt. Next, we look at
how various countries and nation-states use Web ﬁlters,
business-government policies, and laws aimed at preventing
the ﬂow of information over the Internet. Finally, we discuss
some expert opinions on what factors may be involved in the
next phase of the Internet’s evolution, in terms of determining
ongoing Internet censorship and information freedom.
A Look at PC, Mobile Phone, and Internet Usage Globally
PC Usage
According to the Computer Industry Almanac (2012), the
number of PCs in use reached over 1.6 billion units worldwide
at the start of 2012. The United States had the PC usage lead,
with over 50 percent more PCs in use than second-placed
China. In fact, the United States accounts for over 19 percent
of all PCs in use, with only 4.5 percent of the worldwide
68
Internet Censorship

population. As alluded to in Chapter 1, however, the PCs-in-
use growth rate is expected to slow over the next ﬁve years, as
growth bursts are now being seen in iPads and other tablet
computers. Ironically, the United States was projected to have
more PCs in use than people by the start of 2013. The appeal
and rapid growth of mobile PCs (which include iPad and other
tablet computers) is the major reason for present and future PC
expansion in the United States and elsewhere.
In terms of PC usage on a global scale (Computer Industry
Almanac, 2012), for the top 15 countries, having 70.5 percent
of the global market share, the breakdown in market share by
country at the start of 2012 was as follows: (1) United States:
19.4 percent; (2) China: 12.2 percent; (3) Japan: 6.12 percent;
(4) Germany: 4.47 percent; (5) India: 3.56 percent; (6) United
Kingdom: 3.41 percent; (7) Russia: 3.34 percent; (8) France:
3.34 percent; (9) Brazil: 3.01 percent; (10) Italy: 2.79 percent;
(11) South Korea: 2.55 percent; (12) Canada: 1.96 percent;
(13) Mexico: 1.71 percent; (14) Spain: 1.42 percent; and (15)
Australia: 1.22 percent. Other countries had the remaining
29.5 percent of the market share. Thus, the top 15 countries place
in the PC-usage-“haves” category, and the remaining countries,
relatively speaking, place in the PC-usage-“have-not” category.
Mobile Phone Usage
The mobile phone market took off like wild ﬁre in 2011 due
to the Smartphone boom; the Computer Industry Almanac
(2011) projected that by the year’s end worldwide sales of
mobile PCs would reach almost 227 million units, a huge
increase from 2005, when only 63 million mobile PCs were
in use. Again, the major growth factor is the huge marketability
of the iPad and similar tablet devices. Moreover, sales of mobile
PCs by 2015 are projected to account for about 71 percent of
the PC market share. Again, the industrialized countries tend
to fall into the haves category, while the non-industrialized
countries tend to fall in the have-not category. In the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
69

front-running United States, mobile PC usage as a percentage of
PC usage has grown from 19 percent in 1995 to over 63 percent
in 2011 and is projected to be over 74 percent by 2015.
Internet Usage
By the start of 2009, according to the Computer Industry
Almanac (2010), (1) China held the largest market share in
terms of Internet usage (17.03 percent), followed by (2) the
United States (13.41 percent) and (3) India (6.85 percent).
The top 15 countries had 67.07 percent of the Internet usage
market share—representing the have category. The remaining
market share, by country, was as follows: (4) Japan (5.61 per-
cent); (5) Germany (3.31 percent); (6) Brazil (2.80 percent);
(7) United Kingdom (2.58 percent); (8) Russia (2.36 percent);
(9) France (2.35 percent); (10) Italy (2.19 percent); (11)
Indonesia (2.10 percent); (12) South Korea (2.10 percent);
(13) Mexico (1.51 percent); (14) Canada (1.49 percent); and
(15) Spain (1.38 percent). During this time, countries in the
have-not category had the remaining share of about 33 percent.
According to the Computer Industry Almanac (2010), by the
start of 2010, the worldwide number of Internet users exceeded
1.83 billion—up from only about 2 million in 1990, when the
Internet was reaching its adulthood phase of evolution. Five years
later, in 1995, there were 45 million Internet users. By the year
2000, there were 430 million Internet users worldwide, and by
2005, there were about 1.09 billion. There is little question that
Internet adoption increased worldwide as the Internet continued
to evolve throughout its adult stage. Using these projections, the
Computer Industry Almanac suggested that by the end of 2010,
over 2 billion users would be connected to the Internet. Much
of the current and future growth, they added, would come from
the BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India, and China. They also
projected that, over the 2010s, many Internet users will be sup-
plementing their PC Internet usage with smart phones and other
70
Internet Censorship

such mobile devices. In the developing countries, it was projected
that many new Internet users will come from the mobile and
smart phone markets.
Cultural and Legal Jurisdictional Factors Influencing
the Digital Divide
Cultural Adaptation Factors
In short, in terms of PC, mobile phone, and Internet usage,
there is a digital divide between the haves and have-nots, with cul-
tural and socioeconomic factors being the determinants. A recent
newspaper article, for example, talked about the harsh reality that
for India’s “down and out” people on the wrong side of the digital
divide, life can look better on Facebook than it looks in real life.
The story involved a young student named Raju Shaikh, who
lives in a Delhi shelter for homeless boys, sharing a history of vio-
lence, fear, and hunger. Though the shelter is crowded and noisy,
Raju has created a new and exciting life through his Facebook
accounts. On one Facebook account, Raju posts pictures of him-
self chilling with his friends, and he lists songs and movies that he
likes. On a second account, Raju falsely mentions that he is study-
ing software engineering at New York University, and through
this channel, he chats with “friends” online, though he has not
met any of them in person yet (Nolen, 2012).
There are also demographic and legal jurisdictional adaptation
factors that come into play in deﬁning this digital divide. For
example, demographic variables, including gender and life stage,
have been reported to have an impact on Internet user access
and adoption, particularly in the developing nations (Vaagan
and Koehler, 2005). Moreover, Internet access is far greater for
citizens living in cities than in rural areas—with Internet cafes
(i.e., storefronts with Internet connections for fee-paying custom-
ers) being quite popular in more densely populated areas of even
developing nations. Also, in the developing nations, the well-
educated college and university population and those citizens
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
71

with greater economic means are more likely to have Internet
access than are those without advanced education or wealth.
Even during the early days of ARPAnet development, access to
the Internet was restricted to university students and faculty
working on U.S. homeland security issues; U.S. citizens did not
have access.
Even in today’s somewhat more liberated world for women
(especially in the developed world), gender remains a key varia-
ble regarding Internet access. Young males are more likely
to gain access to a computer at earlier ages and to be more
interested in such high-tech activities like hacking and net-
working as compared to young females (Schell, Dodge, with
Moutsatsos, 2002). For example, in a study conducted by
Schell and Melnychuk (2011) on male and female hacker
conference attendees, the mean age that males (n = 66) became
interested in technology was 11 years, whereas for females
(n = 68), the mean age was 15.5 years. Furthermore, the mean
age that males (n = 61) became interested in hacking/IT secu-
rity was 18 years, whereas for females, the mean age (n = 57)
was 23 years.
Finally, life stage factors are important in terms of Internet
access. Individuals born after 1950 are more likely to seek access
to the Internet than those born earlier, because the former are
more likely to have been exposed to computers at a younger
age; therefore, they are less likely to feel overwhelmed by the
opportunities that Internet access can provide (Schell, 2007).
Legal Jurisdictional Adaptation Factors and the Key
Elements of Liability in Conventional and Online Crimes
There is little question that Internet access to and adoption
by citizens in developed and developing nations can result in
both personal and national economic growth. However, it has
become equally clear that as the Internet continued to evolve
into its adulthood, Internet access and adoption by the masses
have led to both positive and negative outcomes. Sometimes,
72
Internet Censorship

the latter result in harm to property or persons, or both. As these
harm-inducing cases have been brought to court in the United
States and elsewhere, interesting legal jurisdictional questions
have arisen, as well as a basic understanding of the key elements
of liability in both conventional and online crimes. Moreover,
generally speaking, when more than one jurisdiction becomes
involved in cases involving online crime, the legal complexity of
the case increases exponentially.
In the various Internet-exploit cases cited in Chapter 1,
when harm was caused—as in the Google hacking/censorship
case regarding Chinese authorities—a cybercrime had techni-
cally occurred. However, the prosecution and the defense
typically have different views about who is liable for the
cybercrime—and why.
For conventional crimes to occur, Anglo-American law bases
criminal liability on the coincidence of four key elements, as
outlined by Susan Brenner (2001):
• A culpable mental state (the mens rea)
• A criminal action or a failure to act when one is under a duty
to do so (the actus reus)
• The existence of certain necessary conditions or attendant
circumstances. With some crimes, it must be proven that cer-
tain events occurred, or certain facts are true, in order for an
individual to be found guilty of a crime.
• A prohibited result, or harm.
In a conventional crime such as bigamy, or multiple mar-
riages, all four of these elements must combine for the imposi-
tion of liability. To start, an individual must enter into a
marriage knowing either that he or she is already married
or that the person whom he or she is marrying is already mar-
ried. The prohibited act is the redundant marriage (the actus
reus). The culpable mental state (the mens rea) is the perpetra-
tor’s knowledge that he or she is entering into a redundant
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
73

marriage. The attendant circumstance is the existence of a pre-
vious marriage still being in force. Finally, the prohibited result,
or harm to persons, is the threat that bigamous marriages pose
to the stability of family life. Put simply, crimes—whether they
occur on land or online—involve conduct deemed to be unac-
ceptable by society’s standards. Thus, society, through its laws,
imposes criminal liability (Schell and Martin, 2004).
A U.S. Legal Jurisdictional Case
The following case is an illustration of these four elements
converging in the instance of a U.S. case involving the Internet,
the WikiLeaks hacker cell and its founder Julian Assange, busi-
nesses who supported the WikiLeaks Web site and the ﬁght for
Internet openness and freedom of information, and Private
Bradley Manning (who while on duty in Iraq in 2009 and
2010 as a U.S. intelligence analyst had access to high-security
government and military documents). Manning chose to transmit
these secret documents to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange over
the Internet while he was stationed in the ﬁeld. Assange then
chose to transmit the said documents over the Internet for citizens
and maybe even the enemy to view.
As noted in Chapter 1, the court-martial of Bradley
Manning in 2013 is believed to be the most signiﬁcant
whistle-blower case since Daniel Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon
Papers. And although Bradley Manning pleaded guilty to 10
offenses that could get him 20 years in prison, military prosecu-
tors on the ﬁrst day of his court-martial were steadfast in insist-
ing that he not only aided the enemy with the use of the
Internet (i.e., a cybercrime) but also violated the Espionage
Act. At the end of Manning’s trial, he was sentenced to 35 years,
but likely eligible for parole in 8.
Interestingly, on the second day of the court-martial at Fort
Meade, Maryland, a hacker by the name of Adrian Lamo
(who in 2004 was charged for a hack attack cybercrime)
afﬁrmed that Private Manning contacted him online in
74
Internet Censorship

May 2010, from base in Iraq, seeking guidance on encrypted on-
line chats, so there was a strong implication that premeditation on
Manning’s part had, indeed, occurred (Simpson, 2013).
Regarding the four critical elements of criminality liability, is
Manning guilty of both a cybercrime and violations of the
Espionage Act? Or is he an innocent man who went through
pretrial abuse (i.e., forced nudity inspections while in solitary
conﬁnement) and harassment over his sexual identiﬁcation
issues, but is nevertheless the responsible bearer of his “legal
duty” to expose war crimes—and thus not guilty of any crime?
Given the importance of this case in American history, legal
experts had earlier projected that the court-martial could last
up to three months, which it did. From what had been pub-
lished on the case by the media, here were the arguments used
by the prosecution and the defense.
To begin, the prosecutors used a Civil War court-martial
argument to advance their position that Manning intentionally
sent (the mens rea) hundreds of thousands of classiﬁed docu-
ments to the WikiLeaks Web site, thus aiding al-Qaida and
causing harm to U.S. soldiers in the ﬁeld (the actus reus). In
order for the four elements to be upheld, the prosecutors must
have proven without a reasonable doubt that Manning knew al-
Qaida members would see what WikiLeaks published (attendant
circumstances) and that this was a prohibited act. In other words,
harm was or could be done. The prosecution said during the pre-
trial, for example, that the government planned to introduce evi-
dence that al-Qaida members, including Osama bin Laden, saw
the war logs and the State Department cables that Manning alleg-
edly sent to WikiLeaks—and that harm actually occurred. The
prosecution also noted that military courts in the past have recog-
nized that publishing critical information in a newspaper can
indirectly send information to the enemy—thus constituting the
act of “aiding the enemy” (Dishneau, 2013).
Defense lawyers argued that the Civil War era cases involved
coded messages disguised as advertisements, and that all of the
modern cases of espionage have actually involved military
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
75

members who have given the enemy information directly. The
defense went on to argue that there has been no case in the
full history of military jurisprudence dealing with someone
giving information to a legitimate journalistic outlet (like
WikiLeaks?)—and then having them publish it online, whether
the enemy viewed it or not. The evidence disclosed by
Adrian Lamo, the online-conﬁdant-for-Manning-turned U.S.
government conﬁdant, was that Manning intentionally chose
to leak the content through the Internet, because he wanted
the people of America and around the world to see the truth.
Moreover, Manning, like other freedom ﬁghters of his time
(such as Aaron Swartz), apparently believed that information
should be free (Dishneau, 2013).
Furthermore, in July, 2012, Manning’s defense attorney ﬁled
a 110-page motion requesting that all charges against the soldier
be dismissed, based on Article 13 of the Uniform Code of
Military Justice, which bans punishment or penalty other than
arrest or conﬁnement upon the charges pending against someone
who is detained. The defense further argued that it does not
believe that there has ever been such an egregious case of unlawful
pretrial detainment as that of Private Manning, who was sub-
jected to an equivalent of solitary conﬁnement for over eight
months, with emails indicating that at least one three-star general
ordered unbearable conditions for Manning, including his being
subjected to nudity during repeat inspections (London, 2012).
The defense further argued that Manning was just “doing his
legal duty” of reporting war crimes while on duty in Iraq. Recall
that Manning was charged with crimes for sending hundreds of
thousands of classiﬁed items and videos, such as the “collateral
murder” video depicting a U.S. Apache attack helicopter killing
12 civilians and wounding 2 children on the ground in 2007 in
Baghdad. The helicopter then ﬁred on and killed the rescuers of
the wounded, and a U.S. tank drove over one of the bodies,
allegedly slicing the man in half. From a legal perspective
and under Article 85 of the ﬁrst protocol to the Geneva
Conventions, these acts constitute three war crimes. Moreover,
76
Internet Censorship

argued Manning’s defense lawyers, Section 27-10 of the U.S.
Army Subject Schedule No. 27-1 stipulates that it is the obligation
of solders to report all violations of the law of war. At his earlier
guilty plea hearing, Manning had, in fact, maintained that he
had spoken to his superiors and asked them to investigate the
video and other “war porn” but that his superiors refused to do
so. Manning said that he was very disturbed by the maimed chil-
dren, the soldiers shown in the video who appeared not to value
human life, and their blatantly referring to the targets as “dead bas-
tards.” So, in essence, argued his defense, Manning was only
22 years old and he courageously committed the legal duty acts
for which he stood criminally accused. To counter charges that
he violated the Espionage Act, the defense further argued
that the prosecution must prove “beyond a reasonable doubt” that
Manning had “reason to believe” that the ﬁles he transmitted to
WikiLeaks over the Internet “could be used to harm the United
States or aid a foreign power” (Cohn, 2013, p. 2 of 4).
At the hearing, when he pleaded guilty to 10 charges,
Manning announced, “I believed if the public, particularly the
American public, could see this, it could spark a debate on the
military and our foreign policy in general as it applied to Iraq
and Afghanistan.” Manning added, “It might cause society to
reconsider the need to engage in counterterrorism while ignor-
ing the situation of the people we engaged with every day.”
These are hardly the words of someone who thought that his
Internet transmissions could harm the United States or aid a
foreign power, noted his attorneys. But that was the critical
issue left to the powers that be at the court-martial—who, in
the end, found that the prosecution’s arguments were the more
credible (Cohn, 2013, p. 2 of 4).
A Multi-jurisdictional, Competing, and Complex
Legal Case
Though the U.S.-jurisdictional case of Bradley Manning
had its challenges from both the prosecution and the defense
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
77

perspectives, Internet crimes involving cross-border jurisdictions
make for much more difﬁcult prosecution than singular jurisdic-
tion cases and, often, competing rulings and remedies by the
courts.
So, what about Julian Assange? Is he guilty of a cybercrime,
and in which jurisdiction should he be tried? Also, what law
did he allegedly violate?
Julian Paul Assange is the editor-in-chief and founder of
the whistle-blowing Web site WikiLeaks. During his youth in
Australia, he was involved with the hacker group known as
the International Subversives and he used the online name
“Mendax.” In 1991, he was caught by the police after hacking
into the systems of the communications company Nortel. He
was also afﬁliated with hack attacks against universities and
U.S. government systems, and was charged with 31 counts of
hacking and related cybercrimes. In 1995, he pleaded guilty
to 25 counts but was released with a small ﬁne and no addi-
tional time behind prison bars. In fact, the judge for this case
indicated that Assange’s hack attacks were not malicious but
rather a consequence of his intelligence and tech-savvy curios-
ity. Thus, the judge ruled that Assange did not merit more sub-
stantive punitive sanctions.
In 2006, Assange founded WikiLeaks to provide, according
to the WikiLeaks Web site, a means of causing regime change
and to advocate for open information sharing to expose injus-
tice and abuses of power. Though the Web site published con-
troversial materials related to the Church of Scientology and
Guantanamo Bay in its earlier years, perhaps WikiLeaks’ big-
gest call to universal fame came with the publication of the
American diplomatic cables on the Internet by Bradley
Manning in 2009 and 2010 (Koring, 2012). Subsequently,
the companies that provided funding and infrastructure for
WikiLeaks, such as PayPal, pulled their support.
In December 2011, news broke that military investigators
had uncovered evidence of what appeared to be a direct link
between Manning and Assange, after a U.S. government digital
78
Internet Censorship

forensic expert examined the computer of Manning and
retrieved communications between the two men. Although
Assange
has
always
denied having
direct
contact
with
Manning—though he has never revealed how the materials that
Manning stole happened to come into the possession of
WikiLeaks—a ﬁle included in the computer investigation
included this line: “You can currently contact our investigations
editor directly in Iceland at 354.862.3481: 24 hour service: ask
for Julian Assange.” Though these revelations seem to provide
some evidence suggesting that Assange had lied about his con-
tact with Manning while he was in Iraq, the bigger question
for the courts is whether this fact strengthens any potential
American legal charges against Assange regarding the Manning
case. Until this time, it seemed as though Assange would be rela-
tively untouchable, because there was no direct evidence that he
had been in contact with Manning prior to, or subsequent to,
the data theft. Going by this evidence, there is a strong suggestion
that Assange was likely afﬁliated with Manning prior to the
data theft, perhaps even coaching him about what to look for in
the conﬁdential ﬁles of interest. If this is the case, the prosecutors
could be looking at Assange’s likely liability, as well as Manning’s,
under the Espionage Act or similar laws (Mataconis, 2011).
Taking a closer look at Assange’s guilt or freedom prospects,
there is quite a difference between a case where Assange was just
the recipient of documents from some anonymous third party
who had gotten the secret documents from Manning and a case
where Assange was actively in contact with Manning before,
during, and following the theft of the said classiﬁed documents.
In the ﬁrst case, the defense could argue that Assange was
merely acting as a journalist and was not guilty of any crime.
In the second case, Assange would have some major legal liabil-
ity to contend with, for his guilt in aiding and abetting an act of
espionage becomes more apparent (Mataconis, 2011).
That said, lawyers maintain that U.S. authorities could face
tremendous legal hurdles if they tried bringing criminal charges
against Assange, assuming in the ﬁrst place they could get
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
79

Assange out from his current hideaway in the Ecuadorian
embassy (and although he is likely fearing extradition to the
United States to face espionage-related charges).
Three specialists in espionage law have argued that prosecuting
someone like Assange on espionage charges would require evi-
dence that the defendant was not just in contact with represen-
tatives from some foreign power but that he also intended to
provide them with secrets. No such evidence has surfaced in the
case of this Australian-born former computer hacker who is now
an international celebrity, visited by such notables as Lady Gaga,
while he remains “in hiding.” Attorney General Eric Holder
warned that the U.S. Justice Department had “an active, ongoing
criminal investigation with regard to this matter . . . [and] to the
extent that we can ﬁnd anybody who was involved in the break-
ing of American law and who has put at risk the assets and the
people I have described, they will be held responsible . . . They
will be held accountable.” However, Mark Stephens, a London
lawyer retained by Assange to represent him should a trial be set
in motion, responded, “Until I see a speciﬁc allegation, then it is
difﬁcult for me to respond.” Stephens also remarked that given
that Manning made unauthorized disclosures of secret documents
while employed for the U.S. government, there is a much
stronger legal foundation of a criminal case against him than that
made for Assange (Reuters, 2010).
Apart from the legal debate just outlined, other experts
believe that the argument against an Espionage Act prosecution
of Assange should not be built upon a denial on his part that he
spoke with Manning. Rather, the fact that Assange communi-
cated with Manning—directly or indirectly, through an inter-
mediary, or both—should be embraced and protected,
because the pair’s ability to communicate is the tenet that
deserves protecting in a free society, whether that communica-
tion occurred in person or through the Internet. It is curious
that Floyd Abrams, one of the leading legal authorities on the
First Amendment and U.S. Constitutional Law appearing
80
Internet Censorship

before the U.S. Supreme Court, defended the New York Times
in the Pentagon Papers case in 1971. This case was very contro-
versial at the time because the paper published secret reports on
U.S. involvement in Vietnam from 1945 to 1967. However,
Abrams feels that it would be far more difﬁcult arguing that
Assange is not guilty of violating the Espionage Act on the basis
that the WikiLeaks Web site is journalism and, therefore,
should be judged by the standards of the First Amendment
(Khatchadourian, 2011).
What Abrams likely had in mind was a line from some
very early WikiLeaks correspondence expressing the notion
that such information leaks could, indeed, “bring down
many administrations that rely on concealing reality—including
the U.S. administration.” But, one needs to ask whether what
Assange and WikiLeaks did was really with criminal sentiment—
or was the act of disclosure on the Internet simply fair expres-
sion of one’s rights under the First Amendment in a society that
values freedom of information, regardless of the mode in which
it is delivered (Khatchadourian, 2011).
The Differences between Freedom of Information,
Internet Freedom, and Internet Censorship
According to an extensive report released by Freedom House in
2012, brutal attacks against bloggers in some Internet-
connected nations, politically motivated surveillance of online
content, proactive manipulation of Web content by some gov-
ernments, and emerging restrictive laws aimed at regulating free
speech online are just some of the diverse threats against infor-
mation and Internet freedom that have emerged since 2010.
But the story is not all bleak. Increased pushback by civil soci-
ety, technology companies, and independent courts, who
believe in defending information freedom and in ﬁghting
against Internet censorship, have resulted in a variety of notable
victories (Freedom House, 2012).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
81

Freedom of Information Deﬁned
Freedom of information generally refers to a citizen’s right to
access information held by the government. In many developed
countries such as the United States and Canada, this freedom is
supported as a constitutional right. In the United States, for
example, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), Title 5,
United States Code, Section 552, was signed into law on
July 4, 1966, by President Lyndon B. Johnson. Afterward, the
FOIA was amended a number of times—in 1974, 1986, and
in 1996 with the enactment of the Electronic Freedom of
Information Act Amendments of 1996. FOIA requires U.S.
federal agencies to make public records available to citizens
both electronically and through public reading rooms.
Though the FOIA applies to records created and kept by
agencies in the executive branch of the federal govern-
ment, such as the Department of Energy, it does not apply to
Congress, the judicial branch of the federal government, or to
state or local governments. Nevertheless, many state govern-
ments in the United States have enacted open records law to
support freedom of information (U.S. Department of Energy,
2013).
Clearly, the FOIA was created to broaden access to govern-
ment information to citizens, regardless of whether the medium
is online or conventional. The Freedom of Information Act and
similar legislation in other countries were established to have
transparency, government accountability, public protection
against mismanagement or corruption, and general education
for citizens. In the United States and elsewhere, related human
rights include such protections as freedom of expression, data pro-
tection privacy, and freedom of association. More than 70 coun-
tries with government representation have approved similar
freedom of information legislation. For example, in China, the
Freedom of Government Information Law has been in effect
since December 28, 2005 (Janssen, 2013).
82
Internet Censorship

Internet Freedom Deﬁned
To show their citizens that they “support” Internet freedom,
governments around the globe, in varying degrees, have adopted
diverse legal and policy decisions to increase access to Internet-
based communication technologies for its citizens. Sometimes,
their motives for endorsing Internet-based technologies include
emphasizing cultural norms or transmitting to the masses key
political objectives. One rather convenient way to profess some
degree of Internet freedom is to set up a series of Internet cafes
so that citizens in more urban areas, at least, have Internet access.
Speaking in January 2010, then U.S. secretary of state Hillary
Clinton compared the spread of Internet-driven information net-
works to “a new nervous system for our planet.” She went on to
say, “[I]n many respects, information has never been so free.
[But] we’ve seen a spike in threats to the free ﬂow of information”
(U.S. Department of State, 2010, 1).
Deﬁning Internet freedom on a macro system basis is a more
difﬁcult problem. From a rhetorical point of view, most global
citizens and their government leaders will espouse support for
the concept of Internet freedom. But what “freedom” is, per se,
means different things to various citizens and governments, pri-
marily because culture plays such a huge factor in deﬁning life
and one’s priorities in life. This normative divergence plays out
in debates over access to information and education, threats to
freedom, online content controls, and governance, in general. In
short, the concept of Internet freedom holds within it a series of
conﬂicts about how the Internet should function. Consequently,
accepting these tensions appears to be a sound approach to take
in deﬁning the term Internet freedom (Bambauer, 2010).
From this angle, several realistic statements about the premises
underlying Internet freedom can be made (Bambauer, 2010):
• First, in order to enjoy the wide range of content available
on the Internet 24/7, citizens need to have access to the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
83

Internet. Countries and nation states vary on their access
policies for citizens. For example, in the United States, the
ability to “go online” is treated more like a market access
privilege issue than as an entitlement. Simply stated, if citi-
zens can afford to pay for access to the Internet, they are wel-
come to do so, but if they cannot afford to have a private
account, they are dependent on Web site available to the
public—such as those found at libraries or in schools. In
contrast, Finland has a policy whereby having a 1 MB con-
nection to high-speed broadband is a basic right for all citi-
zens. Also, France’s Constitutional Council has declared
that high-speed broadband access is a legal right for all
citizens.
• Second, countries and nation states vary on the question,
“Free from whom or from what?” One threat in some coun-
tries is that the nation state can actually impinge online lib-
erties in a myriad of ways, ranging from criminalizing
online speech or conduct, monitoring messages communi-
cated over the Internet, or blocking material on the
Internet altogether. While Americans tend to be focused
on preventing unchecked governmental powers by their
governments, other countries such as those in Europe are
concerned about the vast amounts of personal information
about online users that corporations have accumulated—and
may misuse. Over the past several years, the latter fear seems
to have been substantiated to some degree—accepting, for
example, the controversy generated over Google’s video service
in Italy and Google’s Street View geo-mapping projects in
numerous jurisdictions that raised concerns about adequate
Privacy protections for citizens.
• Third, liability for “inappropriate” Web site content varies
from country to country. In some countries, for example,
there is a need to prevent impingements on one’s freedom
generated by other users, such as concerns about the harm
that may be done to one’s reputations should someone
84
Internet Censorship

decide to place false and highly defamatory content on Web
pages. For this reason, some governments have a policy
requiring Internet Service Providers and social networking
Web sites to police questionable content so as to avoid liabil-
ity suits, while other countries have policies that provide
immunity for anyone but the author of such content.
• Fourth, there is little question that different countries and
nation-states “balance” in a variety of ways “freedom of
expression” and “access to information” against “concerns
about the harm caused by perceived ‘offensive content.’ ”
Generally, there is concern about harm done to individual
citizens (such as online defamation of someone’s character),
religious or ethnic minorities, or common and prioritized
societal values. For example, the United States views the free
exchange of information as “weighty enough” to displace
concerns of a competing nature—which helps to explain
why so-called “offensive” materials like hate speech and por-
nography are protected by the US constitution. Having said
this, however, the US constitution does prohibit certain on-
line threats like cyber stalking, child pornography, and
obscene materials—all perceived to surpass established com-
munity standards of tolerance. In contrast, while European
countries like France and Germany adhere to and strongly
protect “open expression” online, both countries ban online
pornographic content. Finally, in Saudi Arabia, where the
bulk of citizens are followers of the Sunni segment of
Islam, Web sites featuring tenets of the Baha’i faith or the
Shia teachings of Islam have their content blocked by
government authorities.
Thus, given these four factors, if one were to view Internet
freedom as protecting unfettered expression online, this liberty
is counterbalanced in various degrees by competing concerns
even within countries and jurisdictions. As stated, this counter-
balancing of competing factors occurs even in countries having
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
85

a history of strongly protecting citizens’ free speech (Bambauer,
2010).
Finally, countries vary in their perception of who should
actually govern Internet freedom, and how this process should
occur. Clearly, this debate has been ongoing since the Internet
“went commercial.” Given that the U.S. government created
the Internet’s initial architecture, known as ARPAnet, to this
day the United States maintains some degree of control over
the workings of the Internet because of the strong connect
between the U.S. Department of Commerce and ICANN
(the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers)—
which is primarily responsible for overseeing the domain name
system (Schell, 2007).
The United States has strongly protested against the transfer
of ICANN’s functions to other entities because of their strong
belief that putting the Internet under international control
would weaken freedom of expression; in particular, other coun-
tries have argued vehemently that moving forward, there needs
to be a larger voice in decision making about the Internet’s
underlying protocols and standards. Many countries believe
that the Internet is currently overrun by America’s ﬁxation to
properly balance privacy, security, trust, and Internet censor-
ship issues. This debate has reared its controversial head in
a number of venues, such as the World Summit on the
Information Society. While the Australian government has
argued for mandatory Internet ﬁltering, other government ofﬁ-
cials have argued that such ﬁltering is too broad. Perhaps, notes
Bambauer (2010), Internet freedom is a term that should be
abandoned for now, because in a real-world sense, it is too gen-
eral to be useful.
Internet Censorship Revisited
Internet censorship occurs when governments try to control
citizens’ online activities, restrict the free ﬂow of information,
and infringe on the rights of online users. Since about 2005,
86
Internet Censorship

attempts to maintain Internet freedom and openness have been
challenged in a number of countries. Moreover, the methods
used by governments to control the Internet are also becoming
increasingly sophisticated, in both developed and developing
nations.
If you were to enter this debate, which seems to be recurring
worldwide, which side would you argue for—that there are
circumstances under which countries or nation-states can legit-
imately censor the Internet, or that Internet censorship is, with-
out question, evil? In 2010, Professor Derek Bambauer from
the Brooklyn Law School and Professor Richard A. Epstein
from the University of Chicago entered such a public debate.
Bambauer argued the former position, while Epstein argued
the latter. Below is a summary of their speaking points to help
readers decide which side of the debate they would tend to
agree with (Bambauer and Epstein, 2010):
1. For Censorship (Bambauer): Let’s face it, the ﬁctional
binary world of “Censorship” OR “Freedom” no longer
exists, and perhaps even before the Internet came into exis-
tence, it never existed. Every country has a long history of
spying on their own citizens at times, especially when there
is a perceived security threat. Before the Internet’s time and
now, we have lived in a world of ubiquitous Internet
Censorship and surveillance. Technological companies
and Internet Service Providers have had to face these busi-
ness challenge questions when setting up their products
and services in China, Egypt, Pakistan, Australia, and
India. In fact, the United States even requires telecommu-
nications companies to build wiretapping capabilities into
their products and services so that they can be utilized
during terrorist or other security attacks. So, once “spying”
is part of the core functionality of Internet telephony, it is
available to snoops in any country or government arm,
not just the FBI. What is more, we need to acknowledge
that China, Australia, and Ethiopia commit the same
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
87

“crime,” for they restrict access to content online through
laws and technology, and they spy on Internet communica-
tions. To the point, there appears to be some justiﬁcation
by countries to censor the Internet; thus, there is a justiﬁ-
able argument that the key factors determining legitimacy
are found in the process by which a country arrives at the
decision to ﬁlter the Internet and how precisely it blocks
content in practice during non-threatening periods.
2. Against Censorship (Epstein): One can suggest that it is
difﬁcult to tell which reasons for censoring content are valid
because nations tend to ﬁlter different kinds of Internet
content. For example, the United States government blocks
the unauthorized use of copyrights materials [as seen
through its passage, for example, of the DMCA]. Yet
China restricts political speech, the Mumbai government
blocks the speech of extremist Hindu groups, the French
government blocks the images of white supremacist groups,
and the New Zealand government blocks child pornogra-
phy. Here are ﬁve different governments with ﬁve unique
agendas for blocking Internet content. It is wrong to sug-
gest that we turn to procedures to determine how various
governments make these censorious decisions. From the
viewpoint of a classical liberal scholar, I would submit
that the world can discover the right principles by looking
at the output of the process rather than merely guessing
about the various ways that different nations make their
laws. In my view, there appears to be no sound reason
why good laws that emerge, even as if by chance from less
democratic processes, should be condemned.
3. For Censorship (Bambauer): My closing argument is that
the methodology suggested by you has some merit because
it looks at the ends, not the means. But what values should
be prioritized in assessing “appropriate censorship”? Do
these values, for example, derive from American thinking,
or should they be more universal in nature? There is a fear,
88
Internet Censorship

for example, that an approach grounded explicitly in U.S.
values might result in strong resistance from outside actors,
for other governments are often hesitant to yield to Western
values because they conﬂict with their own, or because they
want to avoid being labeled by their own citizens as too weak
to ﬁght against the Western values being imposed. Not only
does a universal approach risk weakening core commitments
just to achieve consensus, but, realistically speaking, an
approach driven by one country’s ideas about information
seems totally impractical. Let’s face it: Substance-based deci-
sions require technology ﬁrms to make very ﬁne-grained deci-
sions about what content is inﬂammatory and what is critical.
For example, should YouTube adhere to the Iranian govern-
ment’s demands to block a video of a 26-year-old female
named Neda Salehi Agha Soltan, who was shot in Iran
in an anti-government protest on June 20, 2009, on the
grounds that this explicit online video showing her death
might induce protests? Rather, a process-based analysis may
provide a clearer mechanism for companies to make faster,
cheaper, and (hopefully) better decisions about censoring
content. Because Iran’s decision-making methods for ﬁltering
appear to be arbitrary and lacking in opportunity for partici-
pation as well as transparency, it would appear that
YouTube should reject any request made by the Iranian
government to block content, as in the case of Neda’s cold-
blooded shooting and the recording of this event.
4. Against Censorship (Epstein): My closing point is to
admit that I remain a universalist on matters of morals
and ethics, for my prior training in Roman law has rein-
forced the notion that social relations do not differ in fun-
damental ways across societies. What does differ from one
country to another are the formalities and institutions uti-
lized to enforce these fundamentals of social relations. In
my view, the U.S. Constitution, for example, has been
quite successful because it accepts the universal standards
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
89

of sanctity of property and contract that require govern-
ment control of such undesirable behaviors like aggression
and fraud—whether they occur on land or in the virtual
world. I would submit that these values are not distinctively
American but are present in both Roman and English sys-
tems worldwide. Moreover, the American founders did
not regard these principles as “distinctively American” but
were happy to learn and borrow these principles from
others inhabiting other lands.
Recent Trends in Internet Censorship According to
the Freedom on the Net 2012 Report
According to a study entitled Freedom on the Net 2012: A
Global Assessment of Internet and Digital Media, some recent
trends on Internet censorship support the concerns of online
global citizens (Freedom House, 2012):
• In some countries, laws have been passed since January 2011
that either restrict online speech, violate online users’ pri-
vacy, or punish online users for posting content viewed as
“objectionable.”
• Bloggers and online users are facing arrest for political
speech and for content posted on the Internet deemed to
be “offensive” to the government.
• Bloggers and online users are tortured, viciously assaulted, or
are gone missing in retaliation for posting offensive messages
online—particularly if the content is deemed to be “offen-
sive” to the government.
• Pro-government commentators are paid to manipulate on-
line discussions to inﬂuence the masses in the direction that
the government favors.
• Cyber wars pitting one nation state against another are
becoming increasingly more common following real-world
events.
90
Internet Censorship

• Online citizens, along with some enlightened court deci-
sions, are effectively yielding some positive returns on hack-
tivistic activities aimed at curbing Internet censorship.
Of course, not all censorship of information on the Internet
can be viewed as negative. Parents around the world, for exam-
ple, use Web ﬁlters to limit or block access to their children to
speciﬁc Web sites that may cause them psychological or physi-
cal harm. But let’s take a closer look at some of these world
events that are causing consternation. The Freedom on the Net
2012 study looked at barriers to access, limits on content, and
violations of online user rights in 47 countries and then rated
countries as “free” or “not free.” Freedom House monitors the
status of freedom in countries that are advocating for democ-
racy, human rights, and Internet openness. Freedom on the
Net 2012 is written by editors afﬁliated with Freedom House.
One key ﬁnding in this report was that Estonia had the
greatest degree of Internet freedom among the countries exam-
ined, with the United States ranking second. Iran, Cuba, and
China were viewed as the most restrictive. According to this
report, though China has the world’s largest population of
Internet users, the authorities seem to operate a highly sophisti-
cated system of Internet censorship, with their Great Firewall
becoming notorious for shutting down Internet “chatter” that
the government authorities deem to be “sensitive.” Earlier in
2012, Chinese censors had completely blocked search terms as
a means of preventing online citizens from getting news on
prominent human rights activist Chen Guangcheng, who cre-
ated a “diplomatic storm” when he escaped house arrest and
sought refuge in the U.S. embassy in Beijing.
Moreover, major Web portals and social networking Web
sites in China—not state-owned—were given the ultimatum of
complying with strict government-imposed Internet censorship
rules or risk being shut down altogether. In March 2012, after
commencing a campaign to remove “rampant online rumors,”
Chinese authorities ordered China’s leading micro-blogging sites
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
91

(like Sina Weibo) to disable their site’s comment feature for three
days. Unlike in the United States and democracies elsewhere, in
China, bloggers are required to register their real names and not
use some moniker disguising themselves. Accepting that this real-
ity is imposed in China, there is no real record of how many on-
line citizens have actually been compliant (Armstrong, 2012;
Freedom House, 2012).
Eleven other countries were ranked as not free in the
Freedom on the Net 2012 report, including Belarus, Saudi
Arabia, Uzbekistan, and Thailand—all countries that seem to
perceive Beijing’s inﬂuence as an “incubator for sophisticated
restrictions” to be a good role model for Internet censorship
in other jurisdictions. Moreover, 20 of the 47 countries exam-
ined were given a negative trajectory in terms of Internet
freedom since January 2011—with Bahrain, Pakistan, and
Ethiopia showing the greatest declines. These declines in rank-
ing reﬂect increased censorship, arrests, and violence used
against bloggers by authorities in the Middle East in an effort
to silence public calls for democratic reform. What’s more, in
Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia, Uzbekistan, and China, government
authorities tried imposing even more restrictions on Internet
content after they saw the key role that the social media played
in the Arab Spring uprisings calling for more democracy in
Egypt (with the overthrow of government leader Hosni
Mubarak) and Tunisia (with the ouster of President Zine el
Abidine Ben Ali) (Armstrong, 2012; Freedom House, 2012).
According to the Freedom on the Net 2012 report, the Saudi
government warned online Saudi users about their desire to
clamp down on protests and went so far as to discourage protes-
tors from participating in demonstrations via BlackBerry’s
multimedia messaging service. Word coming out of Saudi
Arabia was that the authorities had not only detained but had
literally intimidated hundreds of online political activists and
online commentators. The authorities had also ﬁltered what
they deemed to be “sensitive” political, religious, or porno-
graphic content from entering the Saudi Internet, and they
92
Internet Censorship

had allegedly gone to great lengths recruiting supporters online
to “campaign against” calls for protests. It seems that in Saudi
Arabia, Egypt’s “revolution for democracy,” which saw the
30-year rule of Hosni Mubarak come to an end, was called
“the Facebook or Twitter revolution” because of how effec-
tively hacktivists used the social media to spread their message
online, even though there were a number of strong censoring
countermeasures employed. The government’s countermeas-
ures included arresting dissidents, blocking Internet access
when they deemed appropriate to do so, and restricting cellular
phone networks.
Despite citizens’ hopes in Egypt that things would improve,
the report noted that it remains to be seen how the incoming
president Mohamed Morsi will view Internet censorship fol-
lowing the very controlling era of Mubarak and the interim
governing Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF).
Apparently, the Internet, social media, and citizens’ mobile
phones remained under intense surveillance, bandwidth speeds
were on “slow speed” for speciﬁc events, and SCAF-afﬁliated
commentators continued to manipulate online discussions.
Equally as bad, according to facts gathered by Freedom House,
hacktivists and bloggers continued to be beaten, intimidated, or
tried in military courts for allegedly “insulting the military power”
or “disturbing social peace.” Though President Morsi pledged to
set free Egyptians who were subjected to unfair imprisonment,
their fate and the future of Internet freedom in Egypt remain at
high risk (Armstrong, 2012; Freedom House, 2012).
The report accorded 14 countries a positive trajectory rating,
with Tunisia and Burma experiencing the largest improvements
following dramatic political openings calling for broader
institutions of democratic governance and the upholding of
Internet freedom. However, a ﬂicker of hope seemed to be
blown out quickly by the start of 2013, particularly after
the assassination of Chokri Belaid on February 6. Belaid was
the leader of a Tunisian opposition alliance that had been
highly critical of the ruling Islamist party. As a result of the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
93

many and highly volatile changes in government, many young
people in Tunisia have become disillusioned by the country’s fal-
tering economy, an unemployment rate soaring over 17 percent,
and the continued Islamist crackdowns on civil liberties and
Internet freedom (Reguly, 2013).
In fact, some scholars have recently noted that with the vis-
ible instability of the government and economy in Tunisia,
the cradle of the Arab Spring is now becoming a top exporter
of Jihadist militants (Ben Bouazza and Schemm, 2013).
Online Activities in Jurisdictions “Under the
Microscope”: Their Strong Support for Internet
Openness and Their Hard-Core Tactics Used to
Reinforce Internet Censorship
Countries Supporting Internet Openness
According to the Freedom on the Net 2012 editors, several
countries—including the United States, Azerbaijan, and
Russia—have been suggested to be, in various degrees, support-
ers of Internet openness, whereas other countries are clearly
censorious. Let’s take a closer look at the kind of detailed infor-
mation Freedom House maintains and discloses to the public as
a means of assessing Internet freedom in various countries
(Freedom House, 2012).
The United States of America
The ﬁrst example we will review is the United States. With a
population of 314 million, the United States had an Internet
penetration in 2011 of 78 percent. Web 2.0 applications were
not blocked, there was no notable political censorship, there
were
no
bloggers
or
Information
and
Communication
Technology (ICT) users arrested, and status of press freedom
was declared to be “free.” Also, the Internet freedom status for
both 2011 and 2012 was “free.” On a scale from 0 through
100, where 0 indicated “most free” and 100 indicated “least
94
Internet Censorship

free,” the overall Internet freedom status for the United States
was 13 in 2011 and 12 in 2012. This rating included assess-
ment on “obstacles to Internet access” (the United States
received a rating of 4 for both 2011 and 2012); “limits on
Internet content” (received a rating of 2 for 2011 and 1 for
2012); and “violations of Internet user rights” (received a rating
of 7 for both 2011 and 2012).
By deﬁnition, “obstacles to Internet access” assessed the
infrastructural and economic barriers to Internet access; the
government’s attempts to block speciﬁc applications or tech-
nologies; and legal and regulatory ownership of and control
over the Internet and mobile phone access providers. “Limits
on Internet content” addressed the extent of ﬁltering and
blocking of certain Web sites, as well as other kinds of censor-
ship and self-censorship. This deﬁnition included manipulating
Web page content, limiting the diversity of online news media,
and limiting digital media for various forms of hacktivism.
Finally, “Violations of Internet user rights” assessed placing
legal protections and restrictions on online activities, watching
over the Internet’s content, overriding principles of online pri-
vacy, doling out penalties for online activities deemed to be
“inappropriate” or “offensive,” and engaging in imprisoning,
physically attacking, or harassing online users whose activities
were deemed to be immoral, “offensive,” or beyond established
community standards of tolerance within a jurisdiction.
Given these combined ratings, in the United States Internet
access is “open” and fairly “free,” compared to that found in the
rest of the world. The U.S. courts seem to have consistently
upheld that prohibitions against the U.S. government’s regulation
of speech are applied to Internet content as well. There are some
concerns, however, with regard to the U.S. government’s voiced
need to increase Internet surveillance through its recent attempts
to pass the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the Protect IP
Act (PIPA) (Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012, 569–581).
As noted in Chapter 1, January 18, 2012, marked the largest
online protest in the history of the Internet when Web sites of
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
95

various sizes “went dark” in protest of the two U.S. Bills known
as SOPA and PIPA (Goodman, 2013).
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan is the next country we will review. With a popu-
lation of 9.3 million, this country had an Internet penetration
in 2011 of 50 percent. Web 2.0 applications were not blocked,
and there was no notable political censorship. However, unlike
the United States, there had been reports that certain Internet
bloggers and ICT users were arrested. For this reason, the
Freedom House report declared press freedom status to be
“not free.” The report ranked Azerbaijan at 48 in 2011 and
50 in 2012 on overall Internet freedom status, rating the coun-
try on “obstacles to Internet access” at 15 for 2011 and 13 for
2012; “limits on Internet content” at 15 for 2011 and 16 for
2012; and “violations of Internet user rights” at 18 for 2011
and 21 for 2012.
As host of the Internet Governance Forum held in
November 2012, the government of Azerbaijan has been
extremely keen to promote itself as an ICT innovator, but since
that time, it has actually increased its restrictions on Internet
freedom. Instead of actively promoting online content, this
government has been prone to raid cyber cafes to gather data
on user identities, put into prison politically active Internet
users on trumped up charges, and harass hacktivists and their
family members. Since that time, the government authorities
also increased their surveillance capabilities of mobile phones
(Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012, 53–64).
Russia
The third example we examine is Russia. With a population
of 143 million, this country had an Internet penetration in
2011 of 49 percent. Web 2.0 applications were not blocked,
and there was no notable political censorship. However, unlike
96
Internet Censorship

the United States, there had been reports that certain Russian
Internet bloggers and ICT users were arrested. For this reason,
the Freedom House report declared press freedom status to be
“not free.” The report ranked Russia at 52 for both 2011 and
2012 on overall Internet freedom status, rating the country on
“obstacles to Internet access” at 12 for 2011 and 11 for 2012;
“limits on Internet content” at 17 for 2011 and 18 for 2012;
and “violations of Internet user rights” at 23 for both 2011
and 2012.
In Russia, the Internet is the last somewhat uncensored pub-
lic debate platform. However, the disappointing news is that
since January 2011, massive distributed denial of service attacks
(described in Chapter 1), as well as smear campaigns aimed at
decreasing the credibility of hacktivists in Russia, have height-
ened. Moreover, after online tools played a key role in pulling
together anti-government protests that surfaced at the end of
2011, the Kremlin said that it fully intends to tighten its control
over Internet content and various forms of communications
(Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012, 408–421).
Countries Using Hard-Core Tactics to Reinforce Internet
Censorship
According to the Freedom on the Net 2012 editors, several
countries—including China, Iran, and Pakistan—seem to be,
in various degrees, using hard-core tactics to reinforce Internet
censorship.
China
Let’s begin with China. With a population of 1.3 billion,
this country had an Internet penetration in 2011 of 38 percent.
Web 2.0 applications were blocked, there was notable poli-
tical censorship, and there were reports that certain Chinese
Internet bloggers and ICT users had been arrested. For this rea-
son, the Freedom House report declared press freedom status to
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
97

be “not free.” The report ranked China at 83 for 2011 and 85
for 2012 on overall Internet freedom status, rating the country
on “obstacles to Internet access” at 19 for 2011 and 18 for
2012; “limits on Internet content” at 28 for 2011 and 29 for
2012; and “violations of Internet user rights” at 36 for 2011
and 38 for 2012.
Though China is home to the world’s biggest population of
Internet users, it is also one of the most restrictive regimes when
it comes to the Internet. Lately, the government seems to be
increasingly more restrictive. In terms of human rights viola-
tions, in 2011, the government authorities kidnapped dozens
of hacktivists and bloggers, held them “incommunicado” for
weeks on end, and sentenced a number of them to lengthy
prison terms. Moreover, the Chinese government has increased
controls over popular micro-blogging platforms like Sina
Weibo and pressured important companies like Google to
increase their censorship of political content. The Chinese
authorities have also told businesses using the Internet to
register online users’ real names and not fake names. Other
countries like Belarus, Uzbekistan, and Iran see China as a ter-
riﬁc role model for developing stringent Internet controls in
their jurisdictions (Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012, 126–151).
Iran
The second country that we’ll observe as Internet restrictive
is Iran. With a population of 79 million, this country had an
Internet penetration in 2011 of only 21 percent. Web 2.0
applications were blocked, there was notable political censor-
ship, and (like China) there had been reports that certain
Iranian Internet bloggers and ICT users were arrested. For this
reason, the Freedom House report declared press freedom sta-
tus to be “not free.” The report ranked Iran at 89 for 2011
and 90 for 2012 on overall Internet freedom status, rating the
country on “obstacles to Internet access” at 21 for both 2011
and 2012; “limits on Internet content” at 29 for 2011 and 32
98
Internet Censorship

for 2012; and “violations of Internet user rights” at 39 for 2011
and 37 for 2012.
After the disputed government elections in 2009, the Iranian
authorities began to clamp down on Internet censorship. The
Iranian authorities employed a wide range of hard-core tactics,
including upgrading content-ﬁltering technologies, “cracking”
digital certiﬁcates to undermine online users’ privacy, and tak-
ing steps to create a national Internet that would be under the
government’s strict censoring eye. Rated as likely the world’s
harshest disseminator of prison sentences for online users’
behaviors perceived to exceed the community standards of tol-
erance, Iran is known to have imposed the death penalty on at
least three online bloggers and IT professionals (Kelly, Cook,
and Truong, 2012, 262–278).
Pakistan
The third country we review as Internet censorious is
Pakistan. With a population of 180 million, this country had
an Internet penetration in 2011 of only 9 percent. Web 2.0
applications were not blocked, but there was notable political
censorship, and like China, there had been reports that certain
Pakistani Internet bloggers and ICT users were arrested. For
this reason, the Freedom House report declared press freedom
status to be “not free.” The report ranked Pakistan at 53 for
2011 and 63 for 2012 on overall Internet freedom status, rating
the country on “obstacles to Internet access” at 16 for 2011 and
19 for 2012; “limits on Internet content” at 17 for 2011 and 18
for 2012; and “violations of Internet user rights at 22 for 2011
and 26 for 2012.
Some rather unsettling recent developments regarding the
Internet in Pakistan have included a ban on encryption and vir-
tual private networks. There was also a reported death sentence
issued for an online user’s alleged “blasphemous” text message,
and there was a reported one-day block by the government
authorities on all mobile phone networks in the Balochistan
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
99

province. Other steps used by the Pakistani authorities to
increase Internet censorship included a plan to ﬁlter text mes-
sages by keyword, as well as a proposal to develop a nationwide
Internet ﬁrewall. However, these two ideas were put on hold as
a result of effective civil society advocacy campaigns. The
thought remains among online users in Pakistan, however, that
the government authorities are continuing to make plans to ﬁl-
ter key messages by keyword and to develop a nationwide
Internet ﬁrewall. (Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012, 386–399).
The Role of Web Filters and Firewalls, Business-
Government Policies, and Laws Aimed at Internet
Censorship
Web Filters and Firewalls
In this section, we will discuss how various countries and
jurisdictions use Web ﬁlters, business-government policies,
and laws aimed at preventing the ﬂow of information over the
Internet. In earlier days, the Internet was affectionately known
as the Information Superhighway because it was supposed to
let the average online user navigate quickly through the con-
tents of various Web pages on a myriad of topics. Those were
the good old days. Nowadays, depending on the jurisdiction
that online users are in, there could be some major roadblocks
along the “Information Superhighway” that prevent easy navi-
gation—or any navigation at all.
On the basis of the types and number of controls imple-
mented to engage in Internet censorship, the editors of
Freedom on the Net 2012 classify countries in one of three
categories (Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012, 3–4):
1. Blockers: Here, the government blocks a large number of
politically relevant Web sites and certain social media plat-
forms. The government also places considerable resources
into hiring people with the right kind of talent and techni-
cal capacities to identify “offensive” content that should be
100
Internet Censorship

blocked. Countries considered to be “blockers” include
Bahrain, China, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Vietnam,
Syria, Thailand, and Uzbekistan. Blocking and ﬁltering
are the key tools for implementing Internet Censorship in
these jurisdictions, but the authorities have used intense
pressure on bloggers and Internet Service Providers, they
have hired pro-government commentators to advance their
positions, and they arrested online users posting comments
deemed to be critical of the authorities.
2. Non-blockers: Here, the government is not yet at the stage
of systematically blocking politically relevant Web sites,
although the authorities may have already restricted online
content, especially after noticing the critical role that online
tools can play in overturning the political “status quo.”
Typically, the authorities like to show that they respect
“Internet Freedom” and openness, so they tend to use less
visible or less traceable censorship tactics. They may engage
in, for example, “anonymous” cyberattacks targeting inﬂu-
ential news sites at the “right” political moment. Moreover,
these jurisdictions may adopt a harsh legal framework
around free speech; it is not unlikely, in fact, that online
users who post information critical of the government will
ﬁnd themselves charged, detained, or arrested. Countries
placing in this category include Azerbaijan, Egypt, Jordan,
Malaysia, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe.
3. Nascent blockers: Here, the governments appear to be at a
crossroad; though the authorities impose politically motivated
blocks, the blocks tend to be sporadic, and the blocking sys-
tem is far from being institutionalized. Countries placing in
this category include Belarus, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and
Russia. In Russia, for example, the government authorities
ofﬁcially block content considered to promote “extremism”
but because of the range attributable to this term, political
Web sites tend to be blocked as well. Moreover, other juris-
dictions like Pakistan have given serious thought to
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
101

instituting ﬁltering of the Internet nationwide, but because
this effort has not yet transpired, Pakistan is presently consid-
ered to be a “nascent blocker” rather than a “blocker.”
It is quite clear that the motivations for Internet censorship
vary from country to country, ranging from the blocking of, say,
content unsuitable for and should not be seen by minors (which
is what parents also commonly do to prevent their children from
viewing Web sites with pornography, gambling, hate speech or
chat rooms) to completely controlling a nation’s access to infor-
mation online. There are several software products on the market
that can limit or block access to speciﬁc Web sites and are known
as Web ﬁlters. For the home buyer, for example, popular Web ﬁl-
ter software include Net Nanny and CYBERsitter, which has 35
ﬁlter categories that parents can select from. Individuals against
any form of Internet censorship label blocking ﬁlters as “censor-
ware” (Strickland, 2013).
Most Web ﬁlters use two main techniques to block content
(Strickland, 2013):
1. Blacklists: Lists of Web sites that the Web ﬁlter’s creators
have designated as undesirable. The list tends to change
over time, so most companies marketing this software offer
updated lists free of cost. The bottom line is once this soft-
ware is installed any attempt to visit a blocked site fails.
2. Keyword Blocking: With keyword blocking, the software
actually scans a Web page as the user tries to visit it. The pro-
gram quickly analyzes the Web page to determine if certain
keywords exist, and if the program determines that the Web
page is inappropriate, it blocks users’ access to the page.
Another common option for blocking content is installing a
ﬁrewall. In essence, a computer ﬁrewall provides protection
from dangerous or undesirable content. Firewalls can be either
software or hardware, and their purpose is to act as a barrier
102
Internet Censorship

between the Internet and the computer network. Firewalls are
designed to allow only safe content through and to prevent
everything else from entering the network. Implementing and
maintaining a ﬁrewall requires considerable IT skill, and for
this reason, businesses and government agencies employ net-
work administrators. In short, ﬁrewalls contain rule sets that
either grant or deny trafﬁc ﬂowing into or out of a network;
simply put, ﬁrewalls are to the perimeter of a network what a
moat and wall were to a castle (Schell and Martin, 2006).
Business-Government Policies and Laws for Internet
Censorship
There is no question that if companies want to do business
in various countries and jurisdictions, they have to be careful
to abide by the host nation’s policies and laws pertaining to
Internet freedom, openness, and censorship. Let’s face it: busi-
nesses and government agencies alike rely on ﬁrewalls as well
as Web ﬁltering software. Thus, by using ﬁrewalls, both can lit-
erally pick and choose which Web pages or even entire domains
to block. This way, companies and government agencies can
avoid blocking Web sites that employees or citizens need to
access legitimately. Even in countries deemed to be “free,”
when an online user tries to access a restricted Web site, the
user will see a message that typically includes the option of peti-
tioning the network administrator to unblock access if that user
feels the Web site is wrongfully blocked. Afterward, the net-
work administrator can adjust which Web sites are restricted
through ﬁrewall settings (Strickland, 2013).
Further, in blocking various Web sites, government agencies
rely on cooperation from businesses like telecom and cable
companies, for they play a critical role in determining what
content customers or citizens can access on the Internet—
which is, by the way, an ongoing debate in jurisdictions world-
wide. For example, in the United States, there is an ongoing
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
103

debate over a concept called net neutrality, which refers to a so-
called level playing ground where Internet service providers
(ISPs) allow users to access to all content without favoring any
particular Web site. There are, of course, opponents to this
concept, and in the United States, telecom and cable compa-
nies have successfully petitioned the Supreme Court to dismiss
it. Without net neutrality, ISPs can charge content providers a
fee for bandwidth usage so that the content providers paying
the fee will have greater broadband access. With more broad-
band access, such Web sites load faster compared to those of
competitors who choose not to pay the fee. So, let’s say that
Yahoo! paid the fee to an ISP but Google chose not to; conse-
quently, the ISP’s clients would ﬁnd that Yahoo!’s search
engine loads much more quickly than Google’s. Proponents
of net neutrality maintain that such preferential treatment is
simply Internet censorship. Recently, as we have noted in these
ﬁrst two chapters, search engine companies like Yahoo! and
Google have been criticized by censorship opponents for help-
ing restrictive countries like China to maintain control of the
Internet. However, although the companies have their head-
quarters in the United States, they still need to obey local
government restrictions elsewhere if they want to do business
in any jurisdiction (Strickland, 2013).
Moreover, one would be naïve to think that any country is
totally “free” from Internet censorship, for even democratic coun-
tries restrict access to content on the Internet at some level.
Though labeled “free,” even the United States has laws (such as
the Children’s Internet Protection Act) that impact the kind of
information that citizens can access on the Internet, even in pub-
lic spaces like schools or public libraries. And as we have seen in
this chapter, some countries are much more restrictive when it
comes to Internet freedom and openness, while other countries
promote few Internet content restrictions.
The OpenNet Initiative, an organization dedicated to letting
the public know about Web ﬁltering and surveillance policies
globally, classiﬁes Web ﬁltering into four categories consistent
104
Internet Censorship

with the tenets of prevailing laws in any given jurisdiction
(Strickland, 2013):
1. Political: Content belonging to Web sites that include
views counter to the respective country’s policies regarding
the Internet and allowable content. This category also
includes Web site content related to human rights, religious
movements, and other causes of a social nature.
2. Social: Content belonging to Web sites that focus on sex-
uality, gambling, drugs, and other social-cultural issues that
a country’s authorities may ﬁnd “offensive.”
3. Conﬂict/Security: Content belonging to Web sites relating
to wars, skirmishes, overt dissent, and other conﬂicts occur-
ring either within a nation or in some other nation.
4. Internet tools: Content belonging to Web sites offering
tools like email, instant messaging, and language translation
applications and those aimed at circumventing censorship.
Some
democratic
countries
like
Australia—deemed
by
Freedom House to be “free” with an Internet freedom score of
18—and the United Kingdom—also deemed by Freedom
House to be “free” with a score of 25—are fairly liberal with their
government-business policies and laws, restricting a minimum of
Web pages. Yet other countries, such as China and Iran, have
more restrictive government-business policies and laws and are
deemed by Freedom House to be “not free.” As noted, China’s
advanced ﬁltering system known internationally as the Great
Firewall is intensely restrictive, and it can actually search new
Web pages and restrict access in real time. This advanced ﬁltering
system can also search blogs for subversive content and block
Internet users from visiting them. Finally, it is a little-known fact
that Cuba has very restrictive Internet policies and laws; there,
private Internet access is banned completely, and online users
wanting to access the Internet must go to a public access point
(Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012; Strickland, 2013).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
105

The Internet’s Continuing Evolution: A Comparison of
Internet Censorship in 2005 and 2012
The Internet’s State of Openness in 2005
How far has the battle against Internet censorship come in
the past eight years or so? To help us answer this question,
Charles Gimon gives us a glance at Internet censorship trends
and practices around the world in 2005—ﬁve years after the
United States passed the Children’s Internet Protection Act,
which introduced Web ﬁlters in schools. Gimon asked this
important question: what are other countries doing to censor
their citizens, or to protect free speech in their bits of cyber-
space? And then he answered it, as follows (Gimon, 2005):
• In many countries, the Internet is still so new that censor-
ship isn’t an issue yet. In others, computer networking and
email aren’t on the same level as they are in North
America, East Asia, Europe, or even Chile or Turkey. For
example, in Sri Lanka, email is delivered to a Web site out-
side of Sri Lanka; it then is transmitted through a uucp net-
work over regular telephone lines. When email has to be
delivered to a Web site outside of Sri Lanka, it has to go over
an expensive long-distance call from Colombo to Stanford
University in the United States. Because of the expense of
sending email, Sri Lankan email users are strongly encour-
aged not to send long or “frivolous” emails. Moreover, in
Sri Lanka, transferring any image via the Internet—porno-
graphic or not—is forbidden. In fact, the cost of sending
or receiving images on the Internet is more effective than
the government’s having direct interference through, say,
Internet Censorship measures.
• Full Internet service has just opened in Beijing, China, but it
carries just a little over 1,000 Usenet groups on its news
server, and a post sent to Usenet from Beijing warned that
“some sensitive newsgroups are locked out.”
106
Internet Censorship

• In Malaysia, newsgroups carrying discussions or images
against the law in this jurisdiction are shut down. In fact,
the “Acceptable Use Policy” for the Internet at Jaring, the
main Malaysian Internet backbone, states that “members
shall not use Jaring network for any activities not allowed
under any Law of Malaysia. Given that Malaysian censors
are debating whether the children’s movie ‘Casper’ should
be permitted into the country, the potential for Internet
Censorship here appears to be high.”
• In Singapore, the Minister for Information and Arts said in a
speech that “the act of censorship is symbolic and an afﬁrma-
tion of the values we hold as a community.” Government cen-
sors tried to stop un-encoded binaries of any kind from coming
into Singapore, certain overseas Web sites were blocked to on-
line users in Singapore, and ofﬁcials talked about the like-
lihood of suing critics for libel and slander on the newsgroup
soc.culture.singapore. And, believe it or not, virtually chewing
gum in this jurisdiction could lead to a real-time caning.
• In the United Kingdom, legislation was being discussed that
would give Internet providers “common carrier status”—
meaning that the Web site would not be responsible for the
actions of its users. In New Zealand, a pending Technology
and Crimes bill would have punished “every person . . . who
casts, transmits, communicates, or receives through any
means, any objectionable image, or sound” regardless of
whether individuals have knowledge that the said item is
“objectionable” or not. And in Canada, graphic information
about the infamous Karla Homolka murder trial (involving
the sexual assault and cold-blood killing of two Canadian
school girls) continued to be available on the Internet, despite
a total press ban by a judge presiding on the case. As long as
Internet messages were routed through the United States or
elsewhere, and as long as the information was stored outside
Canada, Internet users could render the Canadian press ban
powerless.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
107

The Internet’s State of Openness in 2012
Now, ﬂash forward to 2012. What did Freedom House say
about how far along many of these jurisdictions have come in
terms of Internet freedom? Let’s look at some scores and rankings
for the present time frame (Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012):
• With a population of 21 million people, Sri Lanka still has
only a 15 percent Internet penetration. Though, nowadays,
the country is considered to be “partly free” with a Freedom
House total score of 55, the country does not block Web 2.0
applications, but there is notable political censorship, and
bloggers and ICT users are being arrested. For this reason,
Sri Lanka’s press freedom status remains as “not free.”
• Earlier, we noted that China remains one of the most censo-
rious governments in the world, and their Internet freedom
status remains as “not free.” What is more, if the Chinese
authorities do not like the online coverage that other coun-
tries’ online businesses give news events, present-day China
may have its hackers invade those networks. For example,
in January and February 2013, Facebook said that their net-
work had been the target of a series of sophisticated hack
attacks. Twitter said that they also were hacked during this
same period, noting that about 250,000 user accounts were
potentially affected. And newspaper Web sites including
The New York Times, The Washington Post, and The Wall
Street Journal were similarly inﬁltrated; their network
administrators attributed the hack attacks to Chinese hack-
ers targeting their alleged “offensive” coverage of China
(Reuters, 2013).
• Malaysia, with a population of 29 million, seems to be
improving in terms of Internet freedom. Internet penetra-
tion for 2011 was 61 percent. Currently, Web 2.0 applica-
tions are not blocked, and there is no notable political
censorship. However, because Malaysian bloggers and ICT
users are being arrested, the country’s press freedom status
108
Internet Censorship

remains at “not free,” and the Internet freedom status for
2012 was “partly free.” The total Internet freedom score
for 2011 was 41 and was downgraded to 43 for 2012.
• Singapore, New Zealand, and Canada did not receive
Internet freedom status ratings in 2012, so we cannot com-
ment further for these countries.
• The United Kingdom did well in 2011 and 2012 in terms of
Internet freedom. With a population of 63 million, the
United Kingdom had an Internet penetration of 82 percent
in 2011. Currently, there is no Web 2.0 applications block-
age, there is no notable political censorship, and there are no
British bloggers or ICT users being arrested. Therefore, the
press freedom status is “free” and the Internet freedom status
is marked “free” (with an overall score of 25 for both 2011
and 2012).
Key Tactics That Have Restricted Free Speech and
Encouraged Internet Censorship in Countries in
Recent Years
Clearly, pushing for Internet openness in various jurisdictions
is an ongoing challenge. In the section above, we looked at
some changes in a few jurisdictions from which we had data
for 2005 and 2012, noting that some “light” at the end of the
tunnel of Internet openness was seen in a few jurisdictions,
but that many other jurisdictions still had serious obstacles.
However, according to Freedom House (2012), there appears
to be a shifting set of tactics used by various governments
worldwide to control the free ﬂow of information online.
Although blocking and ﬁltering the content of Web sites are
two of the preferred methods of restricting citizens’ access to
online content, some countries are increasingly using the fol-
lowing four tools to put the lid on political and social speech
deemed “offensive,” in excess of established community stan-
dards, or as intentionally offending the existing authority
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
109

structure and its ruling beliefs and policies. These alternative
tactics include the following four major categories (Kelly,
Cook, and Truong, 2012):
1. Governments introducing vague laws prohibiting certain
types of online content
2. Governments proactively manipulating Internet discus-
sions so as to reﬂect their followings
3. Governments arranging for actual physical attacks to occur
against bloggers and other Internet users whose speech is
deemed to be “offensive” and “inappropriate”
4. Governments arranging for increased surveillance of citi-
zens’ online activities
Governments Introduce Vague Laws Prohibiting Certain
Online Content
Dismayed by the details of some recent user-generated content
ﬁnding its way onto the Internet—such as the conﬁdential U.S.
military material posted online by the anonymous hacker cells
in cooperation with Private Bradley Manning—governments
have tried to pass new legislation to regulate online speech and
prescribe harsher penalties for those found violating a so-called
established set of rules. Although some governments tout the pas-
sage of these new vague laws as a means of maintaining national
security and keeping their online citizens safe from, say, online
pornographers or spammers, these laws are generally viewed by
legal experts and those espousing information freedom and free
speech as overly broad. In short, they are so broadly worded that
they can easily be used against political opponents—at least those
perceived to be so by the authorities.
For example, even in countries like the United States—which
has been assessed by Freedom House to be Internet open and
supportive of free speech—it took massive online campaigns by
civil society groups and technology companies to stop the recent
110
Internet Censorship

attempts at the passage of the SOPA and the PIPA—which were
seen by citizen groups to have an adverse impact on free speech
and on the further healthy development of the Internet. These
two U.S. bills were designed to stop the privacy of copyrighted
material over the Internet on Web sites based outside of the
United States. Then, on Wednesday, January 18, 2012 (as noted
in Chapter 1), the real world and the virtual world watched the
largest protest in the history of the Internet. “Connected” onlook-
ers around the globe, governments and citizens alike, saw the
extreme effectiveness of the concurrent “blacking out” of popular
Web sites—a protest viewed by Americans as a means of increas-
ing the public’s awareness of the two proposed bills. What is
more, the world listened when many of the Internet giants, like
Google, Wikipedia, and Twitter, argued that these U.S. laws, if
passed, would stiﬂe innovation and investment in the Internet—a
global concern, even in the developing nations (Goodman,
2013). Needless to say, the tactic of the massive online protest
had an immediate effect, for it has since been repeated in countries
like Jordan and Italy when the authorities were considering poten-
tially restrictive legislation regarding online activities.
Furthermore, with the 2013 death of 26-year-old American
hacktivist Aaron Swartz—who committed suicide just before his
hacker trial was to commence—lawyers and Internet freedom
activists in the United States have begun to question overly broad
older U.S. legislation, such as the Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act. According to Freedom House (2012), in largely democratic
settings worldwide, the courts have begun to play a key role in
defending Internet freedom and in overturning older pieces of
legislation that may infringe upon it. For example, in Hungary,
the Constitutional Court decided in December 2011 that its
restrictive new media regulations would not apply to online news
sources and portals, and in South Korea in August 2012 the
Constitutional Court issued its third positive decision favoring
Internet freedom over a two-year period.
However, in countries where the judiciary is not indepen-
dent, internal public pressures and international pressures have
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
111

resulted in executive branch decisions nullifying negative court
rulings. For example, in Azerbaijan, Bahrain, China, Egypt,
Syria, Russia, and Saudi Arabia, at least each jailed blogger or
hacktivist was pardoned or released from detention as a result
of high-proﬁle Internet campaigns. There have also been
some exceptionally good news as a result of hugely successful
Internet campaigns, as in Myanmar (Burma), where dozens of
online activists were released after their cases were heard under
very restrictive laws which had landed them in jail.
As noted earlier, since 2011, China has emerged as “the
major incubator” for employing sophisticated new types of tac-
tics restricting Internet access. For example, a prime method for
controlling social media content in China is to restrict access to
international networks, while simultaneously forcing domestic
counterparts to heavily censor and monitor users’ online com-
munications based on Communist Party standards and direc-
tives. This censorious activity has been viewed, however,
positively in countries like Iran, Ethiopia, Libya, Sri Lanka—
whose authorities have apparently asked China for assistance
in this regard. Besides China, authoritarian countries like
Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan have in 2011 submitted a
proposal to the UN General Assembly calling for an Internet
code of conduct which would, for example, legitimize the cen-
soring of any Web site that is perceived by authorities to under-
mine political and social order.
Governments Proactively Manipulate Internet
Discussions to Reﬂect Their Views
According to Freedom House (2012), countries where pro-
government commentators heavily manipulate Internet discus-
sions to reﬂect the governments’ views have included Bahrain,
Belarus, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Malaysia, Russia,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Ukraine, and Venezuela. Besides
using ﬁlters and real-life hackers to censor “inappropriate” online
content of citizens, a growing number of governments—such as
112
Internet Censorship

those just cited—are paying commentators to manipulate online
discussions, say in chat rooms. This tactic seems to have spread
from 2010 to 2012, with Freedom House seeing an increase in
these types of tactics in 14 of the 47 countries studied.
These paid commentators tend not to reveal their “ofﬁcial
links” when they do their online posts. Also, it is likely not sur-
prising that the government authorities engaging in these types
of tactics tend not to tell their tax-paying citizens that some of
their money is being spent in this way. Then, there are the
countries like Cuba that seem to hire hundreds, if not thou-
sands, of bloggers to spread online nasty rumors about the
personal lives of the country’s inﬂuential but government-
independent bloggers. Exactly how many resources are put into
such manipulative tactics worldwide is not known, but an
Iranian ofﬁcial apparently revealed to Freedom House that in
mid-2011, about 40 companies received well over $56 million
to create digital content that was clearly pro-government and
that accurately reﬂected the government’s views.
Furthermore, while government-independent bloggers and
overly political news Web sites are favorite targets for govern-
ments engaging in online manipulation, some hijackings or on-
line impersonations have targeted inﬂuential citizens. For
example, since August 2011, the blogs and Twitter accounts of
at least 24 prominent citizens and government critics in
Venezuela have been hacked and hijacked. The professionals tar-
geted have included journalists, artists, writers, and economists.
The content posted in their names supports the government’s
economic policies, criticizes opposition leaders, or issues threats
to other online users who are not behaving “appropriately.”
Governments Arrange for Actual Physical Attacks to Occur
against Bloggers and Other Internet Users Whose Speech Is
Deemed to Be “Offensive” and “Inappropriate”
According to Freedom House (2012), countries where critics
of the authorities have been victims of physical abuse or have
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
113

been killed include Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Burma, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Libya, Mexico,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Syria, Thailand, Uzbekistan,
and Vietnam. According to their study results, Freedom House
concluded that in 19 of the 47 countries assessed in 2012, a blog-
ger or Internet user was the victim of torture, brutal assault, or a
mysterious disappearance. What is more, at least ﬁve reporters
or activists were killed in these regions in retaliation for some
information that they posted online exposing human rights
abuses in that jurisdiction.
For example, in China, after online calls in February 2011
for a Tunisian-like Jasmine Revolution, 20 or more bloggers,
lawyers, and other popular online activists were kidnapped—
some were detained and sentenced to long prison sentences,
while others were held “incommunicado” and then released
(Freedom House, 2012). There are consistent stories about
the victims being beaten, being deprived of sleep, suffering
from bad health with no medical assistance, and being other-
wise abused. Furthermore, in Bahrain, the moderator of a
popular online forum was killed in police custody in
April 2011, within a week of his arrest—with a commission
of inquiry later conﬁrming that his death resulted from painful
torture. There is also an increasing trend of bloggers and citizen
journalists being targeted by security forces when they are
reporting from the ﬁeld, particularly on citizen-related conﬂicts
and political unrest. For example, in Libya and Syria, citizen
journalists held in high regard by their online comrades—with
some even reaching international prominence—were killed in
cold blood by government forces. And in Kazakhstan, a blogger
was allegedly assaulted by police holding a gun to his head after
he uploaded a video to YouTube showing local residents
protesting a government crackdown. Furthermore, in some
countries, attacks by non-state actors have occurred with-
out punishment by government authorities; for example, in
Thailand, a professor advocating a campaign to stop more
restrictive legislation was assaulted by a pair of unidentiﬁed
114
Internet Censorship

people in an incident that human rights groups believe was
somehow related to his advocacy.
According to Freedom House (2012), authorities in some
jurisdictions use less extreme tactics—intimidation of victims—
having more evasive manifestations. In countries like Bahrain,
Cuba, Turkey, and Thailand, for example, individuals have been
ﬁred from jobs, restricted from universities, or banned from trav-
eling outside of the country after they posted comments criticiz-
ing the government. Also, the various forms of intimidation,
particularly in China, may extend to the target’s family. News
Web sites or free expression online groups have been subject to
various attack tactics. For example, in Venezuela, the ofﬁces of a
civil society group actively defending online freedom of expres-
sion were burglarized twice, and in Sri Lanka, a ﬁre was set to
the ofﬁces of a popular online news site that supported the presi-
dent’s main competitor in the 2010 election.
Governments Arrange for Increased Surveillance of
Citizens’ Online Activities
According to Freedom House (2012), of the 19 countries
that passed new legislation adversely impacting Internet free-
dom in 2011 and early 2012, 12 bolstered their surveillance
of citizens’ online activities, or their authorities were planning
to do so. Accepting that most countries—even democracies like
the United States and the United Kingdom—have been known
to intercept online communications as a means of, say, prevent-
ing terrorist attacks, Freedom House found that in far too
many countries surveillance powers are clearly being abused
for political objectives. Having said this, in recent times, even
in democratic settings, lawyers have effectively argued that issue
of warrants and other protocols have not been adhered to
before snooping into online users’ information.
In the highly repressive yet technically sophisticated coun-
tries, authorities have been found to engage in bulk monitoring
of online communications—often through a central point.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
115

Various intelligence agencies working for the state can then
obtain access to online users’ communications across a variety
of platforms, including but not limited to mobile phone con-
versations, email messages, users’ browsing histories, text and
instant messaging histories, and VoIP discussions. According
to Freedom House (2012), the most advanced systems are
actually capable of scanning the network trafﬁc in real time; this
task is accomplished using preset keywords or email addresses
of particular interest to government authorities. Increasingly,
voice recognition software is being used in jurisdictions to scan
for sensitive keywords or targeted individuals’ voices. Moreover,
ISPs may be required to keep data and online content on targets
and then turn such in to authorities when requested to do so.
While in most authoritarian countries authorities can intercept
communications or obtain requested information with a judicial
warrant, in most democratic countries, a court warrant is required
to access online user information.
Given the anonymous nature of the Internet, however,
authorities with moderate technological capability are still ﬁnd-
ing that they face obstacles in tracing a particular message to its
author. To overcome this obstacle, a number of countries have
recently passed regulations requiring online users to use their
real names and not some other moniker. In China, for example,
major micro-blogging services had a March 2012 deadline to
start implementing real-name registration for their online users
if they were not already doing so. Also, Kazakhstan, Saudi
Arabia, and Syria recently passed regulations increasing restric-
tions on user anonymity. In other countries deemed to be more
democratic—such as India and Mexico—regulations passed
within the last 18 months have increased the authority of secu-
rity and intelligence agencies to intercept communications even
without a court order. However, even when a judge’s permis-
sion is required by law, approval may at times be granted almost
automatically because of a lack of judicial independence.
According to Freedom House (2012), for example, Indonesia
has nine different laws authorizing surveillance, with each law
116
Internet Censorship

setting a different standard of accountability—and with only a
subset of these laws actually requiring judicial approval.
All of this discussion merely points to the obvious: the
growth in surveillance in various jurisdictions (as evidenced by
the clandestine mass electronic data mining program launched
in 2007 by the National Security Agency in the United States
and that Canada set up spy posts to assist the Agency in their
efforts) adds to the reality that even in countries advocating
for an Open Internet, netizens worry that their privacy is being
overtly or inadvertently violated—if not abused by their gov-
ernments. According to Freedom House (2012), numerous
countries have had internationally reported scandals in recent
years with political authorities misusing their powers to either
spy on opponents or engage in bouts of extortion. As a case in
point, in April 2012, Mexico’s Geolocation Law went into
effect, giving law enforcement agencies and lower-level public
servants the ability to get access to mobile phone users’ data
without a warrant. What is more unnerving is that they are able
to access this data in real time. Although this piece of legislation
was likely passed to nab drug trafﬁckers and other most-wanted
criminals, online citizens, understandably so, feared that the
data could and would fall into the wrong hands of authority.
This fear is not unfounded, for previously collected data on
mobile phone users mysteriously found its way for sale online.
Furthermore, even in democratic jurisdictions, note the edi-
tors at Freedom House (2012), where minimal surveillance
exists, online citizens fear that the government may pass laws
and regulations to increase their surveillance capabilities.
These fears were evident in 2012 when the U.K. government
announced its proposal to expand its existing surveillance mea-
sures by requiring ISPs to maintain the particulars of custom-
ers’ social networking activities, email messages, Internet calls,
and online gaming activities for a year.
In the United States, controversial provisions in the
PATRIOT Act once again appeared on the public radar screen
in the Spring of 2011, causing concern among online users and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
117

information freedom groups. The U.S. Congress hastily passed
the anti-terrorist USA PATRIOT Act in 2001, within seven
weeks of the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center. Since
its passage, this piece of legislation has long been the subject
of ﬁerce debate over the balance between civil liberties and
national security. Besides other measures, the act expanded
government search and surveillance authority. After the passage
of the PATRIOT Act, Attorney General John Ashcroft sent to
some of his government colleagues a draft of the PATRIOT II
Act, also known as the Domestic Security Enhancement Act
of 2003. Had this piece of legislation been passed, it would
have had more than 100 provisions intensifying measures
against cyber terrorists. Public outcry killed its passage (Schell,
2007).
Finally, legal ambiguities regarding companies’ and govern-
ments’ data stored in the “cloud” have prompted concerns
among experts that increased surveillance capabilities may be
looming on the horizon (Kalyani, 2014).
How Can Progress Continue to Be Made in Reducing
Internet Censorship?
Is more laws the answer? Or should more effective technologi-
cal solutions be used? No, say experts, to the ﬁrst question,
because new laws tend to be more restrictive rather than open
(Strickland, 2013).
Moreover, regarding technology, there is currently a debate
going on between those who believe that technology is a great
equalizer and those who fear that even in developed nations,
technology may not only fail to produce more Internet open-
ness but actually put an end to the middle class as we know it
today. Likely the dividing line is between those who think that
the tech revolution will continue to bring in hyper-change, car-
rying with it data transfer speeds beyond our imagination
toward ever newer technologically shaped realities indistinguish-
able from magic, and those who think more along the lines of
118
Internet Censorship

the Luddites, who feared that the Industrial Revolution would
result in structural unemployment. For example, Lawrence
Summers, former president of Harvard University and former
U.S. secretary of the treasury, recently remarked at the World
Economic Forum in Switzerland: “As economists like to
explain, the system will equilibrate at full employment. But
maybe the way it will equilibrate at full employment is there’ll
be specialists at cleaning the shallow end and the deep end of
rich people’s swimming pools. And that’s a problematic way
for society to function” (Freeland, 2013, B2).
So, is totally banking on technology the sole answer for con-
quering the great divide and Internet censorship? Probably not.
Furthermore, as has been obvious over the last 40 years, as the
Internet has evolved from its humble beginnings throughout
its adulthood, it has become abundantly clear that humans
make decisions about censorship, not technologies—regardless
of their rapid speed of growth. In short, note the freedom
ﬁghter experts, although individual heroes continue to ﬁght
Internet censorship, either in a premeditated fashion or via hap-
penstance, the bottom line is that there need to be the follow-
ing factors working in tandem (Strickland, 2013):
1. An increase in a strategic analysis of transitions in the post-
communist world
2. A strategic increase in policies worldwide advancing human
rights and democracy
3. A strategic direction in terms of action—with an increase in
the training and support of human rights defenders, civil
society organizations, and members of the media to
strengthen reform efforts in countries around the world
A group of hackers, on the other hand, think that they have
come up with another solution not commonly considered by law-
yers and those in the mainstream for ﬁghting Internet censorship.
They plan to ﬁght back with their own satellite communications
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
119

system. According to a report on the BBC, the plan was outlined
in 2012 at the Chaos Communication Congress in Hamburg.
Dubbed the Hackerspace Global Grid, the project apparently
calls for the launching of a satellite into space and the develop-
ment of a grid of ground stations on earth to track and communi-
cate with the satellites. Although this strategy sounds a bit like
science ﬁction, it was apparently a response to Internet censorship
threats such as proposed legislation like SOPA. Hacker activist
Nick Farr said that the ﬁrst goal of the grid should be to take
the Internet out of the control of terrestrial entities. Alan
Woodward, a computer science professor at the University of
Surrey, however, cautioned that though this grid sounds like an
interesting solution to Internet censorship, the reality is that there
is an interesting legal dimension in that outer space is not gov-
erned by the countries over which it ﬂoats. So, theoretically, outer
space could be a place for illegal communications and Internet
censorship to thrive, for any country could take the law into its
own hands and disable the satellites (Prince, 2012).
Conclusion
This chapter discussed the trials and tribulations occurring
around the growth of the Internet in various jurisdictions, start-
ing from its humble beginnings in the United States and
through its evolution in its adulthood—when concerns about
Internet censorship began to surface worldwide. The issue of
criminal liability was then discussed, with a fulsome coverage
of the recent case involving Private Manning’s expression of
Internet freedom during the Iraq War.
On the basis of the Freedom on the Net 2012, some countries
were identiﬁed in this chapter as “free” and “open,” while
others were identiﬁed as “not free” and censorious. This chap-
ter looked at the various factors involved in the free and censo-
rious ends of the equation, and cited many examples of
countries that have taken identiﬁable stands on why the
120
Internet Censorship

Internet should be free or censored—and the measures that
they have incorporated to ensure that such is the outcome.
From a worldwide perspective, a debate on how free and
how open the Internet should be will, obviously, continue.
According to some experts, decreasing Internet censorship on
a global basis will require more activism, more increases in stra-
tegic policies to advance human rights and democracy, and
more strategic action in terms of training and supporting
human rights defenders. According to a group of hackers, a sat-
ellite network might be able to hold Internet censorship at
check. Given that the world is a forever-evolving political and
technological sphere, the same can be said about the challenges
of the ongoing evolution of the Internet.
Although there is an open commitment to advancing human
rights and democracy in some jurisdictions—such as the
United States and Estonia—other countries will continue to
challenge the degree and transparency of such commitments.
For example, on October 23, 2012, The Voice of Russia pro-
nounced, in a 63-page white paper entitled “On the Human
Rights in the USA,” that the U.S. government, along with pri-
vate companies in that jurisdiction, seem to be actually increas-
ing Internet censorship, not arresting it. The Voice of Russia
stressed, as well, that the First Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution does not allow authorities to openly crack down
on the freedom of speech—which makes the U.S. authorities
go about it in crafty other ways—such as exerting control over
the ISPs, basically an indirect form of Internet censorship
(Voice of Russia, 2012).
References
Armstrong, P. “Big brother still watching: Internet censorship
on the up, report says.” 2012, http://www.cnn.com/2012/
09/27/world/world-internet-freedom-report (accessed
September 28).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
121

Bambauer, D. “The enigma of Internet freedom.” 2010, http://
infousa.state.gov/media/internet/docs/deﬁning-internet
-freedom.pdf (accessed June).
Bambauer, D., and R. Epstein. “Who’s right? Debating
Internet censorship.” 2010, http://photos.state.gov/libraries/
amgov/30145/publications-english/EJ-deﬁning-internet
-freedom.pdf (accessed June).
Ben Bouazza, B., and P. Schemm. Jihadists spring from
Tunisian chaos. The Globe and Mail, 2013, p. A11.
Brenner, S. W. “Is there such a thing as ‘virtual crime’?”
California Criminal Law Review, 4 (2001), pp. 1–12. http://
www.boalt.org/CCLR/v4/v4brenner.htm (accessed
April 2012).
Cassata, D., and N. Benac. “US tracking millions of calls.” The
Globe and Mail, June 7, 2013, p. A3.
Clark, C. “US surveillance: Secret—and sweeping.” The Globe
and Mail, June 8, 2013, p. A11.
Cohn, M. “Bradley manning’s legal duty to expose war crimes.”
2013, http://smirkingchimp.com/thread/marjorie-cohn/
49869/bradley-mannings-legal-duty-to-expose-war-crimes
(accessed June 4).
Computer Industry Almanac. “Worldwide Internet users top
1.8 billion in 2009. China tops 310M Internet users.” 2010,
http://www.c-i-a.com/pr072010.htm (accessed July 12).
Computer Industry Almanac. “PC sales will top 370M in
2011: Worldwide mobile PC sales to reach 227 M units.”
2011, http://www.c-i-a.com/pr072011.htm (accessed
July 25).
Computer Industry Almanac. “PCs in-use reached over 1.6B in
2011: USA has nearly 311M PCs in-use.” 2012, http://
www.c-i-a.com/pr02012012.htm (accessed February 1).
Dishneau, D. “Army likens Manning case to Civil War
espionage.” 2013, http://www.military.com/daily-news/
122
Internet Censorship

2013/01/10/army-likens-manning-case-to-civil-war
-espionage.html (accessed January 10).
Freedom House. “New report: Governments grow increasingly
repressive online, activists ﬁght back.” 2012, http://www
.freedomhouse.org/article/new-report-governments-grow
-increasingly-repressive-online-activists-ﬁght-back (accessed
November 11).
Freeland, C. “A tech-powered end to the middle class.” The
Globe and Mail, February 22, 2013, p. B2.
Gimon, C. A. “Internet censorship around the world.” 2013,
http://www.gimonca.com/personal/archive/foreign.html
(accessed February 8).
Goodman, A. “The Sopa blackout protest makes history.”
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/
2012/jan/18/sopa-blackout-protest-makes-history (accessed
January 29, 2013).
Holland, S., M. Spetalnick, and J. Ruwitch. “US-China talks
‘chart the future.’ ” The Globe and Mail, June 8, 2012,
p. A16.
Janssen, C. “Technopedia explains Freedom of Information.”
2013, http://www.techopedia.com/deﬁnition/24976/
freedom-of-information (accessed February), pp. A12–A13.
Kalyani, M. “NSA surveillance taking a toll on U.S. cloud
computing companies.” 2014, https://spideroak.com/
privacypost/cloud-security/nsa-surveillance-taking-a
-toll-on-us-cloud-computing-companies/ (accessed
February 25)
Kelly, S., S. Cook, and M. Truong. Freedom on the Net 2012:
A Global Assessment of Internet and Digital Media. New York:
Freedom House, 2012.
Khatchadourian, R. “Manning, Assange, and the Espionage
Act.” 2011, http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/
newsdesk/2011/05/manning-assange-and-the-espionage-act
.html (accessed May 20).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
123

Koring, P. “Bradley manning testiﬁes at pretrial.” The Globe
and Mail, December 6, 2012, p. A16.
London, E. “Bradley manning defense ﬁles motion to dismiss
charges over pre-trial abuse.” 2012, http://www.wsws.org/
en/articles/2012/08/mann-a16.html (accessed August 16).
Mataconis, D. “Direct link between Bradley Manning and
Julian Assange discovered?” 2011, http://www.outsidethe
beltway.com/direct-link-between-bradley-manning-and
-julian-assange-discovered/ (accessed December 20).
Nolen, S. “For India’s down and out, life can look better
on Facebook.” The Globe and Mail, February 13, 2012,
pp. A1, A18.
Prince, B. “Hackers plan satellite network to ﬁght Internet
censorship.” 2012, http://threatpost.com/hackers-plan
-satellite-network-ﬁght-internet-censorship-010112/
(accessed January 1).
Reguly, E. “The Tunisian revolution is in trouble.” The Globe
and Mail, January 15, 2013, p. A3.
Reporters Without Borders. “Who we are?” 2012, http://en.rsf
.org/who-we-are-12-09-2012,32617.html (accessed
September 12).
Reuters. “Hard case for US against Wikileaks’s Assange:
Lawyers.” 2010, http://www.theage.com.au/technology/
technology-news/hard-case-for-us-against-wikileakss
-assange-lawyers-20101201-18g5z.html (accessed
December 1).
Reuters. “Facebook hacked ‘in a sophisticated attack.’ ” The
Globe and Mail, February 16, 2013, p. B8.
Schell, B. Contemporary World Issues: The Internet and Society.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2007.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. Contemporary World Issues:
Cybercrime. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. Webster’s New World Hacker
Dictionary. Indiana: Wiley, 2006.
124
Internet Censorship

Schell, B., and J. Melnychuk. “Chapter 8: Female and male
hacker conferences attendees: Their autism-spectrum
quotient (AQ) scores and self-reported adult experiences.”
In T. Holt and B. Schell (Eds.), Corporate Hacking and
Technology-Driven Crime: Social Dynamics and Implications.
Hershey: IGI Global, 2011.
Schell, B., J. Dodge, and S. Moutsatsos. The Hacking of
America: Who’s Doing It, Why, and How. Westport, CT:
Quorum Books, 2002.
Simpson, I. “Witness at manning trial focuses on motives.” The
Globe and Mail, June 5, 2013, p. A11.
Strickland, J. “How Internet censorship works.” 2013, http://
computer.howstuffworks.com/internet-censorship.htm
(accessed February 9).
U.S. Department of State. “E journal: Deﬁning Internet free-
dom.” 2010, http://infousa.state.gov/media/internet/docs/
deﬁning-internet-freedom.pdf (accessed June).
U.S. Department of Energy. “What is the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA)?” 2013, http://www.wipp.energy
.gov/library/foia/foiadeﬁned.htm (accessed February 6).
Vaagan, R., and W. Koehler. “Intellectual property rights vs.
public access rights: Ethical aspects of the DeCSS decryption
program.” 2005, http://informationr.net/ir/10-3/paper230
.html (accessed April).
Voice of Russia. “US steps up Internet censorship—Report.”
2012, http://English.ruvr.ru/2012_10_23/US-Internet
-censorship-scales-up-report/ (accessed October 23).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
125


3
Perspectives
The Internet continues to grow by leaps and bounds.
As reported in The Telegraph, roughly 250 million people
went online for the ﬁrst time in 2012, according to the
International Telecommunications Union, a United-Nations-
sanctioned agency. With similar growth anticipated this year,
it’s projected that 2.7 billion people will be connected to the
Internet by the end of 2013. . . Still, 4.4 billion of the world’s
7.1 billion people remain unconnected.
Ryan, 2013
This chapter explores a range of pertinent issues related to both
sides of the coin regarding Internet freedom and Internet censor-
ship. Perspectives on this intriguing topic include contributions
from experts in criminology, political science, psychology, and
philosophy. Readers will ﬁnd the perspectives to be insightful, as
they explore how things got the way they did in the past—and
how the Internet is likely to evolve.
HACKTIVISM, CYBER WARRIORS, AND CENSORSHIP
Thomas J. Holt
As technology increasingly enables individuals to communicate
and connect with others around the world, computer-mediated
127
Chinese youths work at their computer stations at an Internet cafe in
Beijing, China in 2006. (AP Photo, ﬁle)

communications like Facebook and Twitter have become a key
resource to individuals’ expression of dissent with the practices
of their own government or those of foreign nations (DiMaggio
et al., 2001; Van Laer, 2010; Vasi, 2006). The computers, serv-
ers, and resources that undergird the Internet and critical systems
across the world also present vulnerable targets that can be
harmed with fewer resources than might be needed in the real
world (Brodscky & Radvanovsky, 2011; Wilson, 2008). The
inﬁltration of sensitive government networks in order to delete
or otherwise destroy important information are an excellent way
for attackers to express dissent and cause harm to a government
that they view as an enemy, regardless of their rationale
(Brenner, 2008; Denning, 2011; Kilger, 2011). Access to such
data might also lead an actor to reveal this knowledge to the gen-
eral public to either embarrass or attack an institution, as with the
recent release of diplomatic cables through WikiLeaks (Sifry,
2011). Similarly, actors can use Web defacements to vandalize
Web sites and post messages and beliefs (Denning, 2011; Woo,
Kim, and Dominick, 2004). Web defacements have become a
regular tool for politically motivated hackers and actors to express
their opinions and often appear around many hot-button social
events (Denning, 2011; Woo, Kim, and Dominick, 2004).
Such Web defacements are often attributed to hackers
because of their general involvement in cybercrimes and intru-
sions into sensitive systems (Holt, 2009; Jordan and Taylor,
2004). This, however, is an oversimpliﬁcation, as actors may
use hacking techniques in order to complete various attacks.
Individuals who use hacking techniques to promote an activist
agenda or express their opinion are typically referred to as hack-
tivists (Denning, 2011; Jordan and Taylor, 2004). Such an
attack may be illegal, but it does not create a high degree of fear
or concern among the larger community of citizens that hacti-
vists may hope to reach with their messages (Jordan and
Taylor, 2004). Individuals who use hacking techniques in order
to cause fear among civilian populations and economic harm or
disruption of vital services may be classiﬁed as cyber terrorists
128
Internet Censorship

because of the analogous relationship their actions have with
real world terror (Brenner, 2008; Britz, 2010; Brodscky and
Radvanovsky, 2010; Denning, 2011).
A third, and more recent, group emerging in this space is
actors who engage in attacks but have no ties with or sponsor-
ship from a nation or military group (Denning, 2011; Kilger,
2011). Such actors can leverage technological resources as a
force multiplier to engage either in nonviolent actions like pro-
test or in serious forms of violence such as targeted attacks
against infrastructure with a greater magnitude than what may
otherwise be possible through real world protest and political
action (Brenner, 2008; Jordan and Taylor, 2004; Kilger,
2011). The faceless, borderless nature of the Internet also
allows individuals to efﬁciently mask their real identity and
reduce their likelihood of detection (Brenner, 2008; Denning,
2011). These conditions have given rise to the “civilian cyber
warrior” who can operate with no state sponsorship to attack
various resources within the individual’s own government
or a foreign nation, a task made easier by the power differential
provided by the Internet and various forms of computer-
mediated communications like Twitter (Denning, 2011;
Kilger, 2011).
Though these groups vary on the basis of their interests and
intentions, they all beneﬁt from the open nature of the
Internet and the value of free information sharing. The general
hacker community, and hacktivist groups in general, supports
the idea that information should be freely accessible to all, and
that government and industry stymie creativity and attempt to
censor the Web (Holt, 2009; Jordan and Taylor, 2004; Levy,
2001). Hacktivist groups use their skills to openly promote vul-
nerabilities in hardware and software as well as hacking tech-
niques to ensure that information is made available for
everyone (Jordan and Taylor, 2004). In fact, hacktivist groups
like the Cult of the Dead Cow have created tools like Torpark
to give users a Web-browser that can circumvent nation-level
ﬁrewalls used to stiﬂe free exchange (Denning, 2011).
Perspectives
129

The open promotion of information ﬂow thereby enables
the activities of malicious hackers and cyber terrorists because
they can use attack tools against various resources. Modern
hackers need not have signiﬁcant knowledge of technology to
engage in cyberattacks, as tutorials and forums enable informa-
tion sharing for use against various targets (Denning, 2011;
Holt, 2009; Jordan and Taylor, 2004). Speciﬁcally, the global
jihad movement has also leveraged a range of forums across
the globe written in multiple languages to discuss justiﬁcations
for the resistance to Western occupation of Iraq and the general
lack of respect Western nations show for Islamic value systems
(Britz, 2010; Denning, 2011). Hackers in support of al-Qaida
have posted various resources to facilitate cyberattacks; for
example, Youni Tsoulis published a hacker tutorial titled
“The Encyclopedia of Hacking the Zionist and Crusader
Web sites” (Denning, 2011). This guide provides detailed infor-
mation on vulnerabilities in U.S. cyber infrastructure, as well as
techniques to engage in data theft and malware infections.
Many actors interested in causing harm to various targets
can seek malicious software that is free or available at a low
cost through cybercrime markets. For instance, the group
Anonymous uses a simple point-and-click denial of service tool
called the Low Orbit Ion Cannon, which may be downloaded
for use in attacks against government and industry targets
(Correll, 2011; Poulson, 2011). The group espouses that gov-
ernments are stiﬂing the free ﬂow of information and media
companies are unfairly restricting access to materials and that
therefore a response from frustrated citizens is required.
There are, however, few studies considering who may engage
in an attack as a cyber warrior. Recent research by Holt and
Kilger (2012) used a scenario-based survey mechanism with a
sample of college students to identify any correlates for individ-
ual willingness to engage in various forms of cyberattack. They
found few correlates for willingness to engage in cyberattacks,
except for willingness to engage in protest activities in the real
130
Internet Censorship

world. Thus, there may be a relationship between protest and
civil disobedience online and off-line (Holt and Kilger, 2012).
Further research using demographically diverse samples could
help to determine the inﬂuence of attitudinal and behavioral
factors on actors’ willingness to engage in virtual and real world
acts of violence (Holt and Kilger, 2012; Kilger, 2011).
References
Brenner, S. W. Cyberthreats: The Emerging Fault Lines of the
Nation State. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Britz, M. T. “The Internet as a Tool for Terrorists:
Implications for Physical and Virtual Worlds.” In T. J. Holt
(Ed.), Crime On-Line: Correlates, Causes, and Context (pp.
159–185). Raleigh, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2010.
Brodscky, J., and R. Radvanovsky. “Control systems security.”
In T. J. Holt and B. Schell (Eds.), Corporate Hacking and
Technology-Driven Crime: Social Dynamics and Implications
(pp. 187–204). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global, 2011.
Correll, S. P. “An interview with Anonymous.” PandaLabs
Blog. 2011, Accessed June 12, 2012. http://pandalabs
.pandasecurity.com/an-interview-with-anonymous/.
Denning, D. E. “Cyber-conﬂict as an emergent social
problem.” In T. J. Holt and B. Schell (Eds.), Corporate
Hacking and Technology-Driven Crime: Social Dynamics
and Implications (pp. 170–186). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global,
2011.
DiMaggio, P., E. Hargittai, W. R. Neuman, and J. P.
Robinson. “Social implications of the Internet.” Annual
Review of Sociology, 27 (2001): 307–336.
Holt, T. J. “The attack dynamics of political and religiously
motivated hackers.” In T. Saadawi and L. Jordan (Eds.),
Cyber Infrastructure Protection (pp. 161–183). New York:
Strategic Studies Institute, 2009.
Perspectives
131

Holt, T. J., and M. Kilger. “Examining willingness to attack
critical infrastructure on and off-line.” Crime and
Delinquency, 58 (2012): 798–822.
Jordan, T., and P. Taylor. Hacktivism and Cyber Wars.
London: Routledge, 2004.
Kilger, M. “Social dynamics and the future of technology-
driven crime.” In T. J. Holt and B. Schell (Eds.), Corporate
Hacking and Technology Driven Crime: Social Dynamics and
Implications (pp. 205–227). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global, 2011.
Levy, S. Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution. New York:
Penguin, 2001.
Poulson, K. “In ‘Anonymous’ raids, Feds work from list of top
1,000 protesters.” Wired Threat Level, 2011, Accessed
June 18, 2012 http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/07/
op_payback/
Ryan, A. “Talking points: Logging in.” The Globe and Mail,
October 10, 2013, p. L10.
Sifry, M. WikiLeaks and the Age of Transparency. New York:
OR Books, 2011.
Van Laer, J. “Activists online and ofﬂine: The Internet as an
information channel for protest demonstrations.”
Mobilization: An International Journal, 15 (2010): 347–366.
Vasi, I. B. “The new anti-war protests and miscible mobiliza-
tions.” Social Movement Studies, 5 (2006): 137–153.
Wilson, C. Botnets, cybercrime, and cyberterrorism:
Vulnerabilities and policy issues for Congress. Congressional
Research Service Report RL32114. Washington D.C.:
Congressional Research Service, 2008.
Woo, H., Y. Kim, and J. Dominick. “Hackers: Militants or
merry pranksters? A content analysis of defaced Web pages.”
Media Psychology, 6 (2004): 63–82.
Dr. Thomas J. Holt is an associate professor in the School of
Criminal Justice at Michigan State University.
132
Internet Censorship

INTERNET CENSORSHIP AND THE EUROPEAN
UNION: EXTERNAL COHESIVENESS VERSUS
INTERNAL DISHARMONY
Michael Johns
The European Union (EU) may be seen as one of the great politi-
cal experiments of the twentieth century. If one were to dismiss
the EU as a failure on the basis of the ﬁnancial crises in Greece,
Cyprus, Spain, and elsewhere, that would be a mistake. What
the EU represents is the coming together of 28 countries and over
500 million people to create an international organization that
exerts enormous inﬂuence on the world stage. Even given the rel-
ative decline of the Euro, the combined weight of the EU econo-
mies and their collective trading practices makes the EU one of
the economic powers in the world today—if not the most power-
ful. As the EU has evolved over time from merely a trade agree-
ment into its current form it has attempted to use this economic
power to inﬂuence non-EU members politically and socially.
A recurring issue for the EU is that while it attempts to speak
with one voice on external matters, it faces challenges posed by
its various member-states to ensure that cohesiveness. Whether
the issue surrounds discrimination or the protection of minor-
ities the EU has often argued for one thing and done the other.
Currently, the EU is facing this exact problem when trying to
address the issue of Internet censorship. This brief section will
examine the EU’s policies to encourage greater openness of
the Internet and also highlight the challenges it faces from
among its own member-states.
For some, it may seem odd that this is an issue for the EU at
all. Many see the EU as simply a trade organization based on
the freedom of movement of goods, services, and people.
While this may have been the original intent of the founders
of the EU, it has progressed far beyond its initial mandate.
It is now responsible for the standardization and coordination
of issues that go well beyond traditional understandings
of trade. The EU is now involved in the creation of policies
Perspectives
133

on ﬁscal, political, and social issues—with questions surround-
ing Internet censorship blurring many of these lines.
As the EU has expanded in size and inﬂuence it has also
begun to try to export its values and principles to nations the
EU trades with. Because of the attractiveness of the European
market and the collective inﬂuence of the 28 member-states,
the EU is often successful in placing conditions on potential
trading partners that go far beyond the traditional rules of
trade. Recently, the EU has looked to make issues surrounding
Internet censorship as one of the conditions for trade. Going
beyond their trading partners, the EU has also worked to pro-
mote the global freedom from censorship of the Internet
through policies and mandates coming from the European
Commission and endorsed by the EU Parliament. The crux of
this new emphasis on Internet censorship is the 2011 initiative
from the European Commission called No Disconnect, which
tied access to information online (what the EU calls ICT—
information and communication technology) to issues of
human rights. The policy had four main goals:
1. Developing and providing technological tools to enhance
privacy and security of people living in non-democratic
regimes when using ICT.
2. Educating and raising awareness of activists about the
opportunities and risks of ICT. In particular, assisting
activists to make best use of tools such as social networks
and blogs while raising awareness of surveillance risks when
communicating via ICT.
3. Gathering high quality intelligence about what is happen-
ing “on the ground” in order to monitor the level of surveil-
lance and censorship at a given time, in a given place.
4. Cooperation. Developing a practical way to ensure that all
stakeholders can share information on their activity and
promote multilateral action and building cross-regional
cooperation to protect human rights.
134
Internet Censorship

The No Disconnect policy has been subsequently expanded
with initiatives seeking to add teeth to the ideals promoted
above. In 2012, the European Commission pushed further to
announce that it would be creating the European Capability
for Situational Awareness (ECSA). The ECSA, once fully
operational, would serve as a global watchdog for Internet cen-
sorship and would provide information on violators not only to
the agencies of the EU but also to journalists, activists, academ-
ics, and other state governments. The ECSA will “attempt to
pull together, aggregate, and visualize up-to-date intelligence
about the state of the Internet across the world. It will show
content ﬁltering, blocking, or other disruptions to the Web”
(www.slate.com). By providing some of this information
publically, the ECSA hopes to bring attention on to the states
that infringe on freedom of the Internet and engage in online
surveillance; it would also put pressure on the technology
ﬁrms that provide the software that allows these states to act.
Also in 2012, the European Parliament adopted a resolution
put forward by Jules Maaten that called for the EU to fully
attach conditions on Internet censorship to access to EU
trade. Maaten’s proposal stated that the EU should “deal with
all restrictions to the provision of Internet and information
society services by European companies in third countries as
part of its external trade policy and to consider all unnecessary
limitation to the provision of those services to be trade
barriers” (http://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~eroberts/cs181/
projects/international-freedom-of-info/europe_4.html). While
the EU has yet to formalize this proposal, it is clear the direc-
tion it is heading. Outside of the EU’s border, it will no longer
accept Internet censorship, excessive online monitoring, or any
attempts to limit access to the Internet. Moreover, this proposal
applies to trading partners, including companies such as Yahoo!
and Google, who work inside and outside of the EU, and any
dictatorial government around the world.
It is becoming obvious, then, that the EU is moving toward a
greater emphasis on the freedom of the Internet when dealing
Perspectives
135

with the world abroad; however, it may prove more difﬁcult to
do the same within its own borders. While it has been able to
start developing protocols for dealing with non-democracies—
as their infringements of freedoms are easier to identify—it
has not had the same inﬂuence on the 28 democracies that
comprise its membership. As mentioned above, this problem
regarding Internet censorship is not a unique one for the EU.
Finding wording that all 28 governments can fully agree to
has proven difﬁcult. Moreover, member-states often bristle at
the idea that they need to be monitored and inﬂuenced to the
same extent as states found elsewhere around the world. As a
result, we see a lack of progress within the EU on cohesive
Internet censorship policies and, in fact, see states attempting
to implement their own policies that can be interpreted as
restrictions on Internet freedom. The most obvious case is the
United Kingdom, where the government passed a law in 2013
aimed at curbing access to online pornography. The law would
make the censorship of pornography the default position of all
customers of Internet providers in the country. Those inter-
ested in accessing pornography would need to contact the pro-
vider, identify themselves, and then request to opt in. Violent
sexual imagery would be banned entirely. The law also requires
the development of a list of search terms that major engines
would need to use to block sites dedicated to the exploitation
of children (http://news.yahoo.com/british-porn-ban-way-125
958868.html). While certain religious and child-protection
groups have lauded the law, others have argued that it goes
too far in limiting legal content and acting as a nanny-state in
censoring material that is produced by and for adults.
While Britain has gone the farthest most recently in passing
these types of restrictive laws, it is not alone in the EU in exam-
ining ways to limit access to the Internet. In 2010, Poland
almost passed a law that would have banned online gaming
sites. Only large-scale public backlash made the lawmakers
reconsider. In 2011, Hungary did pass a law in the face of
136
Internet Censorship

public outrage that severely restricted the rights of journalists
both online and in print. It created a censorship authority within
the government that had intrusive powers that could unilaterally
judge if material online was offensive or vaguely inappropriate
and demand for it to be removed. Even more troubling is the fact
that Hungary passed this law when it held the EU presidency—a
time when states have the opportunity to push their particular
agendas forward to the EU as a whole (http://www.edri.org/
edrigram/number9.1/media-law-hungary-blocks-internet).
Also in 2011, Poland, along with other EU states such as
Finland, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Portugal, signed on to the
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, which is claimed by its
advocates to prevent the infringement of intellectual property
rights but anti-censorship activists argue is one of the greatest
threats to a free Internet. This is by no means an exhaustive list
of restrictions to Internet freedom by EU member-states, but
they serve to illustrate the double standard that exists inside
and outside the EU’s borders.
This brief analysis illustrated the double-edged sword the EU
and its lawmakers always face. On the one hand, the EU contin-
ues to strengthen its resolve to prevent dictatorships from denying
their citizens access to the Internet and using the Web as a tool of
repression. On the other, the member-states appear willing to go
their own way and enact many laws similar to those they would
criticize in others. Do we commend the EU for working to try
ensure that people around the world are able to access informa-
tion freely online and will not be monitored online by their
government? Or do we condemn the member-states for often
failing to live up to the very standards they collectively have intro-
duced? Unfortunately, as with many issues in the EU on Internet
censorship, we likely have to do both.
Dr. Michael Johns is vice-dean of humanities and social sciences
and chair of the Political Science Department of Laurentian
University in Barrie and Sudbury, Ontario, Canada.
Perspectives
137

30 YEARS AFTER ORWELL’S NINETEEN EIGHTY-
FOUR: PSEUDO-PRIVACY ONLINE
Michael Bachmann
1949: Inﬂuenced by the Zeitgeist during the beginning of the
Cold War between superpowers that collided over ideologies,
George Orwell publishes the epic novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, in
which he envisions a dystopian future 35 years later that is shaped
by perpetual war, omnipresent government domination, and
public mind control. This society is one in which Big Brother, a
totalitarian prevention and surveillance state, subjugates all citi-
zens and even prosecutes all individual thoughts as thoughtcrimes.
Fast-forward 35 years to 1984: Orwell’s vision hardly
became a reality. Mikhail Gorbachev and his perestroika are
bringing the Cold War to a slow end, while the young start-
up company Apple advertises the Macintosh as breaking the
existing conformity in personal computing. Novelist William
Gibson coins the term cyberspace in his ﬁrst cypherpunk novel
Neuromancer, and Steven Levy publishes the landmark study
“Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution.” In it, Levy
portrays as the original hackers all early contributors to the
advancement and expansion of computer technology, including
innovators who developed new computer-based solutions to a
multitude of human quandaries, entrepreneurs who pioneered
and advanced the computer revolution, and individuals who
paved the way for today’s Internet Superhighway. Levy accurately
depicts the original computing community as a subculture shaped
by the ideals and moral concepts of the hippie movement.
The early computing community was characterized by a fun-
damental distrust of governmental and military monopolies,
power, and authority, as were many other subculture and
counterculture movements at the time. Early computer tinker-
ers and hackers deﬁed corporate domination of culture
and rejected traditional and conservative values, norms, and
lifestyles. Instead, they applied the Enlightenment ideals of
human emancipation and self-fulﬁllment through rational
138
Internet Censorship

thought to the new world of micro technology. Many of the
early developers of Internet technology were idealists who envi-
sioned the use of computer technology for achieving the higher
goals of intellectual discovery, for creating art and beauty, and
for improving the overall quality of life. They conceived the
Internet as a new means to proliferate freedom of information,
knowledge, and intellectual thought, and to realize the funda-
mentally democratic idea that information and knowledge
should be accessible for everyone without restrictions. The
hope was that the expansion of Internet technologies would
bring with it better-informed citizens and a freer, more egalitar-
ian and democratic grassroots-driven society.
Fast-forward another 30 years to today: Unfortunately, the
vision of the Internet as the great decentralized leveler and the
entity that facilitates the collapse of power hierarchies by
empowering individuals through unlimited access to informa-
tion has proved to be as much an idealized fantasy as Orwell’s
despairing vision was. The penetration of every aspect of life
by new technologies has brought society closer to the dystopian
future Orwell had envisioned. No thought police, but thought
tracking through cookies and browser user agents; no central-
ized Big Brother, but an unprecedented level of surveillance
and infringements on personal privacies through an omnipres-
ent recording, digitization, and increasing centralization of
almost every facet of our lives. The biggest difference between
the surveillance Orwell had envisioned and the technical reality
we live in today is that the erosion of privacy is facilitated not
through an oppressive Big Brother but through the users of
technology themselves. We, the consumers, buy the surveil-
lance technology ourselves and our biggest fear when broadcast-
ing the most private aspects of our personal lives online is that
nobody may be watching or listening.
The tremendous technological advancements during the last
30 years have seen the Internet transform from a medium to
share ideas and disseminate knowledge into a mission-critical
marketplace for almost all corporations. It has become
Perspectives
139

commercialized mainstream. Attempts such as the one under-
taken by Aaron Swartz, a hacker in the original sense of the
word, to use the Internet for the free distribution of knowledge
have become increasingly futile. In a sense, the Internet revolu-
tion has swallowed its children. Landline household telephones
have morphed into omnipresent cell phone tracking bugs in
our pockets. A vast array of technological innovations has fun-
damentally changed our lives, interactions, and expectations.
The mass of consumers has no need or desire to understand
the sometimes dangerous potential of their shiny new toys but
demands new convenience features and wider-reaching integra-
tion in ever faster release cycles that make it impossible for secu-
rity to keep pace. The few remaining citizens still concerned
with protecting and maintaining their old-fashioned personal
privacy ﬁnd it virtually impossible to do so. In today’s world,
all of us are, by default, permanently leaking all sorts of per-
sonal information from our smart phones and RFID-enabled
credit cards, government-issued IDs, and even clothing.
New leaks emerge at an increasing speed, and the privacy-
concerned individual cannot thwart all of them.
Our biometric information, among them facial features, ﬁn-
gerprints, and even iris patterns, together with our medical his-
tories, are stored in a multiplying number of governmental and
privately owned massive databases. Our past and present loca-
tions are broadcast by an array of technologies involving cell
phones, WLAN and IP locations, public surveillance cameras
that are increasingly outﬁtted with facial recognition software,
and automated license plate scanners. Triangulation of data
gathered from these technologies permits not merely the inces-
sant tracking of an individual’s present and past whereabouts
but also the creation of location, movement, and behavioral
proﬁles that enable accurate inferential predictions of where a
person will be, who that person may be with, and what that
person might be doing at any given time.
Of particular concern are the three Vs of big data: volume,
velocity, and variety. Together, they describe the current trend
140
Internet Censorship

to integrate and centralize databases and the ﬂood of personal
information they contain, the goal of which is to include every
facet of life into the most complete digital representation of the
individual consumer. When mined with ever more complex
algorithms, this accumulation of data can have unanticipated
consequences, as was the case when the retail chain Target
inadvertently informed an oblivious father about his teenage
daughter’s pregnancy through a congratulatory card that was
sent on the basis of her purchasing records. We consumers will-
ingly feed the algorithms with massive amounts of private data,
be it so we can save a few dollars at the store or simply for added
convenience. Such convenience is offered when users are will-
ing to share their data, for example when users of social net-
works allow companies such as Facebook to search through
their email and phone contacts to analyze their social relation-
ships and to automatically discover who they may know.
User recommendations written for products purchased on-
line are now used by Google+ for targeted advertisement to
other members of that user’s circles. New information of all
sorts, including personal pictures, notes, documents, videos,
and purchases are uploaded and shared in commercial “cloud”
services. By doing so, users of such services inadvertently also
share their private information with the “free” service hosts,
many of whom sell this information for proﬁt.
Most users are oblivious to the fact that large Internet corpo-
rations are increasingly connecting data provided by the users
with other information the users themselves did not provide
or consent to provide. Many users also seem unconcerned
about the fact that data across massive and combined databases
can be analytically de-anonymized. Data mining is big business,
and Internet users should have no illusion that the services they
use “free of cost” are not really free: all of them are paid for in
personal information, the Internet’s second currency after
Bitcoin. When confronted with evidence that their personal
information is part of a multibillion-dollar data mining indus-
try, the question many consumers ask is, “Okay, so we allow
Perspectives
141

corporations unprecedented insights into our personal lives,
but where is the harm?”
Thanks to highly successful strategic marketing campaigns
and user-friendly interfaces, most of us are under the impres-
sion that Google does no evil, as its informal corporate slogan
suggests. Corporations such as Google and Facebook are popu-
larly seen, not as corporate Big Brothers who know you inside
and out, but as the “good guys” who greatly improve our lives
and our social relationships in exchange for the intimate
insights about ourselves we grant them. Personal attitudes on
commercial exploitation of intimate consumer details for tar-
geted advertising purposes aside, this view is extremely naïve,
especially in the light of everything we now know from credible
whistle-blowers such as Edward Snowden.
Corporate consumer information is either willingly sold in
bulk to government agencies, as is the case in annual multimil-
lion dollar deals struck between AT&T and the CIA, or simply
intercepted by the NSA and other agencies through programs
such as Prism, Tempora, Quantum, or Bullrun. Today, unde-
niable proof exists that an armada of clandestine government
agencies and intelligence services across the globe intercept,
record, and mine all the personal information we disseminate
online. The colossal amount of information that is intercepted
by unwarranted wiretapping from the NSA alone necessitated
the agency to recently build an additional two billion dollar
data center facility in Utah capable of storing exabytes of data.
In principle, the dragnet ﬁshing techniques employed by these
agencies are the same as the data mining operations of private
marketing corporations. The inputs, algorithms, and machine
learning techniques are the same; solely the search terms differ.
Ultimately, the issue of privacy today comes down to the
question of trust. From a consumer standpoint, this issue
entails the question of what personal data can you entrust to
whom? From a citizen’s perspective, the question arises whether
you can or should trust secretive intelligence agencies that
142
Internet Censorship

conduct far-reaching domestic and international mass surveil-
lance with only tangential oversight by secret courts. Barely
supervised intelligence agencies with the capability to read all
our data are but one step away from rewriting and altering this
data. History books are ﬁlled with examples, such as the Stasi,
that show that centralized information is power that is highly
susceptible to corruption when left unchecked. The simple
answer that “I needn’t be concerned about who’s watching
because I have nothing to hide” no longer applies in today’s
digitally interconnected world.
We all have something to hide, chieﬂy our private digital lives.
We should be particularly concerned about the fact that the circle
of persons with access to all this information is widening. It is not
just the NSA who is infringing on our constitutional rights; much
of our digitized personal information can be subpoenaed without
a warrant, enabling a range of persons and professions, from pri-
vate investigators to divorce attorneys, to access our information
and potentially reveal damaging insights into our most private
activities. Moreover, governmental data mining aside, one cannot
discount the impact of the many breaches of data security that
wash all of this personal information into the welcoming hands
of cyber criminals and fraudsters.
It is easy to become defeatist when confronted with so many
mounting privacy concerns, but that does not mean one should
simply abandon the idea of privacy. To the contrary, it requires
users to become aware of the implications of digitized and cen-
tralized personal information, and it calls for personal action to
minimize unwanted dissemination. We have to reclaim owner-
ship of our personal information. Encryption of transmitted
ﬁles and efforts to keep one’s online footprint small are just
the beginning. Granted, it is an uphill battle, and we still have
a long way to go. We will likely have to sacriﬁce some conven-
ience and ease of accessibility, but that is a small price to pay
to prevent a sliding into a twenty-ﬁrst-century version of an
Orwellian surveillance society.
Perspectives
143

Dr. Michael Bachmann is a professor of criminal justice at Texas
Christian University. His research focuses on the social dimensions
behind technology-driven crimes.
CYBERSECURITY IS NOT CENSORSHIP1
Dorothy E. Denning
Many cybersecurity mechanisms block access to and the ﬂow of
information. Firewalls, for example, stop the ﬂow of selected pack-
ets to and from a network. Intrusion prevention systems and anti-
virus tools block packets and software that match the signatures or
behavior of malicious ones. Access controls, user authentication,
and cryptography prevent unfettered access to systems and infor-
mation. Flow controls prevent information from ﬂowing from
objects at one classiﬁcation level to those at a lower level.
Because the mechanisms used for censorship also block
access to and the ﬂow of information, cybersecurity might be
seen as just a form of censorship. In this section, I argue that
it differs from our common understanding of censorship in
three important ways.
First, cybersecurity is more about the execution of code than
information in a passive or inert sense. The reason that ﬁrewalls
and intrusion prevention systems block certain packets entering
a network is that the packets could trigger the automatic execu-
tion of code whose effects would be harmful. In particular, the
packets might contain malicious software (malware) that would
be executed upon arrival or malicious input data to programs that
process the incoming packets. Similarly, anti-virus tools stop
viruses and other forms of malware from running on the systems
they reach. It isn’t that the virus code is dangerous to look at;
144
Internet Censorship
1Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. The views expressed in this
document are those of the authors and do not reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or position
of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.

rather, the danger comes from its execution. Access controls and
user authentication mechanisms do more than just keep users
away from certain data—they keep users from running code
against the data in order to exﬁltrate or download the data, or to
modify or delete it. Even security mechanisms that prevent out-
going ﬂows of data are as much about code as data. For example,
a ﬁrewall rule that blocks packets whose destination IP address
matches that of the “drop server” used by malicious exﬁltration
code would not be needed if other security mechanisms could
keep the malicious code off the network. Denial of service (DoS)
and distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks are also about code.
Although the immediate concern may be resource capacity, owing
to the sheer volume of trafﬁc, these attacks would not be a threat
were it not for the code that drives them (e.g., to command a bot-
net to send out gigabits of trafﬁc per second) and is often exploited
by them (e.g., to amplify effects through DNS reﬂection).
By contrast, censorship is about blocking information from
human eyes and ears on the grounds that people receiving the
information might be harmed in some way or use the informa-
tion in a way that is harmful to the censor’s objectives. Here,
the concern is not with the execution of software, but rather with
what humans might do with the information. This distinction is
apparent when one considers that computer crime laws generally
allow the publication and distribution of malicious software for
human viewing, but not for the purpose of triggering computer
infections. For example, it is permissible to post virus or exploit
code on a research Web site, but not to launch the virus or use
the exploit to gain access to a system without authorization.
The second way that cybersecurity differs from censorship
is that the former is concerned with the volume of data as
well as its content. This is particularly true in the case of DoS
and DDoS attacks. Whereas a single Web page request (i.e.,
HTTP GET packet) to a public-facing server usually poses no
cybersecurity threat, a ﬂood of billions of such requests does,
and so might trigger controls to block the packets. Attacks that
employ network scanning to ﬁnd open and vulnerable access
Perspectives
145

points can also trigger security controls that respond to the vol-
ume of trafﬁc. By contrast, censorship controls are generally not
concerned with volume; if they would allow a single request for
a Web page, they would allow a billion.
The third way cybersecurity differs from censorship is that
security controls serve to protect systems and their data from
cyberattacks, whereas censorship serves to protect populations
from exposure to material deemed harmful, say, because it is
believed to threaten social norms or stability, national security,
or political power. Further, the owners of cyber resources
choose which security controls to deploy on the basis of their
expected needs and risks from cyberattacks. Certain industries
may be required by law to install particular security controls
(e.g., to protect ﬁnancial or health records), but these mandates
are generally consistent with industry objectives to protect their
information and that of their customers and clients.
By contrast, censorship is more about third party, particu-
larly government, mandates and controls that have little if any-
thing to do with preventing cyberattacks and may or may not
be desired by those subject to the controls. Under censorship,
an information ﬂow from one person to another may be
blocked not because either party wants that to happen, but
because the state has forbidden it. The state may implement
some of the controls, say, by installing packet-ﬁltering mecha-
nisms in backbone routers that are owned and operated by
the state. The state may also direct private sector entities such
as Web-hosting companies, private ISPs, search engine provid-
ers, and cyber cafes to implement the controls.
Censorship meets cybersecurity when the same blocking tech-
nologies are used for both. For example, a network owner might
ﬁlter out some packets because of censorship rules from the state
and others because they are known to be associated with DDoS
or other types of cyberattacks that are affecting the network or
its customers. Censorship meets cybersecurity also when security
controls intended to block cyber threats have the side effect of also
stopping non-threatening ﬂows. For example, a company might
146
Internet Censorship

block employee access to certain Web sites on the grounds that
malware was found on the sites, but in the process effectively cen-
sor other content hosted on the sites. Still, even though blocking
technologies play this dual role, cybersecurity and censorship have
different objectives and concerns. Cybersecurity aims to defend
against cyberattacks and is concerned with executable code and
trafﬁc volume as well as information content; censorship aims to
defend against more general harm and is concerned almost exclu-
sively with content and its impact on human populations.
Dorothy E. Denning is distinguished professor of defense analysis at
the Naval Postgraduate School. She has been widely recognized for
her contributions to cybersecurity and cyber conﬂict, and is a member
of the inaugural class of the National Cyber Security Hall of Fame.
BETWEEN LIBERTY AND HARMONY:
PHILOSOPHICAL PERSPECTIVES ON CENSORSHIP
IN THE AGE OF THE INTERNET
Alanda D. Theriault
The topic of censorship is undoubtedly one of the more durable
preoccupations within the history of Western philosophical
inquiry. Indeed, the ethical richness of the question of whether
suppressing certain forms of expression can ever be justiﬁed
endures because it is the sort of inquiry that cuts a broadly discur-
sive swath through a diverse forest of theory and fact that stretches
through psychology, sociology, linguistics, politics, and statecraft.
From Plato’s Socratic dialogues to Milton (1644), Hobbes
(1651), Locke (1689), de Tocqueville (1835), J. S. Mill (1859),
Stalin (1922), Mao Tse-Tung (1964–1976), Rawls (1971), and
Nozick (1974), the tension between what can be said and who
is responsible for patrolling the limits of appropriate speech and
representation cuts across culture, place, and time, thus granting
the topic an indelible place in many intellectual traditions.
Contemporarily, the question of whether some information
and expression requires censoring has been turned afresh toward
Perspectives
147

a frontier that expands and challenges traditional modes of expres-
sion. The rise of the Internet and the de-territorialization of infor-
mation access by the Internet’s creators, regulators, and content
generators allows for the conditions of abundant expression
whether it is through the printed word, visual art and video tech-
nologies, or dissenting political opinion exchanged in open com-
ment forums on blogs and Web sites. Having Internet access
means that words and images are transmitted farther and more
instantaneously than in the past, which yields considerably
unique implications for state and regional politics, social cohe-
sion, national security, and access to productivity tools for Web
content generation. While philosophical arguments that tradi-
tionally deﬁne and shape the modes of argumentation about
censorship remain as they primarily always have—depicting a
spectrum between promoting societal harmony and defending
individual liberty—the context, scope, and reach of the Internet
challenges these basic tenets in unprecedented ways. The central
problem for identifying the many pragmatic consequences
explored elsewhere in this book on Internet censorship is, then,
one that rests on making a conceptual distinction between the
classical philosophical arguments about censorship and the more
recent broadening scope of the Internet. In what follows I shall
brieﬂy describe this enduring spectrum of debate about censor-
ship and argue that, in order to make sense of the practical con-
cerns of the implementation of Internet censorship, we must
distinguish the traditional audience of censorship from the new.
Between Harmony and Liberty: A
Spectrum of Philosophical Arguments
about Censorship
Throughout the Western philosophical tradition, the concepts
of harmony and liberty have broadly guided our thoughts about
the nature of, and need to, censor certain ideas. Indeed, both
harmony and liberty represent opposing conceptual end stones
of a broad spectrum of beliefs that captures a range of profoundly
148
Internet Censorship

inﬂuential thoughts about the appropriate role and reach of
government, the acceptability of expressing criticism, the inherent
rights and freedoms of individual citizens to determine their
desires and life goals, as well as the deep philosophical concern
with how to attain social goods such as a peaceful social order,
in addition to more abstract concerns such as attaining and
understanding The Good. Both harmony and liberty, then, serve
as the opposing ends of the debate about censorship by acting as
guiding principles that express some of our highest values and
hopes for a just, peaceful, and progressive society.
Those who are in support of censorship tend to use the con-
cept of harmony as their guiding principle with the aim of
developing and maintaining a peaceful social order. The notion
of harmony, understood philosophically, has an extensive his-
tory of use stretching back to pre-Socratic times and is still used
primarily as a political metaphor representing a well-ordered,
rightfully governed, and ideally perfected state. Indeed, this
notion of harmony remains a central theme in the current dis-
course about censorship in China and especially the state-
regulated view that the primary role of journalists and news media
is to “uphold correct guidance of public opinion” wherein the
press must “arm the people with scientiﬁc principles, guide the
people with correct public opinion, mold the people with a noble
spirit, and invigorate the people with excellent works” (Zhao
Ziyang, “Major Events” in China Comment, an internally pub-
lished magazine in the Propaganda Bureau). More interestingly,
in a 2007 speech to journalism students, Yuan Zhifa, an educator
and former editor of Guangming Daily, uses the term cadence
(韵律) euphemistically to describe the ideological importance
of harmony as a social good and the role of news reporters in
inculcating this virtue in its audience:
As a form of ideology, news must have its own cadence.
Cadence is an expression of the basic attributes of things.
I’ve learned that only by grasping the cadence of news
can we effectively unite the value orientations of news
Perspectives
149

with its inherent rules and in this way step into the har-
monious realm of news propaganda (Yuan Zhifa, 2007).
For Yuan, the heart of his philosophical notion of cadence upholds
the Propaganda Bureau’s emphasis on the correct guidance of
public opinion. In fact, in the same speech Yuan continues:
Guidance of public opinion is the lifeblood of news
propaganda. Correct guidance of public opinion means
the prosperity of the party and the people, while incorrect
guidance spells disaster for both. The question of correct
and incorrect guidance concerns the fate of the party and
the country.
The justiﬁcation of the promotion of self-censorship among
journalists and the necessity to approach news analysis using
the philosophical concept of social harmony indeed echoes
many similar themes used to support censorship in other socio-
cultural contexts. Both Stalin and Lenin held that the main use
of books in the Soviet Union was to embed “cultural products
into the collective memory” of the people (Plamper, 2001).
The purging of libraries in the Soviet Union between 1920
and 1940 was aimed to ensure consistency of socialist and com-
munist party ideals among its citizens and to uphold the ideo-
logical concern with the promotion of social and civil harmony.
Such concern with social harmony as the primary justiﬁca-
tion of censorship has its historical roots in perhaps the most
elaborate explanation of the necessity of the state to control
information consumed by citizens—that is, The Republic, by
Plato. In what is considered to be perhaps the most important
and richly complicated of the Platonic dialogues, The Republic
casts censorship as a signiﬁcant aspect in the cultivation of
happy and reasoned citizens. In describing and promoting his
ideal state, the main character Socrates elucidates how justice
is not only a prime value of both individual and civic life, but
has been largely misunderstood by the commoners and elites
150
Internet Censorship

alike. The dialogue roams through a tremendous variety of sub-
jects that touch on rival views of justice, differing views of
human happiness, the role of education, the nature and impor-
tance of philosophy, the structure of reality, knowledge, the
Forms, the virtues of good and bad souls, the nature of political
regimes in addition to the role of the family, women, and com-
munity in individual moral and political development. It is,
however, Plato’s reasoning for the censoring of ﬁctional repre-
sentations that allows us to best understand how the harmony
of the whole society is argued to outweigh individual liberty.
In reliable Platonic fashion, Socrates strategically builds his
argument from the particular to the general where he relies on
making a case for the betterment and harmony of the whole com-
munity by situating the need for restriction and control upon the
human soul. In Books II and IV of The Republic, Socrates urges
his friends to accept that the exercise of moderation is required
in order to ﬁnd happiness and harmony within the soul. The con-
ﬂicting tensions between reason, the appetites, and the soul
require the discipline and experience found in the education of
our non-rational parts of the soul—that is, our emotions—as they
are most affected by ﬁctional representations found in poetry,
painting, and music. Censorship, according to Socrates, is neces-
sary as it allows for the proper cultivation of reason that is free
from emotive affectations not grounded in reality and Truth.
Socrates’s argument for censorship ﬁnds its most robust
articulation in Book X (605b), when he makes the case that ﬁc-
tional representation blurs the distinction between appearance
in reality in such a way that, hermeneutically at least, the non-
rational part of the soul (emotion) cannot tell the difference
between ﬁction and reality and thus cannot serve to regulate
our action by reason.2 Socrates holds that without censoring
the ﬁctive accounts of the world individuals will be prone to
Perspectives
151
2This problem of not acting by reason alone is known as akrasia—a weakness of will.

mistake their role models for those characters who are ﬂawed
and damaged as well as allowing for our attitudes to be mis-
guided as we are prone to be emotionally aroused by tales of
moral ambiguity, scandal, and generally poor or disgraceful
behaviour. Socrates argues that, by censoring out the stories,
allusions, metaphors, and representations of themes that do
not ennoble the spirit of citizens, greater harmony, peace, and
order can be more easily maintained as it is consistent with
the good of the whole rather than merely the individual.
Justice is a good in itself for Socrates, and this virtue requires
that society be viewed as greater than an art wherein the princi-
ples of harmony, reason, and Truth must necessarily prevail.
At the other end of the philosophical spectrum of censorship
are arguments that edify individual freedom of expression and
discussion above the need for social harmony. While its value
is not absolute, the freedom of speech and expression are taken
as the triumphant markers of a liberal society wherein truth is
not something that is objective and infallible, but rather some-
thing that is far more pragmatic and corrigible through free
discussion and debate.3 Unlike those arguments that seek to
defend the need for censorship on the grounds that it imbues
individual citizens with appropriate values and a unifying prin-
ciple that encourages social harmony, arguments against
152
Internet Censorship
3There are in fact many restrictions on speech, expression, and representation. The
standard example that expression is not a legal absolute stems from a 1919 U.S.
Supreme Court case (Schenck v. United States, Baer v. Same), where it was afﬁrmed
that should a speech act be used in circumstances to create a “clear and present dan-
ger that they will bring about the substantive evils which Congress has a right to pre-
vent” (http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/249/47). The legal discussion
of this case gave rise to perhaps the most ensuring example of the government having
the right to curtail an individual from playfully yelling “ﬁre” in a crowded theater
on the grounds that the speech act creates panic and danger. More modern examples
of the restriction on speech and representation can be found in the current legislation
in Canada against hate propaganda and pornography laws. See http://www.parl.gc.ca/
Content/LOP/researchpublications/843-e.htm for more discussion.

censorship prize an individual’s ability to access and know truth
empirically and to act morally not merely because it provides
unity to the whole society, but because it is rationally consistent
with an individual’s utility. The principle of utility—that is, the
guiding moral principle of the nineteenth-century British social
movement of Utilitarianism that holds that an action is morally
correct when one acts proportionally to bring about the greatest
good to the greatest amount of people—promotes the individu-
alism, empiricism, and emphasis of individual happiness that
inﬂuences deeply the arguments against censorship. Social har-
mony is too abstract and logically inconsistent a value to be
considered a social good as it lacks a way to describe individual
contribution to the whole. Censorship too is taken in this
manner to lack the requisite utility that would allow for the
maximal freedom and happiness of each individual citizen.
The roots of this utilitarian view against censorship are to be
found in the writing of John Stuart Mill, the great nineteenth-
century statesman, philosopher, and social reformer. For Mill,
censorship stiﬂes the ability of individuals to access and try on
their own accord to know truth. In On Liberty (1859) he
acknowledged that, because we largely must rely on our percep-
tions of the world through our senses (which are often inaccu-
rate and misleading), our knowledge of the world is largely
fallible and uncertain. However, because of this epistemic inac-
cessibility of the Truth, humans are corrigible and must seek to
constantly improve our opinions about our knowledge of the
world. By this reasoning, Mill maintains that state censorship
prevents us from correcting our errors of thought by critical dis-
cussion and robs individuals of the ability to freely criticize the
important orthodoxies of the day. Even state protection from
offensive criticism is considered inappropriate for Mill since,
as he argues in an 1825 paper titled “Law of Libel and Liberty
of the Press,” a law against offensive criticism only makes
minority voices less heard and its defenders appear to be more
moderate and reasonable, in addition to stretching the law
inappropriately to regulate controversy. For Mill, outlawing
Perspectives
153

offensive criticism against an individual or group because it is
hurtful does not address the epistemic beneﬁt of having the dis-
cussion of the criticism that he values as far greater than the
need to restrict the expressive act. It is also difﬁcult to distin-
guish between temperate and offensive criticism without the
debate becoming arbitrary.
The Problem for Internet Censorship
With the range of philosophical arguments existing within the
spectrum between harmony and liberty, providing the legal and
moral groundwork for Internet censorship shall be no easy task.
The range and scope of the Internet presents a unique challenge
to these classic arguments, a challenge not anticipated or assumed
in the philosophical cannon that operated within an understand-
ing of a cohesive and sovereign state. The central problem posed
by the Internet toward arguments about censorship, then, is
largely framed by the de-territoriality of the Internet’s accessibility
by millions of users across the globe. State forces that in the past
have at least ideologically facilitated the ﬂow of information and
power between citizen and state cannot easily legally and morally
shape the audience who are the inheritors of information and
services provided by Internet networks. The Internet both under-
mines and re-shapes traditional post-Westphalian boundaries that
dominate the ostensible world in such a way that stretches
the practical limitations of state laws. Philosophically speaking,
the spectrum of the debate over censorship remains the prov-
enance of ideologies and principles that work best in the contexts
in a single sovereign state—that is, unchanged ideas in the great
conversation—with only subtle relevance to the practical develop-
ment and implementation of rules and restrictions over the
Internet’s pioneering spirit of intellectual frontier-ism. This is of
course not to say that the philosophical representatives discussed
in this section have no relevance to contemporary discussions
154
Internet Censorship

about Internet censorship, but rather that we must be mindful of
how our longest intellectual conversation about censorship can
continue to provide the moral framework to uphold the values
that we hold dear. Whether we think that censorship is helpful
or harmful will depend largely on our moral and axiological
standpoint. The purpose of this piece is to point out where it is
that we have come from in our ideological thinking about censor-
ship. It is hoped that an understanding of our philosophical
underpinnings can guide our decisions regarding the Internet in
the future.
References
“The Evolution of Pornography Laws in Canada.” Prepared by:
Casavant, Lyne and Robertson, James R. Law and
Government Division, Web site of the Parliament of
Canada. Revised 25 October 2007. http://www.parl.gc.ca/
Content/LOP/researchpublications/843-e.htm.
“Guidance of Public Opinion.” Media Dictionary. China
Media Project: A project of the Journalism and Media Studies
Centre at the University of Hong Kong. http://cmp.hku.hk/
2013/11/05/423/
Plamper, Jan. “Abolishing Ambiguity: Soviet Censorship
Practices in the 1930s.” Russian Review, Vol. 60,
no. 4(2001): 526–544.
Plato. The Republic. 2nd ed. Trans. Desmond Lee. New York,
NY: Penguin Books, 1987.
Robson, John M and Collini, Stefan, eds. The Collected Works
of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXI: Essays on Equality, Law, and
Education. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984.
Schenck v. United States. http://www.law.cornell.edu/
supremecourt/text/249/47.
Perspectives
155

Yuan Zhifa, “Chinese Leaders Meditate Loudly on the
Philosophy of Censorship as 17th Congress Nears.” China
Media Project. http://cmp.hku.hk/2007/08/30/584/
Alanda D. Theriault is a professor of philosophy at Georgian
College in Barrie, Ontario, Canada.
156
Internet Censorship

This page intentionally left blank


4
Profiles
2600: The Hacker Quarterly
The magazine 2600: The Hacker Quarterly is highly regarded in
the hacker community for its information and coverage of issues
pertaining to the hacker underground, including freedom of infor-
mation and Internet openness. The title of this publication comes
from the tone used by phreaks—2600—to control telephony.
First published in 1984 by Eric Corley (a.k.a. Emmanuel
Goldstein) and David Ruderman, the magazine continues to be
released quarterly. Its focus is on applications of hacking that
extend technology to its limits. Hacking is seen as “good” if it
advances the dissemination of knowledge—which should be free.
2600 is still very popular with hackers today and is consid-
ered by many to be controversial in nature—in a cognitively
complex “nice” sort of way. Eric Corley remains the editor-in-
chief, and Ed Cummings (a.k.a. Bernie S.) is a regular contributor
and collaborator (Schell and Martin, 2006). The magazine
has covered many notable issues, including free speech issues
159
A masked hacker, part of the Anonymous group, hacks the French presiden-
tial Elysee Palace Web site on January 20, 2012, near the eastern city of Lyon.
Anonymous, which brieﬂy knocked the FBI and Justice Department Web
sites ofﬂine in retaliation for the U.S. shutdown of the ﬁle-sharing site
Megaupload, is a shadowy group of international hackers with no central
hierarchy. (Jean-Philippe Ksiazek/AFP/Getty Images)

related to technology and Internet freedom, as well as the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).
The DMCA copyright case involved 2600 and Universal
Studios over allegations by Universal Studios that 2600 had
infringed the DMCA. This intriguing case arose in November
1999 from 2600’s publication of and linking to a computer pro-
gram called DeCSS as part of its news coverage about DVD
decryption software that could be used to unscramble digital
video discs. Universal Studios and other members of the
Motion Picture Association of America ﬁled suit against the
hacker magazine in January 2000; they sought an order that
2600 no longer publish the said contents. In particular, the com-
plainants objected to the publication of DeCSS because, they
argued, it could be used to infringe copyrights on DVD movies.
The magazine, represented by Eric Corley, argued in its defense
that decryption of DVD movies is necessary for a number of rea-
sons, including to make fair use of movies and to play DVD mov-
ies on computers running the Linux operating system (Schell,
Dodge, with Moutsatsos, 2002).
In the end, 2600 lost the legal case. Upon hearing the
court’s decision, the head of the Motion Picture Association
of America declared that the decision “nailed down an indis-
pensable constitutional and congressional truth. It’s wrong to
help others steal creative works” (Dixon, 2001, p. B22).
Subscriptions to the Internet openness–supporting maga-
zine, back issues, and other merchandise are available from
the 2600 online store; individuals may also write to 2600
Magazine, P.O. Box 75, Middle Island, New York 11953.
Nowadays, the magazine is available in paper or digital forms.
The magazine’s Web site is at http://www.2600.org.
American Civil Liberties Union
The U.S. founder of the American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), Roger Baldwin, once boldly pronounced, “So long
160
Internet Censorship

as we have enough people in this country willing to ﬁght
for their rights, we’ll be called a democracy.” Members of the
ACLU work in courts, legislatures, and communities to defend
and maintain individual rights and liberties that the U.S.
Constitution and various U.S. laws guarantee citizens. The
ACLU has defended the First Amendment (guaranteeing free-
dom of speech, association, and assembly; freedom of the press;
and freedom of religion), has fought unlawful discrimination,
and has argued for citizens’ right to due process, should crimi-
nal charges be laid. The ACLU has also taken on the right to
privacy—including freedom from unwarranted intrusion into
one’s private life or affairs by the government.
In June 2013, Edward Snowden released secret documents
onto the Internet regarding the U.S. government`s surveillance
program called Prism—and then identiﬁed himself through the
news media as being “the leaker.” Within 24 hours of this pub-
lic announcement, Dianne Feinstein of California, who heads
the Senate Intelligence Committee and supports the notion of
Internet surveillance, accused Edward Snowden—who actually
was given a high level of security clearance—of committing an
“act of treason.” Feinstein argued vehemently that Snowden
should be prosecuted accordingly (Jakes, 2013).
At this point, Snowden told the media that he may seek asy-
lum in Iceland, known for its strong free-speech protections
and reputation globally for providing safety for the outspoken
and the outcast in democratic societies like the United States.
True to form and to its commitment to ﬁght the government’s
unwarranted intrusion into citizens’ private lives, the ACLU
immediately ﬁled legal action to force a secret U.S. court to
make a public disclosure of the justiﬁcation for the scope
of its surveillance, calling the programs “shockingly broad”
(Jakes, 2013).
Headquartered on Broad Street in New York City, the ACLU
has been active in ﬁghting for democracy and related freedoms
since 1920. Their Web site is at http://www.aclu.org/.
Profiles
161

Anonymous
Anonymous is used to refer to the loose collective of actors who
have engaged in hacking-related attacks against various targets
around the world. The hacker cell’s activities have been linked
to the group 4 chan and other online communities where individ-
uals share images and information in a relatively anonymous
fashion. Exactly what Anonymous is remains somewhat of a mys-
tery, but hackers from this clan have brought down the Vatican’s
Web site, taunted cabinet ministers whose policies they did not
like, and inserted themselves into online national debates without
being invited. But is Anonymous an agitprop activist group, or is
it an international security threat? Could the group be an online
cover for governments wanting to meddle in other governments’
affairs, or is the group just a bunch of hacktivists whose anarchy
has, literally, gone “viral” online? What IT security experts know
is that Anonymous is not centralized anywhere but acts as a nebu-
lous collection of cells and splinter groups that tend to coordinate
their efforts in online chat rooms. Consistent with the hacker
manifesto, Anonymous members are committed to anonymity,
the free ﬂow of information on the Internet, and transparency.
Anonymous seems to embody a culture of online “creative
disturbance” (Tossell, 2012).
In February 2012, Anonymous turned its virtual attention to
Canada’s public safety minister Vic Toews. Anonymous posted
a video on YouTube calling on Toews to drop the federal gov-
ernment’s controversial Internet surveillance Bill C-30, named
the Protecting Children from Internet Predators Act—and
touted as protecting children online by allowing police to
access personal information about Internet users without ﬁrst
obtaining a search warrant. The intent, of course, was to nab
online child pornographers. The YouTube video showed a
headless man in a black suit under a red maple leaf, speaking
in a computer-generated voice, demanding Toews’s resignation
(The Canadian Press, 2012). The speaker also purported to
“know all about” the minister and threatened to release this
162
Internet Censorship

information on the Internet if Bill C-30 was not dropped. The
video has since been removed from YouTube. In 2011,
Anonymous gained prominence after they launched cyber-
attacks on PayPal and Visa. Anonymous has also had a key role
in the Occupy Wall Street movement (D’Aliesio, 2012).
Opposition to the proposed Canadian Bill C-30, focusing on
the federal government’s “lawful access,” continued to grow
after the YouTube video was released, and the bill was eventu-
ally abandoned. Internet privacy advocates viewed Bill C-30
as an unnecessary intrusion into Canadians’ lives. Responding
to such criticisms, Toews, in trying to show that the government
was justiﬁed in promoting Bill C-30 to prevent harm to
Canadians, responded forcefully to such criticisms of the bill by
declaring that opponents of the bill were either “with the
Conservatives supporting the bill” or “with the child pornogra-
phers,” an event that prompted even greater indignation
(Mackrael, 2012). Toews defended his statement by adding, “If
Canadians, as a nation, do not take steps” to end the proliferation
of online child pornography, “this proliferation will continue.
And that is simply unacceptable” (Ibbitson, 2012, p. A6).
Anonymous was part of one of the biggest online pro-
tests launched by hackers, in January 2012, as a means of
stopping two pieces of controversial U.S. legislation in the
U.S. House—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA)—and
Senate—Protect Intellectual Property Act (PIPA). As a result
of this widespread online protest, some of the most popular
Web sites in the world, including Wikipedia and Reddit,
became difﬁcult or impossible to access (El Akkad, 2012b).
Anonymous made media headlines worldwide in February
2012 when Interpol announced that 25 suspected members of
the loose-knit hacker movement had been arrested in Europe
and South America. Interpol further said that the arrests made
in Argentina, Chile, Columbia, and Spain had been comple-
ted by law enforcement ofﬁcers working with the support
of Interpol’s Latin America Working Group of Experts
on Information Technology Crime. The suspects, aged 17
Profiles
163

through 40, were held for planning coordinated cyberattacks
against Columbia’s defense ministry and presidential Web sites
and Chile’s Endesa electricity company and national library,
among other targets. There was immediate Internet noise sug-
gesting that Anonymous might launch a distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) attack against Interpol’s Web site. There is little
question that many of the hacktivist activities of Anonymous
have increased since the global clampdown on music piracy
and the international controversy caused by WikiLeaks—which
Anonymous members seem to identify with (Keller, 2012).
On March 7, 2012, the media announced that Hector
Xavier Monsegur, one of the purported leaders of the Lulz
Security hacker group afﬁliated with Anonymous, had been
assisting the FBI in the United States for months to help track
down hackers who recorded a private conference call between
the FBI and Scotland Yard. Operating under the moniker
Sabu, Monsegur was well known and respected in hacking
circles, but when word got out he helped the FBI snag fellow
hackers, ripples of distrust among hackers surfaced. However,
in an effort to quiet down the unrest, an Anonymous-
afﬁliated group declared online: “#Anonymous Is an idea, not
a group. There is no leader, there is no head. It will survive,
before, during and after this time” (El Akkad, 2012b).
Julian Assange (1971–)
Julian Paul Assange is the editor-in-chief and founder of
the whistle-blowing Web site WikiLeaks. During his youth
in Australia, he was involved with the hacker group the
International Subversives and used the handle “Mendax.”
Assange was caught in 1991 by police after hacking into sys-
tems of the communications company Nortel. He was also
associated with hack attacks against university and U.S.
government systems, and was charged with 31 counts of hack-
ing and related offenses. In 1995, he pleaded guilty to 25 of
the counts and was released with a small ﬁne and no additional
164
Internet Censorship

time served. The judge for this case indicated that Assange’s
attacks were not malicious but rather a consequence of his intel-
ligence and curiosity. Thus, he did not merit more substantive
punitive sanctions. Upon his release, Assange began working
as a computer programmer and author, and he created various
freeware programs designed to protect data.
In 2006, Assange founded WikiLeaks to provide “an outlet
to cause regime change and open information sharing” in order
to expose injustice and abuses of power. The Web site has
published materials related to the Church of Scientology,
Guantanamo Bay, military strikes, and classiﬁed documents
around the world. The Web site is perhaps most famous for the
acquisition and publication of 251,000 American diplomatic
cables that range from unclassiﬁed to secret. This information
was obtained by a U.S. Army soldier named Bradley Manning,
who downloaded the materials while in Iraq in 2009 and 2010.
He then provided the materials to WikiLeaks, who chose to
release these materials over the Internet in batches over two years
with the cooperation from major news outlets like The New York
Times and Der Spiegel (Koring, 2012).
As noted in Chapter 1, in August, 2013, a military judge
sentenced Private First Class Bradley Manning to 35 years in
prison, though he will likely be eligible for parole in as few
as eight years. Manning’s sentence is, notably, the longest
ever issued in a case involving a leak of conﬁdential U.S.
government information to the public through an online venue
(Savage and Huetteman, 2013).
No wonder that Manning’s sentence was so harsh; the release
of these cables caused massive controversy and embarrassment
for the U.S. government because of the sensitive nature of the
information they contained. In fact, a DDoS was launched against
the WikiLeaks Web site shortly after the ﬁrst release, taking the
Web site ofﬂine. Subsequently, the companies that provided fund-
ing and infrastructure for WikiLeaks, such as PayPal, pulled their
support. As a consequence, the group Anonymous began DDoS
attacks against the ﬁnancial service providers to punish them for
Profiles
165

their actions. The controversy over these documents led some in
the United States to call for the arrest of Assange, and even his exe-
cution, in some cases. Assange was wanted in 2010 in the United
Kingdom on charges unrelated to WikiLeaks—rape and a sexual
assault in Sweden (Harding and Quinn, 2012).
Assange has been ﬁghting an extradition order from the
Swedish government since then, and he applied for political
asylum in Ecuador on June 19, 2012. Ecuador agreed to grant
this request. Standing on the balcony from his Ecuadorian
sanctuary, on August 20, 2012, Assange called on the United
States to end its “witch hunt” or “war on whistleblowers,”
and he demanded, as well, that Manning be released from
prison—which, it turns out, just isn’t the case. Assange called
Manning a hero—“an example to all of us”—which drew
cheers from WikiLeaks supporters who had packed the
Knightsbridge pavement below (Harding and Quinn, 2012,
p. A3).
As of February 2014, Julian Assange was still in hiding in
the Ecuadorian embassy in London. His publicity-generating
behaviors have continued since his initial lock-up in the
embassy; in September, 2013, for example, Julian set up a
WikiLeaks party and released a video onto the Internet target-
ing his political opponents in Australia, where he decided to
run for a Senate seat (Paramaribo, 2013).
Meanwhile, British ofﬁcers have been stationed outside the
Ecuadorian embassy ever since Assange took refuge there.
Ecuador continues to grant Assange political asylum, noting
that the U.K. government has failed to give assurances to
Assange that he will not be extradited from Sweden to the
United States to possibly face espionage-related charges. By
mid-February 2013, the Scotland Yard police headquarters esti-
mated that the costs for the 24/7 police watch had totaled
£2.9 million, or $US 4.3 million. That cost amount is now
worth $US 4.8 million in 2014 currency exchange. Ofﬁcials
at the Ecuadorian embassy have said that until they obtain
these undertakings from the U.K. government, the embassy
166
Internet Censorship

will continue to protect Julian Assange on human rights
grounds enshrined in international law (ABC News, 2013).
Toward the end of the summer of 2013, a ﬁlm about Julian
Assange and his colleagues in WikiLeaks was released at the
Toronto Film Fest. Called The Fifth Estate, the thriller exposed
the hot-button issues of personal privacy versus public transpar-
ency with the handy use of the Internet. The ﬁlm made stars of
Assange (cyber Robin Hood) and Domscheit-Berg (right-hand
merry man) as they set out to expose the nasty little secrets of
the corrupt and the powerful in cyberspace (Lacy, 2013).
Black Hat and DefCon Hacker Conferences
The Black Hat and DefCon hacker conventions have
been held each summer in Las Vegas, Nevada, since the early
1990s. The Black Hat conference is meant for legal and IT
security professionals and is usually held at the Caesar’s Palace
Hotel. Entry into this conference has a much heftier price tag
compared to that for DefCon, which is held later in the same
week at a different hotel and is intended for students interested
in the same topics but having little money to put toward the
ticket. The visionary behind these hacker conferences is Jeff
Moss (“The Dark Tangent”). Both hacker conferences have
always been open to the public and the press, and the audience
ranges from law enforcement agents to technophiles.
Because of its huge popularity and its broader push for
freedom of information on the Internet, the Black Hat
conference has changed substantially since its start as a regional
hacker conference. Black Hat conferences are now also held in
Europe and Abu Dhabi.
Attendees at Black Hat receive an insignia backpack, a CD,
and excellent food following registration with some professional
or press title; attendees at DefCon receive a bit less, and there
are no meals furnished. However, DefCon attendees are happy
that they receive what they came for: a convention program and
a data disk containing data and ﬁles for panels, events, and
Profiles
167

other conference-related materials. An ofﬁcial conference identiﬁ-
cation badge is also furnished to each participant, with a different
design each year. While no identifying information is required
from attendees at DefCon (unlike at Black Hat), the conference
identiﬁcation badge must be worn at all times within the hotel
in order for participants to enter panels and events. Panel presen-
tations go on throughout the conference on a myriad of IT secu-
rity issues, hardware hacking, phreaking, privacy and legal issues
of concern, and abstract technical applications—all in the name
of disseminating information—which should be free.
Presenters come from diverse backgrounds, and include
PhDs, IT security professionals, government and FBI agents,
lawyers, and hackers with speciﬁc talents. In fact, many of
the speakers at Black Hat often speak without payment at
DefCon as a means of educating the next-generation of tech-
savvy hackers and legal wannabes.
Respected legal experts, like Jennifer Granick, currently the
director of civil liberties at the Stanford Center for Internet
and Society, speak on topics on Internet openness, Internet
freedom, and Internet censorship. Lawyers speaking at these
hacker conferences tend to focus on the controversies of the day.
Granick has in recent years spoken about computer crime and
IT security, electronic surveillance, consumer privacy, data
protection, copyright issues, and trademarks and the DMCA.
In July 2013, Marcia Hofmann, an attorney who litigates,
counsels, writes, and speaks about a broad range of technology
law issues, including free expression and copyright, spoke at
Black Hat. A member of the legal team appealing Andrew
Auerheimer’s criminal conviction on hacking charges in the
United States, her talk, “What security researchers need to
know about anti-hacking law,” focused in part on the legal dif-
ﬁculties that information freedom ﬁghter Aaron Swartz would
have had in defending himself had he lived and gone to trial.
Both Black Hat and DefCon are as much a social function as
an educational event, providing a wealth of unique opportuni-
ties to observe hackers, to learn more about hacking, and to
168
Internet Censorship

network in real time with like-minded folks. More details about
Black Hat and Defcon may be found at http://www.blackhat
.com/usa/ and http://www.defcon.org.
The Page-Brin Google, Inc. Team
Sergey Brin, born in Russia in 1973, and Larry Page, born in the
United States the same year, are two Stanford University PhD
dropouts who started Google, Inc., the hugely popular Internet
search engine company that has made this pair billionaires. Before
Page and Brin launched Google, Inc., Internet searches often
returned more useless than useful information. Users had to wade
through all of the useless information to ﬁnd something worth-
while—a huge waste of resources and time. The Internet’s pioneers
streamlined the search process to such a degree that, today, the
search engine Google has taken the world by storm.
Brin’s father was a Russian professor who moved to teach at
the University of Maryland, and his mother worked for NASA.
Page’s father was also a professor employed by Michigan State
University. Both Page and Brin attended Montessori schools,
where, they claim, their young minds were fueled by creativity
and free-thinking thoughts. Page says that when he and Brin
were working on their PhDs, they really had no interest in
being entrepreneurs, but when their computer science research
produced a search engine faster than any other available at that
time, the team abandoned academia and capitalized on their
entrepreneurial spirits (Schell, 2007).
Already by 2006, Brin and Page were worth about $11 bil-
lion and were ranked the second-richest Americans under the
age of 40. Like other billionaires who capitalized on creative
technologies and keen marketing skills, Brin and Page were,
clearly, accomplished beyond their years. But running a hugely
successful global company is not easy, and challenges for the
team started making media headlines. For example, in
April 2011, Page announced that he would take over as CEO
of the company, and at the time, he promised that he would
Profiles
169

shake up the Internet search engine giant by responding more
effectively and efﬁciently to major corporate decisions that
needed to be made to keep Google on top as a key high-tech
innovator.
However, serious challenges quickly accumulated for Page.
One of the challenges included a broad U.S. antitrust probe
of the company’s practices. Another challenge involved a pro-
tracted criminal investigation into Google’s advertising business
practices. A third challenge involved emerging industry forces
that led him to close a deal buying mobile device maker
Motorola Mobility Holdings, Inc. for $12.5 million. In
August 2011, U.S. federal prosecutors informed Google that
they reviewed the company’s practice of allowing ads from ille-
gal online pharmacies on its search engine since 2003; the pros-
ecutors “singled out” Larry Page as being the top executive with
the knowledge that Google was guilty of the crime but failed to
prevent it. To avoid criminal charges, Google paid the prosecu-
tors $500 million (Efrati, 2011).
For Sergey Brin, the main challenge seems to be related to his
comments regarding Internet freedom and threats to the latter
emerging from China, Saudi Arabia, and Iran. In 2012, Brin
espoused the view that these countries are needlessly censoring
and restricting the use of the Internet. In an interview with
reporters, he warned that there were “very powerful forces that
have lined up against the open Internet on all sides and around
the world” and that the “principles of openness and universal
access that underpinned the creation of the Internet three decades
ago are under greater threat than ever” (Katz, 2012, p. A9).
Brin further claimed that the threat to the freedom of the
Internet comes from a combination of (1) governments wanting
to control access and communication by their citizens, (2) the
entertainment industry’s attempts to crack down on piracy, and
(3) the increase in “restrictive” walled gardens like Facebook and
Apple—whose executives tightly control what software can be
released on their platforms—thus risk stiﬂing innovation and bal-
kanizing the Internet. Brin continued by saying that he and Page
170
Internet Censorship

would not have been able to create Google if the Internet had
been dominated by Facebook (Katz, 2012).
Brin also criticized restrictions placed by certain U.S. legisla-
tion. He afﬁrmed that Google was sometimes forced to hand
over personal data to the authorities and sometimes prevented
by legal restrictions to notify users that they had done so. He
concluded, “We push back a lot; we are able to turn down a
lot of these requests. We do everything possible to protect the
data. If we could wave a magic wand and not be subject to U.S.
law, that would be great. If we could be in some magical jurisdic-
tion that everyone in the world trusted, that would be great.
We’re doing it as well as can be done” (Katz, 2012, p. A9).
Canada’s Copyright Modernization Act of 2012
(Formerly Bill C-11)
Passed June 18, 2012, Canada’s Copyright Modernization Act
(formerly Bill C-11) includes provisions that would lock users
out of their own services and give media giants increased
powers to shut down Web sites deemed to be in violation of
Canada’s copyright provisions. Needless to say, some Internet
openness activists across Canada were hoping that the act
would not become law. This was the fourth attempt over the
last seven years to revamp copyright law in Canada. Some fea-
tures of the act were acceptable—such as no term extension
for copyright holders, a limited role for Internet service provid-
ers (ISPs), and an innovative user-created content add-on to fair
dealing. However, the digital-lock provisions, in particular,
were quite worrisome. The provisions of concern included the
following (Winseck, 2012):
• tough rules requiring intermediaries such ISPs, search engines
(like Google), social networking sites (like Facebook and
Twitter), and data and Web-hosting sites (like Black Sun and
other cloud-computing providers) to block access to Web sites
alleged to enable copyright infringement;
Profiles
171

• a notice and take-down and graduated response scheme that
would allow ISPs to disconnect subscribers accused of
repeated copyright infringement that would replace the less
invasive notice and notice scheme currently practiced by the
major Canadian ISPs;
• claw backs to the innovative user-generated content clause,
allowing online users to make re-mixes and mash-ups for
personal and noncommercial use; and
• copyright term extensions from the lifetime of the creator plus
50 years to life + 70 years.
Further, some Internet openness activists worried that if the
Act were passed (which it did), there would be tough provi-
sions, such as those found in the proposed U.S. legislation
known as SOPA, which was eventually not passed after a wide-
spread public outcry. Speciﬁcally, Bill C-11 would allow rights
holders to include digital locks on their copyrighted content,
which includes music, videos, e-books and software. Users
could legally make copies for personal backups, but all other
duplications could result in ﬁnes for the perpetrators. While
the movie, music, and software industries were pleased with
how quickly the Canadian Conservative government had
moved to get the bill passed, other groups like librarians, educa-
tors, consumer associations, and many Canadians expressed
immediate concerns about these digital locks and what the
ramiﬁcations will be for the lawful distribution of content.
Cran Campbell (1949–)
Much of our discussion has centered on countries censoring
content on the Internet. However, there are individuals who
claim to do the same. There is a Canadian, a self-proclaimed
“Craigslist crusader,” who hunts down Internet openness indi-
viduals whom he believes cite offensive and racist comments
on the Craigslist Web site, a classiﬁed ads Web site offering a
variety of items and services. Not yet as famous as Canadian
172
Internet Censorship

Michael Calce (“Maﬁaboy”), Cran Campbell has been ﬂagging
postings under a heading called “rants and raves” in the person-
als section of the company’s Vancouver, British Columbia,
Web site.
By calling on police, human rights tribunals, and politicians
across Canada to take action, Campbell, a retired man, has
asked authorities to force companies maintaining Internet
servers outside the country but using the .ca domain name to
comply with Canada’s hate speech laws. But Campbell has a
big ﬁght ahead, for the individuals behind Web sites with .ca
domains are not required to live in Canada or to operate their
Internet servers there. What is even more important is the fact
that the organizations managing those Web sites do not man-
date what laws people must follow. Another complication is
that Canada’s hate speech laws are complex (Drews, 2013).
While Campbell says that he has reported his concerns to
Craigslist ofﬁcials through email, he has not yet received a
response. However, someone else online commented that the
ﬂagger—Campbell—should be “squashed like a bug,” and
another online user threatened to send people after whoever
wants the comments removed. The authorities say that for a
message to be deemed as hate propaganda under Canada’s
Criminal Code, the message has to be made publicly and must
target one of ﬁve identiﬁable protected groups based upon race,
color, religion, ethnic origin, or sexual orientation. The author-
ities must also determine whether someone is attempting to
cause disdain or hatred toward a protected group. Apparently,
upon investigation by Canadian authorities, Campbell’s com-
plaints have repeatedly failed to meet the test (Drews, 2013).
Center for Internet and Society
The Center for Internet and Society (CIS) was founded in
2000 at Stanford Law School. It was created to be a public
interest technology law and policy program that aims to
bring together researchers, academics, legislators, students, and
Profiles
173

scientists to study the interaction of evolving technologies and
their relationship with the changing needs of appropriate legis-
lation. The center is particularly involved with the interaction
between new technologies and the law, and how the synergy
between the two can either promote or harm the public good.
Topics of interest include Internet openness, free speech,
Internet innovation, and Internet censorship. Founded by
Lawrence Lessig, CIS continues to strive to improve both tech-
nology and law by encouraging key decision makers from rel-
evant ﬁelds to further democratic values, whether on land or
online. The Web site may be found at http://cyberlaw
.stanford.edu/about-us.
Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto
The Citizen Lab, located at the University of Toronto in
Ontario, Canada, is housed at the Munk School of Global
Affairs. Their mission is to advance research and development
aimed at the crossover between digital media, human rights,
and IT security on a global basis. By utilizing experts in various
ﬁelds—including political science, sociology, computer science,
engineering, and graphic design—participants are motivated to
collaborate together and with other research centers and organ-
izations to monitor, analyze, and determine the impact of
political power in the virtual world and promote Internet
openness. The Citizen Lab’s research network includes the
OpenNet Initiative, OpenNet Eurasia, OpenNet Asia, and
the Cyber Stewards Program. The Citizen Lab was a founding
partner from 2002 through 2012 of the Information Warfare
Monitor and helped create the original design for the
Psiphon software to circumvent Internet censorship. The
Citizen Lab is ﬁnancially supported by a number of arms—
including the SecDev Group; Psiphon, Inc.; the Ford
Foundation; the Open Society Institute; and the Donner
Canadian Foundation. Their Web site is at https://citizenlab
.org/about/.
174
Internet Censorship

Copyright Armageddon: 3D Printers
There is a legal battle about to occur between traditional manu-
facturers and the Internet’s capacity to deliver real-world 3D
objects, given the rising popularity of 3D printers. This potential
legal battle has been labeled “the copyright Armageddon.” With
low-end 3D printers costing only about $500, citizens could soon
print 3D plastic items without leaving their living rooms. Think
about it, with this 3D printer, one could produce musical instru-
ments, household items, or toys for children. The possibilities for
home manufacturing of all sorts of goodies are limited only by
one’s imagination, the possibilities for raging legal battles are high,
as piracy concerns in many jurisdictions are the present-day
reality—particularly in the United States. Piracy has been a popu-
lar legal issue in the United States since the passage in 1998 of the
DMCA. One of the ﬁrst piracy cases to make media headlines
involved Shawn Fanning, the creator of the music ﬁle-sharing
program known as Napster. As a result, in 2001, Napster was
forced to shut down. However, concerns have remained about
online theft of data (Mallough, 2013).
The big fear within the 3D printing industry is that govern-
ments will enact legislation to limit the use of this technology.
In fact, in 2011, the Atlantic Council in the United States rec-
ommended a law similar to the DMCA that would allow copy-
right holders of various items to demand that ﬁles be removed
because of copyright infringement. However, free speech activ-
ist groups like Public Knowledge and the Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF) are recommending that companies choose
to adapt to the new technology rather than spend tons of
money ﬁghting it. For example, manufacturing companies
might consider selling the 3D ﬁles through an ofﬁcial online
store, similar to how songs are sold on iTunes. However, given
the history of Napster, it is probable that, like the music and
ﬁlm industries, the manufacturers of the 3D printers will likely
decide to ﬁnish the battle in the courts rather than through
some well-reasoned compromise (Mallough, 2013).
Profiles
175

Electronic Frontier Foundation
The EFF is an organization that was rooted in the summer
of 1990, primarily as a reaction to threats to free speech. The
triggering event was the U.S. Secret Service’s raids to track
down the dissemination of a document copied illegally from a
BellSouth computer. The contents included the workings of
the 911 emergency system. The way the Secret Service agents
saw it, if hackers knew how to access telephone lines dedicated
to receiving 911 emergency phone calls, they could overload
those lines, putting individuals in a real emergency at extreme
risk. At the time, one of the alleged recipients of the coveted
information was a systems operator employed by Steve
Jackson Games. After issuing a search warrant, the Secret
Service agents conﬁscated the computers and copies of a game
book from the company’s premises. The case ended with the
U.S. Secret Service deciding not to charge the company of any
crime, primarily because the agents could not locate any copies
of the allegedly stolen 911 ﬁles on the company’s computers
(Schell and Martin, 2006).
However, when the game publisher received their computers
back from the U.S. Secret Service, they noticed that all of the
electronic mail stored on the company’s bulletin board system
(where users dialed in and were able to transmit personal mes-
sages to one another) was accessed and deleted. Consequently,
Steve Jackson Games felt that both their rights to free speech
and privacy had been violated; however, they did not know where
to turn, because they felt that no civil liberties group in the
United States at that time had a good enough grasp of technology
to assist them in their cause. Finally, the company found people
who could help them in a virtual community known as the
Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link—which included some clever peo-
ple like Mitch Kapor (once the president of Lotus Development
Corporation), John Perry Barlow (former lyricist for the
Grateful Dead musical group), and John Gilmore (of Sun
Microsystems). The trio began an organization to work on civil
176
Internet Censorship

liberties issues relevant to emerging technologies. On the day of
their start-up, the group said that they were representing not only
Steve Jackson Games but also some of the company’s BBS users
whose free speech and privacy rights had been violated. It was this
event that saw the birth of the EFF (Schell and Martin, 2006).
The Steve Jackson Games legal case helped to deﬁne an
appropriate legal framework for dealing with free speech and
privacy infringement in the Internet world. As a result, law
enforcement agents must now obtain a warrant before seizing
or reading emails—a principle established in the Steve Jackson
Games case. The EFF continues to defend parties whose rights
are believed to be infringed in cyberspace.
Freedom House
With ofﬁces on Wall Street in New York and on Connecticut
Avenue in Washington, D.C., Freedom House is a prestigious,
independent private organization supporting the expansion of
freedom throughout the world. Their members believe that
freedom—be it online or on land—is possible only in
democratic
political
systems
in
which governments
are
accountable to their own people. Moreover, the rules that pre-
vail in that jurisdiction must be more open than closed, and
freedoms of expression, association, and belief are guaranteed.
Working with others around the globe who also support non-
violent civic initiatives in places where freedom is at risk,
Freedom House acts as a catalyst for change by analyzing the
state of online information freedom or censorship on a world-
wide scale. They act as an advocate to encourage American
policymakers and others to adopt policies advancing human
rights and democracy and take action through exchanges and
technical assistance to provide training and support to human
rights defenders, civil society organizations, and the media
to strengthen reform efforts worldwide. Founded in 1941
by Eleanor Roosevelt, Wendel Willkie, and other Americans
concerned with increased threats to peace and democracy,
Profiles
177

Freedom House has since been a vocal proponent for
democratic values and a strong opponent to dictatorships,
whether they represent the Left or the Right. Their Web site
is at www.freedomhouse.org.
William H. Gates (a.k.a. Bill Gates) (1955–)
Microsoft Corporation’s chief software architect and chair for
years is Bill Gates, who cofounded this hugely successful com-
pany with friend Steve Allen back in 1975. Apparently, Bill
Gates was drawn to computers and programming at the young
age of 11. He started at Harvard University in 1973, where he
met Steve Ballmer, former CEO of Microsoft (Yarow and
Libetti, 2013). In order to be a more effective businessman,
Bill Gates chose to drop out of Harvard University in his third
year of study. In 1999, Bill Gates released his book Business @
the Speed of Thought, which remained in The New York
Times best-seller list for seven weeks. It is sold in more than
60 countries and has been translated into at least 25 languages
(Schell, 2007).
An entrepreneur and writer, Bill Gates announced that in
July 2008, he intended to step down from his daily work at
the company and devote himself to more philanthropic activ-
ities. He said that he needed to join the global ﬁght against
HIV/AIDs and begin a campaign to eradicate polio and
malaria. Another ambition he stated to the media was that he
had to ﬁnd new ways to drive innovation that will beneﬁt the
world’s poorest countries. As for his views on Internet censor-
ship, when he was speaking to students at Stanford University
in February 2008, Bill Gates said, “I don’t see any risk in the
world at large that someone will restrict free content ﬂow on
the Internet. You cannot control the Internet.” Though
China has become active in censoring the Internet in recent
years, Bill Gates admitted in his speech to the students that
Microsoft, along with several other U.S. companies, has been
involved in the crossﬁre. In late 2005, he said Microsoft shut
178
Internet Censorship

down the blog of journalist Zhao Jing (a.k.a. Michael Anti)
after he had blogged about a newspaper strike in China. Bill
Gates concluded his speech by saying that in the long run, free
speech will win out over Internet censorship because of busi-
ness requirements. Restriction on free speech curtails business
activities, so the reality is that commercial forces will work
together to combat online censorship. “If your country wants
to have a developed economy,” afﬁrmed Bill Gates, “you basi-
cally have to open up the Internet” (McMillan, 2008).
Iceland’s Planned Internet Porn Ban
Though not rated by Freedom House (2012) in the Freedom on
the Net 2012 report, one has to ask the intriguing question, In
the age of freedom of information and free speech, and in an
era where about one-third of the population is Internet con-
nected, can a thoroughly “wired” country like Iceland really
expect to be a pornography-free zone? It appeared that in
February, 2013, Icelandic authorities wanted to ﬁnd out, but
as of February, 2014, the small North Atlantic jurisdiction
was still drafting advanced plans to ban pornographic content
in print and online as a means of protecting minors. Needless
to say, the proposal of interior minister Ogmundur Jonasson
has met with intense public outcry around Internet censorship,
in particular, on grounds that the nation’s commitment to free
speech is being jeopardized (Lawless and Helgason, 2013).
Advocates of the planned ban, however, feel that the posi-
tives of protecting children from serious harm far outweigh
the negatives. For example, Halla Gunnarsdottir, a political
advisor to the interior minister, said that an expert committee
will simply be upholding existing law—which is vaguely
worded—and not introduce new restrictions. Violent porno-
graphic images are already banned in Iceland, she afﬁrmed,
and have been so for decades. Because the term pornographic
is not clearly deﬁned, she continued, the law is not enforced
(Lawless and Helgason, 2013).
Profiles
179

Playboy and Penthouse magazines are sold in stores, hard-core
and violent material can be bought from so-called stag and
doe shops, and adult erotica channels are part and parcel of
digital-television packages that minors can easily tap into in
Iceland. The authorities plan to ban porn online as a means to
differentiate online erotica from pornography, the latter deﬁned
as material with violent or degrading content. The authorities
have considered some measures for implementing the ban, such
as making it illegal to pay to view pornographic content using
an Icelandic credit card and introducing a national Internet ﬁl-
ter to block a list of “offensive” Web site addresses. But critics
have argued that such ﬁlters are ﬂawed in that they capture
innocent Web sites as well in their wide-casting net and that
other adverse effects include slowing down the Internet and
opening up a Pandora’s box to a series of human rights, access
to information, and freedom of expression issues. Other critics
concerned about Iceland’s economy have argued with fervor
that with Iceland’s current reputation as being one of the
best-connected jurisdictions worldwide with one of the highest
levels of Internet use by its citizens, the implementation of such
a ban would hinder the country’s economic growth, as the
nation would then be viewed by the outside world as anything
but a center for media, technology, and Internet freedoms
(Lawless and Helgason, 2013).
Steve Jobs (1955–2011) and Steve Wozniak
(“The Woz”) (1950–)
Along
with
American
Steve
Wozniak—an
information
freedom ﬁghter and founder of the famous EFF, Steve Jobs
as a young adult started the well-known company Apple Com-
puter, Inc. Of the pair, Jobs is probably best known for his
entrepreneurial gifts, while Wozniak became known for his
activism related to Internet freedom.
After studying physics, literature, and poetry at Reed College
in Portland, Oregon, Steve Jobs sold his VW minibus in 1976
180
Internet Censorship

so that he could have start-up money to begin his computer
company. The business was so successful that, four years later,
Jobs and Wozniak were able to take their company public,
at $22 a share. By 1984, the creative and entrepreneurial pair
re-invented the personal computer, when they launched the
Macintosh. Jobs left Apple during the period from 1986
through 1997, during which time he founded and ran another
company called NeXT Software, Inc. The latter created hard-
ware to exploit the full potential of object-oriented technolo-
gies. Jobs sold NeXT to Apple in 1997, when he re-associated
himself with Apple (Schell and Martin, 2006).
Forever the entrepreneur and visionary, Jobs discovered and
bought an animation company called Pixar Animation Studios
in 1986. This company became the creator and producer of
such top-grossing animated ﬁlms as A Bug’s Life; Monsters,
Inc.; Toy Story; and Toy Story 2. After 1997, Steve Jobs helped
Apple to produce and bring to market such innovative products
as the iMac, the iBook, the iMovie, the iPod, iPhone, and the
iPad. Perhaps less well known is the fact that Jobs was part of
the brain team that positioned Apple to venture onto the
Internet (Schell and Martin, 2006).
Around January 2011, the media started writing articles
about the difﬁculties Steve Jobs was having with his health; at
the end of August 2011, feeling that he was unable to continue
as CEO of Apple because of his deteriorating health, Jobs
resigned. The world felt that his resignation closed the book
on one of the most successful and iconic technology leadership
stints in U.S. corporate history. The 56-year-old cofounder of
today’s second-most valuable company in the world left his
post with these closing words: “I have always said if there ever
came a day when I could no longer meet my duties and expec-
tations as Apple’s CEO, I would be the ﬁrst to let you know.
Unfortunately, that day has come” (El Akkad, 2011, p. A1).
The positive creative vision that Steve Jobs had for Apple
included the move into the mobile phone market with the
iPad and iPhone—still the second best-selling and hugely
Profiles
181

proﬁt-making devices in this highly competitive mobile
market, despite dozens of competing products released by
Microsoft, Samsung, and Hewlett-Packard since 2010. At the
time of his departure from Apple as CEO, Steve recommended
that Tim Cook be named as his successor, for much of Apple’s
success, note business gurus, is a result of the company’s ability
to keep costs low. And, afﬁrmed Steve Jobs, much of that ﬁnan-
cial discipline resulted from the recommendations and sharp
mind of Cook (El Akkad, 2011).
After Steve Jobs’s death in 2011, Walter Isaacson produced a
stimulating biography on Jobs with a motivation to have read-
ers consider what insightful messages they could draw to
enhance their leadership and entrepreneurial potential. Like
his founding partner Steve Wozniak, Steve Jobs believed in
the freedom of information and the positive and highly creative
ongoing evolution of the Internet. Though Steve Jobs returned
to Apple in 1997 and stayed with the company until his death,
entrepreneurial Steve Wozniak went on his own separate path.
He founded the EFF advocacy group, the Tech Museum, and
the Children’s Discovery Museum in San Jose (Schell, 2007).
Liu Xiabo (1955–) and Liu Xia (1959–)
In December 2010, Nobel laureate and professor Xiabo Liu,
a prominent Chinese democracy activist since the 1989
demonstrations at Tiananmen Square, was sent to prison for
11 years on the grounds that he had “incited subversion” in
China, a charge stemming from a pro-democracy manifesto
known as Charter 08 that Liu helped to write and disseminate.
At the government’s command, police were deployed around
Liu’s and his wife’s apartment building in west Beijing just
hours before Liu’s Nobel win was formally announced in
December 2010 (MacKinnon, 2012).
The Charter 08 manifesto appealed in all media for freedom
of expression—including freedom on the Internet, democratic
elections in China, and human rights. In court, Liu was allowed
182
Internet Censorship

to make a public statement. That speech, entitled “I have no
enemies,” was perhaps the ﬁnest articulation of the struggle
for information and free speech freedom in modern China,
illustrating why Liu is so deserving of the 2010 Nobel Peace
Prize. In place of an acceptance speech in Oslo, Liu’s “I have
no enemies” was read by Norwegian ﬁlm artist Liv Ullman
(Halvorssen, 2012).
While Liu spends his years in a Chinese prison, his wife Xia
Liu has been cut off by the Chinese authorities from the world
outside of her apartment. She is not allowed guests, she cannot
make telephone calls, and she cannot use the Internet to com-
municate with others. Though she has been charged with no
crime, she is being punished for being the wife of China’s most
famous political dissident. Xia Liu told the Associated Press in
December 2012: “I felt I was a person emotionally prepared
to respond to the consequences of Liu Xiabo winning the prize.
But after he won the prize, I really never imagined that after he
won, I would not be able to leave my home. This is too absurd.
I think Kafka could not have written anything more absurd and
unbelievable than this” (MacKinnon, 2012, p. A20).
During the time of this interview, Chinese author Mo Yan
headed to Stockholm to collect his Nobel Prize for literature—
the ﬁrst Chinese national not in jail or in exile who was allowed
to win and collect a Nobel prize. And while news of Liu’s
Nobel Prize was effectively squelched by the Chinese authorities
to the point that most Chinese citizens never even heard about
this good news story, Mo, a writer with strong ties to the
Communist Party, has been touted as a hero by the country’s
state-controlled media (MacKinnon, 2012).
Bradley Manning (a.k.a. Chelsea 1988–)
The case of U.S. soldier Bradley Manning illustrates clearly the
ﬁne line drawn between national security during a war and the
role of the Internet and hackers in overriding established rules
of information disclosure to the public. On day one of the
Profiles
183

court-martial, Private Manning confessed to being the source of
the huge number of archives of secret military and diplomatic
documents released to the public over the Internet by
WikiLeaks. At this early stage of the trial, Manning’s defense
lawyer told the judge that his client tried to ensure that the hun-
dreds of thousands documents that he turned over to WikiLeaks
would not cause harm; he was, after all, selective about the infor-
mation that he shared with WikiLeaks. According to the lawyer,
Manning’s motive was to make the world a better and more
informed place (Savage, 2013).
On the second day of trial, however, the prosecution called
to the witness stand a hacker named Adrian Lamo, who had
at ﬁrst befriended Manning, giving him guidance on encrypted
chat lines and then turned him over to authorities. Going by
the way the prosecution framed it, Manning knew that he
could potentially cause harm by showing the American public
the ugly reality of war in Afghanistan and Iraq. Thus, just in
the ﬁrst two days of the trial the disparate views at both ends
of the continuum of the freedom ﬁghter and the need for cen-
sorship came to light. The trial dragged on for months, and
Manning faced eight counts of espionage as well as a federal
computer fraud charge (Simpson, 2013).
By mid-August, when Private Manning took the stand, he
apologized to the American people for hurting people with his
actions as well as the United States. In his defense, an Army
psychologist noted that while he was in the midst of a gender
identiﬁcation issue, Manning was on duty in a hostile work-
place that would not have tolerated this reality very well.
Thus, this condition, his personality and idealism, coupled
with a lack of friends while stationed in Iraq, caused Manning
to “reasonably conclude” that he could somehow change the
world for the better by leaking classiﬁed information over the
Internet (Dishneau and Jelinek, 2013).
In the end, Private Manning was sentenced to 35 years in
prison for providing WikiLeaks with its biggest mainstream
success: the disclosure of secret documents and a stash of about
184
Internet Censorship

a quarter million U.S. diplomatic cables with a 40-year history.
In his U.S. prison cell, Private Manning now uses the name
Chelsea instead of Bradley (Lacy, 2013).
On February 19, 2014, former U.S. security contractor
Edward Snowden presented an Oxford University Sam Adams
award for integrity and intelligence to Chelsea Manning via
YouTube from his place of hiding in Russia. In the video,
Edward Snowden warned of the dangers of government “over-
classiﬁcation,” a term he said well describes the U.S. govern-
ment’s use of state secrecy privileges to keep information from
the public that is actually not related to national security
(Agence France-Press, 2014a).
OpenNet Initiative
The goal of the OpenNet Initiative (ONI) is to provide infor-
mation to the world about how countries either allow or deny
access to information to their citizens. Their mission is to iden-
tify and document Internet ﬁltering and surveillance and pro-
vide a global forum for opening discussion on these issues.
The ONI has just announced the availability of their summa-
rized global Internet ﬁltering data—ready for download under
a Creative Commons license. This initiative involves a number
of prestigious universities around the world, including Harvard
Law School in the United States, the University of Toronto in
Canada, and Oxford University and the University of
Cambridge in England. On their Web site, found at http://
opennet.net/, is an interactive map indicating the countries
censoring the Internet.
Besides the afﬁliated universities listed above outlined above,
there are other groups offering advice on how to disable or cir-
cumvent censorware. Some of these groups advocate use of
proxy sites—Web pages allowing users to browse the Web
without using an Internet protocol (IP) address. Once one visits
the proxy site, which includes a form into which one types the
URL of the restricted Web site one wants to visit, the proxy site
Profiles
185

retrieves the Web page and displays it. Outsiders, such as
authorities, can only see that one has visited the proxy site and
not the actual Web sites pulled up (Strickland, 2013).
And, of course, there are loose cells of hackers like Anonymous
who claim that they are ﬁghting Internet censorship by hacking
into targeted Web sites and displaying prime content on the
Internet for others to see.
Psiphon Software
Thanks to an ingenious piece of Canadian software called
Psiphon that allows users to bypass Internet censors, citizens in
censored nations can view Internet content that is deemed “inap-
propriate” by the authorities; the software has also sometimes
been put into use by government authorities. In fact, it is esti-
mated that about 25,000 to 40,000 Syrians currently bypass
the country’s sensors daily using this software. Moreover, in
Iran, it is estimated that about 150,000 Internet users are able
to access online services like Facebook, Twitter, and Skype with
the use of this software (Braga, 2012). According to Psiphon’s
Web site, the primary purpose of the software is to do just that:
enable online users to access Internet content that is otherwise
censored and to preserve security, privacy, and access. The com-
pany’s Web site is available at http://psiphon.ca/.
Researchers from the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab
and the SecDev Group—both committed to exploring privacy
and censorship issues within oppressive regimes around the
globe—ﬁrst devised the software in 2004 and then brought it
to the market in 2008. The software is distributed worldwide
through email, online games, and actual mail addresses that
people in censorious nations tend to pass along or whisper
among each other. Logistically, once an online user installs
Psiphon on his or her computer, all Internet trafﬁc is encrypted
and securely funneled through a server outside of the censoring
country. The server then acts as a relay, bouncing censored sites
back to rebels and dissidents (Braga, 2012).
186
Internet Censorship

The developers of the software have nicely labeled it “a com-
plex act of digital sleight of hand”—one that censorious
authorities are daily trying to ﬁgure out. Actually, the software
seems to act like a well-designed botnet, but its motivations
are positive, not negative. Put another way, Psiphon’s pro-
grammers seem to fully understand the persistent nature of
nefarious malware but have harnessed its potential for the
power of good by making the servers and software difﬁcult for
oppressive regimes to identify and then conquer. But given that
Psiphon is not designed for anonymity, it is possible for govern-
ments to detect the software’s presence on a country’s network
at this point in time—but not how it is being used. So, is there
is risk associated with using this software in an Internet-
censorious country? Absolutely, says the CEO of the company.
“If you choose to use an anti-censorship technology, one that
breaks whatever laws of your own country, that’s the same as
going out on the streets during a demonstration. It’s not some-
thing that’s inconsequential” (Braga, 2012, p. A13).
Public Knowledge
The mission of Public Knowledge is to promote the following:
openness
of
the
Internet
and
the
public’s
access
to
knowledge, and creativity through balanced copyright (i.e.,
maintaining and protecting the rights of online consumers as
they use innovative technology in a legal fashion). There is little
doubt that Public Knowledge seems to work at the intersection
of copyright, telecommunications, and Internet law. What is
more, these ﬁelds seem to be converging. Thus, the agency’s
experience in all these areas seems to place it in the perfect posi-
tion to lobby for policies serving the public interest. So what
does Public Knowledge actually do?
According to their Web site, Public Knowledge (2013a)
• ensures universal access to affordable and so-called open
networks;
Profiles
187

• advances the transparency of government and the public’s
access to knowledge;
• opposes policies slowing technology, impeding innovation,
or downsizing the fair use policies;
• educates the media and the public using lay language,
through white papers and blogs;
• produces forum events for policymakers, the public,
industry, and the media to exchange ideas about Public
Knowledge’s main mission and their established priorities.
Reporters Without Borders
While it concerns itself with the concept of Internet censorship,
Reporters Without Borders’s (RWB) scope and mission extend
far beyond Internet practices. While RWB does keep a list of
“Internet enemies”—deﬁned by them as countries creating
and maintaining the most censorious policies and restrictions
on the Internet worldwide, the association also maintains a
record of the journalists and netizens who have been killed
as well as imprisoned (often without a fair trial). Reporters
Without Borders was started in France in 1985 by four journal-
ists: Robert Ménard, Rémy Loury, Jacques Molénat and
Émilien Jubineau. This association, registered as a nonproﬁt
organization in France since 1995, immediately took on an
international dimension and has remained that way ever since.
Their Web site is at http://en.rsf.org/who-we-are-12-09-2012,
32617.html.
Neda Salehi (1983–2009)
It was June 22, 2009. The place was Iran. It was hot in the car,
so the young, educated woman named Neda Salehi and her
singing instructor got out of their car for some fresh air on a
quiet side street not far from the Iranian antigovernment pro-
tests the pair had set out to attend. Soon, a gunshot rang out,
and Neda Salehi (a.k.a. Ms. Agha-Soltan) fell to the ground.
188
Internet Censorship

“It burned me,” she said before she died. The YouTube video
of her death, taken by an onlooker at the scene, circulated in
Iran and around the world via the Internet (see http://www
.youtube.com/verify_age?&next_url=/watch%3Fv%3DOjQxq
5N—Kc). It, literally, “went viral,” making Neda Salehi, a
26-year-old who relatives said was not all that political before
then, an instant symbol of the censorious antigovernment
movement (Fathi, 2009).
Within 24 hours of the incident, the 40-second video of her
death was transmitted around the world via the Internet. What
is so very interesting is that the video avoided an intense cat-
and-mouse game by Iran’s Internet censors, and the man who
shot the video knew that the Iranian government was blocking
Web sites like YouTube and Facebook. Thus, he knew that if
the authorities discovered that he had sent the video to those
Web sites, he and his family members would have been at severe
risk. So, instead, the man emailed the 2-megabyte video to a
friend, who forwarded it to the Voice of America, The Guardian
in London, and ﬁve online friends in Europe with this message,
“Please let the world know.” One of those friends, an Iranian
expatriate living in The Netherlands, posted the video on
Facebook. Copies of the video quickly appeared on CNN, and,
despite a prolonged attempt by Iran’s government to keep a
media “lid” on the violent protests erupting in the streets of
Iran, Neda Salehi was, through happenstance, transformed on
the Internet from being a nameless victim to becoming an icon
against Internet censorship (Stelter and Stone, 2009).
Yekaterina Samutsevich (1983–)
Individual heroes ﬁghting for information freedom, freedom of
expression, and political freedoms do not always choose the
same venue for their activism. Some choose to do so online
and are known as hacktivists, while others choose to do so on
land. Pussy Riot, a punk rock group, launched a protest in
Russia in February 2012, that, since then, has sparked rights
Profiles
189

discussions all over the globe. Band member Yekaterina
Samutsevich and her three band mates were sentenced to two
years in prison for hooliganism and acts of blasphemy against
the Russian Orthodox Church. What did these women do
in February 2012 that was such a crime? According to
freepussyriot.org, the two-minute song that they sang in the
Russian Orthodox Church had an opening lyric that, when
translated, simply means “occupy the city with a kitchen frying
pan.” The band’s “Putin Lights Up the Fires” was a single
recorded by the non-imprisoned band members of Pussy Riot
and released after their fellow band members were sent to
prison for singing their song (Morris, 2012).
A year after her arrest in February 2013, Yekaterina
Samutsevich, freed from prison, gave an interview to reporters
outside of Christ the Saviour Church, where the band had
staged its original freedom of information and political freedom
protest against Putin’s censorious government on February 21,
2012. The legal defense for her release was that the guards
grabbed her before she could join in the band’s “punk prayer.”
Though free while her friends remained in prison, Yekaterina
told reporters that she still feels defeated that the band’s protest
song did not stop Vladimir Putin from winning a presidential
election the next month—a result that upheld the leader’s
unhealthy and dangerous relationship with the church and the
lack of genuine political freedoms for Russian citizens, she
afﬁrmed. When they got to church, maintained Yekaterina,
the band members wanted to make a video clip and release it
to the world, likely through the Internet. Yekaterina said,
“We wanted to start a discussion in society, show our negative
view of the merging of the church and state . . . The problem
was raised internationally, the problem of human rights was
put sharply into focus . . . I don’t regret the performance. I only
regret that they [the courts] put us in prison” (Heritage, 2013,
p. A12).
On February, 2014 during the Sochi games, Nadezhda
Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina, two of the Pussy Riot
190
Internet Censorship

band members, were detained by police along with other pro-
testors for allegedly attempting to steal a woman’s purse, but
they were released within hours. The two women said that they
went to Sochi to record a new protest song. The pair said that
they were taken under arrest by police when they were inno-
cently walking down the street (Walker, 2014).
Edward Snowden (1984–)
In mid-June 2013, politicians in the United States started ask-
ing for some real answers from the Obama administration
about allegations from a till-then-unknown American com-
puter analyst named Edward Snowden, who had proclaimed
through the media that a U.S. secret surveillance program
called Prism was responsible for “hacking into” Hong Kong
computer systems to dig out some private and conﬁdential
information without the authorities knowing about it.
Edward Snowden, it seems, became an overnight media sen-
sation, when he appeared to be a protagonist in some thriller
ﬁlm. It was early in the early summer of 2013 that 29-year-
old Snowden ﬂed to Hong King with a trove of classiﬁed
material allegedly stolen from the National Security Agency
(NSA), where he had been a consultant with considerable secu-
rity clearance. It was there that Snowden revealed to the news
media the details of an NSA program that sweeps up informa-
tion on telephone calls and emails in the United States as a
means of identifying patterns of possible information exchanges
between terrorists. When the news broke, Hong Kong legisla-
tors, as well, took notice. Hong Kong administrator James
To, for example, was quoted as saying to the press, “I am inter-
ested to know how vulnerable our cybersystems are, and I want
to ask Mr. Snowden questions and verify his claims” (Coleman,
2013, p. 6A).
Snowden afﬁrmed to The Washington Post and The Guardian
that he had leaked news of this surveillance program to show
the American public that President Obama had failed to follow
Profiles
191

through on his earlier pledges of transparency. Later, while tak-
ing refuge in Hong Kong, Snowden announced that he would
seek asylum from any country that—like him—believed in free
speech and was opposed to interfering with the online privacy
of citizens (Blake, Gellman, and Miller, 2013).
After his open declarations about the U.S. surveillance pro-
grams and those of the British—who were equally as guilty, he
said—Snowden was on the run for the rest of the summer. It
was Julian Assange and WikiLeaks that helped Snowden make
his way to his eventual asylum in Russia, over loud cries from pol-
iticians in the United States who continued to argue throughout
the summer that Snowden needed to be returned to the United
States to face charges over his “acts of treason” (Lacy, 2013).
On August 13, 2013, Edward Snowden thanked Russia after
being granted temporary asylum for one year. He was told that
he could work in Russia during this period, and at least for a
year, the self-declared freedom ﬁghter is safely out of the reach
of U.S. prosecutors (Myers and Kramer, 2013).
Aaron Swartz (1987–2013)
A hacktivist born in the United States, Aaron Swartz was the
founder of the Demand Progress movement—which launched
a strong and successful campaign against the U.S. Internet cen-
sorship bills SOPA and PIPA. Demand Progress, an anti-
Internet censorship group, now has a membership with over a
million members. Aaron was also a contributing editor to The
Bafﬂer, a journal of art and criticism edited by John Summers
with Thomas Frank and Chris Lehmann and published in print
and in digital formats by MIT Press. Aaron was a frequent com-
mentator on television, and he enjoyed writing articles on a
variety of topics, from the corruption of big money in institu-
tions to politics and public opinion. From 2010 to 2011,
Aaron was a fellow at the Harvard Ethics Center Lab on Insti-
tutional Corruption, and he served on the board of Change
Congress, a good government nonproﬁt organization.
192
Internet Censorship

His brilliant analysis of Wikipedia has been widely cited in the
literature, and by working with Web inventor Tim Berners-Lee at
MIT, Aaron helped develop and popularize standards for sharing
data on the Web. Aaron also coauthored the RSS 1.0 speciﬁca-
tion, currently widely use for publishing news stories. In 2007,
Aaron led the development of the nonproﬁt Open Library, a
hugely ambitious project, where he set out to collect data on every
book ever published. All of this information is available on Aaron
Swartz’s Web site http://www.aaronsw.com.
Sadly, Aaron allegedly took his own life at age 26 in January
2013 in his apartment in New York—just months before he
was to face trial on hacking-related charges said to be in contra-
vention of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA). His
death sparked grief and angered online-rights advocates around
the world as well as his family members—many of whom ques-
tioned whether Aaron’s death was actually a suicide.
Peter Eckersley of the California-based activist group EFF
said, “Aaron did more than anyone to make the Internet a
thriving ecosystem for open knowledge and to keep it that
way” (Agence France-Presse, 2013, p. A9). David Moon, a
member of Aaron’s Demand Progress, remarked that this
hacktivist “reﬁned advocacy for the progressive and open-
information movement” (Agence France-Presse, 2013, p. A9).
Aaron’s “crime” was that he broke into a closet at MIT to
plug into the computer network to download millions of aca-
demic journal articles from a subscription-only service known
as JSTOR. (Aaron, like many hackers, was a strong believer in
free information.) Aaron Swartz pleaded not guilty to charges
of computer fraud, wire fraud, and other cybercrimes all carry-
ing a prison sentence of at least 35 years and a $1 million ﬁne if
convicted. Prominent blogger and friend Cory Doctorow said
that Swartz “could have revolutionized American [and world-
wide] politics. His legacy may still yet do so” (Agence France-
Presse, 2013, p. A9).
In January, 2013, Jennifer Granick of the Center for
Internet and Society said online that the CFAA is extremely
Profiles
193

broad, covering tons of online conduct that should not merit
prison time. She continued with her line of reasoning.
Though Aaron’s defense under the CFAA would not be an easy
task, one cannot say that he was guilty of the crime for which
he was charged, for he was authorized to access JSTOR just
by being on MIT’s campus. Further, though the CFAA may
protect “the box” from unauthorized access, it does not regulate
the means or the speed of access. A critical point is that Aaron
was allowed to download from JSTOR. Because the CFAA
arguably applies to Aaron’s alleged actions, it is time, Granick
said, that this piece of legislation is amended. It is also a good
reason why prosecutors must be extremely careful when bring-
ing such cases to court. That said, many knowledgeable people
feel that Aaron’s prosecution was disproportionate to the
offense, if any, committed (Granick, 2013).
Granick continued with her argument online as follows. The
U.S. government authorities ﬁled multiple, duplicative charges—
forcing Aaron to initially see 35 years and then 50 years behind
prison bars, if convicted. This is not an uncommon tactic, for
case after case, the government tends to overcharge, and for
the ﬁrst-time defendant, the prospects can be terrifying. In this
atmosphere of terror, it is quite common for the prosecutor to
offer a deal—usually before dispositive motions are heard or
before trial. When the facts are unclear or the case arises under
a vague and an overly broad law like the CFAA, defendants like
Aaron unjustly face the same tactics used against ﬁrst-time
offenders every day in court, especially in a computer crime
context (Granick, 2013).
Jennifer Granick concluded her online statement by saying
(Granick, 2013):
My hope is that this community will productively cross-
pollinate with criminal justice advocates and that together
we are strong enough not only to change the CFAA but
also the normalization of disproportionately harsh pros-
ecutorial tactics.
194
Internet Censorship

In the next few days, I’ll post a short reading list
and seek out compatriots at the ACLU, NACDL, and
Federal Defender bar and talk to friends and colleagues
about what’s next.
To Aaron’s friends and family: I’m sorry. In the after-
math of this great loss, all I know how to do is make a
To Do list. I am going to try to make changes that will
reduce the chances that something like this happens again.
It will not bring our Aaron back.
Clarence Page (2013) remarked in Aaron’s honor that the
world will never know whether this restless Internet wizard
and proponent of Internet openness would have avoided a con-
viction, but he clearly is a man who was ahead of his time and
could not wait for Congress to catch up to his foresight.
And as David Segal, executive director of Demand Progress,
stated it (Page, 2013), Aaron’s indictment was “like trying to
put someone in jail for allegedly checking too many books out
of the library. Granted, we’re talking about a lot of ‘books.’ ”
Swartz’s lawyer and other legal allies insist that Aaron did noth-
ing wrong, for MIT ran an open computer network, and
JSTOR said in a statement that it settled civil claims with
Swartz a month before his prosecution began in 2011. After
Aaron’s death, both JSTOR and MIT expressed condolences
on their Web sites, and JSTOR announced that it would open
its archives of more than 1,200 journals free of cost for reading
by the public on a limited basis (Page, 2013).
The Censorware Project
This project, formed in 1997, has a mission of educating peo-
ple about Web-ﬁltering software and practices. On the Web
site are a series of investigative reports on the major ﬁlter pro-
grams and commercial applications available on the market
(such as Cyber Patrol, X-Stop, SmartFilter, WebSENSE,
and Bess). As well, there are timely essays and news reports
Profiles
195

regarding Internet censorship worldwide. Though similar to
another Web site Peaceﬁre.org, whose mission it is to protect
free speech on the Internet for young people, in particular,
The Censorware Project was formed by a group of writers and
activists who deﬁne censorware as “software which is designed
to prevent another person from sending or receiving informa-
tion (usually on the Web).” Their Web site is at http://sethf
.com/freespeech/censorware/essays/censorwareorg.php.
Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement
In recent years, the “big media” lobbyists have been pushing for
trade agreements with copyright measures that are far more
restrictive than those currently required by existing treaties or
legislation in the United States and Canada; but in 2012, the
big media lobbyists went international. The Open Internet
activists saw the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP) agreement as
the most threatening of these developments.
The overriding fear was that the TPP sought, among other
provisions, (1) the rewriting of the global rules on intellectual
property enforcement, giving the big media companies new
powers to lock online users out of content and services; (2) pro-
viding new liabilities forcing ISPs to police online activities; and
(3) giving the big media companies stronger powers to shut
down Web sites and remove content deemed “offensive.”
The Open Internet activists also fear the TPP’s proposed
encouragement of ISPs to block accused infringers’ access to
the Internet and the possibility that ISPs will give online users’
private information to big media conglomerates without appro-
priate privacy safeguards. In other words, Open Internet activ-
ists have argued that given the number of restrictions in the
proposed TPP agreement, all Internet users could become sus-
pected copyright criminals, and it appears to criminalize con-
tent sharing, in general. It is further believed by the activists
that the pro-TPP lobbyists had been paid for by U.S. mega-
corporations. Though these behind-door negotiations seem to
196
Internet Censorship

have been going on since 2008, it appears that there was
actually a gathering in Chile recently with discussions of more
restrictive online copyright enforcement, and according to the
U.S. Trade Representative’s Ofﬁce, negotiators were hoping
to ﬁnalize the TPP agreement by July 2012. Open Internet
activists have further argued that the approach that is being
used to advance the TPP is undemocratic, because there has
been a woeful lack of proper online citizen and stakeholder con-
sultation. Furthermore, there has been no open access to TPP
documents, and, sadly, there appear to have been no checks
or balances in place to ensure the well-being of online global
citizens. In short, there needs to be an adequate means of pro-
tecting content owners’ needs balanced with the rights of
Internet users—and this just doesn’t seem to be the case
(Bailey, 2012).
The 11 nations negotiating the TPP in 2013 included the
United States, Canada, Australia, Peru, Malaysia, Vietnam, New
Zealand, Chile, Singapore, Mexico, and Brunei Darussalam.
The EFF obtained a leaked document of a February 2011 TPP
draft—never ofﬁcially released by the TPP—which can be found
at
http://keionline.org/sites/default/ﬁles/tpp-10feb2011-us-text
-ipr-chapter.pdf (EFF, 2013). In 2014, Japan joined in negotiat-
ing the TPP, bringing the total number of nations involved to 12.
Furthermore, according to the EFF, TPP negotiators are
trying to adopt copyright measures far more restrictive than
currently required by international treaties, including the
controversial Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement. More-
over, all countries signing on would be required to have their
domestic laws and policies comply with the provisions in the
agreement—meaning that a recently leaked U.S.-proposed
intellectual property chapter would include provisions exceed-
ing current U.S. law, including the controversial aspects of
the DMCA. In February, 2013, the EFF Web site said that
the EFF joined 24 U.S. civil society groups to demand a base-
line of transparency in TPP negotiations, and a letter was sent
to Barbara Weisel, the lead negotiator for the TPP, calling for
Profiles
197

more baseline needs for transparency and increased civil
involvement in the secret backdoor meetings (Sutton, 2013).
On February, 23, 2014, the 12 nations involved in the Trans-
Paciﬁc Partnership free trade negotiations continued efforts to try
to clinch a deal at a ministerial meeting in Singapore, with each
country engaging in bilateral talks. Japan intended to hold bilat-
eral meetings with Canada, Mexico and New Zealand during this
gathering, but Japanese negotiators were less optimistic that the
bilateral meetings with the U.S. would go smoothly, as the U.S.
has distinctly different views from Japan over tariff removal and
automotive issues (Kyoto News International, 2014).
Finally, Public Knowledge expressed concerns in 2013 about
the TPP because there has been a history of rounds of secretive
negotiations, several leaks of the proposed text, and close-to-
zero involvement of the public. Very worrisome is the fact that
everything known about the TPP is known because of leaks;
the negotiators have not even once willingly given the public
or public interest organizations like the EFF and Public
Knowledge any key information voluntarily. Furthermore, the
schedule for negotiation seems to have become accelerated in
recent months to bring a close to the process. Quite alarming,
however, is that the process has become more and more closed;
stakeholder forums, common at the start of the process, have
been replaced by stakeholder tables (tables staffed by interested
stakeholders to which negotiators may go or not go). And, dis-
appointingly, the negotiators seem to be engaging in off-the-
record “inter-session” meetings between scheduled ofﬁcial
meetings (Public Knowledge, 2013b).
WikiLeaks
Besides
the
loose
hacker
cells
collectively
known
as
Anonymous—that
advocate
for
Open
Internet—another
well-known hacker group is WikiLeaks, founded in 2006 by
Julian Assange. At start-up, WikiLeaks actually touted an open
contribution policy similar to that of the online encyclopedia
198
Internet Censorship

Wikipedia. Now, WikiLeaks publishes documents obtained from
so-called reputable sources and contributors on multiple servers
and domain names. Thus, this protocol makes the information
easier to procure but harder to block. From a controversy stand-
point, WikiLeaks became most famously known worldwide after
Private Manning leaked important government documents to
WikiLeaks during the Iraq War. WikiLeaks also got the media’s
attention after they put on the Internet some controversial details
about the relationship between the governments of the United
States, Venezuela, and Paraguay (Ruth and Stone, 2012).
Julian Assange was linked to the controversial Internet free-
dom ﬁghter court martial case of Private Manning, who put
on the Internet, with Assange’s assistance, controversial cables
thought to result in harm to soldiers ﬁghting in Iraq in 2009
and 2010. The case also brought some interesting legal debates
to the forefront regarding noncomplex and complex jurisdictional
issues related to criminal liability (Mataconis, 2011), as detailed in
Chapter 2. Private Manning will now be spending up to 35 years
in a U.S. federal prison for his acts producing grievous harm to
U.S. soldiers in the ﬁeld (Savage and Huetteman, 2013).
Wanted on charges unrelated to WikiLeaks (Paramaribo, 2013),
Julian Assange remains holed up in the Ecuadorian embassy in
the United Kingdom in 2014, but he continues to communicate
with the world through the Internet.
Malala Yousafzai (1998–)
As noted in Chapter 2, in a democracy, freedom of expression
and open access to information will likely always be perceived
by citizens to be their greatest freedoms. Even in countries
where limits exist regarding open access, many citizens crave
these freedoms.
In 2013, a 15-year-old Pakistani schoolgirl named Malala
Yousafzai was undergoing yet another operation to reconstruct
her skull and restore her hearing in a British hospital after she
was shot, on October 9, 2012, in Pakistan for her activism in
Profiles
199

promoting education for girls. Malala made front-page media
headlines internationally after the shooting, which occurred as
she was returning home on the school bus. Taliban militants in
Pakistan admitted that they had targeted her because she pro-
moted girls’ education—which was clearly fueled by her inappro-
priate “Western kind of thinking” (Associated Press, 2013a).
A young woman who likes to speak what is on her mind,
Malala had also criticized Taliban’s actions once they occupied
the rather scenic Swat Valley where she and her family resided.
To say that Malala was not connected to the Internet would be
false, for at age 11, she started writing a blog under a pseudonym
for the BBC about living under the ruling Taliban. In fact, after
Pakistan’s military ousted the Taliban from Swat Valley in
2009, Malala was known to speak out publicly about the need
for girls to be educated in Pakistan, and she often was invited to
speak to the media on this topic. Considering her maturity at
such a young age, Malala was rapidly making a positive name
for herself and for her valiant motives; she was given one of the
country’s highest honors for her world-recognized bravery after
the shooting Given the ugliness of the shooting of an innocent
school girl, citizens in Pakistan and in countries around the world
were outraged, and in an overt manifestation of her international
reach as a special kind of information freedom ﬁghter, Malala was
shortlisted for Time magazine’s Person of the Year for 2012. After
her operations, Malala was deﬁnitely on the road to recovery. She
was able to stand, write, and return to Swat Valley—with
minimal signs of brain damage (Associated Press, 2013a).
Malala Yousafzai was invited to address the United Nations
during the ﬁrst third of Ramadan in mid-July 2013, a period
regarded as the days of God’s mercy. Her powerful speech, trav-
elling over the Internet and heard by citizens around the world,
left an indelible mark on the global citizenry. She started her
speech by praising God and then masterfully wove throughout
her short but eloquent discussion ﬁve important themes: inclu-
siveness, non-violence toward others, forgiveness for wrongs
committed, the importance of education regardless of gender,
200
Internet Censorship

and the importance of female self-reliance. She invoked the
names of past freedom ﬁghters like Nelson Mandela, Martin
Luther King, and Muhammad Ali Jinnah, reminding Muslims
worldwide to search beyond their own comfortable spheres
and reach out into the vast expanse of universal principles
embodied by the many intricate and richly woven strands of
humanity (Kahn, 2013).
On July 12, 2013, the UN-designated Malala Day (on her
16th birthday), the information freedom ﬁghter said to the
U.N. Assembly: “One child, one teacher, one book, and one
pen can change the world” (Hui, 2013, p. A9).
In 2014, Malala continues her outreach for freedom of infor-
mation and education for women and children. In February,
she urged the world to help Syrian refugee children receive a
proper education, as she visited a school in northern Jordan’s
Zaatari refugee camp. A video of her talk was posted on the
Web site of the United Nations refugee agency. The Malala
Fund is currently working with the Save the Children Fund
to construct a new school in Jordan and to expand one
there for refugees (Agence France-Presse, 2014b).
Bassem Youssef (1975–)
A doctor in Egypt, Bassem Youssef rose quickly to fame when
his video blogs mocking Egyptian politics received hundreds
of thousands of hits shortly after the 2011 uprising that
brought down the long-time former leader Hosni Mubarak—
an 84-year-old man now being held in a military hospital for
failing to prevent the killing of almost 900 protestors during
the 2011 uprising (Associated Press, 2013b).
The Egyptian prosecutors launched an investigation on New
Year’s Day 2013 against the popular part-time television and
video blog satirist Youssef for allegedly insulting his country
and its leaders. The case of Youssef, a believer in free speech,
came at a time when the opposition media and independent
journalists had grown worried about press freedoms under a
Profiles
201

new constitution widely supported by an extremist Islamic
government. Bassem Youssef’s crime appears to be that he
insulted then-president Mohammed Morsi and his Islamist
allies by “putting the Islamist leader’s image on a pillow and
parodying his speeches” (Batrawy, 2013).
Aged 38, Youssef has his own television show modeled after
Jon Stewart’s The Daily Show, on which he has appeared as a
guest. One of Egypt’s most popular television presenters, with
1.4 million fans on Facebook and nearly 850,000 followers on
Twitter, Youssef has been cited as a freedom of information
hero. Egyptian citizens maintain that Youssef tells them things
that they never knew because of his belief in freedom of infor-
mation and Internet openness. At the time of this incident,
Youssef had nearly as many followers on Facebook and
Twitter as Egypt’s president (Batrawy, 2013).
References
ABC News. “Assange stand-off costing London police
$4.3 million.” 2013, http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-02
-17/assange-stand-off-costing-london-police-4-million
-dollars/4523300 (accessed February 16).
Agence France-Presse. “Advocates angered by death of 26-year-
old hacktivist.” The Globe and Mail, January 14, 2013, p. A9.
Agence France-Presse. “Privacy: Snowden presents award via
YouTube.” The Globe and Mail, February 20, 2014a, p. A14.
Agence France-Presse. “Education: Malala ﬁghts for rights of
Syrian children.” The Globe and Mail, February 20, 2014b,
p. A14.
Associated Press. “Pakistani girl shot in head by Taliban in
stable condition after 2 successful surgeries at U.K. hospital.”
2013a, http://news.nationalpost.com/2013/02/03/
pakistani-girl-shot-in-head-by-taliban-in-stable-condition
-after-2-successful-surgeries-at-u-k-hospital/ (accessed
February 3).
202
Internet Censorship

Associated Press. “Retrial for Mubarak could make political
stability more elusive.” The Globe and Mail, January 14,
2013b, p. A9.
Bailey, A. “TPP: The secretive agreement that could criminalize
your Internet use.” 2012, http://openmedia.ca/blog/
tpp-secretive-agreement-could-criminalize-your-internet-use
(accessed May 14).
Batrawy, A. “Egypt’s answer to Jon Steward comes under state
scrutiny.” The Globe and Mail, January 2, 2013, p. A14.
Blake, A., B. Gellman, and G. Miller. “NSA secrets leaker
revealed.” Las Vegas Review-Journal, June 10, 2013,
pp. 1A, 4A.
Braga, M. “Canadian software beating Syrian censors.” The
Globe and Mail, July 16, 2012, p. A13.
Canadian Press. “Toews under ‘direct threat’ by online collective
Anonymous.” The Globe and Mail, March 7, 2012, p. A3.
The Center for Internet and Society. “Jennifer Granick.” 2013,
http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/about/people/jennifer-granick
(accessed February 16).
Coleman, Z. “Snowden’s claims intrigue Hong Kong.” USA
Today, June 14, 2013, p. 6A.
D’Aliesio, R. “Anonymous wants transparency, hides behind
name.” The Globe and Mail, February 20, 2012, p. A4.
Dishneau, D., and P. Jelinkek. “WikiLeaker sorry ‘actions hurt
people.’ ” The Globe and Mail, August 15, 2013, p. A14.
Dixon, G. “Hackers under attack over copyrights.” The Globe
and Mail, August 2, 2001, p. B22.
Drews, K. “Craigslist crusader hunts Internet haters.” The
Globe and Mail, February 19, 2013, p. A8.
EFF. “Trans Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement.” 2013, https://
www.eff.org/issues/tpp (accessed February 5).
Efrati, A. “ ‘Honeymoon over’ for Google’s CEO.” The Globe
and Mail, August 20, 2011, p. 12.
Profiles
203

El Akkad, O. “Unable to continue, Apple’s Jobs steps down.”
The Globe and Mail, August 25, 2011, pp. A1, A12.
El Akkad, O. “Hacker crackdown.” The Globe and Mail,
March 7, 2012a, p. A3.
El Akkad, O. “Online protest prompts retreat on privacy bills.”
The Globe and Mail, January 19, 2012b, p. A12.
El Akkad, O. “Why Facebook paid $1-billion for Instagram.”
The Globe and Mail, April 10, 2012c, p. B3.
Fathi, N. “In a death seen around the world, a symbol of
Iranian protests.” 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/
23/world/middleeast/23neda.html (accessed June 22).
Granick, J. “Towards learning from losing Aaron Swartz:
Part 2.” 2013, http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2013/01/
towards-learning-losing-aaron-swartz-part-2 (accessed
January 15).
Halvorssen, T. “Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo’s imprisonment a
painful reminder of China’s dictatorship.” 2012, http://
www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/thor-halvorssen/nobel-laureate
-liu-xiaobo_b_1166012.html (accessed December 10).
Harding, L., and B. Quinn. “From his Ecuadorean sanctuary,
Assange calls on U.S. to end ‘witch hunt.’ ” The Globe and
Mail, August 20, 2012, p. A3.
Heritage, T. “Pussy Riot protest sparked rights’ discussions.”
The Globe and Mail, February 22, 2013, p. A12.
Hui, A. “One pen can change the world.” The Globe and Mail,
July 13, 2013, p. A9.
Ibbitson, J. “Cybercrime bill sparks backlash.” The Globe and
Mail, February 15, 2012, p. A6.
Jakes, L. “U.S. spying raises fresh anger.” Las Vegas Review-
Journal, June 11, 2013, pp. 1A, 6A.
Kahn, S. “Malala spoke. Muslims, listen.” The Globe and Mail,
July 17, 2013, p. A15.
204
Internet Censorship

Katz, I. “Web freedom is seriously threatened, says Google
co-founder.” The Globe and Mail, April 17, 2012, p. A9.
Keller, G. “Police sweep nets 25 alleged Anonymous hackers.”
The Globe and Mail, February 29, 2012, p. A14.
Koring, P. “Bradley Manning testiﬁes at pretrial.” The Globe
and Mail, December 6, 2012, p. A16.
Kyoto News International. “TPP countries continue talks to
clinch deal in Singapore. 2014,” http://www.globalpost.
com/dispatch/news/kyodo-news-international/140223/tpp
-countries-continue-talks-clinch-deal-singapore-0 (accessed
February 26).
Lacy, L. “TIFF’13: Vantage Point.” The Globe and Mail,
August 31, 2013, pp. R1, R7.
Lawless, J., and G. Helgason. “Porn ban plan sparks free speech
uproar.” The Globe and Mail, February 26, 2013, p. A16.
MacKinnon, M. “Nobel laureate’s wife a prisoner in her
home.” The Globe and Mail, December 7, 2012, p. A20.
Mackrael, K. “Toews faces personal threats over Internet bill.”
The Globe and Mail, February 20, 2012, p. A4.
Mallough, R. “The new age of piracy.” Maclean’s, 126 (4)
(2013): 42.
Mataconis, D. “Direct link between Bradley Manning and Julian
Assange discovered?” 2011, http://www.outsidethebeltway
.com/direct-link-between-bradley-manning-and-julian
-assange-discovered/ (accessed December 20).
McMillan, R. “Bill Gates: Internet censorship won’t
work.” 2008, http://www.nytimes.com/idg/IDG_00257
0DE00740E18882573F50010C487.html?x=1361336400
&en=dd5f1577b37941cd&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt
&emc=rss (accessed February 20).
Morris, D. “Pussy Riot, a critical assessment.” The Globe and
Mail, August 20, 2012, p. R2.
Profiles
205

Myers, S., and A. Kramer. “Snowden thanks Russia after being
granted temporary asylum for a year.” The Globe and Mail,
August 2, 2013, p. A3.
Page, C. “Sad farewell to Aaron Swartz, Internet Freedom
Fighter.” 2013, http://www.newsday.com/opinion/oped/
page-sad-farewell-to-aaron-swartz-internet-freedom-ﬁghter
-1.4452273 (accessed January 18).
Paramaribo, S. “Ecuador rebukes Assange for mocking
Australian politicians in video.” The Globe and Mail,
August 31, 2013, p. A20.
Public Knowledge. “About our work.” 2013a, http://
publicknowledge.org/about (accessed February 24).
Public Knowledge. “The Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership
Agreement.” 2013b, http://tppinfo.org/ (accessed
February 24).
Ruth, S., and S. Stone. “Hactivism–A legislator’s dilemma.”
IEEE Internet Computing 16 (6): 78–81, 2012.
Savage, C. “Leaker portrayed as ‘good-intentioned’ and a trai-
tor.” The Globe and Mail, June 4, 2013, p. A3.
Savage, C., and E. Huetteman. “Manning’s 35-year sentence
‘the longest in a leak case.’ ” The Globe and Mail, August 22,
2013, p. A3.
Schell, B. Contemporary World Issues: The Internet and Society.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2007.
Schell, B., J. Dodge, with S. Moutsatsos. The Hacking of
America: Who’s Doing It, Why, and How. Westport, CT:
Quorum Books, 2002.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. Webster’s New World Hacker
Dictionary. Indiana: Wiley, 2006.
Simpson, I. “Witness at Manning trial focuses on motives.” The
Globe and Mail, June 5, 2013, p. A11.
206
Internet Censorship

Stelter, B., and B. Stone. “Web pries lid of Iranian censorship.”
2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/23/world/
middleeast/23censor.html?ef=middleeast (accessed June 23).
Strickland, J. “How censorship works.” 2013, http://computer.
howstuffworks.com/internet-censorship3.htm (accessed
March 3).
Sutton, M. “EFF joins 24 US civil society groups in demanding
a baseline of transparency in TPP negotiations.” 2013,
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/02/eff-joins-24-us
-civil-society-groups-demanding-baseline-transparency-tpp
(accessed February 5).
Tossell, I. “The ABCs of cybersecurity.” The Globe and Mail
Report on Business, 28 (10): 55–60, May 2012.
Walker, S. “Pussy Riot members among group of activists
arrested in Sochi.” 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/
music/2014/feb/18/pussy-riot-members-arrested-sochi
-winter-olympics (accessed February 26).
Winseck, D. “Debunking Bill C-11: Why Canadians should be
concerned.” 2012, http://openmedia.ca/blog/debunking
-bill-c-11-why-Canadians-should-be-concerned (accessed
March 10).
Yarow, J., and R. Libetti. “How Steve Ballmer became
Microsoft’s CEO and what he has to do to keep his job.”
2013, http://www.businessinsider.com/steve-ballmer
-bio-video-2013-2 (accessed February 25).
Profiles
207


5
Data and Documents
In some cases, the world is applying digital technologies faster
than our ability to understand the security implications and
mitigate potential risks.
—James Clapper, U.S. Director of National Intelligence
(Mazzetti and Shane, 2013, p. A15)
This chapter presents some statistics on Internet usage world-
wide and Internet penetration by region. The discussion then
turns to some ﬁndings from the Freedom on the Net 2012
report, with a particular emphasis on differentiating the coun-
tries designated as “free” by the editors of this report relative
to the countries designated as “not free.” We then look more
closely at the tactics used by the highly censoring countries,
particularly over the period 2011–2012. The remainder of the
chapter looks at the kinds of legislation and other guidelines
that nations have for controlling the Internet in their particular
jurisdictions—with a discussion of recent controversial pieces
of legislation that have been attempted by various countries to
further control Internet behaviors and activities, beginning
with the United States.
209
Navy Rear Admiral William E. Leigher, one of the nation’s top military
experts on cybersecurity, is reﬂected in a computer screen displaying a
numerical code on November 7, 2013. (AP Photo/Robert F. Bukaty)

Statistics on Internet Usage Worldwide
According to the Internet World Stats (2013), as of June 30,
2012, there were 2,405,518,376 known Internet users world-
wide, a phenomenal 566.4 percent growth rate in Internet
usage since 2000 (see Table 5.1).
However, when one looks at the Internet penetration rates
(deﬁned as the percentage of the total population of a given coun-
try or region that uses the Internet) on the basis of the world’s
population (7,017,846,922) relative to the estimated Internet
users as of June 30, 2012 (2,405,518,376), the world Internet
penetration rates by geographic regions show a drastically
different picture, as illustrated in Table 5.2 (Internet World
Stats, 2013). Considering these world Internet penetration rates,
the world’s average is estimated by the Internet World Stats
(2013) to be about 34.3 percent. Countries with penetration rates
above 50%—such as the U.S., Canada, and Norway—are consid-
ered to have sound Internet penetration rates. Countries having
penetration rates below 50% are indicative of areas that could be
improved. Looking at Table 5.2, both Asia and Africa have
penetration rates below the world average.
A Closer Look at the Freedom on the Net 2012 Findings
Are the geographic locations that have above-average Internet
penetration
rates
more
apt
to
provide
their
citizens
210
Internet Censorship
Table 5.1
Internet Usage Worldwide
Region
Internet Usage (%)
Asia
45
Europe
21
North America
11
Latin America and the Caribbean
11
Africa
7
Middle East
4
Australia
1
Source: Internet World Stats (2013).

freer and open Internet access? On the basis of the Freedom on
the Net 2012 report (Kelly, Cook, and Truong, 2012), the
answer appears to be “yes.” Table 5.3 shows the two extremes
as determined by the authors of the report: (1) the countries
deemed to be “free” (i.e., whose penetration rates are placed
well above the mean) and (2) those deemed to be “not free”
(i.e., whose penetration rates are placed very near or below
the mean). Regarding metrics pertaining to the freedom
on the net total score, obstacles to Internet access, limits on
Web site content, and violations of user rights for “inappropri-
ate” online content, the lower the score, the better, meaning
that users should be experiencing a fair degree of Internet open-
ness and freedom of speech. Entries in bold refer to countries
for which the metrics for the freedom on the net total score
had slight or signiﬁcant negative trajectories over the period
2011–2012—meaning that things got worse rather than better.
These countries (in bold) are also those Freedom on the Net
2012 has labeled as “blockers,” meaning that their governments
have chosen to block a large number of politically relevant Web
sites, often placing tight blocks on certain social media plat-
forms. As well, these blocker governments seem to invest a
huge amount of resources in technical capacity and stafﬁng to
identify “inappropriate” online content.
In the censoring countries shown in bold in Table 5.3, author-
ities use a number of tactics to maintain or increase control over
Data and Documents
211
Table 5.2
Internet Penetration Rates
Region
Internet Penetration Rates (%)
Asia
27.5
Europe
63.2
North America
78.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
42.9
Africa
15.6
Middle East
40.2
Australia/Oceania
67.6
Source: Internet World Stats (2013).

the
Internet—including
blocking
Web
2.0,
exhibiting
notable political blocking, having localized or nationwide
Information Communication Technology (ICT) shutdowns,
212
Internet Censorship
Table 5.3
“Free” and “Not Free” Internet Geographical Locations
Country
Freedom on
the net status
Freedom on
the net total
(0–100)*
Obstacles
to access
(0–25)*
Limits on
content
(0–35)*
Violations of
user rights
(0–40)*
Estonia
Free
10
2
3
5
United
States
Free
12
4
1
7
Germany
Free
15
4
3
8
Australia
Free
18
2
6
10
Hungary
Free
19
5
6
8
Italy
Free
23
4
7
12
Philippines
Free
23
10
5
8
United
Kingdom
Free
25
1
8
16
Argentina
Free
26
9
9
8
South
Africa
Free
26
8
8
10
Brazil
Free
27
7
6
14
Ukraine
Free
27
7
8
12
Kenya
Free
29
10
7
12
Georgia
Free
30
9
10
11
Thailand
Not free
61
11
21
29
Pakistan
Not free
63
19
18
26
Belarus
Not free
69
16
23
30
Bahrain
Not free
71
12
25
34
Saudi
Arabia*
Not free
71
14
26
31
Vietnam
Not free
73
16
26
31
Burma
Not free
75
22
23
30
Ethiopia
Not free
75
22
27
26
Uzbekistan
Not free
77
19
28
30
Syria
Not free
83
23
25
35
China
Not free
85
18
29
38
Cuba
Not free
86
24
29
33
Iran
Not Free
90
21
32
37
*Lower numbers indicate greater Internet openness.
Source: Kelly, Cook, and Truong (2012).

hiring pro-government commentators to manipulate online dis-
cussions, passing new laws or guidelines to increase censorship
or punishment, passing new laws to increase online surveillance
or restrict anonymity, arresting bloggers and ICT users for their
political or social writings, and physically attacking or killing blog-
gers and ICT users for “inappropriate” online content. Table 5.4
shows the tactics used by each one of these highly censoring
countries over the period 2011–2012 (Kelly, Cook, and
Truong, 2012).
Internet Legislation in the United States Related to
Privacy, Security, Trust, and Censorship
Newsworthy Internet crimes prosecuted in the United States,
as described in Chapters 1 and 2, have generally fallen under
the computer crimes statute 18 U.S.C. Section 1030. In this
jurisdiction, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) has
been the primary federal statute criminalizing Internet abuses
regarding privacy, security, trust, and censorship. To strengthen
its powers, it was modiﬁed in 1994 and again in 1996 by the
National Information Infrastructure Protection Act and codiﬁed
at U.S.C. subsection 1030, Fraud and Related Activity in
Connection with Computers. Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks
on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the U.S.
government passed a number of laws to curb Internet crimes
and cope with potential terrorist and cyber terrorist activities.
We now discuss more details pertaining to Internet legislation in
the United States (Schell, 2007).
18 U.S.C.
As noted, statute 18 U.S.C., Section 1030, is the primary
federal statute criminalizing Internet abuses in the United
States; thus, it is aptly named the Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act. Enacted in 1986, it was amended in 1994, 1996, and
Data and Documents
213

Table 5.4
Tactics Used by Highly Censoring Countries
Censoring
country
Web 2.0
blocked
Notable
political
blocking
Localized or
nationwide ICT
shutdowns
Pro-government
commentators
manipulate
online
discussions
New laws passed
to increase censor-
ship, punishment,
surveillance or to
restrict anonymity
Bloggers and ICT
users arrested
for posting
“offensive”
political or
social content
Bloggers and ICT
users physically
attacked or killed for
posting “offensive”
political or social
content
Pakistan
X
X
X
X
X
Bahrain
X
X
X
X
X
X
Saudi
Arabia
X
X
X
X
X
Ethiopia
X
X
X
X
China
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Iran
X
X
X
X
X
X

again in 2001 by the USA PATRIOT Act, following the 9/11
attacks. Section 1030, in particular, deals with fraud and associ-
ated activity aimed at or using computers. At its inception, the
CFAA applied only to government computers, but today it
applies to a broad group of protected computers, including
those used in interstate commerce. Drafted with the future in
mind, the CFAA provides the principal basis for criminal
prosecution of the various kinds of cybercrime occurring
within the jurisdiction of the United States. Broad in its appli-
cation, the CFAA has been modiﬁed to address emerging
changes in technology and tech-savvy criminal techniques used
to commit exploits. A conviction for violating most of the pro-
visions of the CFAA can be up to ﬁve years in prison for each
count and up to a $500,000 ﬁne for a second offense. The
CFAA also permits any target suffering damage or loss by rea-
son of a violation of the CFAA to bring civil action against
the perpetrator for damages (Schell and Martin, 2006).
The following statutes pertain to speciﬁc kinds of Internet
crime under 18 U.S.C. (Schell, 2007):
• Section 1020: Fraud and related activity regarding access
devices
• Section
1030:
Fraud
and
related
activity
regarding
computers
• Section 1362: Communication lines, stations, or systems
• Section 2510: Wire and electronic communications inter-
ception as well as the interception of oral communications
• Section 2512: The manufacture, distribution, possession,
and advertising of wire, oral, or electronic communication
intercepting devices prohibited
• Section 2517: Authorization for disclosure and use of inter-
cepted wire, oral, or electronic communications
• Section 2520: Recovery of civil damages authorized
• Section 2701: Unlawful access to stored communications
Data and Documents
215

• Section 2702: Voluntary disclosure of customers’ communi-
cations or records
• Section 2703: Required disclosure of customers’ communi-
cations or records
• Section 3121: Recording of dialing, routing, addressing, and
signaling information
• Section 3125: Emergency pen register and trap and trace
device installation
A high-proﬁle case of a hacker charged under the CFAA was
that of Aaron Swartz, a student at MIT. His alleged crime was
that he broke into a closet at the university he attended to plug
into the computer network to download millions of academic
journal articles from a subscription-only service known as
JSTOR. Fuller details on this fascinating case are given in
Chapter 4 under his name (Agence France-Presse, 2013).
For More Information: 18 U.S.C. 1030. United States
Code, 2006 Edition, Supplement 4, Title 18—Crimes and
Criminal Procedure. Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
granule/USCODE-2010-title18/USCODE-2010-title18-partI
-chap47-sec1030/content-detail.html
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996
The
Health
Insurance
Portability
and
Accountability
Act (HIPAA) of 1996 focuses on health protection for
U.S. employees in a number of ways, with the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services having the responsibility to
implement various unrelated provisions of HIPAA. Title I of
the Act maintains that health insurance coverage for individuals
and their families continues when they transfer or lose employ-
ment, and Title II requires the Department of Health and
Human Services to develop and maintain national standards
for electronic transactions regarding health care in the United
States. As well, Title II speaks to the security and privacy of
216
Internet Censorship

online health data—that which can be sent through the
Internet. The developers of HIPAA felt that such standards
would improve the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the U.S.
health care system by demanding secure and private handling of
electronic data. From an IT security angle, HIPAA requires
a double-entry or double-check of data entered by staff.
All U.S. healthcare organizations had to be compliant with
the HIPAA Security Rule by April 21, 2005—which meant
taking extra measures to secure online citizens’ health informa-
tion (Schell and Martin, 2006).
In 2009, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Ofﬁce for Civil Rights announced a ﬁnal rule that implemented a
number of provisions of the Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health Act—enacted as part of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009—to increase
the privacy and security provisions for health information set
out in HIPAA. The latter rule was designed to strike a balance
between permitting important uses of health information for
patients while protecting their privacy rights. Given the diversity
of the health care market in the United States, the rule was
designed to be ﬂexible and comprehensive in order to effectively
cover the variety of uses and disclosures needing to be addressed.
HIPAA-covered health plans are now required to use standard-
ized HIPAA electronic transactions (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 2013).
In January 2012, an interesting California Watch media story
focused on possible questionable Medicare billing practices at
the Prime Healthcare Services hospital chain in the United
States. The FBI was apparently investigating the hospital chain
after some questionable information had surfaced. Over an
18-month period beginning in July 2010, three California
congressmen
asked
Medicare
to
investigate
the
Prime
Healthcare Services chain for a type of Medicare fraud known
as up-coding, whereby a health care provider ﬁles false claims
via computerized billing codes in order to receive enhanced
reimbursements. The hospital chain has former employees
Data and Documents
217

who claimed that the chain’s owner, Dr. Prem Reddy, encour-
aged physicians and coders to log conditions paying a premium
when treating elderly Medicare patients. The hospital chain
denied any wrongdoing, saying its Medicare billings are legal
and proper (Williams, 2012).
In 2013, the controversy around Prime Healthcare Services
continued to grow. In an effort to rebut the California Watch
story, the hospital chain apparently shared a certain patient’s
medical ﬁles with local newspapers and hundreds of employees.
This outcome caused California regulators to ﬁne the hospital
chain $95,000 for violating state conﬁdentiality laws as well as
the HIPAA federal law. The lawyer representing the hospital
chain insisted that the company was not guilty of any wrong-
doing. The company said that they would likely sue California
Watch for defamation, because of the report that the company
was under investigation by the FBI (Cocchi, 2013). However,
the allegations around the misdeeds continued to mount.
For More Information: Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
Available at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/
summary/
Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998
The protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) from
attack by criminals using the Internet is for many corporations
today a hugely important concern. The Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998 implements certain world-
wide copyright laws to cope with emerging technologies by pro-
viding protections against the disabling of or bypassing of
technical measures designed to protect copyright. Thus, the
DMCA sanctions apply to anyone attempting to impair or dis-
able an encryption device (Schell and Martin, 2006).
In 2009, U.S. news headlines carried an interesting story
about a would-be satellite television “pirate” who was arrested
after allegedly offering a $250,000 reward for secret code for
218
Internet Censorship

a satellite television smartcard, according to a federal grand jury
indictment. Apparently Jung Kwak, the owner of a company
importing receiver boxes that pick up satellite television signals,
had made a deal with two other people to hire a tech-savvy per-
son to crack the latest encryption scheme used by Echostar
Corporation’s Dish Network.
Known as Nagra 3, the encryption scheme was implemented
by the Echostar Dish Network in 2007 to ward off pirates
who had cracked earlier versions of their encryption to obtain
programs illegally. Practically speaking, the encryption scheme
required subscribers to use special smartcards (made by
Nagrastar) in their receiver boxes to unscramble the network’s
legitimately paid-for proprietary content. In a nutshell, Kwak’s
company Viewtech typically imported and sold Viewsat receiver
boxes to capture supposedly only free satellite television programs
capturing a small niche market, for example, for religious pro-
grams (Zetter, 2009).
To increase his market share, Kwak and his two pals went to
a cracker and allegedly reimbursed that person $8,500 to buy a
specialized and costly microscope used for reverse-engineering
the smartcards. Kwak apparently also agreed to pay the cracker
$250,000 if he was able to secure Nagra cards’ erasable pro-
grammable read-only memory, the gist of the chip needed to
reverse-engineer Dish Network’s encryption scheme. Jung
Kwak, Phillip Allison (“the broken”), and Robert Ward
(“thedssguy”) were charged with one count of conspiring to
violate the DMCA (Zetter, 2009).
On a related note, on January 26, 2013, a new law went into
effect in the United States making it illegal for cell phone users to
unlock their cell phones in order to switch carriers. Anyone who
infringes this law, given recent changes made to the DMCA can
be ﬁned between $2,500 and $500,000, and, in some cases,
spend time behind prison bars. In essence, the lock feature on
mobile devices gives carriers a means of preventing customers
from switching to a new plan with another company. So, without
Data and Documents
219

a carrier’s permission to unlock a cell phone, unlocking it
becomes a crime in this jurisdiction (Clarke, 2013).
A digital rights analyst with the Electronic Frontier Foundation
(EFF) commented that this amended law was not good one,
because cell phone users should be able to unlock their phones
to do what they want to do with the device that they legally pur-
chased. The original law was meant to combat copyright infringe-
ment, not to stop people from doing what they want with a
purchased cell phone, the analyst afﬁrmed (Clarke, 2013).
For More Information: Digital Millennium Copyright Act.
Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-105publ304/
pdf/PLAW-105publ304.pdf
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act of 1999 (Financial Services
Modernization Act)
Personal information that many online citizens would con-
sider to be private—such as bank account numbers and bank
account balances—is routinely exchanged for a price by banks
and credit card companies. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(GLBA), also known as the Financial Services Modernization
Act of 1999, brought in some privacy protections against the
sale of citizens’ private information, particularly that of a ﬁnan-
cial nature. Moreover, the GLBA codiﬁed protections against
pre-texting, deﬁned as the act of getting someone’s personal
information by a false means.
Before the GLBA’s passage, an insurance company having citi-
zens’ health records would be deemed to be distinct from a bank-
ing institution having personal information on a client wanting a
house mortgage; thus, insurance companies and banks, upon a
merger, could share information on their clients (Schell, 2007).
With the passage of the GLBA, a number of privacy risks
became evident; therefore, the GLBA included three require-
ments to protect the online personal data and privacy of indi-
viduals (Schell, 2007):
220
Internet Censorship

1. Information had to be securely stored;
2. The merged institutions had to advise clients about their pol-
icy of sharing personal ﬁnancial information with others; and
3. The institutions had to give consumers the right to opt out
of the information-sharing schemes, if they so desired.
Because of the awkwardness of the opt out clauses, however,
on July 26, 2001, EPIC and Public Citizen, along with other
organizations concerned with privacy protection issues, submitted
a petition to the GLBA authorities stating their concerns. They
argued that the notices distributed by ﬁnancial institutions used
dense, misleading statements that confused consumers about
how to go about opting-out. So, these privacy concerns groups
requested an amendment to the GLBA to ensure that consumers
are provided with better notice and a more convenient way to opt
out of the information-sharing scheme (EPIC, 2013).
It is not well known that a Victoria’s Secret lingerie catalog—
distributed to consumers online and in print—was one of the
key reasons that U.S. Congress included privacy protections
for ﬁnancial information when passing the GLBA. The debate
started in Congress when Joe Barton talked about his concerns
that his credit union had sold his address to the lingerie com-
pany, after which he started getting the catalogs at his home.
He claimed that he became stressed when they arrived in his
mailbox, because he did not want his wife to think that he
was entertaining himself with the lingerie-clad attractive
women featured in the catalogs. He emphasized that neither
he nor his wife had ever purchased anything from the store—
online, in person, or from a catalog. Barton also claimed that
since he spent so little money in Washington, he knew that
his credit union was the only business having his home address.
He concluded by saying that since he believed he should be
able to stop ﬁnancial institutions from selling personal informa-
tion to third parties, he was supporting the passage of the
GLBA. Following passage of the act, individuals have the right,
Data and Documents
221

of course, to direct ﬁnancial institutions not to sell personal
information to third parties (Schell, 2007).
Finally, other Congress representatives were concerned that,
given physical access to a computer network could be obtained,
where such personal data on clients were stored, gaining illegal
access could cause harm to clients’ privacy rights or even result
in identity theft. Company owners and employees are person-
ally liable for up to $10,000 per violation of the GLBA.
Severe civil and criminal penalties for fraud and negligence exist
for violations of the GLBA, including huge ﬁnes and imprison-
ment (Innovarus, 2012).
Unfortunately, in recent years, hackers have gotten access to
critical personal information of insurance company clients. For
example, in October, 2012, the Nationwide Mutual Insurance
Company announced that a cracking exploit targeting their
network had exposed over 1 million people to identity fraud.
The network was also used by Alliance Insurance; data stolen
from the insurers included names, Social Security numbers,
drivers’ license numbers, and clients’ birth dates. Nationwide
notiﬁed authorities shortly after discovering the breach
and then started notifying the victims. Because more than
5,000 of the victims were from California, the California
Department of Insurance also began reviewing the security
measures that the Nationwide and allied group of insurance
companies had in place to see if they adequately protected the
consumers. Immediately after the breach and during the review
(whose results have not been made public), the Nationwide
insurance company offered clients a free credit-monitoring
and identity theft protection product for a year through their
partnership with Equafax, though there was not any evidence
at the time of the breach to indicate that the stolen data was
being misused by the hackers. The company also said that it
would provide clients with a notiﬁcation of any adverse change
in their credit rating, and that it would cover up to $1 million
related to identity theft expense coverage. In recent years,
222
Internet Censorship

U.S. courts have broadened their deﬁnition of the damages that
consumers can suffer from such breaches, making companies
now liable for actual and future damages, given that identity
theft fraud can occur considerably after the network breaches
are discovered (Gonsalves, 2012).
For more information: Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Available at
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-106publ102/pdf/PLAW
-106publ102.pdf
Trademark Law, Patent Law, and the U.S. Anti-
cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act of 1999
Trademark law governs disputes between businesses over the
names, logos, and other means used to identify their products
and services in the market and online. If someone owns a trade-
mark or a service mark (federally registered or not), there could
be, for example, some domain names on the Internet infringing
on that trademark. Although individuals may not realize this
fact, under U.S. trademark law, trademark owners have a duty
to police their trademarks and to notify authorities of perceived
infringements (Schell, 2007).
What should you do to protect yourself if someone alleges that
you have violated, say, the U.S. Anti-cybersquatting Consumer
Protection Act (ACPA)? Let’s say that you have received a trade-
mark infringement and cyber squatting threat letter from a trade-
mark owner claiming that you have engaged in bad faith cyber
squatting. Domain name disputes typically occur between trade-
mark owners and domain name registrants over allegations of
cyber squatting, or between the trademark owners and Web site
developers or business partners over domain name theft (or
hijacking). Let’s assume that in the threat letter, the trademark
owner says that he has had a registered trademark ﬁled with the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce since 2002, but that you had
registered your domain name with the same trademark in 2006.
The letter goes on to say that you are in violation of the ACPA,
Data and Documents
223

and that the owner of the trademark is thinking about ﬁling
an ACPA lawsuit, naming you as a defendant and claiming
$100,000 in damages plus attorney’s fees (Schaefer, 2012).
So, what should you now do? According to U.S. cyber squat-
ting law attorney Enrico Schaefer, you should take the threat letter
seriously. If you are thinking of turning over the domain name, be
careful how you verbalize that in your response letter, because
often your incorrectly written letter will in court prove that you
have been, in fact, cyber squatting. Schaefer’s bottom line is this:
get a good attorney to defend you early on in the game to obtain
a settlement and release. Once in court, the damages can sky-
rocket well above the $100,000 mark—as numerous cases fought
in U.S. courts in recent years have shown (Schaefer, 2012).
For more information: Anti-cybersquatting Consumer Pro-
tection Act. Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS
-106s1255is/pdf/BILLS-106s1255is.pdf
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 and PATRIOT Act II
In October 2001, following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism—the
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001—was hastily enacted into law.
In fact, Congressman Ron Paul told The Washington Times that
no one in Congress was allowed to read in full the text of
PATRIOT I. When eventually shown to the public, that
remark seemed to upset civil libertarians as well as constitu-
tional scholars. William Saﬁre, in writing for The New York
Times, remarked that in passing the act so quickly, President
Bush was, in effect, seizing dictatorial control.
Then, in early February 2003, the Center for Public
Integrity, a public interest think tank in Washington, D.C.,
disclosed the entire text of the highly controversial Domestic
Security
Enhancement
Act
of
2003—better
known
as
PATRIOT Act II. This proposed piece of legislation was never
brought to Congress in its entirety. Some of the controversy
224
Internet Censorship

surrounding this proposed piece was caused by provisions that
would give the executive power the ability to, say, revoke
American citizenship from a citizen suspected of terrorism,
allow the CIA and FBI to partake in domestic spying, mandate
the collection of DNA samples from “persons of interest,” and
revoke certain aspects of the Freedom of Information Act—
including the right to obtain information about detained
family members who may themselves be terrorists. All of these
provisions would adversely impact civil liberties, the public
interest tanks argued, thus killing the eventual passage of the
PATRIOT Act II (Schell, 2007).
For more information: USA PATRIOT Act. Available at http://
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-107hr3162enr/pdf/BILLS-107hr
3162enr.pdf. Center for Public Integrity, “Justice Dept. drafts
sweeping expansion of anti-terrorism act.” Available at http://
www.publicintegrity.org/2003/02/07/3159/justice-dept-drafts
-sweeping-expansion-anti-terrorism-act
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2002 or Homeland
Security Act of 2002
In 2002, the U.S. Senate proposed the Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act, or Homeland Security Act, on November
25, establishing the Department of Homeland Security. The act
was clearly meant to keep the networked critical infrastructure
safe from attack or to have a readiness response if they were
attacked. The nine subsections of the Homeland Security Act
are as follows (Schell, 2007):
1. Title I: The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and
its missions and functions
2. Title II: Information analysis and infrastructure protection
3. Title III: Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
countermeasures
4. Title IV: Border and transportation security
Data and Documents
225

5. Title V: Emergency preparedness and response
6. Title VI: Internal management of the DHS
7. Title VII: General provisions and coordination with nonfed-
eral entities, the inspector general, and the U.S. Secret Service
8. Title VIII: Transitional items
9. Title IX: Conforming and other technical amendments
It is important to note that civil liberties groups objected
strongly to the Homeland Security Act right from the beginning,
arguing that it is characterized by three trends that can adversely
impact citizens: reduced privacy, increased government secrecy,
and increased government power to protect their own special
interests. In fact, Allen Weinstein, the president of the Center
for Democracy in Washington, D.C., labeled it “a law of unin-
tended consequences” (9-11 Research, 2012).
For more information: Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of
2002. Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-107hr
3482rfs/pdf/BILLS-107hr3482rfs.pdf. Homeland Security Act
of 2002. Available at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/hr_5005
_enr.pdf
PROTECT Act of 2003, COPPA of 1998, and
CIPA of 2000
An important piece of U.S. legislation is the PROTECT
Act—or the Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to End
the Exploitation of Children Today Act of 2003. It was passed
by the U.S. Senate in February 2003, with an extraordinary
vote of 84 senators in favor and none opposed. The purpose
of this piece was to assist law enforcement in their attempts to
protect children from criminal exploitation by adults, particu-
larly relating to the production and distribution of child
pornography over the Internet.
The PROTECT Act also attempted to extend prosecutorial
powers beyond U.S. jurisdictions; thus, the national AMBER alert
system was enhanced. For example, within the PROTECT Act,
226
Internet Censorship

the AMBER alert sections provide a means for improved national
coordination of established state programs, such that an ofﬁcial
from the U.S. Department of Justice is assigned as the national
AMBER alert coordinator, who establishes a set of minimum stan-
dards to apply when deciding to issue an alert across U.S. states.
These standards, which most U.S. states employ, include the fol-
lowing: (1) a law enforcement agency conﬁrms an abduction has
taken place of a child aged 17 or younger; (2) the law enforcement
agency believes the child abducted is in danger of bodily harm or
death; and (3) there is enough descriptive information about the
child and the abductor, or the abductor’s vehicle, that if made
available to the public, could help ﬁnd and save the child.
An AMBER alert, however, can be activated by law enforce-
ment only in the most serious of cases. These alerts can be
transmitted over the radio and television (often on a “crawl” infor-
mation strip at the bottom of the screen), through the Internet,
and on electronic trafﬁc information signs on highways. The
AMBER alert system was put into place after 9-year-old Amber
Hagerman was kidnapped as she was riding her bike outside of
her home in Arlington, Texas, in broad daylight and in view of
witnesses. Her body was found four days later at the bottom of a
creek. The cause of death was a slit throat, and her murderer
was not found (U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce Access, 2013).
The PROTECT Act also redeﬁned child pornography to
include not only images of real children engaging in sexually
explicit conduct with adults but of computer-generated depic-
tions indistinguishable from real children engaging in such acts.
Indistinguishable was further deﬁned as that which an ordinary
person viewing the image would conclude is a real child engag-
ing in sexually explicit acts. However, cartoons, drawings,
paintings, and sculptures depicting minors or adults engaging
in sexually explicit acts, as well as depictions of actual adults
that look like minors engaging in sexually explicit acts, were
excluded from the deﬁnition (Schell, 2007).
Furthermore, the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA) of 1998, which actually became effective in 2000,
Data and Documents
227

applied to the online collection of personal information
from children under age 13. COPPA details what a Web site
operator must include in their privacy policy, when and how
to seek veriﬁable consent from parents or guardians, and what
actions an operator must take to protect children’s privacy and
online safety. These Internet safety policies require the use of
ﬁlters to protect users against access to visual depictions consid-
ered as obscene or harmful to minors. By deﬁnition, a ﬁlter is a
device for suppressing or minimizing waves or oscillations of
certain frequencies. As a result, ﬁltering software blocks access
to blacklisted Web sites (Schell, 2007).
Finally, the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) of
2000 requires that U.S. libraries receiving electronic-rate dis-
counts or grants for Internet access enforce stipulated policies
using technological protection measures—primarily ﬁlters—to
keep minors safe from harmful Web site viewing. What is
deemed harmful is child pornography, content that is obscene,
and information that is generally considered to be harmful to
minors. This law does not require ﬁlters to block other text-
based material (Schell, 2007).
For more information:
PROTECT Act of 2003. Available at http://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/BILLS-108s151enr/pdf/BILLS-108s151enr.pdf
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Rule. Available at
http://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/rules/rulemaking-regulatory
-reform-proceedings/childrens-online-privacy-protection-rule
Children’s Internet Protection Act. Available at http://ifea
.net/cipa.pdf
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003
Known ofﬁcially as the Controlling the Assault of Non-
solicited Pornography and Marketing Act of 2003, the act was
passed by the U.S. Senate on November 25, 2003, to regulate
interstate commerce by imposing penalties on online users
transmitting unsolicited email through the Internet—spam.
228
Internet Censorship

President George W. Bush signed it into law on December 16,
2003, and it took effect on January 1, 2004. Penalties included
ﬁnes as high as $1 million or jail terms up to ﬁve years, or both.
There were critics to the act, such as Steve Linford, the director
of the Spamhaus Project, who argued that with the passage of
such a law, the U.S. government seems not to understand the
extent and danger of the spam problem. Linford compared the
legislation to that passed in the United Kingdom, which he said
had more teeth because it made spam illegal. Linford further
argued that the CAN-SPAM Act simply attempts to regulate
spam rather than ban it. Moreover, he said that because the act
requires online citizens to read and react to every spam opt out
clause, millions of email users will inadvertently ﬁnd their email
addresses sold on the Internet. Linford argued that ultimately
there would have to be a new U.S. federal law passed that would
properly ban spam (Schell and Martin, 2006).
Offenders of the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 are considered to
be individuals who knowingly (Schell, 2007)
• gain access to a protected computer without authorization
and intentionally initiate the sending of multiple commer-
cial email messages from or through that computer and a
connection to the Internet;
• use a protected computer to relay or retransmit multiple
commercial email messages to intentionally either deceive
or mislead receivers or any Internet access service as to the
origin of such email messages;
• intentionally falsify header information in multiple commer-
cial email messages and intentionally initiate the sending of
such messages;
• register using information falsifying the identity of the actual
registrant for ﬁve or more email accounts, or online user
accounts of two or more domain names, and intentionally
initiate the sending of multiple commercial email messages
from any combination of these accounts or domain names;
Data and Documents
229

• intentionally falsely represent oneself as a legitimate regis-
trant of ﬁve or more Internet protocol (IP) addresses, and
then intentionally initiate the sending of many commercial
email messages from such addresses.
Jurisdictions besides the United States have in recent years
passed similar pieces of legislation to curb spammers. For exam-
ple, the European Union (EU) has a number of pieces of legis-
lation, including the E-Privacy Directive, the E-Commerce
Directive, and the Data Protection Directive. Canada’s online
anti-intrusion legislation involving section 342.1 of the
Canadian Criminal Code is aimed at several potential harms
to property and persons, including stealing computer services,
invading online individuals’ privacy rights, and trading in com-
puter passwords or cracking encryption systems. Charges for
breaches of this nature are typically made with regard to appli-
cable sections of the Canadian Criminal Code, such as theft,
fraud, computer abuse, information abuse, and the interception
of communications (Schell, 2007).
Some interesting spammer court cases have made media head-
lines in recent years. In 2009, a U.S. man who bragged about being
“the godfather of spam” was sentenced to 51 months in a federal
prison by a judge in Detroit, Maryland, for his role as the pro-
tagonist in an email stock scam scheme. Alan Ralsky, then
aged 64, faced ﬁve years of probation after fulﬁlling his
prison term and had to hand over $250,000 seized by the
U.S. government agents in 2007. Ralsky’s son-in-law Scott
Bradley, then aged 48, received 40 months in prison and
5 years of probation after his release from prison. The pair
were charged with committing wire and mail fraud, money
laundering, and violation of the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003. In
the end, they pleaded guilty to the charges (Yousuf, 2009).
For more information: Controlling the Assault of Non-
Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act of 2003. Avai-
lable at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-108publ187/
pdf/PLAW-108publ187.pdf
230
Internet Censorship

Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2005/2002
Though the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2001 was
introduced and sent to the House Judiciary by Lamar Smith
in December 2001, and later sent to the U.S. Senate in 2002,
it wasn’t until April 20, 2005, that the House Committee on
Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infra-
structure Protection, and Security Technologies passed HR
285—known as the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act. This act
stated that the assistant secretary for cybersecurity would be
head of the Directorate’s Ofﬁce of Cybersecurity and Com-
munications within the National Protection and Programs.
The head of the Directorate was responsible for enhancing the
security, resilience, and reliability of the United States’ cyber
and communications infrastructure and creating an effective
cyberattack warning system for the nation (Schell, 2007).
In March 2013, additional changes were proposed to the
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act. Under HR 756, as ordered
by the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
the Act would reauthorize a number of programs under the
National Science Foundation to enhance cybersecurity by better
protecting networks from breaches, it would require the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to carry
on with its cybersecurity awareness program and with the
development of standards for better managing personal informa-
tion being stored on computers, and establish a task force for
recommending appropriate actions to Congress for upgrading
R & D activities to improve cybersecurity. For More Information:
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2005. Available at https://
www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/109/hr285/text
Recent Internet Laws Not Passed in the United States
Related to Privacy, Security, Trust, and Censorship:
CISPA, SOPA, and PIPA—and Why
What is probably noteworthy is the demand of U.S. online citi-
zens that their government provide adequate protections
Data and Documents
231

through effective and evolving legislation—making it unlawful
for another online user to intrude into their personal data or
attack critical infrastructure binding the United States and
holding the economy together. As well, there are high-proﬁle
pressure groups like the EFF and hacktivist cells like Ano-
nymous that forcefully allege that some pieces of proposed
legislation aimed at safeguarding online citizens represent seri-
ous threats to Internet freedom, privacy, and openness.
Clearly, then, one of the major challenges met in passing
Internet-related legislation in the United States (or in any juris-
diction, for that matter) is to balance such competing interests.
Often, the balancing of competing interests can mean delays in
getting legislation passed, or total roadblocks.
In fact, there are sometimes rather interesting real-life events
that expose the truly complex relationships existing between the
government’s information technology policy interests and soci-
ety, in general. For example, a practical real-world question that
has arisen over the past 15 years or so is this: should the U.S.
and other governments openly pursue the unique talents of
hackers in order to help keep the nation’s networks safe from
cyber invasions? And in some jurisdictions like the United
States and China, the answer appears to be “yes.”
As a case in point, in July 2012, a U.S. four star general,
Keith Alexander, the director of the U.S. National Security
Agency, dressed in jeans and a T-shirt, told thousands of male
and female Black Hat and DefCon hacker attendees in Las
Vegas that the NSA needs great talent; though they do not
pay as much as other competitors, the NSA is fun to be
around.
That said, other events have shown that with the activities of
hacker cells like Anonymous and WikiLeaks, governments
around the world seem to be thinking twice about hiring tal-
ented individuals lurking in the Computer Underground in
order to safeguard networks. It is one thing, say onlookers, that
Anonymous hacker cells took on the Church of Scientology in
2008, when hackers within their fold tried removing online
232
Internet Censorship

access to interviews with actor Tom Cruise, a strong supporter
of that church. It is quite another thing that hacker cells like
Anonymous and WikiLeaks have moved on to attacking
government networks and exposing critical information on
the Internet to allegedly protect the openness of the Internet.
As a case in point, in April 2012, Anonymous disabled sev-
eral U.K. government Web sites through distributed denial-
of-service attacks as a response to existing British legislation or
new proposals aimed at authorizing the surveillance of citizens’
Internet activities.
As hacking exploits, online piracy, and online theft increased
dramatically worldwide in 2012, legislators in various jurisdic-
tions were in a constant debate about which laws to pass to stop
Internet-based security threats—and how, so as to protect on-
line citizens’ freedoms. For example, in April 2012, the U.S.
House of Representatives passed a pretty stringent Cyber
Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act (CISPA), but because
of such concerns and public outcry, the Senate modiﬁed the act
considerably. The result was that the revised law, known as the
Cybersecurity Act of 2012, was signiﬁcantly less restrictive than
its original version but, unlike the earlier version, it had
President Obama’s support. What the president liked about the
revision was that it helped companies—with reasonable liability
protection—to share data with government ofﬁcials when their
networks had been attacked to help them recover from this kind
of costly disaster (Ruth and Stone, 2012).
A major reason that the CISPA bill was revised was that lob-
bying groups like the EFF argued for less restrictive language.
Also, the EFF pushed for voluntary compliance from businesses
and a voluntary self-certiﬁcation process that would be overseen
by a new National Cybersecurity Council, with members from
the private and public sectors as well as government. The EFF
was also opposed to excessive surveillance measures that the
U.S. government wanted to implement with this piece of
legislation. After many discussions on a number of fronts,
on August 3, 2012, just prior to the month-long recess of
Data and Documents
233

Congress, the revised CISPA bill was defeated. What’s more,
no active U.S. cybersecurity legislation was pending. The spon-
sors of CISPA, therefore, vowed to revive their discussions
through 2013, in the hopes of eventually getting the bill passed
(Ruth and Stone, 2012). The bill was passed by the House and
amended April 18, 2013.
For more information: Cyber Intelligence Sharing and
Protection Act. Available at http://intelligence.house.gov/sites/
intelligence.house.gov/ﬁles/documents/CISPAPassedApril
2013.pdf
SOPA and PIPA
In January 2012, digital rights activists, online citizens, and a
number of high-proﬁle technology companies collaborated on
an Internet blackout to protest against two U.S. Cong-
ressional bills: the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the
PROTECT IP Act (PIPA). The high-tech companies included
the popular news-sharing Web site reddit, the browser pioneer
Mozilla, Google, and the photo-sharing Web site Twitpic. All
expressed solidarity with the protest by putting anti-SOPA
material on their home pages. Furthermore, these online pro-
tests were accompanied by on-land protests, in New York
City, where thousands of the city’s technology industry partic-
ipants demonstrated outside the ofﬁces of U.S. senators
Chuck Schumer (D-NY) and Kristen Gillibrand (D-NY)
(Carter and Grimm, 2012).
Both of these bills had the objective of combating piracy on
non-U.S. Web sites hosting content allegedly infringing on U.S.
copyrights. If passed, they would have allowed the U.S. attorney
general to order that ISPs had to block any Web site that con-
tained so-called infringing material. However, both bills were
withdrawn after the online blackout and public outrage.
Following the failure of SOPA to pass as law, the U.S.
government authorities decided to use other means to bring
down groups that they believe are dissident and a menace to
234
Internet Censorship

society. For example, the micro-blogging Web site Twitter
received a number of subpoenas from the U.S. government ask-
ing for information on so-called anti-secrecy organizations like
WikiLeaks (the hacker group founded in 2006 and known
worldwide after they claimed to have leaked online several con-
ﬁdential ﬁles regarding the violence in Syria) and the Occupy
Wall Street movement (a leaderless hactivist movement whose
Web site says that members are opposed to the greed and cor-
ruption “of the 1%” and will use tactics of the revolutionary
Arab Spring to achieve their ends). However, rather than giving
the U.S. government the information being subpoenaed,
Twitter challenged these requests in court, and was successful
(Freedom House, 2012; Ruth and Stone, 2012).
For more information:
Stop Online Piracy Act. Available at http://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/BILLS-112hr3261ih/pdf/BILLS-112hr3261ih.pdf
PROTECT IP Act of 2011. Available at http://www.leahy
.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/BillText-PROTECTIPAct.pdf
Internet Legislation Attempts Globally Related to
Privacy, Security, Trust, and Censorship: The Budapest
Convention on Cybercrime
In 2001, group action on an international front was being
taken to combat Internet crime. On November 8, 2001, at
the 109th Session of the Council of Europe, the Committee
of Ministers of the council adopted a Convention on
Cybercrime and its explanatory report and then opened it for
signature in Budapest on November 23, 2001. Known as the
Budapest Convention on Cybercrime, it came into force on
July 1, 2004. This convention was the ﬁrst global legislative
attempt to set standards on Internet-related crime and develop
policies and procedures to govern international cooperation in
order to combat it. The treaty was to enter into force when at
least ﬁve states, three of which were members of the Council
of Europe, had ratiﬁed it (Schell, 2007).
Data and Documents
235

On November 17, 2003, President Bush transmitted the
convention to the U.S. Senate for ratiﬁcation. The conven-
tion requires countries ratifying it to adopt similar criminal
laws on cracking, infringements of IPR, Internet-related
fraud, and Internet-disseminated child pornography. It also
contains provisions on investigative powers and procedures,
including the search of computer networks and the inter-
ception of communications. In particular, the convention
requires cooperation between cross-border law enforcement
agencies in searches, seizures, and extradition. After the out-
set, it was amended by an additional protocol making any on-
line publication of racist propaganda a criminal offense
(Schell, 2007).
As of October 28, 2010, 30 states had signed, ratiﬁed, and
acceded to the Budapest Convention, whereas a further 16
states had signed but not ratiﬁed it. Moreover, on July 2,
2013, in Brussels, the high representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy issued a joint
communication to the European Parliament, The Council,
The European Economic and Social Committee, and the
Committee of the Regions. Titled, “Cybersecurity Strategy of
the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace,”
this report was a rather comprehensive cybersecurity strategy
proposal for the EU. It outlined the EU’s vision and actions
for strongly protecting and promoting citizens’ online rights
and making EU’s online environment one of the safest in the
world. Accepting that this vision could be realized only through
a true partnership between many actors, the proposal called
for member states that have not yet ratiﬁed the Budapest
Convention to ratify it and implement its provisions as early
as possible (High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, 2013). As of January,
2014, 41 states had ratiﬁed.
For more information: Budapest Convention on Cybercrime.
Available at http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/
185.htm
236
Internet Censorship

Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement
Besides SOPA and PIPA, the U.S. government advocated an
online copyright protection and antipiracy measure, known as
the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA). ACTA
had a number of provisions like SOPA and PIPA; plus it had
support from the U.S., Mexican, and Moroccan governments,
to mention just a few. However, once WikiLeaks in 2008 dis-
closed some online details of the “secret” international negotia-
tions and alleged that ACTA would authorize signatory nations
to “peer inside your iPod” at border crossings, ACTA’s progress
and usefulness were immediately questioned outside of the
United States and Japan (Ruth and Stone, 2012).
Organizations
representing
non-governmental
interests
argued that ACTA could infringe citizens’ fundamental rights,
including
freedom
of
expression
and
privacy.
Doctors
Without Borders maintained that the passage of ACTA would
jeopardize access to medicines in developing nations, and the
Electronic Frontier Foundation argued that because of the
secret nature of the negotiations, key parties were missing—
such as civil society groups and developing nations.
The ﬁnal blow to ACTA came in July 2012, when the
27-member-state European Parliament loudly and collaboratively
defeated it, saying that it was an anti-Internet and pro-censorship
bill. In short, apart from a few tries to legislate tiny parts of the
former SOPA law—like requiring U.S. embassies to move foreign
copyright experts from State Department supervision to U.S.
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce supervision—the United States is
unlikely to pass any kind of major antipiracy legislation being
passed any time soon (Ruth and Stone, 2012).
For more information: Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agree-
ment. Available at http://www.ipo.gov.uk/pro-crime-acta
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement
In recent years, the “big media” lobbyists have been pushing
for trade agreements with copyright measures that are far more
Data and Documents
237

restrictive than those currently required by existing treaties or
legislation in the United States; but in 2012, the big media lob-
byists went international. The Open Internet activists saw the
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP) agreement as the most threat-
ening of these developments.
The overriding fear is that the TPP seeks, among other pro-
visions, (1) the rewriting of the global rules on intellectual
property enforcement, giving the big media new powers to lock
online users out of content and services, (2) providing new
liabilities forcing ISPs to police online activities, and (3) giving
the big media companies stronger powers to shut down Web
sites and to remove content deemed to be “offensive.”
The Open Internet activists also fear the TPP’s proposed
encouragement of ISPs to block accused infringers’ access to the
Internet and the possibility that ISPs could give online users’ pri-
vate information to big media conglomerates without appropriate
privacy safeguards. In other words, the Open Internet activists
argue that given the number of restrictions in the proposed
TPP, all Internet users could become suspected copyright crimi-
nals, and it appears to criminalize content sharing, in general. It
is further believed by the activists that the pro-TPP lobbyists have
been paid for by U.S. mega-corporations.
These behind-closed-door negotiations seem to have been
going on since 2008, and according to the U.S. Trade Repre-
sentative’s Ofﬁce, negotiators were hoping to ﬁnalize the TPP
by July 2012. However, as of December 2012, the negotia-
tions seem to be continuing, with a sixteenth round of TPP
negotiations scheduled to take place in Singapore from March 4
to 13, 2013 (Ofﬁce of the United States Trade Representative,
2013).
The Open Internet activists have vehemently argued that the
approach being used to advance the TPP is undemocratic,
because there has been a woeful lack of proper online citizen
and stakeholder consultation. Furthermore, there has been no
open access to TPP documents, and, sadly, they argue, there
appear to have been no checks or balances put in place to
238
Internet Censorship

ensure the well-being of online global citizens. In short, there
has to be an adequate means of protecting content owners’
needs, balanced with the rights of Internet users—and this just
doesn’t seem to be the case with the TPP (Bailey, 2012).
The 11 nations currently negotiating the TPP are the United
States, Canada, Australia, Peru, Malaysia, Vietnam, New
Zealand, Chile, Singapore, Mexico, and Brunei Darussalam.
The EFF obtained a leaked document of a February 2011
TPP draft—never ofﬁcially released by the TPP—which can
be found at http://keionline.org/sites/default/ﬁles/tpp-10feb2011
-us-text-ipr-chapter.pdf (EFF, 2013).
Furthermore, according to the EFF, U.S. negotiators are try-
ing to adopt copyright measures far more restrictive than those
currently required by international treaties, including the con-
troversial ACTA. Moreover, all countries signing on would be
required to conform their domestic laws and policies to the pro-
visions in the Agreement—meaning that a recently leaked
U.S.-proposed intellectual property chapter would include pro-
visions exceeding current U.S. law, including the controversial
aspects of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, or DMCA.
On February 5, 2013, the EFF Web site said that the EFF
joined 24 U.S. civil society groups to demand a baseline of
transparency in TPP negotiations, and a letter was sent to
Barbara Weisel, the lead negotiator for the TPP, calling for
more needs for transparency and an increased civil involvement
instead of the secret backdoor meetings (Sutton, 2013).
Finally, the Public Knowledge Web site has expressed similar
concerns about the TPP. As of mid-2012, they afﬁrm, there
have been about thirteen rounds of secretive negotiations, ﬁve
leaks of the proposed text, and close to zero involvement by
the public. Very worrisome is the fact that everything known
about the TPP is known because of leaks through the
Internet, and the negotiators have not even once willingly given
the public or public interest organizations like the EFF and
Public Knowledge any key information voluntarily. Further-
more, the schedule for negotiation seems to have become
Data and Documents
239

accelerated in recent months in order to bring a “close” to the
process (Public Knowledge, 2013).
For more information: Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership. Available at
http://www.ustr.gov/tpp
The United Nations: Unprecedented Power over Web
Content and Infrastructure?
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) con-
vened the World Conference on International Telecommuni-
cations in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, from December 3 to
14, 2012. This landmark conference had as its priority a review
of the International Telecommunication Regulations, which acts
as the binding global treaty to facilitate international interconnec-
tion and interoperability of information by ensuring global use-
fulness and open access to the Internet (ITU, 2013).
However, several nations hoped to use this conference to
push for more stringent Internet controls by pressing to tacti-
cally take away control of the Internet’s technical speciﬁcations
control and the domain name system from U.S. bodies and to
give them to an international organization similar to—if not
to—the United Nations. Advocates for this change included
Russia and China, along with other nations that wanted the
“less biased” international organization to have unprecedented
power over Web content and infrastructure.
Some Open Internet activists and high-tech companies like
Google saw such a proposed move as increasing the censorship
of the Internet and going against the basic principle of Internet
freedom and openness. In fact, a Google spokesperson voiced
concerns that only governments had a voice at the ITU
conference—and not high-tech companies or others that have
a stake in the Internet’s development and ongoing evolution
(Emmanuel, 2012).
In an attempt to ensure that Internet regulation continues to
be as free and open as possible (and considering that many of
the Internet-regulating organizations reside in the United
240
Internet Censorship

States), in August 2012, the U.S. House rushed to pass a unani-
mous resolution against any increase in the United Nations’, or
some similar body’s, control over the Internet The resolution
stated that the US would continue to work on a policy to
promote a global Internet free from government control
(Ashford, 2012).
Despite Russia’s above proposal advocating a more open
Internet, the Russian Duma, following a day’s protest blackout
of Russian-language content on the Wikipedia Web site—
along with claims of online censorship—passed by a vote of
441 to 9 a bill aimed at blacklisting over 400 “harmful
Internet sites”; the bill took effect in November 2012 (Ruth
and Stone, 2012).
A similar paradox exists in China. Although China is home
to the world’s largest population of Internet users—many of
whom have manifested increasing creativity in ﬁghting online
censorship (such as imprisoned Nobel laureate Liu Xiabo),
China remains one of the world’s most restrictive online envi-
ronments. One academic study reviewed censorship across
almost 1,400 blog-hosting and bulletin board platforms in
China and found that about 13 percent of the posts were
deleted, many within a 24-hour period after being deemed by
government authorities as “sensitive” or espousing an “inappro-
priate” message regarding the Chinese Communist Party
(Freedom House, 2012).
What’s more, China has been known to act in other aggres-
sive, censoring ways, such as imprisoning what is estimated to
be at least 190,000 online users whose behavior was deemed
by government agents to be “in need of reform.” These online
users are placed in one of the country’s network of 350 work
camps, typically without the bother of any charges, lawyers, tri-
als, or appeals. These work camps were penal systems designed
by Mao Zedong to deal quickly with Chinese government
political opponents (MacKinnon, 2013).
Nowadays, Chinese citizens can be sentenced to up to four
years of “re-education through labour.” Ren Jianyu, having
Data and Documents
241

served his time in such a work camp, is now free. Ren believes
that he was sent to one outside of Chongqing, because he
posted something online that offended Bo Xilai, the ex-boss
of the local communist party (MacKinnon, 2013).
Actually, Ren’s imprisonment struck a chord nationwide,
because he was not a political or religious activist; he was just
somebody who had posted his thoughts on the Internet.
Another famous person who spent three years in a work camp
was Liu Xiabo, the alleged dissident and Nobel laureate who
questioned the Communist Party’s right to rule. Besides doing
menial labor in the camps, which human rights activists have
negatively called “the re-education archipelago,” prisoners
undergo an educational portion of the rehabilitation program,
including hearing constant and numerous tales of Communist
Party heroes. China has recently thrown its support behind
the United Nations’ having tighter control over the Internet.
Zhou Litai, a prominent Chongqing lawyer, said on Ren’s
release (MacKinnon, 2013, p. A9): “Factually, [the labor-
camp system] has become a tool that local governments used
to get revenge on ordinary people. [It] is the opposite of what
China’s current social and legal system requires.”
For more information: International Telecommunication
Regulations. Available at http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/
itrs.aspx
Conclusion
Over the past 20 years, the Internet has had a tremendous and
very positive impact on all parts of society—citizens’ daily lives,
their fundamental rights, their social interactions, and their
nations’ economies. This chapter opened with a look at Internet
usage worldwide and Internet penetration. Some countries were
viewed as being strong advocates of the Open Internet—such as
the United States and Estonia, while other countries like China
and Iran were viewed as being strong advocates for Internet
censorship, particularly around politically sensitive issues.
242
Internet Censorship

Legal experts have argued that, for cyberspace to remain
open and free, the same norms, principles, freedoms, and values
that are upheld on land should be upheld online. An open and
free cyberspace has promoted political and social inclusion
worldwide, taken down barriers between countries and its citi-
zens, allowed for the interaction and sharing of information
globally, provided a forum for freedom of expression and
fundamental rights, and empowered online citizens in non-
democratic governments to continue pushing for democratic
and more just societies—as demonstrated recently by the Arab
Spring (Ruth and Stone, 2012).
But, as the balance of this chapter has discussed, in order for
the Internet to remain open and free, fundamental rights,
democracy, and rule of law all need to be protected. So, exactly
where have passed or not-passed legislation or data collection
guidelines leave governments trying to curb cybercrime and
online censorship? The answer plainly is, “It varies widely.”
On March 13, 2013, for example, the Canadian federal
government, concerned that we live in an information age
where data mining can invade online citizens’ privacy rights,
announced that it has changed its own restrictions regarding
data gathering when Canadians visit government Web sites.
Among other things, the new rules prohibit the government
from proﬁling individuals’ online activities by tracking their
computer’s IP address. Furthermore, any use of the IP address
to measure Web site trafﬁc must also ensure that the address
is rendered anonymous. However, these rules do not cover the
data available to the government via social media Web sites cre-
ated by individual departments, which clearly operate beyond
the bounds of Canadian federal policy (Canadian Press, 2013).
Also on March 13, 2013, according to the U.S. Intelligence
chief James Clapper (whose quote appears at the start of this
chapter), the present-day reality is that a devastating cyber-
attack could cripple America’s infrastructure and economy.
Clapper warned Congress that such cyberattacks pose the most
dangerous immediate threat to the United States—more
Data and Documents
243

pressing than, say, a land attack by global terrorist networks.
Clapper’s testimony took note of the negative consequences of
the Arab Spring, saying that while “some countries have made
progress toward democratic rule, most are experiencing uncer-
tainty, violence and political backsliding,” including ethnic vio-
lence and on-land terrorist attacks. As a result of the Arab
Spring backlash, he said that the United States needs to worry
about impending, devastating cyberattacks, because of three
main issues: (1) the possibility that political chaos will produce
“ungoverned spaces” from which extremists could plot against
the United States, (2) the fact that high unemployment rates
and severe economic distress found in these spaces could exac-
erbate the destabilization here, and (3) the likelihood that
anti-American sentiments on the part of new, populist govern-
ments in these volatile regions could cause heated ﬂare-ups
(Mazzetti and Shane, 2013, p. A15).
So what immediate remedies would legal and cybersecurity
experts suggest to cope more effectively with these concerns?
Some legal experts have argued that the various laws currently
available in the United States and elsewhere, plus more voluntary
actions by major ISPs, could help to keep such cyberattacks at
bay. Other more conservative factions have argued that more
restrictive laws like SOPA and PIPA need to be enacted in the
United States or elsewhere. And when certain pieces of more
restrictive legislation like SOPA, PIPA, and CISPA are defeated
in the United States or elsewhere—usually as a result of activist
groups’ loud outcries that Internet censorship is harmful to online
citizens’ rights—government ofﬁcials, as a means of providing
stopgap measures, seem to start drafting executive orders not
requiring formal approval by bodies like the U.S. Congress.
In the meantime, afﬁrm the bulk of cybersecurity experts,
the potential dangers of tech-savvy cyber criminals continue to
grow day by day—bringing with them the real possibility for
cyberattacks on targeted nations’ networks responsible for
water, power, fuel, transportation, and ﬁnance. Clearly, some
more effective solutions need to be found.
244
Internet Censorship

References
9-11 Research. “The Homeland Security Act.” 2012, http://
911research.wtc7.net/post911/legislation/hsa.html (accessed
December 21).
Agence France-Presse. “Advocates angered by death of 26-year-
old hacktivist.” The Globe and Mail, January 14, 2013, p. A9.
Ashford, W. “US passes resolution to block UN control of the
Internet.” 2012, http://www.computerweekly.com/news/
2240160979/US-passes-resolution-to-block-UN-control-of
-the-internet (accessed August 6).
Bailey, A. “TPP: The secretive agreement that could criminalize
your Internet use.” 2012, http://openmedia.ca/blog/
tpp-secretive-agreement-could-criminalize-your-internet-use
(accessed May 14).
Canadian Press. “Privacy: Tories restrict online data mining,
but not for social media.” The Globe and Mail, March 13,
2013, p. A8.
Carter, Z., and R. Grimm. “SOPA blackout aims to block
Internet censorship bill.” 2012, http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.
com/2012/01/18/sopa-blackout-internet-censorship_n
_1211905.html?iew=print&comm_ref=false (accessed
January 20).
Clarke, J. “Jailbreaking cell phones to become ILLEGAL at
midnight: Law makes ‘unlocking’ devices to switch carriers
punishable by ﬁnes and even prison.” 2013, http://www
.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2268743/New-law-makes
-unlocking-cell-phones-switch-carriers-punishable-ﬁnes
-prison.html (accessed January 26).
Cocchi, R. “Hospital chain faces two federal investigations.”
2013, http://healthexecnews.com/hospital-chain-faces
-federal-investigations (accessed February 8).
EFF. “Trans Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement.” 2013, https://
www.eff.org/issues/tpp (accessed February 5).
Data and Documents
245

Emmanuel, O. “Google steps up pressure on UN’s Internet
treaty conference.” 2012, http://premiumtimesng.com/
news/109644-google-steps-up-pressure-on-uns-internet
-treaty-conference.html (accessed December 3).
EPIC. “The Gramm-Leach Bliley Act.” 2013, http://epic.org/
privacy/glba/ (accessed March 6).
Gonsalves, A. “Nationwide/Allied security breach highlights
litigation fears.” 2012, http://www.cso.com.au/article/
444079/nationwide_allied_security_breach_highlights
_litigation_fears/ (accessed December 7).
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy. “Joint Communication to the European
Parliament, The Council, The European Economic and
Social Committee and The Committee of the Regions
‘Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open,
Safe and Secure Cyberspace.’ ” 2013, http://ec.europa.eu/
digital-agenda/en/news/eu-cybersecurity-plan-protect-open
-internet-and-online-freedom-and-opportunity-cyber
-security (accessed and downloaded from a related link
February 7).
Innovarus. “Gramm-Leach Bliley Act.” 2012, http://innovarus
.com/glba.htm (accessed March 2).
Internet World Stats. “World Internet Users Statistics: Usage
and World Population Stats.” 2013, http://www.internet
worldstats.com/stats.htm (accessed February 17).
ITU. “World Conference on International Telecommunications
(WCIT-12).” 2013, http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/
default.aspx (accessed March 12).
Kelly, S., S. Cook, and M. Truong. Freedom on the Net 2012: A
Global Assessment of Internet and Digital Media. New York:
Freedom House, 2012, http://www.freedomhouse.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/FOTN%202012%20FINAL.pdf (accessed
December 30).
246
Internet Censorship

MacKinnon, M. “One man’s crusade against China’s re-education
camps.” The Globe and Mail, March 11, 2013, pp. A1, A9.
Mazzetti, M., and S. Shane. “Cyberattacks top threat to US,
intelligence chief says.” The Globe and Mail, March 13,
2013, p. A15.
Ofﬁce of the United States Trade Representative.
“Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP): 16th round of TPP
negotiations set for Singapore—March 4–13, 2013.” 2013,
http://www.ustr.gov/tpp (accessed March 12).
Public Knowledge. “The Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement.”
2013, http://tppinfo.org/ (accessed February 24).
Ruth, S., and S. Stone. “A legislator’s dilemma,” IEEE Internet
Computing 16 (6): 78–81, Nov–Dec, 2012.
Schaefer, E. “How to defend against a claim of cybersquatting:
Litigation stories from the jury box.” 2012, http://tcattorney
.typepad.com/domainnamedispute/2012/07/how-to-defend
-against-a-claim-of-cybersquatting-litigation-stories-from
-the-jury-box.html#more (accessed July 19).
Schell, B. Contemporary World Issues: The Internet and Society.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2007.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. Webster’s New World Hacker
Dictionary. Indiana: Wiley, 2006.
Sutton, M. “EFF joins 24 US civil society groups in
demanding a baseline of transparency in TPP negotiations.”
2013, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/02/eff-joins-24
-us-civil-society-groups-demanding-baseline-transparency
-tpp (accessed February 5).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. “Omnibus
HIPAA Rulemaking.” 2013, http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/
hipaa/administrative/omnibus/index.html (accessed March 6).
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce Access. “The Protect Act of
2003.” 2013, http://www.gpoaccess.gov/index.html
(accessed March 8).
Data and Documents
247

Williams, L. “Local Prime patient visited by Feds.” 2012,
http://www.redding.com/news/2012/jan/10/local-prime
-patient-visited-by-feds/ (accessed January 10).
Yousuf, H. “ ‘Godfather of Spam’ going to prison.” 2009,
http://money.cnn.com/2009/11/24/technology/King_of
_spam_lawsuit_fraud_Ralsky/index.htm# (accessed
November 30).
Zetter, K. “Feds: Would-be satellite TV pirate offered
$250,000 reward to smartcard cracker.” 2009, http://www
.wired.com/threatlevel/2009/07/satellite/ (accessed July 15).
248
Internet Censorship

This page intentionally left blank


6
Resources
This chapter focuses on print and nonprint resources on Internet
censorship and related Internet topics like hacking and cyber-
crime. In the print section are Internet censorship and hacking-
related books, magazines, and Web sites having downloadable
news stories and white papers on a wide range of relevant topics.
In the nonprint section are the Web sites for the following: organ-
izations advocating for Internet freedom, Internet censorship vid-
eos, and companies offering software classiﬁed as anti-virus,
ﬁrewall, content ﬁltering, and ﬁltering bypass. Finally, key U.S.
government agencies and independent organizations concerned
about Internet abuses are delineated.
The U.S. Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and
Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS) has an email service that
gives updates on various forms of Internet-related crimes. To
receive updates and to be added to the list, readers can send a
message to http://www.justice.gov/govdelivery/subscribe.html?
code=USDOJ.
Furthermore, the CCIPS Web site www.usdoj.gov/criminal/
cybercrime/index.html has links to the following:
• Press releases from 1999 to the present (including the
September 17, 2012, press release entitled “Two Romanian
251
Protesters carrying anti-ACTA placards at a rally in Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (Wessel Cirkel/Dreamstime.com)

Nationals Plead Guilty to Participating in Multimillion
Dollar Scheme to Remotely Hack Into and Steal Payment
Card Data from Hundreds of US Merchants’ Companies”)
• Manuals and reports on Internet-related crimes (including
Prosecuting Computer Crimes, Searching and Seizing Com-
puters
and
Obtaining
Electronic
Evidence
in
Criminal
Investigations manual, Prosecuting Intellectual Property Crimes,
and Digital Forensic Analysis Methodology Flowchart) as well as
reports regarding intellectual property (IP) protection
• A summary of important criminal cases involving the Internet
at http://www.justice.gov/publications/case-highlights.html
• How to report Internet-related crime, including network
cracking and the breaching of IP
Print: Books
Abbott, J. P. The Political Economy of the Internet in Asia and the
Paciﬁc: Digital Divides, Economic Competitiveness, and Security
Challenges. Westport, CT: Praeger (Greenwood), 2004.
Though many people think that the Internet can level the
playing ﬁeld in jurisdictions where freedom of speech is
controlled by the government, the essays in this book
show that despite the opportunities the Internet provides,
there are countries, like China, where censorship remains.
Alford, L. The Great Firewall of China: An Evaluation of
Internet Censorship in China. Saarbruken, Germany: VDM
Verlag Dr. Müller, 2010.
This book is actually a set of study results that takes an inno-
vative approach to viewing Internet censorship in China,
because it looks at the many forces in this jurisdiction that
are opposing censorship by the government authorities.
Ammori, M. On Internet Freedom. Washington, DC: Elkat
Books, 2013.
252
Internet Censorship

An Internet freedom advocate, lawyer, and scholar focusing
on the First Amendment, Marvin Ammori comprehensively
discusses why freedom of the Internet is under constant
threat—because of power struggles by corporations, govern-
ments, and hacker cells. A fascinating and powerful book on
this important topic.
Arguilla, J., and D. F. Ronfeldt. Networks and Netwars: The Future
of Terror, Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 2001.
This interesting book describes emerging forms of cyber con-
ﬂict using the Internet. Among other topics, the book dis-
cusses netwars (conﬂicts involving terrorists, criminals, gangs,
and ethic extremists) and various ways of coping with them.
Barbour, S. Censorship: Opposing Viewpoints. Farmington Hills,
MI: Greenhaven Press, 2010.
This book gives some interesting and very countering
views about censorship and what it means for society.
Beaver, K. Hacking for Dummies, 3rd Edition. New York: Wiley,
2010.
This book is a good foundational one for understanding
malicious hacking. Preventive measures are outlined with
easy-to-understand descriptions. This book also explains
ethical hacking and why it is useful in today’s virtual
world. The book includes a lot of useful details on Web
application hacking, mobile hacking, and VoIP hacking.
Berkowitz, B. D. The New Face of War: How War Will Be Fought
in the 21st Century. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2003.
This book discusses the emerging types of information wars,
details on how they have revolutionized combat using the
Internet,andhowawaragainstcyberterroristscouldbewaged.
Blunden, B. The Rootkit Arsenal: Escape and Evasion in the Dark
Corners of the System, 2nd Edition. Burlington, MA: Jones &
Bartlett Learning, 2012.
Resources
253

This book presents a comprehensive and up-to-date cov-
erage of forensic countermeasures for network exploits.
Topics include designing and deploying covert channels
and ways of discovering new hack attacks.
Boyden, C. M. Internet Censorship and Freedom in China: Policies
and Concerns. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publication, Inc.,
2013.
This book gives a fascinating look at the kinds of tactics
that are used inside of China to maintain control
over the Internet. It looks at why the United States and
other nations are, therefore, concerned about human
rights abuses, trade and investment issues, and cyber-
security threats commencing in this country.
Buyya, R., J. Broberg, and A. Goscinski. Cloud Computing:
Principles and Paradigms. New York: Wiley, 2011.
This book is meant to be used by professionals and IT and
business graduate students interested in having a solid
grasp of the principles underlying cloud computing. The
book also cites research topics that relate to cloud
computing.
Casey, E. Digital Evidence and Computer Crimes. San Diego,
CA: Academic, 2000.
This book details the law as it applies to computer net-
works. It also describes how evidence stored on or trans-
mitted by computers can play a role in a wide range of
crimes—including homicide, child abuse, stalking and
harassment, fraud, theft, and terrorism.
Castells, M. Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in
the Internet Age. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2012.
The author looks at new forms of social movements and
protests worldwide, particularly their unique ways of organ-
izing and using the Internet as an effective means of com-
municating with others around the globe. Movements like
254
Internet Censorship

the Arab Spring and the Occupy Wall Street in the United
States were created by the autonomous communication net-
works
available
through
the
Internet
and
wireless
communication.
Chirillo, J. Hack Attacks Encyclopedia: A Complete History of Hacks,
Cracks, Phreaks, and Spies over Time. New York: Wiley, 2001.
Written by a security expert, this book covers historical
texts, program ﬁles, code snippets, hacking and security
tools, and a series of more advanced topics on password
programs, sniffers, spoofers, and ﬂooders.
Clarke, R. A., and R. Knake. Cyber War: The Next Threat to
National Security and What to Do about It. New York: Ecco,
2012.
The authors, one an international security expert who
worked for the U.S. government and the other a cyber
expert, talk about the role of the Internet in cyber wars—
hostile attempts by one nation to penetrate the networks
of another nation for critical information. Recent past and
present-day cyber wars are detailed in this very interesting
and well-written book.
Clifford, R. D. Cybercrime: The Investigation, Prosecution, and
Defense of a Computer-Related Crime. Durham, NC: Carolina
Academic, 2001.
Intended primarily for a legal audience, this book covers
topics such as what conduct is considered to be a cyber-
crime, how to investigate kinds of cyber conduct such as
malicious hacking, how to try a cybercrime case as a pros-
ecuting or defending attorney, and how to handle the
international aspects of cybercrimes.
Cohen, N. You Can’t Read This Book: Censorship in an Age of
Freedom. New York: HarperCollins, 2012.
This intriguing book talks about censorship in countries
that purport to be active on the Internet and supporters
Resources
255

of an age of freedom. The author explores the present-day
Internet reality in Iran, China, and elsewhere. The Great
Firewall of China is discussed, along with the importance
of religion, power, and dictatorships in keeping censorship
alive and well in some key jurisdictions connected to the
Internet.
Congressional Executive Commission on China. China’s
Censorship of the Internet and Social Media: The Human Toll
and Trade I. Seattle, WA: CreateSpace, 2012.
This book presents the results of a hearing on China’s pre-
disposition to violate human rights and disregard the
Internet laws and international standards that authorities
say they believe in and uphold. Yet, they have not only
increased censorship and control over the Internet, but
they have been known to violate their citizens’ human
rights and dignity.
Davidoff, S., and J. Ham. Network Forensics: Tracking Hackers
through Cyberspace. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012.
This book provides a nice foundation and road map for
those trying to get the gist of cloud computing, advantages
for businesses to move to the cloud, and concerns about IT
security in the cloud. The book details the various kinds of
“footprints” that hackers leave when they exploit networks.
Duthel, H. Internet Censorship: Reports, Ratings, and Trends
around the World. Seattle, WA: CreateSpace, 2010.
The author presents a fulsome view of Internet censorship
in various jurisdictions around the world. It is an interest-
ing read because of some conspiracy theories linking
Facebook, Google, and the CIA.
Duthel, H. Freedom of the Press Report: Censorship—Internet
Censorship. Seattle, WA: CreateSpace, 2011.
Freedom of the press and Internet censorship are closely
related. The author details why in this book and compares
256
Internet Censorship

and contrasts jurisdictions where the press is most free (such
as Finland, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden)
and where the press is least free (such as Eritrea, North
Korea, Turkmenistan, Iran, and Myanmar [Burma]).
Engebretson, P. The Basics of Hacking and Penetration Testing:
Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Made Easy. Rockland,
MA: Syngress Publishing, 2011.
This book provides the basics for completing a penetra-
tion test for conducting ethical hacks using such available
tools as Metasploit, Whois, Google, Backtrack Linux, and
Nmap. Written by an experienced penetration tester, the
book takes a hands-on approach for conducting penetra-
tion testing.
EPIC. Filters and Freedom 2.0: Free Speech Perspectives on
Internet Content Controls. Washington, DC: EPIC, 2001.
This book talks at length about how Internet ﬁltering
affects online freedom of expression more severely than
laws implemented in various jurisdictions for censoring
Internet content. The book also discusses newer forms of
legislation passed in the United States and within the
European Union to create a uniform rating scheme for
online material, as well as the use of ﬁlters in libraries.
Erikson, J. Hacking: The Art of Exploitation, 2nd Edition. San
Francisco, CA: No Starch Press, 2008.
Written by a hacker who believes in the power of creative
hacking, the book explains how hacking techniques work.
Included are basics on C programming, Linux program-
ming, assembly language, and shell scripts. The book’s
hands-on approach covers such important topics as buffer
overﬂows, bypassing protections, cracking wireless devi-
ces, and high-jacking network communications.
Furnell, S. Cybercrime: Vandalizing the Information Society.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2001.
Resources
257

Written by a British computer security expert, this book
gives a thorough overview of cracking, viral code, and elec-
tronic fraud. It covers a wide range of crimes and abuses
related to IT. Unlike many other hacking books on the
market, this one does not require advanced technological
knowledge to understand the bulk of the material covered.
Goldsmith, J., and T. Wu. Who Controls the Internet? Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Will the Internet bring an end to the geographic bounda-
ries that currently exist? This book explores this question
at length, as viewed through the lens of two law profes-
sors. Their main thesis is that national governments will
keep their independence even with the Internet, largely
because of economics. The authors argue their points with
colorful illustrations from worldwide court cases involving
big companies like eBay and Yahoo.
Goldstein, E. The Best of 2600: Collector’s Edition—A Hacker
Odyssey. New York: Wiley, 2009.
A top seller among hackers, this is a 912-page volume
packed with real-life hacking events and exploits written
by hackers. Emmanuel Goldstein (whose real-life name is
Eric Corley) gives brilliant insights into the hacker culture
as well as a series of controversial articles that depict IT
security milestones and the evolution of technology over
the past 25 years. As a bonus, a CD-ROM featuring some
hit episodes of Goldstein’s Off the Hook 2600 radio shows
is also included in the collector’s edition.
Goodman, S. F., and A. D. Sofaer. The Transnational Dimension
of Cybercrime and Terrorism. Prague, Czech Republic: Hoover
Institute, 2001.
Unlike maps showing the boundaries of countries around
the globe, the Internet has no virtual boundaries. Thus,
this interesting book, intended for a more advanced
258
Internet Censorship

audience, covers the important topics of transnational
cybercrime and cyber terrorism.
Greenberg, A. This Machine Kills Secrets: How WikiLeakers,
Cypherpunks,
and
Hacktivists
Aim
to
Free
the
World’s
Information. New York: Dutton Adult (Penguin Books), 2012.
The Guardian, and M. Belam. Battle for the Internet: An Open
Democracy or a Walled Garden? London: Guardian Books, 2012.
The Internet can help shape democratic societies worldwide
or enforce the surveillance by censorious governments of on-
line citizens and perceived dissidents. This book details the
different philosophical stances of countries utilizing the
Internet to optimize their own objectives. The author looks
at how the software and systems underpinning the Internet
call into question not only how IP can be protected but
how it can be accessed by the enemy.
Hadnagy, C. Social Engineering: The Art of Human Hacking.
New York: Wiley, 2010.
This book covers a lot of interesting topics related to social
engineering, such as the psychological principles used and
abused by hackers, steps to complete a successful social
engineering exploit, and how to capitalize on cracking
cameras, GPS devices, and caller IDs for ensuring a suc-
cessful hack attack.
Harper, A., S. Harris, and J. Ness. Gray Hat Hacking: The
Ethical Hackers Handbook, 3rd Edition. New York: McGraw
Hill Companies, Inc., 2011.
This book, written by experts in the ﬁeld, provides useful
and practical techniques for discovering and repairing
security ﬂaws. It also outlines legal disclosure methods.
Penetration testing, malware, SCADA attacks, Web secu-
rity, social engineering, and Metasploit usage are just a few
of the important topics detailed in this book.
Resources
259

Herumin, W. Censorship on the Internet: From Filters to
Freedom of Speech. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Enslow Publishing,
Inc., 2004.
This book is a good one for younger children who want to
get a better understanding of the relationship between free
speech and the Internet. A number of laws passed in the
United States are discussed, particularly as they relate to
ﬁlters used to control the content on the Internet.
Himanen, P., M. Castells, and L. Torvald. The Hacker Ethic and
the Spirit of the Information Age. New York: Random House,
2001.
This is one of a few books focusing on White Hat hack-
ing, its values, and beliefs. The underlying theme of this
book is that individuals can create great things by joining
forces and using information and the Internet in imagina-
tive ways.
Holt, T. J., and B. H. Schell. Corporate Hacking and
Technology-Driven Crime: Social Dynamics and Implications.
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, 2011.
This book presents a series of refereed chapters on impor-
tant corporate hacking issues. Experts in the ﬁeld have
contributed a variety of views on control systems security
and the social dynamics and the future of technology-
driven crime; compared hackers and white-collar crimi-
nals; and examined the language of carders.
Holt, T. J., and B. Schell. Contemporary World Issues: Hackers
and Hacking. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2013.
This book answers a lot of interesting questions, such as
What deﬁnes the social world of hackers, and what moti-
vates them to hack? This book traces the origins of
hacking from the 1950s to today, gives readers a thought-
provoking look at the ways in which hackers deﬁne
260
Internet Censorship

themselves, details how and why they hack, and presents
essays from experts in cybercrime about hackers and how
they function in the unique cyber world they live and
work in.
House, J. Internet Censorship in China. Ann Arbor, MI:
ProQuest, UMI Dissertation Publishing, 2012.
This thesis is an academic focus on China’s sophisticated
Internet censorship schema used to help the country
maintain its authoritarian government. The thesis gives
an in-depth and interesting look at the history, players,
and tactics used by the Chinese government to control
content on the Internet.
Huff, M., K. Bendib, and Project Censored. Censored 2013:
The Top Censored Stories and Media Analysis of 2011–2012.
New York: Seven Stories Press, 2012.
Since 1976 and every year afterward into the present,
Project Censored, the United States’ oldest news-
monitoring group, now under the leadership of the ﬁrst
author, has published the top 25 news stories that should
have made it to the media but did not because of a combi-
nation of media bias and self-censorship. This book is a
fascinating read.
International Group of Experts at the Invitation of the NATO
Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence. Tallinn
Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare.
Cambridge, UK: Oxford University Press, 2013.
This book was prepared by a team of 20 legal experts
working with the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the U.S. Cyber Command for NATO. This
team of experts warns that state-sponsored cyberattacks
must avoid sensitive civilian targets, like hospitals, dams,
and nuclear power stations. It also says that hacktivists
Resources
261

who participate in online attacks during a war could
become legitimate targets even though, technically, they
are civilians.
Komar, B., J. Wettern, and R. Beekelaar. Firewalls for Dummies.
New York, NJ: Wiley, 2003.
This book presents key facts about ﬁrewalls to assist busi-
nesses and individuals wanting to protect their computer
systems against hack attacks. The book is quite easy to
understand, even though it is written by computer secu-
rity experts.
Kulesza, J. International Internet Law. London: Routledge, 2012.
This important book looks at critical international legal issues
and debates related to Internet governance. Topics include
international copyright protection, cyber terrorism, identity
theft, fake Internet Web sites, denial of service attacks, and
international privacy protections. The author looks at how
various jurisdictions view these issues, including China, the
United States, the European Union, and Singapore.
Lankford, R. D. Censorship (Issues That Concern You).
Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 2010.
This book examines a lot of important topics on censor-
ship, including if censorship is ever acceptable, whether
parents and the government should restrict content on
the Internet, and the role of Internet service providers
(ISPs) in censoring online content. It also looks at work-
place infringements on free expression online.
Levy, S. Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution. New York:
Penguin, 2001.
A classic, this book was written for young people to
inform them about the importance of MIT’s Tech
Model Railroad Club as a key pioneering effort in hacking
history. This is where the White Hat hackers had their
critical beginnings.
262
Internet Censorship

Littman, J. The Fugitive Game: Online with Kevin Mitnick.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company, 1997.
A great book to accompany the reading of Ghost in the
Wires (see later in this section), this book details the online
pranks of convicted cracker Kevin Mitnick. It is an excit-
ing read, for it provides interviews with Kevin while he
was on the run from the FBI. Kevin’s views on the power
of social engineering are especially insightful.
Littman, J. The Watchman: The Twisted Life and Times of Serial
Hacker Kevin Poulsen. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company,
1997.
This book covers the interesting exploits of former hacker
and now writer Kevin Poulsen, the ﬁrst man in the United
States accused of carrying out espionage using a computer.
By ensuring that he was the 101st caller into radio stations
in the United States, Poulsen accrued two Porsches and
over $22,000 in cash. A very interesting read, indeed.
Lynch, M. The Arab Uprising: The Unﬁnished Revolutions of the
New Middle East. New York: PublicAffairs, 2013.
A political science professor in the United States, the
author looks at the many implications of the Arab
Spring. In this day and age of young people being inter-
connected to the world through the Internet, can the
young people in the Middle East who want more
democratic freedom overcome their leaders’ capacity to
kill their own citizens so that they can remain in
power? This book explores the answer to this intriguing
question.
MacKinnon, R. Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide
Struggle for Internet Freedom. New York: Basic Books, 2012.
The author, a journalist and Internet policy analyst, says
that while the Internet was meant to liberate online users,
for every media piece talking about how empowering the
Resources
263

Internet is, there is a media piece talking about how com-
panies and governments collect personal data on online
citizens without their permission. This book addresses
the hugely important question of how technology should
be governed to uphold the rights and liberties of online
users worldwide.
McChesney, R. W. Digital Disconnect: How Capitalism Is
Turning the Internet against Democracy. New York: The New
Press, 2013.
A professor of communications at the University of
Illinois, the author explores the relationship between the
digital world and economic powers—suggesting that capi-
talism is turning the Internet against democracy and the
nations that practice it. The author further suggests that
monopolies dominate the political economy, including
Google (with 97 percent of the mobile search market)
and Microsoft (whose operating system is inside over
90 percent of the world’s computers). The author also says
that with the marked declines in jurisdictions enforcing
antitrust violations and the increase in patents on digital
technologies, the Internet has become a virtual world of
commercialism. This book is a fascinating read.
McClure, S., J. Scambray, and G. Kurtz. Hacking Exposed:
Network Security Secrets and Solutions, 6th Edition. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2009.
This popular book discusses a practical approach to net-
work security and presents an extensive catalog of the weap-
onry that Black Hats utilize. Detailed explanations of
concepts such as war dialing and rootkits are presented.
There is also a comprehensive discussion of how to use
hacking software. The language and concepts are advanced
and are intended for experts like system administrators.
The authors also talk about how to locate and patch system
264
Internet Censorship

vulnerabilities, wireless and radio-frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) attacks, Web 2.0 vulnerabilities, and anonymous
hacking tools.
Meinel, C. P. The Happy Hacker, 4th Edition. Tucson, AZ:
American Eagle, 2001.
This book is part of a series of hacker books written by
self-proclaimed female hacker Carolyn Meinel. The basic
theme in all of her books is that hacking is fun but crack-
ing is not. This book is especially useful for neophytes
interested in hacking.
Miles, J. The SOPA & PIPA Conspiracy: Taking CONTROL
through Internet Censorship. Seattle, WA: Amazon Digital
Services, Inc., 2012.
This book takes an in-depth look at the controversies over
recent laws proposed by the United States: SOPA and
PIPA. The author gives an interesting view of what would
have happened to Internet censorship in this jurisdiction
if these laws had been passed, and what could happen in
the future if similar laws are considered.
Mitnick, K., and W. L. Simon. The Art of Deception: Controlling
the Human Element of Security. New York: Wiley, 2002.
This book, written by ex-convict Kevin Mitnick (whose
hacking exploits put him behind prison bars a number of
times) and writer William Simon, gives readers important
tips about securing business computer networks and hon-
ing one’s own expertise in social engineering.
Mitnick, K., and W. L. Simon. The Art of Intrusion: The Real
Stories behind the Exploits of Hackers, Intruders, and Deceivers.
New York: Wiley, 2005.
This fascinating book details some interesting hacking
exploits of individuals bilking Las Vegas casinos of millions
of dollars, hackers who have joined terrorist groups like
Resources
265

Al-Qaeda to cause harm, and a prisoner who communicates
with the outside world unbeknownst to prison ofﬁcials with
the help of his computer. Because the book avoids technical
complexities, readers unfamiliar with the workings of
computers will ﬁnd the contents compelling and to be an
interesting read.
Mitnick, K., S. Wozniak, and W. L. Simon. Ghost in the Wires:
My Adventures as the World’s Most Wanted Hacker. Boston,
MA: Little, Brown and Company, 2011.
Coauthored by a hacker who was once on the FBI’s Most
Wanted list and in and out of prison a number of times—
Kevin Mitnick—this book details his strategies as he was
on the run from the law for his hacking exploits into net-
works at Motorola, Sun Microsystems, and Paciﬁc Bell.
The other famous hacker coauthor (of the White Hat
variety) is Steve Wozniak.
Morozov, E. The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet
Freedom. New York: PublicAffairs, 2012.
The author, a visiting scholar at Stanford University, has
written for The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal,
The Financial Times, and other high-quality publications.
This book, employing a case study approach, talks
about the freedoms of the Internet in some jurisdictions
like the United States and the severe restrictions placed
on the Internet in jurisdictions like China and Iran.
Nunziato, D. Virtual Freedom: Net Neutrality and Free Speech
in the Internet Age. Stanford, CA: Stanford Law Books, 2009.
The author argues that communications giants, like
Google and AT&T, as key providers of broadband access
and Internet search engines, not only have the unique
capacity to monitor and control online communications
but also may be required to obstruct email messages to
censoring cablecasts because of recent amendments
266
Internet Censorship

to U.S. free speech legislation. The author maintains that
the U.S. Supreme Court has failed to protect online citi-
zens’ rights to a broad range of content on the Internet.
Consequently, he outlines a strategy for preserving free
speech for online citizens.
Nuwere, E. Hacker Cracker: A Journey from the Mean Streets of
Brooklyn to the Frontiers of Cyberspace. New York: William
Morrow, 2002.
Written by a then-21-year-old cracker who is now a
respected IT security specialist, this book provides young
readers with a novel look into the Black Hat world.
Olson, P. We Are Anonymous: Inside the Hacker World of
LulzSec, Anonymous, and the Global Cyber Insurgency. Boston,
MA: Little, Brown and Company, 2012.
The author documents the interesting hacktivist attempts
of the LulzSec and Anonymous hacker cells operating on
the Internet. Interesting attacks on SONY, Visa, and
PayPal networks in retaliation for their poor treatment of
WikiLeaks are described in detail.
Pager, S. A., and A. Candeub. Transnational Culture in
the Internet Age. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publisher,
2012.
This book on cyber law addresses the legal and economic
parameters of the Internet. As well, the important role of
jurisdiction is discussed from various disciplines. As well,
there is an examination of online threats to free speech
and harms caused by identity theft.
Peterson, T. F. Nightwork: A History of the Hacks and Pranks at
MIT. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Young readers and adults will ﬁnd this book interesting, as
it gives insights into the history of the pioneers at MIT
Resources
267

who were involved in the very early stages of White Hat
hacking, during the 1960s and 1970s.
Poulsen, K. Kingpin: How One Hacker Took over the Billion
Dollar Cybercrime Underground. New York: Crown Publishers,
2011.
It is safe to say that Kevin Poulsen, who himself is a well-
named hacker in hackerdom history, has watched other
interesting hackers in his midst. In this book, the protago-
nist is a White Hat hacker who turns bad. The book is
well written and reads like a thriller. The pages are ﬁlled
with gripping descriptions of online fraud markets, mur-
derous Russian criminals, phishing attacks, trojan horses,
and outlandish hack attacks designed to bilk unsuspecting
Americans of billions of dollars.
Raymond, E. S. The New Hacker’s Dictionary. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1996.
This book is a classic regarding early hacking history and
computer folklore. It deﬁnes the jargon used by hackers
and programmers in the Computer Underground in the
early days.
Ringmar, E. A Blogger’s Manifesto: Free Speech and Censorship in
the Age of the Internet. New York: Anthem Press, 2007.
This interesting book talks about the role of bloggers as
thinkers and online activists in terms of freedom of
speech. The author describes the special role that the
Internet plays in making this a virtual reality.
Schell, B. H. The Internet and Society: A Reference Handbook.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2007.
This book summarizes the background and history of the
Internet, provides biographical sketches of famous people
who have contributed to the growth of the Internet, and
gives details on various forms of U.S. legislation dealing
with Internet security issues.
268
Internet Censorship

Schell, B. H., and C. Martin. Cybercrime: A Reference
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
This book details the history and types of cybercrime; the
issues, controversies, and solutions associated with com-
puter system intrusions; a series of cybercrime legal cases;
and biographical sketches of famous cyber criminals.
Schell, B. H., and C. Martin. Webster’s New World Hacker
Dictionary. New York: Wiley, 2006.
This dictionary describes almost 900 hacker terms, pieces
of legislation aimed at combating malicious hack attacks,
and famous hackers from the past and present.
Schell, B. H., J. L. Dodge, and S. S. Moutsatsos. The Hacking
of America: Who’s Doing It, Why, and How. New York:
Quorum, 2002.
This book describes the 2000 study of hundreds of hack-
ers who attended the DefCon and HOPE conferences.
The study used numerous previously validated inventories
to proﬁle the personalities and behavioral traits of many
self-admitted hackers in an attempt to answer the ques-
tion, Is the viliﬁcation of hackers justiﬁed?
Shimomura, T., and J. Markoff. Takedown: The Pursuit and
Capture of Kevin Mitnick, America’s Most Wanted Computer
Outlaw, by the Man Who Did It. New York: Warner, 1996.
This book describes the capture of Kevin Mitnick by the
authorities with the assistance of White Hat hacker Tsutomu
Shimomura. Besides giving some details on the author’s
personal life, the book also covers some of the technical,
legal, and ethical questions surrounding the Kevin Mitnick
hacking case that put Mitnick on the FBI’s Most Wanted list.
Solove, D. J. The Future of Reputation: Gossip, Rumor, and Privacy
on the Internet. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.
A law professor, the author does an excellent job of
explaining the key legal issues surrounding privacy and
Resources
269

free speech on the Internet. Though most online users
view the Internet as a friendly place to communicate with
others through chat rooms, blogs, and social networking
Web sites, the author maintains that there is a dark side
as well—a lasting image of the Web sites that users visit.
There are trails of information about us that are available
to interested parties who may want to use that informa-
tion in a variety of ways, some good and some bad.
Spinello, R., and H. T. Tavani. Readings in Cyber Ethics.
Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett, 2001.
This book is an anthology of more than 40 essays present-
ing conﬂicting points of view about new moral and ethical
questions raised by Internet usage. Topics include free
speech and content controls, IP protection, privacy and
security protection, and professional ethics and codes of
conduct regarding Internet usage.
Sterling, B. The Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the
Electronic Frontier. New York: Bantam, 1993.
This classic book details the authority crackdowns on
hackers that occurred during the early 1990s. It explains
well the paranoia that hackers have been experiencing
and their fear about being caught for engaging in illegal
hacker exploits.
Stoll, C. The Cuckoo’s Egg: Tracking a Spy through the Maze of
Computer Espionage. New York: Gallery Books, 2005.
Originally published in 1985, this book was written by an
astrophysicist who hunted down a hacker who attempted
to exploit around 450 networks afﬁliated with U.S.
national security. The hunt paid off with Stoll ﬁnding
the culprit: a 25-year-old hacker from Germany named
Markus Hess, allegedly also a member of a spy ring. The
book reads like a thriller and is understandable to those
without a strong computer background.
270
Internet Censorship

Szoka, B., J. Benlevi, R. MacKinnon, J. O. McGinnis, and J.
Kuznicki. Does Internet Activism Work? Washington, DC:
Cato Institute, 2012.
The authors address the intriguing link between technol-
ogy, freedom, and power. The book provides detailed dis-
cussions on how the Internet has provided an interesting
screen for various scenarios incorporating power and lib-
erty, or power and the lack of liberty.
Travis, H. Cyberspace Law: Censorship and Regulation of the
Internet. London: Routledge, 2013.
This book discusses in detail what the American Civil
Liberties Union has labeled the “third era in cyber space,”
whereby ﬁlters change the Internet’s architectural struc-
ture, reducing online free speech. Although the courts
and other organizations insist that liberties online must
be defended, the author says that large, multinational
companies have produced tools and strategies enhancing
Internet censorship.
U.S. Department of Justice. 21st Century Guide to Cybercrime.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 2003.
This resource provides extensive coverage of the Depart-
ment of Justice’s work on computer crime and IP crimes
and discusses the role of the National Infrastructure
Protection Center (NIPC). The topics covered include
searching and seizing computers in criminal investigations,
legal issues in computer crime, international aspects of com-
puter crime, cyber ethics, and sound standards for prosecut-
ing cyber criminals.
Wang, W. Steal This Computer Book 3. San Francisco, CA: No
Starch Press, 2003.
This book has it all: humor, comprehensive topics on IT
security, and valuable insights into the topic of personal
computer security. Written for a wide-ranging audience
Resources
271

from young to more mature readers, this book outlines
key tools and techniques utilized by hackers.
White, A. E. Virtually Obscene: The Case for an Uncensored
Internet. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company, 2006.
This book looks at Internet pornography as a means of
showing its importance in a broader argument about
Internet regulations, community standards of tolerance,
free speech debates, and its adverse impact on minors,
women, and the morals of society, in general.
Yang, G. The Power of the Internet in China: Citizen Activism
Online. New York: Columbia University Press, 2011.
The
author
maintains
that
since
the
mid-1990s,
the Internet has aided creative expression in China,
despite the willingness of the government to control the
Internet’s contents. The author says that Chinese online
activism, like many other present-day online protest
forms, is alive and well, despite the government’s efforts
to effect the contrary. The tradition of protest in China
and a unique partnership with Internet companies has
encouraged an interesting synergy between commerce
and online activism in this jurisdiction.
Zalewski, M. Silence on the Wire: A Field Guide to Passive
Reconnaissance and Indirect Attacks. San Francisco, CA: No
Starch Press, 2005.
There are numerous ways that potential attackers can
intercept information or learn more about the target as
information passes through the Internet. The author dis-
cusses in this book the many kinds of stealth-like insidious
attacks that often go unnoticed by system administrators,
though intrusion detection, anti-virus software, and ﬁre-
walls are available to monitor known or direct attacks.
He provides a comprehensive view of passive reconnais-
sance and indirect attacks and how to protect networks
against them.
272
Internet Censorship

Zuchora-Walske, C. Internet Censorship: Protecting Citizens or
Trampling Freedom? (USA Today’s Debate: Voices and Perspectives).
Minneapolis, MN: Twenty-First Century Books, 2010.
This is an excellent book looking at the topic of Internet
censorship. Besides giving the history of Internet censor-
ship, starting with the Declaration of Independence and
moving into more controversial modern U.S. legislation
like the PATRIOT Act, this book presents some fascinat-
ing real-life cases. It also gives readers insights into privacy
issues, online child safety, intellectual property rights, and
the importance to society of online privacy, security, trust,
and a lack of censorship.
Print: Network Security Magazines and Hacker News
Sites, Internet Freedom White Papers, and Internet-
Related Downloadable Reports
Network Security Magazines and Hacker News Sites
2600: The Hacker Quarterly
http://www.2600.com/
This Web site/magazine is a favorite among hackers. The proud
sponsor of the HOPE hacker conference, this often politically
motivated Web site has two weekly live Net broadcasts: Off
the Wall on Tuesdays and Off the Hook on Wednesdays.
Emmanuel Goldstein also has a featured book for sale called
Dear Hacker, featuring letters sent to him by colleagues in the
Computer Underground.
Anon News
http://anonnews.org/
Anon News is an independent, uncensored, but monitored
news platform for Anonymous, where anyone is welcome to
post news. In October 2012, a popular news piece on this
Resources
273

Web site involved Anonymous’s hacks of the Siemens and
Fujitsu company Web sites.
Infosecnews
http://www.infosecnews.com
This Web site presents the latest news in the IT security world.
For example, on October 12, 2012, Dan Kaplan wrote an
interesting news story “Second LulzSec Member Pleads Out
in Sony Pictures Attack.” Also on this date appeared another
story, by Danielle Walker: “Presidential Election Spurs
Malware-laden CNN Spam.” The Web site features interesting
white papers like “Privileged Password Sharing the ‘Root’ of All
Evil.” There is also a special section for Canadian IT security
news. For example, a story by Danny Bradbury running
September 10, 2012, had this heading: “Canadian Energy
Companies under Threat from Anonymous, Say Agencies.”
LulzSec
News c/net
http://www.news.com
News c/net is all about information technology. Under the
Security and Privacy tab for October 2012 were such timely
articles as “Pre-emptive cyberattack possible, Panetta warns,”
“Anonymous turns its back on WikiLeaks after Paypal dis-
pute,” and “Mozilla rereleases Firefox 16 after ﬁxing critical
ﬂaw.” In 2014, fascinating topics include: “Colbert turns his
funny gun on Snowden in RSA keynote” and “Yahoo, ICQ
chats still vulnerable to government snoops.”
PC World
http://www.pcworld.com
This IT magazine’s Web site is anything but boring. There are
group chat showdowns that featured, for example, “Which
274
Internet Censorship

instant messenger service is best?” There are also some very
interesting review features, such as “Hacker rift: Anonymous
takes offense at WikiLeaks.”
Security Magazine
http://www.secmag.com
This online magazine has featured stories on current IT security
issues. For example, in October 2012, a feature story was “How
cloud computing changes risk management”; in Septem-
ber 2012, there was “Making a difference in fraud detection”;
and in October 2012, under the Critical Infrastructures tab, there
was “Secretary of Defense says future cyberattacks could rival 9/
11.” In 2014, interesting stories like the following have been fea-
tured: “U.S. businesses lead the pack in cybersecurity readiness”
and “Three in four Britons concerned about Internet privacy
according to a new poll.”
ZD Net
http://www.zdnet.com
This online high-tech magazine has news, blogs, and white papers
dealing with secure transactions over the Internet. Moreover, the
magazine’s white paper directory is purportedly one of the largest
online libraries containing free IT updates and numerous case
studies on data management, IT management, networking, com-
munications, enterprise applications, and IT privacy, security,
and trust issues. There is also a special section devoted to cloud
computing and data centers. Under the Security heading are
interesting, timely stories like; “IT security in the Snowden era”
and “Snowden’s legacy and the NSA of everything.”
Internet Freedom White Papers—A Sampling
ACLU. “Fahrenheit 451.2: Is cyberspace burning?” 2002,
http://www.aclu.org/technology-and-liberty/fahrenheit
-4512-cyberspace-burning (accessed March 17).
Resources
275

Eber-Schmid, N. “The effect of new media censorship on the
world-NMI White Paper.” 2009, http://www.newmedia.
org/articles/the-effect-of-new-media-censorship-on-the
-world—nmi-white-paper.html (accessed June 27).
Electronic Frontiers Australia. “Internet censorship: Law &
policy around the world.” 2002, https://www.efa.org.au/
Issues/Censor/cens3.html (accessed March 28).
Friedman, A. “Cybersecurity in the balance: Weighing the risks
of the PROTECT IP Act and the Stop Online Piracy Act.”
2013, http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2011/11/
15-cybersecurity-friedman (accessed March 17).
Global Internet Freedom Consortium. “Defeat Internet cen-
sorship: Overview of advanced technologies and products.”
2007, http://www.internetfreedom.org/archive/Defeat
_Internet_Censorship_White_Paper.pdf (accessed
November 21).
Google. “Enabling trade in the era of information technologies:
Breaking down barriers to the free ﬂow of information.”
2010, http://static.googleusercontent.com/external
_content/untrusted_dlcp/www.google.com/en//google
blogs/pdfs/trade_free_ﬂow_of_information.pdf (accessed
November 15).
Hannemyr, G. “Cyber-censorship in Norway.” 2012, http://
hannemyr.com/en/censorship01.php (accessed January 24).
Information Ofﬁce of the State Council of the People’s
Republic of China. “The Internet in China.” 2010, http://
china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7093508.htm
(accessed June 8).
Synthesio. “Social media and censorship in China.” 2011,
http://synthesio.com/corporate/en/2011/case-studies/
social-media-and-censorship-in-china/ (accessed January).
Weinstein, L. “Censorship, governments, and ﬂagellating
Google.” 2011, http://lauren.vortex.com/censorship
276
Internet Censorship

-governments-google-white-paper-05-04-2011.html
(accessed May 4).
Key Internet-Related Downloadable Reports
Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA).
2013, http://www.caida.org/home/ (accessed March 25).
This Web site provides tools and analyses promoting the
engineering and ongoing maintenance of a sustainable, scalable
international Internet infrastructure. Two interesting 2014
papers on the Web site include: “Analysis of country-wide
Internet outages caused by censorship” and “A coordinated
view of the temporal evolution of large-scale Internet events.”
Freedom House. “Freedom on the Net 2012.” 2012, http://
www.freedomhouse.org/sites/default/ﬁles/FOTN%
202012%20FINAL.pdf (accessed September 24). This
downloadable report gives detailed “Free” or “Not Free”
Internet ratings for jurisdictions globally.
Internet Trafﬁc Report. 2013, http://internettrafﬁcreport.com/
(accessed March 25). This Internet trafﬁc is an ongoing
“living” report that details how the Web site it monitors
ﬂows of data through the Internet worldwide, with displays
of values between 0 and 100. Higher numbers indicate a
faster Internet with reliable connections
Mandiant. “APT1: Exposing one of China’s cyber espionage
units.” 2013, http://intelreport.mandiant.com/Mandiant
_APT1_Report.pdf (accessed February 19). This 60-page
report outlines the ﬁndings of the ﬁrm’s tracking of China’s
most sophisticated hacking groups Comment Crew and
Shanghai Group, which have allegedly stolen corporate
proprietary information from the networks of large
companies in North America and elsewhere.
Renesys. 2013, http://www.renesys.com/(accessed March 25).
Renesys, an Internet intelligence authority, provides an array
Resources
277

of downloadable data and observations on the global state of
the Internet. Recent 2014 observations include: “Syria,
Venezuela, Ukraine: Internet under ﬁre” and “Protests lead
to outage in Thailand.”
Nonprint: Web Sites of Internet Openness
Advocacy Groups
http://www.aclu.org/
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). The U.S. founder of
the ACLU, Roger Baldwin, once said, “So long as we have enough
people in this country willing to ﬁght for their rights, we’ll be
called a democracy.” ACLU members are found in courts, legisla-
tures, and communities defending individual rights and liberties
that are guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution and various U.S.
laws. The ACLU defends the First Amendment (guaranteeing
freedom of speech, association, and assembly; freedom of the
press, and freedom of religion) and is headquartered on Broad
Street in New York City. The ACLU has been active since 1920.
https://citizenlab.org/about/
The Citizen Lab. The Citizen Lab, located at the University of
Toronto in Ontario, Canada, is housed at the Munk School of
Global Affairs. Its mission is to advance research and develop-
ment aimed at the crossover between digital media, human
rights, and IT security on a global basis. By using experts in a
variety of ﬁelds—political science, computer science, and engi-
neering—the group collaborates with other researchers to mon-
itor, analyze, and determine the impact of political powers in
the virtual world and to promote Internet openness.
https://www.eff.org/
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF). With their main
ofﬁce in San Francisco, California, the EFF is an organization
that was rooted in the summer of 1990, primarily as a reaction
to threats against free speech. The EFF continues to defend
278
Internet Censorship

parties whose rights they believe have been infringed in cyber-
space. For example, when Russian Dmitry Sklyrov was arrested
in Las Vegas at the DefCon hacker convention, the EFF
stepped in to defend his rights and freedoms.
www.freedomhouse.org
Freedom House. With ofﬁces on Wall Street in New York and
on Connecticut Avenue in Washington, D.C., Freedom House
is a prestigious, independent private organization supporting
the expansion of freedom throughout the world. Their mem-
bers believe that freedom—whether it be online or on land—is
possible only in democratic political systems in which govern-
ments are accountable to their own people.
http://www.nacdl.org/about.aspx
National
Association
of
Criminal
Defense
Lawyers
(NACDL). Their Web site saying that they are “liberty’s last
chance,” the NACDL is located in the United States and has
the mission of ensuring justice and due process for individuals
accused of a variety of crimes, including hacking. Founded in
1958, NACDL has about 40,000 defense lawyers, judges, pub-
lic defenders, U.S. military defense lawyers, and law professors
located in 28 countries—all dedicated to preserving fairness
within the criminal justice system.
http://opennet.net/
The OpenNet Initiative. The goal of the OpenNet Initiative is
to provide information to the world about the various ways and
means that countries around the globe either allow or deny access
to information to their citizens. Their mission is to identify and
document Internet ﬁltering and surveillance and provide a global
forum for opening discussion on these issues.
http://publicknowledge.org/
Public Knowledge. With their ofﬁce located at 1818 N Street,
NW in Washington, DC, the mission of Public Knowledge is
Resources
279

to promote openness of the Internet and the public’s access to
knowledge, as well as creativity through “balanced copyright”
(i.e., maintaining and protecting the rights of online consumers
as they use innovative technology legally).
http://en.rsf.org/who-we-are-12-09-2012,32617.html
Reporters Without Borders (RWB). While they concern them-
selves with the concept of Internet censorship, RWB’s scope and
mission extends far beyond Internet practices. While the RWB
does keep a list of Internet enemies—deﬁned by them as coun-
tries creating and maintaining the most censorious policies and
restrictions on the Internet worldwide—the association also
maintains a record of the journalists and netizens who have been
killed or imprisoned (often without a fair trial). Reporters
Without Borders was started in France in 1985 by four journal-
ists: Robert Ménard, Rémy Loury, Jacques Molénat, and
Émilien Jubineau. This association, registered as a nonproﬁt
organization in France since 1995, immediately took on an
international dimension and has remained that way ever since.
Nonprint: Internet Censorship Videos
Biden on Internet Freedom Anti SOPA
Date: 2012
Length: 2 minutes
This short video gives Vice President Joe Biden’s candid views on
why the SOPA legislation is detrimental to the United States.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZXS5lIV2XNs
Hackers Strike After U.S. Internet Piracy Clampdown
Date: 2012
Length: 1 minute
This short video discusses why the loose hacker cell known as
Anonymous hacked the Web sites of the U.S. Department of
280
Internet Censorship

Justice, the FBI, and the White House as a sign of Internet cen-
sorship following the arrest of members of MegaUpload.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruSlO_-CZMI
iFI: Internet Freedom is Love
Date: 2012
Length: 3 minutes
This video is actually a musical album dedicated to the sharing
of emotion and sentiment across huge distances without cen-
sorship or infringement.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=rE
kK00ZvVrU
Internet Freedom and Authoritarianism: Author Rebecca MacKinnon
Date: 2012
Length: 9 minutes
This intriguing video talks about the worldwide struggle for
Internet freedom by the author of the book Consent of the
Network. The author was a former reporter in China in 1995,
when the Internet ﬁrst arrived there. Her talk also focuses on
the role that authoritarian systems have played in censoring
content on the Internet, and why.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LuWQMeNkJBU
Internet Freedom in Danger After Court Ruling
Date: 2010
Length: 4 minutes
The video discusses the controversies around a ruling in the
United States against the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) on the issue of net neutrality and why Internet freedom
is in danger.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbAoRZJyoJI
Resources
281

Internet Regulation, Internet Freedom, Internet Activism
Date: 2011
Length: 30 minutes
This interesting video discusses some controversial political
movements suggested in the United States, including taxing
services on the Internet.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bOYAodmVcFQ
The Internet of Tomorrow
Date: 2006
Length: 1 minute
This extremely short video is motivational in nature, in that it
advocates net neutrality. It cites concerns about the future of
the Internet if high-tech companies do not support the critical
aspects of freedom of information worldwide.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8CHzuSTowRg
Protecting Internet Freedom and Privacy
Date: 2012
Length: 6 minutes
Senator Rand Paul talks about the continual erosion of the
Fourth Amendment in the United States, considering the
present-day reality that considerable personal information of
citizens is held by third parties. He discusses key ramiﬁcations
of the PATRIOT Act.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=377-mueo21c
Hillary Clinton Secretary Clinton on “Internet Rights and
Wrongs: Choices and Challenges in a Networked World”
Date: 2011
Length: 44 minutes
Secretary Clinton speaks on the George Washington University
campus to an audience interested in Internet openness and
Internet freedom. Secretary Clinton speaks to the importance
of global events like the Egyptian and Iranian governments
282
Internet Censorship

shutting down citizens’ access to the Internet during periods of
protest and homeland disputes.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pa-8z2p0SfA
Secretary Clinton Speaks on Internet Freedom
Date: 2010
Length: 60 minutes
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton eloquently speaks about the
importance of Internet freedom as a means of safeguarding a
series of freedoms for nations in the networked cyber world.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccGzOJHE1rw
Secretary Clinton Speaks on U.S.-China Relations in the 21st Century
Date: 2011
Length: 40 minutes
Secretary Clinton discusses the future of U.S.-China relations,
emphasizing the importance of allowing citizens in China to
have open access to the Internet and to respecting citizens’
human rights and dignity as they try to access this information.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yv4qLYCE3XI
Sopa Pipa Acta & Hr 1981 Vs Internet Freedom
Date: 2012
Length: 5 minutes
This brief video outlines why the passage of SOPA and PIPA
would have adversely impacted on Internet freedom in the
United States.
http://www.viduba.com/video:
QdlTJRleONlVGJFMWtmVrRmeFdXWn1TP
Stop ACTA! 2012 Internet Freedom!
Date: 2012
Length: 2 minutes
This video discusses the negative role that the passage of
ACTA (Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement) would have on
Resources
283

Internet freedom in at least 39 countries that secretly engaged
in its design and promotion—including the United States,
Mexico, and Morocco. If passed, the ISPs who give citizens
around the world access to the Internet would then become
known as “the copyright police.”
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXGCoudsNAw
Nonprint: Web Sites of Companies Offering
Anti-virus Software
Two kinds of virus-scanning software exist to protect computer
networks. One type is used on individual computers, while the
other scans trafﬁc going to and from the Internet at a gateway—
looking for potentially harmful code. Both types of software
not only try to remove any attached viruses, worms, or trojans
from software programs and documents but also inform users
about some actions being taken.
The Web sites listed below offer a wide range of anti-virus
and anti-malware products for gateway-based and local installa-
tions. These products differ primarily in their licensing and
packaging schemes. These products are regularly tested by the
computer security companies producing them, and the compa-
nies’ Web site content is, therefore, continually updated to
reﬂect the ﬁndings of those tests. Most of the companies listed
also provide information services to their customers as well as
to the public about newly released malware on the Internet.
The Web site content also details known countermeasures,
commonly called patches or ﬁxes.
F-Secure
http://www.f-secure.com
The F-Secure 2013 package is part of an award-winning prod-
uct line for this U.S.-based security software company. For
example, the F-Secure Internet Security 2013 product line
was the AV-Test Best Protection 2012 Award. The 2013 secu-
rity package guards against existing and emerging threats to
284
Internet Censorship

computer networks—and it has gone to the cloud. The F-Secure
Web site says that it will keep companies’ and government net-
works secure using real-time cloud-based technology to guard
against viruses, spyware, and other forms of malicious attacks.
What’s more, the company produces a user-friendly ﬁrewall to
thwart hack attacks, block spam and phishing attacks, and pre-
vent identity theft. For the home computer user, the F-secure
protection package allows parents to block harmful sites from
children or block children’s uncontrolled surﬁng.
Corporate headquarters: San Jose, California, and Helsinki,
Finland
Network Associates—McAfee
http://www.mcafee.com
The McAfee, Inc. Web site has this clever saying: “Safety is not
a privilege. It is a right.” To this end, the new McAfee anti-virus
protection package is marketed as a total defense protection
suite that has “best of breed” rootkit protection, quick-scan
and one-step easy installation, and automatic scanning of USB
drives. This company was founded in 1987 by John McAfee
and continues to make technology advances annually.
Corporate headquarters: Santa Clara, California
SafeNet
http://www.safenet-inc.com/?aldn=true
SafeNet is one of the largest data security companies in the
world. More than 25,000 government agencies and businesses
across 100 companies rely on this company’s products to help
safeguard their networks—whether it be data protection, two-
factor authentication, cloud security, cybersecurity, software
security, or software licensing.
Corporate headquarters: Belcamp, Maryland
Resources
285

Sophos
The Sophos company markets their suite of products as being able
to effectively protect networks, servers, data, endpoints, and
mobile devices. The goal of the company is to eliminate malware,
protect data on corporate and home networks, prove compliance,
and protect mobile devices from hack attacks. The company
claims, “We make the Internet safer and more productive.” Their
Web site also provides up-to-date IT security news and trends.
Corporate headquarters: Abingdon, Oxford, and Burlington,
Massachusetts
Symantec
Symantec lets online users become better informed about the
Norton AntiVirus protection product line to help them safeguard
their networks against spyware and virus invasion. Thus, the
Norton Internet Security and Norton 360 products are aimed at
providing the ultimate virus protection—complete with backup
and 2 GB online storage. The company Web site offers online
visitors interesting videos, such as this one with the attention-
getting message for enterprise IT security administrators: “Data
center down! Is your business prepared to recover?”
Corporate headquarters: Mountain View, California
Trend Micro
http://www.trendmicro.com
The Trend Micro Web site opens with this attention-getting sen-
tence: “Securing your journey to the cloud.” It goes on to remark
to visitors: “Relax. We make it easier to secure your digital life”
and “Trend Micro Smart Protection Network unleashes big data
in the ﬁght against ‘Tomorrow’s Threats.’ ” Founded in 1988 in
the United States, Steve Chang is the cofounder and chair of the
corporation, and Eva Chen is the cofounder and CEO.
Corporate headquarters: Tokyo, Japan
286
Internet Censorship

Nonprint: Web Sites of Companies Offering Firewall,
Web-Filtering, and Web-Filtering Bypass Software
Businesses and government agencies, alike, rely on ﬁrewalls as
well as Web-ﬁltering software. Thus, by using ﬁrewalls, both
can
literally
pick
and
choose
which
Web
pages
or
even entire domains to block. This way, companies and
government agencies can avoid blocking Web sites that
employees or citizens need to access legitimately. Even in
countries deemed to be free, when an online user tries to
access a restricted Web site, he or she will see a message that
typically includes the option of petitioning the network
administrator to unblock access if he or she feels that the
Web site is wrongfully blocked. Afterward, the network
administrator can adjust which Web sites are restricted
through ﬁrewall settings.
Web Sites of Companies Offering Firewall Software
The ﬁrewall suppliers listed below have all provided well-
designed products for these objectives. What is equally interest-
ing is that these companies have created new technologies
beyond ﬁrewalls to contend with emerging trends like cloud
computing and RFID tracking and control.
Check Point
http://www.checkpt.com
When one goes on the Check Point Web site, the company
motto appears: “Helping retailers grow proﬁtably.” The company
has speciﬁc IT solutions for retailers in these market segments:
apparel, food markets, warehouses, pharmacies, hardware stores,
and specialty stores. Besides providing protections, the company’s
solutions offer retailers in-stock information on their product line
inventory.
Corporate headquarters: Thorofare, New Jersey
Resources
287

Cisco
http://www.cisco.com
The company’s products are wide ranging and include applica-
tion networking services, data center automation and manage-
ment, blade switches, networking software, physical security
software, routers, uniﬁed computing and servers, and video
conferencing software. The company’s services are also wide-
ranging and include borderless network services, data center
and virtualization services, routing and security services, storage
networking services, and WebEx collaboration services.
Corporate headquarters: San Jose, California
DellSonicWALL
http://www.sonicwall.com
In 2012, DellSonicWALL Next-Generation ﬁrewalls earned
recognition for the product line from three of the industry’s
most inﬂuential third-party evaluators. The company’s network
and security products include secure remote access, anti-spam
and email security solutions, backup and recovery solutions, man-
agement and reporting solutions, and endpoint security solutions.
Originally founded in 1991 under the name SonicWALL, the
company was acquired by Dell in 2012.
Corporate headquarters: San Jose, California
Web Sites of Companies Offering Web-Filtering Software
Most Web ﬁlters use two main techniques to block Internet
content: blacklists (Web sites designated as undesirable) and key-
word blocking (whereby the software scans a Web page to deter-
mine if certain keywords exist and if the Web page is deemed to
be inappropriate, the users’ access is blocked). The SmartFilter
software originally made by the Secure Computing company in
California and then bought by McAfee in 2008 is reportedly used
288
Internet Censorship

in countries like Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Iran, Bahrain, the
United States, and the United Kingdom. The WebSense Web ﬁl-
ter is reportedly used in Myanmar and Yemen, and the Canadian-
produced Netsweeper is reportedly used in Qatar, the United
Arab Emirates, and Yemen. The company Web sites for these
Web-ﬁltering software products are given below.
Netsweeper
http://netsweeper.com/what-we-do/
The Netsweeper software ﬁlters Web content so that compa-
nies can better manage threats against their networks by con-
trolling access to content deemed to be inappropriate. This
company’s solutions use a cloud-based artiﬁcial intelligence
categorization engine with conﬁguration and administrations
tools allowing organizations to tailor solutions to their particu-
lar needs. Also, the Web ﬁltering is said to be smart, in that it
continuously learns and improves its capabilities by recognizing
the usage patterns of employees and millions of other
Netsweeper users worldwide.
Corporate headquarters: Guelph, Ontario, Canada
SmartFilter by McAfee
http://www.mcafee.com/us/products/smartﬁlter.aspx
The McAfee company, known for its anti-virus software, pro-
duces the SmartFilter software to prevent companies’ employ-
ees from accessing Web sites known to expose the network to
viruses, malware, and other security issues. Also, the software
is said to reduce legal liability and to save bandwidth for
business-related activities rather than for those activities per-
ceived to adversely impact employees’ productivity. McAfee
says that the software has predeﬁned ﬁltering policies for over
35 million Web sites in almost 100 categories.
Corporate headquarters: Santa Clara, California
Resources
289

WebSense by GuardSense.com
http://www.guardsense.com/Web-Filter.asp
The WebSense Web-ﬁltering software has been on the market
for over 15 years, making it one of the oldest products being
used to control employees’ access to Web sites deemed to have
inappropriate content. There are many more current versions
of the software product that deal more effectively with today’s
sophisticated network attack agents.
Corporate headquarters: Irvine, California
The following companies offer software products to intro-
duce ﬁltering on Web content in order to keep children safe
from predators while they are online:
CyberSitter by Solid Oak Software
http://cybersitter.com/
Solid Oak Software, located in Santa Barbara, California,
makes CyberSitter. CyberSitter produces ﬁltering software to
keep children safe while online. It blocks inappropriate adult-
only content, certain social networking sites and online games,
and other customized Web sites that parents feel are inappro-
priate for viewing by their children. This software also records
Facebook chats and posts.
Corporate headquarters: Santa Barbara California
Net Nanny
http://www.netnanny.com/
The Net Nanny software is designed to be a ﬁltering device that
parentscanusetokeeptheirchildrensafewhileonlinebydetermin-
ingtheuseofwordsorphrasesincontext.Ifthewordbreastappears,
for example, the software is said to be able to differentiate between
when it is used in a normative sense and when it is used in a porno-
graphic sense. If it is used inappropriately, that Web site is blocked.
Corporate headquarters: Salt Lake City, Utah
290
Internet Censorship

Web Site of a Company Offering Web-Filtering
Bypass Software
Psiphon
http://psiphon.ca/
The Psiphon open source software, produced in Canada, has
been put to use to bypass Internet censors that have been put into
effect by government authorities in certain jurisdictions. In fact, it
is estimated that about 25,000 to 40,000 Syrians currently bypass
their country’s sensors daily using this software. Also, in Iran, it is
estimated that about 150,000 Internet users can access online
services like Facebook, Twitter, and Skype with this software.
Researchers from the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab in
Ontario, Canada, and the SecDev Group devised the software
in 2004 and then took it to market in 2008.
Corporate headquarters: Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Nonprint: U.S. Government Agencies and Independent
Organizations Fighting Internet Abuses
The FBI, IC3, the National White Collar Crime Center
(NWC3), the Department of Homeland Security, the NIPC,
and the National Computer Security Center (NCSC) are
involved in the ﬁght against malicious hacking in the United
States, besides the U.S. Department of Justice. An independent
organization with similar motivations includes the United
States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (U.S.-CERT).
The locators for these U.S. government agencies and indepen-
dent organizations are given below.
The Department of Homeland Security
http://www.dhs.gov/
Homeland Security Operations Center
Washington, DC
Telephone: (202) 282-8101
Resources
291

The creation of the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) was the most signiﬁcant transformation of the U.S.
government since 1947, when Harry S. Truman merged
the various branches of the U.S. armed forces with the
Department of Defense to better coordinate the nation’s
defense against military threats. The DHS represents a similar
high-tech consolidation, both in style and in substance.
In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of 9/11, President
George W. Bush decided that 22 previously disparate domestic
homeland security agencies needed to be coordinated into one
department to better protect the nation against threats. Thus,
the new department’s priority objective was to protect the nation
against further terrorist attacks. Component agencies assist in ana-
lyzing threats and intelligence, guarding borders and airports, pro-
tecting critical infrastructure, and coordinating the responses to
future emergencies. The DHS is dedicated to protecting the rights
of American citizens and enhancing public services (such as natu-
ral disaster assistance) by dedicating ofﬁces to them, besides pro-
viding a better-coordinated defense of the U.S. homeland.
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The function of the FBI is to protect American citizens of all
ages from threats such as internal and external terrorists, gangs,
and cyber criminals. To this end, the FBI has taken on a proac-
tive role of ﬁghting crime to present and emerging threats as a
means of keeping US citizens safe.
http://www.fbi.gov
J. Edgar Hoover Building
935 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC
Telephone: (202) 324-2000
Internet Crime Complaint Center or IC3
http://www.ic3.gov
The IC3 accepts complaints about Internet crime from either
the victim or a third party representing the victim. Many of the
292
Internet Censorship

complaints this government agency deals with involve online
fraud. The IC3 is a partnership between the FBI and the
National White Collar Crime Center. The Web site gives
Internet crime–prevention tips and outlines current reported
trends (such as the Nigerian Letter scheme, also known as 419).
National White Collar Crime Center
http://www.nw3c.org
Telephone: (803) 273-NW3C
The NWC3 is a U.S.-based center that provides a support
system for law enforcement and regulatory agencies in the pre-
vention, investigation, and prosecution of high-tech crimes.
This agency conducts specialized training in computer foren-
sics, conducts research on the many facets of white collar crime,
and partners with the IC3. The NWC3 was formed in 1978,
when it was known as the Leviticus Project (whose mission it
was to investigate crime dealing with the coal industry), but
the agency’s name was changed to NW3C in 1992 to reﬂect
an expanded mandate involving high-tech crimes.
NIPC
Information Analysis Infrastructure Protection
Washington, DC
Telephone: (202) 323-3205
Founded in 1998, NIPC was initially housed in the FBI
headquarters. In 2003, it was moved to the Department of
Homeland Security. NIPC is the government agency charged
with safeguarding the U.S. infrastructure networks from attack
by hackers and malware.
The NIPC issues three levels of infrastructure warnings:
• Level one assessments provide general information about
nonspeciﬁc threats.
• Level two advisories address particular dangers requiring
greater preparedness or a change in posture.
• Level three alerts warn of major and speciﬁc threats.
Resources
293

For example, in 2002, the NIPC issued a level one assess-
ment warning against possible hacktivism exploits connected
with upcoming meetings of the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank.
NSA National Computer Security Center
NSA INFOSEC Service Center
INFOSEC Awareness, Attn: Y13
Fort George G. Meade, MD
Telephone: (800) 688-6115
Founded in 1981, the NCSC provides solutions, products,
and services and conducts defense information operations to
keep the critical U.S. infrastructure safe from attack. A part of
the National Computer Security Agency, the NCSC provides
information systems security standards and solutions.
Working in partnership with industry, academic institutions,
and other U.S. government agencies, the NCSC initiates needed
research and develops and publishes standards and criteria for
trusted information systems. The NCSC also promotes informa-
tion systems security awareness, education, and technology trans-
fer through cooperative efforts, public seminars, and an annual
National Information Systems Security conference.
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team
http://www.us-cert.gov
U.S.-CERT is jointly run by the Department of Homeland
Security and CERT at Carnegie-Mellon University. Their mis-
sion is to coordinate previously dispersed efforts to counter
threats from all forms of cybercrime. Therefore, U.S.-CERT
does the following:
• Analyzes
and
attempts
to reduce
cyber
threats
and
vulnerabilities
• Disseminates cyber threat warning information
• Coordinates incident responses
294
Internet Censorship

Individuals wanting to subscribe to CERT’s mailing lists and
feeds in order to get the latest information on vulnerability and
threat information or wanting to report a known vulnerability
are encouraged to enter their Web site: http://www.kb.cert
.org/vuls/html/report-a-vulnerability/
U.S. Department of Justice
10th and Constitution Ave. NW
Criminal Division
John C. Keeney Building, Suite 600
Washington, DC
Telephone: (202) 514-1026
http://www.cybercrime.gov
Resources
295


7
Chronology
This chapter delineates in chronological order selected Internet
development and Internet censorship events, beginning with the
Internet’s humble beginnings (the 1940s through the 1960s);
moving to the Internet’s adolescent years (the 1970s and the
1980s), where the dark side of computer hacking often stole the
media headlines; and concluding with the Internet’s adult years
(from 1990 to the present), where we begin to understand how
various governments around the world justify the need to censor
Web site content as a means of keeping their online citizens safe.
The Internet’s Humble Beginnings (the 1940s through
the 1960s)
1947–1948
John Bardeen and Walter Brattain develop
transistors.
1958–1959
Jack Kilby and Robert Noyce develop integrated
circuits, aiding in the further development of computers. With
the development of integrated circuits, instead of making tran-
sistors one by one, several transistors can be made at the same
time and on the same piece of semiconductor. Furthermore,
297
Protesters demand political asylum for whistle-blower Edward Snowden
during a Chaos Communication rally against governmental monitoring and
surveillance in Hamburg, Germany on December 28, 2013. (David Fischer
Baglietto/Demotix/Corbis)

other electric components like resistors, capacitors, and diodes
can be made using the same process and materials.
1960s
Moore’s law is recognized to denote this huge process
in circuit fabrication, named after Gordon Moore, a pioneer
in the integrated circuit ﬁeld and the entrepreneurial founder
of the Intel Corporation. Though accepting these advances in
hardware technology, the question of how to hook up and share
the data between computers remains. Also during this period,
the revolutionary
packet-switching
technique
invented by
Leonard Kleinrock gains popularity among more computer users,
and Paul Baran at the Rand Institute begins researching how to
use packet switching for secure voice over military networks.
1969
The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network, or
ARPAnet, is created to be the initial cross-continent, high-
speed computer network built by the U.S. Department of
Defense as a digital communications experiment. ARPAnet
allows artiﬁcial intelligence researchers in dispersed areas to
exchange information with incredible speed and accuracy.
Also, the standard operating system UNIX is developed
by Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson, researchers at Bell
Laboratory. UNIX is considered to be a thing of beauty because
its standard user and programming interface assists users with
computing, word processing, and networking requirements.
The Internet’s Adolescent Years: The 1970s and 1980s
1970
The civil rights and women’s rights movements are in
full swing in the United States, and at this time, only about
100,000 computers are in use.
1971
One of the forefathers of the Internet who worked
on the ARPAnet, Ray Tomlinson, gives to society one of the
greatest online communications gifts in Internet history: the
@ symbol for email.
A Canadian professor at the University of Toronto named
Stephen Cook publishes Cook’s theorem, identifying a large
298
Internet Censorship

class of computational search problems that at this time would
take the largest, most powerful computers millions of years to
solve. This theorem helps researchers make huge strides in the
cryptography ﬁeld, critical for secure online transactions.
1972
The National Center for Supercomputing Applications
creates the telnet application for remote login, making it easier
for users to log into remote machines.
David Boggs and Robert Metcalfe invent Ethernet at the
Xerox Corporation, making it possible to connect computers
in a local area network.
1973
The ﬁle transfer protocol is developed, simplifying the
transfer of information between networked machines. During this
time, American computer experts believe that the bigger the com-
puter, the more powerful it can be. But in this year, a Canadian
mathematician and business genius, Mers Kutt, goes against the
mainstream and argues that smaller is better; he releases onto the
North American market the world’s ﬁrst personal computer
(PC). With just 8 kilobytes of memory, the PC costs $5,000 and
gets its power from a small chip rather than from vacuum tubes.
1975
Americans Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak start the
Apple computer company using the simplistic and user-friendly
BASIC computer language in their machines and placing the
roots for the soon-to-blossom home use computer market.
Americans Bill Gates and Paul Allen start the Microsoft
Corporation, producing innovative software products.
1976
Secure transactions using the Internet get a power
boost because Whitﬁeld Difﬁe and Martin Hellman create the
Difﬁe-Hellman public key algorithms.
1978
Though the Internet is still missing a networking social
club, two men from Chicago, Randy Suess and Ward
Christiensen create the ﬁrst computer bulletin board system
(BBS), the root of modern-day online chat rooms.
The transmission control protocol (TCP) is split into the
TCP and IP (Internet protocol), a critical event in the evolution
of the Internet.
Chronology
299

1982
California IT pioneers Scott McNealy, Bill Joy, Andy
Bechtolsheim, and Vinod Khosla start the Sun Microsystems
company, based on the assumption that UNIX running on
relatively inexpensive hardware is a grand solution for a wide
range of applications. As a result, the Sun networks start to
replace older and less efﬁcient computer systems like the VAX
and other time-sharing systems that take up a huge amount of
ﬂoor space in large companies and research universities.
On a happy note, Scott Falhman creates the ﬁrst online
smiley,☺, and William Gibson coins the term cyberspace.
Also, the simple mail transfer protocol is published, which
relates to how email is transmitted between host computers
and users.
1983
The telnet protocol is published, allowing individuals
with UNIX to log onto other computers on the Internet.
1984
Computer hacker Eric Corley (a.k.a. Emmanuel
Goldstein) starts 2600: The Hacker Quarterly to give hackers a
venue for expressing technical and political issues in the virtual
world.
Steven Levy’s popular book Hackers: Heroes of the Computer
Revolution is released, letting those in mainstream society gain
some key insights into what goes on in the then-secret
Computer Underground. Also during this year, Fred Cohen
uses the term computer virus to indicate a cyberspace vandal that
corrupts or erases information stored on computers. In the
business realm, the Cisco Systems company is started by a small
number of scientists at Stanford University.
1985
The ﬁrst Web site domain name is registered and
assigned, American Online is incorporated, and the Free
Software Foundation is started by Richard Stallman so that
computer users can use, study, copy, change, and redistribute
computer programs as a means of promoting the development
of free software. This is the year that the term hacker is intro-
duced into mainstream society to indicate a well-meaning
300
Internet Censorship

individual who enjoys learning the details of computer systems
and how to stretch their capabilities.
1986
The term criminal hacker is used in the British press
when Robert Schifreen and Steven Gold break into a text infor-
mation retrieval system operated by BT Prestel; they leave a
message for his Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh on his
network mailbox.
U.S. Congress passes the controversial Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act as a means of preventing fraud aimed at or com-
pleted with computers. The Internet Engineering Task Force
starts to act as a technical coordination forum for individuals
working on ARPAnet, the U.S. Defense Data Network, and
the Internet core gateway system.
1988
Robert Morris, a U.S. graduate student, accidentally
unleashes onto the Internet the ﬁrst Internet worm. As a result,
the Computer Emergency Response Team/CERT Coordination
Centre is created at Carnegie Mellon University to coordinate com-
munications among homeland security experts during emergencies.
1989
Herbert Zinn (“Shadowhawk”) is the ﬁrst minor to be
convicted in the United States as a violator of the U.S.
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, after he cracks the American
Telephone and Telegraph computer network and that of the
U.S. Department of Defense—getting him nine months in
prison and a ﬁne of $10,000.
In Germany, a group of hackers called the Chaos Computer
Club make international headlines after they exploit the U.S.
government’s computer network and sell the operating system
source code to the Soviets. During this year, only about
90,000 computers are linked to the Internet.
The Internet’s Adult Years: 1990 to the Present
1990
Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau develop the pro-
tocols that become the World Wide Web, a browser-editor that
looks very one dimensional. Then the browser is renamed
Chronology
301

Nexus to stop the confusion between the software program
and the more abstract information space that is spelled
World Wide Web (with spaces between the words).
During this period, tech-savvy individuals can ﬁnally afford
to buy PCs similar in power and storage to those of the clunky
computers of the 1980s, but the software for these PCs remains
expensive.
1993
There are more than 1,000,000 computers linked to
the Internet.
1994
Two Stanford University students named David Filo
and Jerry Yang start a cyber guide in a campus trailer to track
their interests on the Internet, the start of the Yahoo! (Yet
Another Hierarchical Ofﬁcious Oracle) search engine.
1994
The term hacktivist becomes a reality when individuals
squash the U.S. government’s highly controversial Clipper
proposal, which would have placed strong encryption (the tech-
nical process of scrambling information into something unin-
telligible) under the government’s control.
1995
Jeffrey Bezos launches the ﬁrst online bookstore, later
to be known as Amazon. Also this year, Microsoft releases its
Windows 95 software product, making software prices more
affordable for home PC owners.
1996
The World Wide Web now has 16 million hosts. Also in
this year, the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act
is enacted in the United States, amending the Computer Fraud
and Abuse Act to enhance the power of this law.
1998
In
the
United
States,
the
Digital
Millennium
Copyright Act is passed as a means of coping with emerging
digital technologies and their unlawful disabling or bypass by
tech-savvy individuals in the mainstream.
1999
The Melissa virus is created by David Smith and
released onto the Internet, infecting millions of computer sys-
tems in the United States and Europe and costing at least
$80 million in damages to computers worldwide. Also in this
302
Internet Censorship

year, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act is passed in the United
States to provide limited privacy protection against the sale of
individuals’ private information following mergers of ﬁnancial
institutions and insurance companies.
2000
There is worldwide panic about data losses resulting
from Y2K computer glitches—which, as it turns out, never
did happen. Also this year, the world learns about Canada’s
hacker headline maker Michael Calce “Maﬁaboy”—showing
the world the damage that can be caused by denial-of-service
attacks. Through his exploits, Maﬁaboy brought down high-
proﬁle Web sites like Amazon, eBay, and Yahoo!
2001
The fears of a “cyber apocalypse” arises as hackers
attack a computer system controlling the distribution of elec-
tricity in California, an attack said to have originated in
China’s Guangdong province. Also in this year, users started
playing games online, and massively multiplayer online role-
playing (MMORPG) becomes popular.
2003
The CAN-SPAM Act is passed by the U.S. Senate to
regulate interstate commerce by placing limitations and penal-
ties on the transmission of spam (deﬁned as “junk mail” deliv-
ered to online users without their permission).
2004
In January, the Recording Industry Association of
America begins legal pursuits against U.S. netizens for swap-
ping songs without paying royalties to the song artists, after
tracking at least 500 song swappers by their IP addresses.
2005
Fears of Internet censorship begin to appear when the
world learns that China is actively blocking Internet content
perceived by authorities to be immoral or violent in nature.
China closes more than 12,000 Internet cafes to prevent neti-
zens of all ages from viewing so-called offensive material.
Also in this year, cyber wars become a media headline
catcher; in March a cyber war breaks out between Indonesia
and Malaysia over a dispute regarding the Ambalat oil ﬁelds in
the Sulawesi Sea. Within 24 hours, the Web site of Uniersiti
Chronology
303

Sains Malaysia is under cyberattack and plagued with aggressive
anti-Malaysian messages with an Indonesian twist.
Elsewhere around the globe, ﬁve hackers belonging to a
group called Oxlfe Crew in the Netherlands are found guilty
of disabling a number of Dutch government Web sites, in their
efforts to protest against recent cabinet proposals that they do
not like. This incident is the ﬁrst time that anyone in the
Netherlands is convicted of such a cybercrime.
In China, which is getting a growing reputation for censor-
ing Internet content, a newly released search engine called
Baidu.com is publicly traded, creating high hopes for the
37-year-old founder Robin Li to become a high-tech billionaire.
As Li is having a press conference outlining his hopes of becoming
very wealthy, Chinese authorities shut down another two Internet
sites popular among academics, journalists, and civil rights activ-
ists. One of the two serves as an online discussion group to report
on anticorruption protests in a southern village around Beijing,
and the other services the ethnic Mongolians.
2006
News headlines become dominated by the emergence
of botnets—large numbers of computers that are comman-
deered by hackers and marshaled for personal gain.
Also, by year’s end, the world hears about Internet censor-
ship occurring in places like Iran. Authorities shut down citi-
zens’ access to some of the world’s most popular Web sites,
like Amazon, YouTube, Wikipedia, and The New York Times
to impede “corrupting” foreign ﬁlms and music and to purge
Iran of Western cultural inﬂuences. When users try to open
the ﬁltered Web pages, they see this message: “The requested
page is forbidden.” At this time, Iran is listed by Reporters
Without Borders (RWB) as being one of 13 countries branded
as an “enemy of the Internet.” The reason cited by RWB is that
Iran not only has rampant state-sanctioned blocking of Web
sites but also often intimidates and imprisons bloggers.
2007
Reports of Internet censorship continue to mount. The
Burmese (Myanmar) junta try to shut down Internet and
304
Internet Censorship

telephone links to the outside world after a stream of blogs and
mobile phone videos capture dramatic scenes on the streets of
Burma. Immediately, cyber cafes are closed by the authorities
and mobile phones are disconnected. Although at this time less
than 1 percent of the Burmese population have access to the
Internet, and only 25,000 people have email addresses, certain
clever netizens capitalize on loopholes by evading the ofﬁcial
ﬁrewalls. The netizens seek access to the Internet by conn-
ecting to embassies, foreign businesses, and nongovernmental
organization networks where Internet access is not so tightly
controlled.
Also in this year, an attempt to force search engine Google to
stop censoring its search results in content-repressive countries
is rejected by the company shareholders. During this year, the
world learns that the government authorities in Belarus,
Burma, Cuba, Egypt, Iran, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam regularly
restrict content on the Internet.
2008
Georgia and Russia brieﬂy go to war online when distrib-
uted denial of service (DDoS) attacks bring down Georgian Web
sites. The media pinned Russia as the obvious perpetrator.
Also during this year, Anonymous, a nebulous collection of
hacker cells and splinter groups that coordinate their activities,
targets the Church of Scientology. Apparently, the church’s
secretive, controlling nature runs counter to the hacker collec-
tive’s views and values—which they want the online commu-
nity to know and appreciate.
2009
U.S. president Barack Obama criticizes the Internet cen-
sorship that has been taking place in China since at least 2005, as
he gives a speech to students in Shanghai. The president also
speaks about the importance of the value of freedom of expression
and political participation to the approximately 400 students
gathered. The Chinese ofﬁcials reject the U.S. request that about
1,000 students be invited to attend President Obama’s talk and
that it be broadcast live nationwide.
Chronology
305

2010
The Facebook virus called Koobface shows the world
that social media are now vulnerable to hack attacks; when
this virus infects a computer, it sends a lurid message to the
computer owner’s friends, tricking them into downloading
malware.
WikiLeaks is once again in the news for acquiring and pub-
lishing over 250,000 American diplomatic cables, ranging from
unclassiﬁed to secret documents. A U.S. Army soldier named
Bradley Manning downloaded the materials while stationed in
Iraq and then turned them over to Julian Assange and the folks
at WikiLeaks. WikiLeaks then releases the materials for world-
wide transmission to The New York Times and Der Spiegel.
The release of these cables causes massive controversy and
embarrassment for the U.S. government because of the sensi-
tive nature of the information. Companies providing funding
and infrastructure for WikiLeaks—such as PayPal—pull their
support. As a consequence, hacker cells worldwide begin
DDoS hack attacks against the ﬁnancial service providers to
punish them for their actions. The controversy over these docu-
ments leads some authorities in the United States to call for the
arrest of Assange, and even his execution.
2011
The Symantec IT security ﬁrm announces that
there are at least 286 million malware variants in circulation
worldwide—many of which have the potential to expose
personal data on the Internet.
2012
In January, two U.S. bills—SOPA in the House and
PIPA in the Senate—are designed to stop the piracy of copy-
righted material over the Internet on Web sites based outside
of the United States. Once word about these gets circulated
among the online masses, on January 18, the largest online pro-
test in the history of the Internet occurs. Small and large Web
sites “go dark” in protest of these two pieces of legislation that
could profoundly change the Internet.
Also, in this year, Julian Assange faces charges in Sweden,
where he is wanted for questioning by authorities about sexual
306
Internet Censorship

assault allegations. Assange fears that Sweden will extradite him to
the United States to face charges related to the WikiLeak’s disclo-
sure of the secret cables. Assange, therefore, views himself as an
information freedom ﬁghter who deserves and is granted asylum
in the Ecuadorian embassy in London in June.
2013
Assange remains on the lam and holed up in the
embassy when he decides to run for a Senate seat in his home-
land of Australia in September, and to this end, he releases onto
the Internet a video making fun of Australian politicians.
Ecuadorian president Rafael Correa chastises Assange, noting
that as a matter of courtesy, Ecuador will not bar him from
exercising his right to be a candidate, as long as he does not
make fun of Australian politicians over the Internet.
On June 4, the court-martial of U.S. soldier Bradley
Manning begins in the United States. This case illustrates the
delicacy between national security during war and the role of
the Internet and hackers in overriding established rules of infor-
mation disclosure to the public. On the opening day of the
trial, Manning confesses to being the source for the vast
archives made public by WikiLeaks. By mid-June, prosecutors
present evidence that Manning’s leaks compromised sensitive
information in a range of categories, including techniques for
neutralizing improvised explosives and the naming of troop
movements. By mid-August, Manning takes the witness stand
and apologizes to the American people, saying that though he
did what he did, he did not believe that his actions would cause
harm. On August 21, Manning receives a sentence of 35 years
in prison, the longest sentence handed down in a case involving
a leak of U.S. government information.
On June 9, a 29-year-old past undercover CIA employee
named Edward Snowden—a self-pronounced information free-
dom ﬁghter—announces that he is the main source of recent dis-
closures in the United States about top-secret National Security
Agency surveillance programs tracking phone and Internet mes-
sages around the globe with the objective of thwarting terrorist
Chronology
307

threats. Within 24 hours of this news, U.S. politicians like
Dianne Feinstein of California accuse Snowden of committing
“an act of treason” and say that he should be prosecuted accord-
ingly. Snowden ﬂees to Hong Kong and later to Moscow seeking
asylum. On August 13, Snowden thanks Russia for granting him
temporary asylum for one year. Immediately, U.S. lawmakers call
for some form of tough retaliation against Russia, such as boycott-
ing the Winter Olympic Games held in Sochi—a boycott that
never happened in 2014.
308
Internet Censorship

This page intentionally left blank


Glossary
Access Controls
The physical or logical safeguards prevent-
ing unauthorized access to information resources.
Account Harvesting
This term is often used to refer to
spammers, individuals who try to sell or lure others through
email advertising or solicitation. Account harvesting involves
using computer programs to search areas on the Internet to
gather lists of email addresses. Newsgroups and chat rooms
are great resources for harvesting email addresses.
Actus reus
One of the four elements on which Anglo-
American law bases criminal liability. This element means a
criminal action or a failure to act when one is under a duty to
do so.
Algorithm
A set of rules and procedures for resolving a math-
ematical or logical problem, much as a recipe in a cookbook
helps bafﬂed cooks to resolve a meal preparation problem. In
computer science, an algorithm usually indicates a mathe-
matical procedure for resolving a recurrent problem. IT security
professionals are concerned with cryptographic algorithms—
those used to encrypt, or encode, messages.
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
Members work in
courts, legislatures, and communities to defend and maintain
311
The login screen for the Facebook application on an iPhone 4s. (Editor77/
Dreamstime.com)

individual rights and liberties that the U.S. Constitution and
various U.S. laws guarantee citizens.
Anonymous
A collection of hacker cells that coordinate their
efforts, to some degree, in online chat rooms. The cells have
brought down the Vatican’s Web site, teased cabinet members
in numerous countries when their political messages were con-
troversial, and released cracked emails dealing with sensitive
information regarding the U.S. government. This group of
hackers seems to embody a culture of creative disturbance in
the pursuit of chaos, justice, and retribution.
Anti-virus Software
Detects viruses and notiﬁes the user that
the virus is present. This type of software keeps a database of “ﬁn-
gerprints,” a set of characteristic bytes from known viruses, on ﬁle.
ARPAnet
The ﬁrst transcontinental, high-speed computer
network built by the U.S. Department of Defense as an experi-
ment in digital communications.
Attendant Circumstances
One of the four elements on which
Anglo-American law bases criminal liability. This element means
the existence of certain necessary conditions. With some crimes,
it must be proven that certain events occurred, or certain facts
are true, for a person to be found guilty of some crime.
Authentication
A user’s legitimacy to enter the network
information—typically a password, a token, or a certiﬁcate.
Blacklist
Lists of Web sites that the Web ﬁlter’s creators
have designated as being undesirable; these tend to change over
time, so most companies marketing this kind of software offer
updated lists free of cost.
Blockers
Term given to governments that block a large num-
ber of politically relevant Web sites and certain social media plat-
forms. Term also includes governments that place considerable
resources into hiring people with the talent and technical
capacities to identify “offensive” content that should be blocked.
Blog
Actually a short form for Weblog, a blog is like an on-
line personal journal, such that online users can post thoughts
312
Glossary

or comments. Blogs usually have links to other Web sites. They
are increasingly becoming popular ways of sharing social and
political issues.
Blogosphere
Blogs on the Internet within a speciﬁc jurisdiction,
such as the American blogosphere or the Chinese blogosphere.
The Budapest Convention on Cybercrime
A convention
that came into effect on July 1, 2004—the ﬁrst global legisla-
tive attempt to set standards on the deﬁnition of Internet-
related crime and develop policies and procedures to govern
international cooperation in order to combat it. The treaty
was to enter into force when at least ﬁve states, three of which
were members of the Council of Europe, ratiﬁed it.
Bulletin Board System (BBS)
The BBS, the precursor to the
Internet, was a computer system that ran software to allow users
to dial into the system using a phone line. The users could then
download software and data, upload data, read news, or trade
messages with other online users. It was popular from the
1970s through the early 1990s.
Censorship
Refers to tactics used by government authorities
to block access to certain Web sites for online users within that
jurisdiction.
The Censorware Project
Formed in 1997 with the mission
of educating people about Web-ﬁltering software and practices,
their Web site features a series of investigative reports on the
major ﬁlter programs and commercial applications available
on the market.
Channel
An established communication link through which a
message travels as it is transmitted between a sender and a receiver.
Chat Rooms
Online “rooms” allowing many users to engage
in real-time, text-based chats.
The Citizen Lab
Located at the University of Toronto in
Ontario, Canada, the Citizen Lab’s mission is to advance
research and development aimed at the crossover between digi-
tal media, human rights, and IT security on a global basis. By
Glossary
313

using experts in ﬁelds like political science, sociology, computer
science, engineering, and graphic design, the participants are
motivated to collaborate with other research centers and organ-
izations to monitor, analyze, and determine the impact of
political powers in the virtual world and to promote Internet
openness.
Cloud Computing
Basically speaking, any company’s or
government agency’s data and applications running on the
Internet. That means that everything is stored on servers at a
remote location and can be accessed from any Web browser
anywhere around the globe.
Conﬂict/Security Web Filtering
Filtering content belonging
to Web sites relating to wars, skirmishes, overt dissent, and other
conﬂicts either within a nation or in some other nation.
Council of European Convention on Cybercrime
The ﬁrst
global attempt of its kind to set standards on the deﬁnition of
cybercrime and develop policies and procedures governing
international cooperation to combat Internet crime.
Crackers
Often called hackers in the media, crackers are indi-
viduals who break into other computer systems without authori-
zation to commit crimes. Believed to be motivated by mal-
intent, crackers are also labeled network hackers or net-runners.
Criminal Trespass
A legal term indicating that someone has
entered or remains in an area in which that person does not
have legal access.
Critical Elements
As in land-based crimes, for cybercrime to
exist, four elements must be present: actus reus (the prohibited
act or failing to act when one is supposed to be under duty to
do so; mens rea (a culpable mental state); attendant circum-
stances (the existence of certain necessary conditions); and harm
resulting to persons or property.
Critical Infrastructure
Critical infrastructure according to
the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 included the following
critical infrastructure sector and resources: chemical systems;
314
Glossary

emergency services; information technology; postal and ship-
ping; telecommunications; and transportation systems (includ-
ing buses, ﬂights, ships, ground systems, rail systems, and
pipeline systems). Nuclear power systems are also part of this
label.
Cybercrime
A crime related to technology, computers, and
the Internet that causes harm to property or to persons.
Cyber terrorism
Unlawful attacks and threats of attack by
terrorists against computers, networks, and the information
stored within computers when done to intimidate or coerce a
government or its people to further the attacker’s political or
social objectives.
Cyber cafe
A business where consumers pay a price to use
computers so that they can gain legal access to the Internet for
a given period of time.
Cyberspace
Composed of hundreds of thousands of intercon-
nected computers, servers, routers, switches, and ﬁber optic cables.
It allows a nation’s critical infrastructure—telecommunications,
energy, banking, water systems, government operations, and
emergency services—to function well for society. In short,
cyberspace is the virtual nervous system of the global economy.
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
Web servers can
handle only so much trafﬁc, beyond which the network crawls
or crashes. DDoS is one way of shutting down a network,
which is bombarded with trafﬁc from all directions. This can
be done with a botnet, using which an attacker relays a signal
that causes thousands or more infected computers to bombard
a targeted Web server. There is also a volunteer attack, whereby
Internet users use software like the Low Orbit Ion Cannon,
which turns computers of willing users into generators of traf-
ﬁc. The multiple origins of the attack make DDoS attacks difﬁ-
cult to defend against.
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
An organization that
started in the summer of 1990, primarily as a reaction to threats
Glossary
315

against free speech. Located in the United States, the EFF con-
tinues to defend parties whose rights in cyberspace are believed
to have been infringed. Often, the EFF becomes involved in
defending hackers charged of computer crimes.
Email
An electronic system, like the Internet, using which a
message is sent from one party to another.
Facebook
A social networking Web site. Employers are con-
cerned about social Web sites like Facebook for two main rea-
sons: they think that employees’ productivity will be adversely
affected and that if they use mobile devices for corporate use
to log onto Facebook, critical company information may be
leaked though a social network.
Firewalls
Designed to allow only safe content through and
prevent everything else from entering the network; ﬁrewalls
may be either software or hardware.
Fixes or Patches
Updated system software, created by com-
puter security experts to close security gaps discovered in soft-
ware after it has been released into the marketplace.
Forum
Online discussion groups allowing users with similar
interests to exchange messages through the Internet. Forums
are also known as newsgroups.
Forum Trolling
Spies who linger in chat rooms or a forum
so that they can read the posts of online users and then report
their ﬁndings to the authorities.
Freedom House
An independent watchdog organization
supporting democratic change that monitors the status of free-
dom in countries around the globe and assesses which ones
are advocating for democracy, human rights, and Internet
openness. This organization regularly publishes the report enti-
tled Freedom on the Net.
Freedom of Information
A citizen’s right to access informa-
tion held by the government. In many developed nations, this
freedom is supported as a constitutional right.
316
Glossary

Hacker
A person who enjoys learning the details of computer
systems and how to stretch their capabilities.
Hacktivism
Using the Internet to promote one’s own politi-
cal platform or mission.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
A programming lan-
guage used to transfer data over the World Wide Web.
ICT
Information and communications technologies that
include hardware like computers and mobile devices.
Identity Theft
The malicious theft of and consequent misuse
of someone else’s identity.
Information Packet
A piece of data of ﬁxed or variable size
sent through a communications network like the Internet.
Intellectual Property (IP)
IP refers to the protection of cre-
ative products of the human mind like the protection of prop-
erty. IP laws grant certain kinds of exclusive rights over these
creative products, similar to property rights.
Internet
A network connecting computer systems.
Internet Censorship
When governments try to control on-
line citizens’ activities, restrict the free ﬂow of information,
and infringe on the rights of users.
Internet Enemies
Deﬁned by Reporters Without Borders
to be countries creating and maintaining the most censorious
policies and restrictions on the Internet worldwide.
Internet Freedom
Protection of unfettered expression online.
Internet Usage Policies
Before giving them access to the
company’s Internet service, companies require employees to
sign an Internet usage policy form, which has them agree they
will be accountable for their online activities.
Intranet
An information system internal to an organization
that is built with Web-based technology.
ISP (Internet Service Providers)
Internet service providers
are companies providing access to the Internet for a fee;
Glossary
317

typically, users who pay a fee for this service receive a software
package, a user name, a password, and a telephone number to
initiate a connection.
Keyword Blocking
Refers to a technique used by Web-
ﬁltering software; the software program scans a Web page as a
user tries to visit it, analyzes the page quickly to determine if
certain keywords exist, and blocks users’ access to that page if
that Web page is found inappropriate.
Limits on Content
The ﬁltering and blocking of certain
Web sites, as well as other kinds of online censorship and self-
censorship.
Listserv
An online subscription to some topic of interest.
Mens rea
One of the four elements on which Anglo-
American law bases criminal liability. This element means a
culpable mental state.
Microblog
A kind of blog allowing online users to publish
short text updates that are distributed to a large number of on-
line followers. One such site is Twitter.
Nascent Blockers
Term given to governments that appear to
be at a crossroad; though authorities impose politically moti-
vated censorious blocks, the blocks tend to be sporadic, and
the blocking system is far from institutionalized.
Net Neutrality
Refers to a so-called level playing ground
where ISPs allow access to all content without favoring any par-
ticular Web site.
Netizen
Someone who is actively engaged in the Internet—a
sort of virtual world citizen.
Non-blockers
Term given to governments not yet at the
stage of systematically blocking politically relevant Web sites,
although the authorities may have already restricted online con-
tent, especially after noticing the critical role that online tools
play in overturning the political “status quo.”
318
Glossary

Obstacles to Access
Infrastructural and economic barriers to
Internet access.
OpenNet Initiative (ONI)
An organization dedicated to
letting the public know about Web ﬁltering and surveillance
policies globally.
Piracy
Copying protected software without authorization.
Political Web Filtering
Blocking content belonging to Web
sites that include views counter to the respective countries’
policies regarding the Internet and allowable content. This
category includes Web site content related to human rights,
religious movements, and other causes of a social nature.
Privacy
The state of being free from unauthorized access.
Privacy Laws
Laws dealing with the right of individual pri-
vacy, critical to maintaining the quality of life that citizens in
a free society expect. Privacy laws generally maintain that an
individual’s privacy shall not be violated unless the company
(or government) can show some compelling reason to do so—
such as by providing evidence that the safety of the company
(or of the nation) is at risk.
Protocol
A set of rules governing how communication
between two programs has to take place to be considered valid.
Psiphon Software
A Canadian software application that is
sometimes put into use in censorious jurisdictions to bypass
Internet censors that have been put into effect by government
authorities. Therefore, citizens in censorious nations can view
Internet content that is deemed to be “inappropriate” by the
authorities.
Public Knowledge
An agency whose mission is to promote
openness of the Internet and the public’s access to knowledge,
as well as creativity through balanced copyright (deﬁned as main-
taining and protecting the rights of online consumers as they
use innovative technology in a legal fashion).
Glossary
319

Real Name Registration
In some jurisdictions, online users
wanting to post a comment ﬁrst have to complete a registration
form that collects information like the user’s real name (and not
some moniker) or the user’s contact phone number or address.
Reporters Without Borders (RWB)
Concerning itself with
Internet censorship, this association keeps a list of “Internet
enemies” and maintains a record of journalists and netizens
who have been killed as well as imprisoned—often without a
fair trial.
Security
Being protected from adversaries, particularly from
those who do harm—unintentionally, or otherwise—to prop-
erty or a person. IT security issues include but are not limited
to authentication, critical infrastructure protection, disaster
recovery, intrusion detection and network management, mali-
cious code software protection, physical security of networks,
security policies, the sharing of rights and directories, and wire-
less security.
Social Engineering
A deceptive process whereby crackers
engineer a social situation with the purpose of tricking others
into allowing them access to an otherwise closed network.
Social Networking Site
A Web site allowing users to create
public proﬁles and form online relationships with others.
Examples include Facebook, MySpace, and Orkut.
Social Web Filtering
Filtering content belonging to Web
sites that focus on sexuality, gambling, drugs, and other social-
cultural issues that a country’s authorities may ﬁnd “offensive.”
SOPA and PIPA
Two U.S. bills designed to stop the piracy
of copyrighted material over the Internet on Web sites based
outside of the United States.
Spamming
To send unsolicited emails for commercial pur-
poses or with the intent to defraud.
Surveillance
Governments intercepting online communica-
tions as a way of, allegedly, preventing terrorist attacks.
320
Glossary

3G
Third generation of mobile communication technology,
allowing high-speed Internet access for mobile phone users.
Trademark Law
Governs disputes between business owners
over the names, logos, and other means used to identify prod-
ucts and services in the marketplace.
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement (TPP)
An agreement
sought by the big media lobbyists pushing for trade agreements
with copyright measures that are far more restrictive than those
currently required by existing treaties or legislation in the
United States, Canada, and elsewhere around the world.
Feared by the Open Internet activists, the TPP was seeking
the rewriting of the global rules on IP enforcement to give the
big media new powers to lock online users out of content and
services; seeking more liabilities to be forced upon ISPs so that
they do a better job of policing netizens’ online activities; and
giving the big media companies stronger powers to shut down
Web sites and remove content deemed to be “offensive.”
Trust
A complex concept studied by scholars from a number
of disciplines, deﬁned to be present in a business relationship
when one partner willingly depends on an exchanging partner
in whom one has conﬁdence. The term depend can take on a
number of meanings, including the willingness of one partner
to be vulnerable to the actions of the other, or the expectation
that one partner will receive ethically bound behaviors from
the other partner. IT security issues involving rust center on
maintaining trust in online, or e-commerce, transactions.
Video Sharing
Uploading video clips online for others to see.
The practice of video sharing can take place through paid Web-
hosting sites or through free Web sites like YouTube.
Violations of Users’ Rights
Placing legal protections and
restrictions on online activities, watching over the Internet’s
content, overriding principles of online privacy, doling out
penalties for online activities deemed to be “inappropriate” or
“offensive,” and engaging in imprisoning, physically attacking,
Glossary
321

or harassing online users whose activities are deemed to be
“immoral,” “offensive,” or beyond established community stan-
dards of tolerance within a jurisdiction.
Virus
A computer program that replicates itself by embed-
ding a copy of itself into other programs.
Web Filtering
Filtering content belonging to Web sites offer-
ing tools like email, instant messaging, language translation appli-
cations, and those aimed at circumventing censorship.
Web 2.0
The so-called second generation of the Web, it
refers to advanced graphical features, greater interactivity by on-
line users, and various online services like video sharing, social
networking, and blog hosting.
Wi Fi
Wireless technologies providing an Internet connec-
tion for such devices as computers and mobile phones within
a given physical or geographical location.
WikiLeaks
Founded by Julian Assange in 2006 to provide an
outlet to cause regime change and open information sharing,
this Web site is controversial. It has published materials related
to the Church of Scientology, Guantanamo Bay, military
strikes, and classiﬁed documents around the world. The Web
site is most famous for its acquisition and publication of over
250,000 American diplomatic cables, ranging from unclassiﬁed
to secret documents and tied to U.S. Army soldier Bradley
Manning.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
A law
and protection agency set up to protect intellectual property
rights. This international organization promotes the use and
protection of IP—creative outputs in all ﬁelds, including
science, technology, and the arts—most of which are available
for posting online.
322
Glossary

Index
A closer look at the Freedom
on the Net 2012 ﬁndings,
210–213
Adequate information release
by governments versus
Internet Censorship, 6–7
A look at PC, mobile phone,
and Internet usage
globally, 68–72
American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU),
160–161, 278
Baldwin, Roger, 160–161
American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of
2009, 217
Android mobile phone, 35
Anglo-American law and
criminal liability, 72–74
Anonymous, 32–34, 36, 159,
162–164
role of Hector Xavier
Monsegur, 164
SOPA and PIPA proposed
legislation, 163
Vic Toews and Bill C-130,
162–163
ARIN, 23
Assange, Julian, 7–8, 65, 74,
78–81, 164–167
afﬁliation with U.S. Private
Manning, 165
Church of Scientology,
Guantano Bay, and other
online leaks, 165
ﬁlm called The Fifth
Estate, 167
political asylum in Ecuador,
166–167
role with WikiLeaks,
164–165
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, 55
Bachmann, Michael,
138–144
Baidu search engine,
34, 39
Bardeen, John and Walter
Brattain, 18
Barlow, John Perry, 3
Baron, Paul, 18
Bambauer, Derek, Professor,
and Professor Richard A.
Epstein Debate on
323

Internet Censorship,
87–90
Berners-Lee, Tim and Robert
Cailliau, 22
Between liberty and harmony:
philosophical perspectives
on censorship in the Age
of the Internet, 147–156
Bezos, Jeffrey, 23
Bigamy deﬁned, 73–74
Black Hat and DefCon hacker
conferences, 167–169
Granick, Jennifer, 168
Hofmann, Marcia, 168
Moss, Jeff (aka, The Dark
Tangent), 167
Blockers deﬁned, 100–101
Boggs, David, and Robert
Metcalfe, 19
Boston Consulting Group
report, 40–42
Botnet, 30
U.S. Private Bradley Manning
(aka Chelsea Manning),
8–11, 74–77, 79–81,
110, 120, 183–185
Brin, Sergey, 31
Burmese junta, 31
Calce, Michael (aka
Maﬁaboy), 25
Campbell, Cran, 172–173
Canada’s Copyright
Modernization Act of
2012 (Formerly Bill,
C-11), 171–172
Canadian online activity
trends, 38, 41, 51–52
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, 28,
228–230
activities considered to be
infringements of the act,
229–230
Linford, Steve, 229
Ralsky, Alan, case, 230
similar pieces of legislation
in other jurisdictions, 230
Carnivore, 29
Censorship versus national
security, 4–6
why there will never be total
freedom of the press, 4–6
why there will never be a
total lack of press and
Internet censorship, 4–6
The Censorware Project,
195–196
Center for Internet and
Society, 173–174
Children’s Internet Protection
Act, 104
Chinese youths work at their
computer stations in an
Internet café in Beijing,
China, 127
Chronology, 297–308
The Internet’s adolescent
years: The 1970s and
1980s, 298–301
The Internet’s adult years:
1990 to the present,
301–308
324
Index

The Internet’s humble
beginnings (the 1940s
through the 1960s),
297–298
Citizens’ Internet
Empowerment
Coalition, 24
The Citizen Lab, 278
Citizen Lab at the University
of Toronto, 174
Clapper, James, 209
Clinton, Hillary, U.S.
Secretary of State on
Internet censorship,
34–35, 52–53, 83
Clipper Proposal, 23
The Code Red Worm, 26
Cohen, Fred, 21
Communications and
Multimedia Act, 24
Computer ﬁrewall deﬁned,
102–103
Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act (CFAA), 21–22
Computer Industry Almanac,
28, 68, 69, 70
ComScore, Inc., 38
Copyright Armageddon: 3D
printers, 175
Corley, Eric (aka Emmanuel
Goldstein), 21
Cracker deﬁned, 46–47
culpable mental state (the
mens rea), 73
a criminal action or failure
to act when one is under
duty to do so (the actus
reus), 73
Cultural and legal
jurisdictional factors
inﬂuencing the digital
divide, 71–72
cultural adaptation
factors, 71
the differences between
freedom of information,
Internet freedom, and
Internet censorship,
81–90
legal jurisdictional
adaptation factors and the
key elements of liability in
conventional and online
crimes, 72–74
a multi-jurisdictional, com-
peting, and complex legal
case, 77–81
a U.S. legal jurisdictional
case, 74–77
Cyber Intelligence Sharing
and Protection Act
(CISPA), 233–234
Cybersecurity Enhancement
Act of 2005/2002 or
Homeland Security Act of
2005/2002, 225–226,
231
Allen Weinstein’s views as
president of the Center
for Democracy, 226
Amendments proposed in
2013, 231
Index
325

Civil liberties groups
objections, 226
Cybersecurity is not
censorship, 144–147
Demon Internet, 25
Denning, Dorothy E., 144–147
Dhhaka government and
Bangladeshi hacker
cyberwars, 48–49
Digital divide deﬁned, 51–52
demographic factors, 71–72
gender factors, 72
life stage factors, 72
Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA),
23, 218–220
Comments on the act by the
Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF), 220
Kwak, Jung case, 219–220
18 U.S.C., 213–216
Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF),
176–177, 278–279
Electronic Privacy
Information Center
(EPIC), 24
Email deﬁned, 43
the existence of certain
necessary conditions
or attendant
circumstances, 73
Explorer vulnerability, 33
Filo, David and Jerry Yang, 23
Flooding deﬁned, 47
France’s Constitutional
Council, 84
Freedom House, deﬁned, 55,
177–178, 279
countries arranging for
increased surveillance of
citizen’s online activities,
115–118
countries proactively
manipulating the
Internet, 113
countries where physical
attacks occur against
bloggers, 113–115
Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA), 82
Freedom of the Net 2012
report, 68
Internet censorship by
parents, 91
recent global trends in
Internet censorship, 90–94
Free Software Foundation
(FSF), 21
Gaining authorized and
unauthorized access to the
Internet—and how
hacking may be related to
Internet censorship, 42–51
authorized access and
various modes of
communication, 42–45
how hacking may be related to
Internet censorship, 49–51
326
Index

unauthorized access to
network and the types of
harm caused by hack
attacks, 45–49
Gates, Bill (William H.), and
Paul Allen, 20, 178–179
General Intelligence Laws
Amendment Bill, 55
The general state of online
censorship by
governmental view:
placements on the
freedom ﬁghter versus
censorship scales, 53–56
Georgia and Russia
Cyberwar, 32–33
Gigabyte, 27
Gilmore, John, 54
The global growth of Internet
usage, 37–42
adoption of the Internet in
developed nations,
37–39
adoption of the Internet in
developing nations and
the emergence of Internet
censorship, 39–40
assessing the present-day
Internet economy on a
global scale, 40–42
Glossary, 311–322
Google India, 40
Google’s video service
in Italy and Google’s
Street View, 84
Graber, Doris, 5
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of
1999, 24, 220–223
Congressman Joe Barton’s
view on why the law is
needed, 221–222
National Mutual Insurance
Company network
breach, 222–223
Three requirements to
protect online personal
data and privacy of
individuals, 220–221
Hacker deﬁned, 46
Hacktivism, cyber warriors,
and censorship, 127–132
Hacktivistic act deﬁned, 50
Harm caused by perceived
offensive content, 85
Hatewatch members, 23–24
Health Information Tech-
nology for Economic
and Clinical Health
Act, 217
Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) of 1996,
216–218
Holt, Thomas, J., 127–132
How can progress continue to
be made in reducing Internet
censorship?, 118–121
an increase in a strategic
analysis of transitions in
the post-communist
world, 119
Index
327

a strategic direction in terms
of action, 119
a strategic increase in
policies worldwide
advancing human rights
and democracy, 119
hackers’ satellite
communications system,
dubbed the Hackerspace
Global Grid, 119–120
IBM, 20
Iceland’s planned Internet
porn ban, 179–180
Indonesia and Malaysia
cyberwar, 29–30
Information-censoring
continuum, 54–56
Infringing intellectual
property rights and
copyright deﬁned, 47
Innocence of Muslims ﬁlm,
55–56
International
Telecommunications
Union (ITU), 240–241
Internet censorship and the
European Union: external
cohesiveness versus internal
disharmony, 133–137
Internet Censorship
deﬁned, 3–4
pushback by civil society,
technology companies,
and independent
courts, 81
The Internet’s colorful
history, 17–37
adolescent years: the 1970s
and 1980s, 18–22
humble beginnings: the
1940s through the 1960s,
17–18
the Internet’s adult years:
1990 to the present,
22–37
The Internet’s continuing
evolution: a comparison
of Internet censorship in
2005 and 2012
the Internet’s state of
openness in 2005, 106–107
the Internet’s state of
openness in 2012, 108–109
Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), 86
Internet Freedom deﬁned,
83–86
Internet Governance
Forum, 96
Internet “kill switches,” 6
Internet legislation attempts
globally related to privacy,
security, trust, and
censorship, 235–242
Anti-Counterfeiting
Trade Agreement
(ACTA), 237, 251
The Budapest Convention
on Cybercrime,
235–237
328
Index

The United Nations:
unprecedented power
over Web content and
infrastructure?, 240–242
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership
(TPP) Agreement,
238–240
Internet legislation in the
United States related to
privacy, security, trust,
and censorship, 213–231
Internet Relay Chat
deﬁned, 44
Internet usage, 70–71
Internet Watch
Foundation, 24
Jianyu, Ren, 242
Jobs, Steve, Ronald Wayne,
and Steve Wozniak,
19–20, 180–182
Johns, Michael,
133–137
Key tactics that have restricted
free speech and
encouraged Internet
censorship in countries in
recent years, 109–121
governments arrange for
actual physical attacks to
occur, 113–115
governments arrange for
increased surveillance of
citizens’ online activities,
115–118
governments introduce vague
laws prohibiting certain
online content, 110–112
governments proactively
manipulate Internet
discussions to reﬂect their
views, 112–113
Kilby, Jack and Robert
Noyce, 18
Kleinrock, Leonard, 18
Koobface virus, 34
Kutt, Mers, 19, 299
Leigher, Rear Admiral
William E., 209
Li, Robin, 29
Listserv deﬁned, 43
Log-in screen for the
Facebook application on
an iPhone 4s, 311
Manning, Bradley, U.S.
Private (aka Chelsea
Manning), 8–11, 74–77,
79–81, 110, 120,
183–185
Goodale, James, 10
Lamo, Adrian, 9
McNealy, Scott, Bill Joy,
Andy Bechtolsheim, and
Vinod Khosla, 20
Metadata deﬁned, 67
Mitnick, Kevin, 22
Mobile phone usage,
69–70
Moore, Gordon, 18
Index
329

Morris worm, 21–22
Computer Emergency
Response Team
(CERT), 21–22
Morris, Robert, Jr., 21
MyDoom worm, 28
Napster, 175
Nascent blockers deﬁned,
101–102
National Association of
Criminal Defense
Lawyers (NACDL), 279
National Information Infra-
structure Protection Act, 23
Net neutrality deﬁned, 104
Newsgroups deﬁned, 44
The New York Times, 7, 9, 30,
81, 165, 178, 224
Non-blockers deﬁned, 101
Nonprint: Internet censorship
videos, 280–284
Nonprint: U.S. Government
agencies and independent
organizations ﬁghting
Internet abuses, 291–295
Nonprint: Web sites of
companies offering anti-
virus software, 284–286
Nonprint: Web sites of
companies offering
ﬁrewall, Web-ﬁltering,
and Web-ﬁltering bypass
software, 287–291
Nonprint: Web sites of
Internet openness
advocacy groups,
278–280
NSA’s Prism program, 49,
66–67
Obama, Barack, U.S.
president and Xi Jinping,
Chinese president, on
Chinese cyber spying, 67
Obstacles to Internet access
deﬁned, 95
Online activities in
jurisdictions “under the
microscope”: their strong
support for Internet
openness and their hard-
core tactics used to
reinforce Internet censor-
ship, 94–100
countries supporting
Internet openness, 94–97
countries using hard-core
tactics to reinforce
Internet censorship,
97–100
OpenNet Inititative, deﬁned,
53, 104–105, 279
Outcast, 25
The Page-Brin Google, Inc.
Team, 169–171
Brin’s challenges, 170–171
Page’s challenges, 170
Palfrey, John, 56
PC usage, 68–69
Phishing deﬁned, 47–48
330
Index

Phreaking deﬁned, 47
PIPA, 36, 95, 111
Premises underlying Internet
freedom, 83–86
President Obama in
Shangai, 52
Prime Healthcare Services
case, 217–218
Print: books, 252–273
Print: network security
magazines and hacker
news sites, Internet
freedom white papers,
and Internet-related
downloadable reports,
273–278
a prohibited result,
or harm, 73
Prosecutorial Remedies and
Other Tools to End the
Exploitation of Children
Today (PROTECT) Act
of 2003, 27
PROTECT Act of 2003,
COPPA of 1998, and
CIPA of 2000, 226–228
Protection of State
Information Bill, 55
Psiphon software, 186–187
Public Knowledge, 187–188
Recent Internet laws not
proposed in the United
States related to privacy,
security, trust, and
censorship: CISPA,
SOPA, and PIPA—and
why, 231–235
Recording Industry
Association of America
(RIAA), 28
Remote Retrieval deﬁned, 45
Reporters Without Borders,
30, 65–66, 188, 280
Richie, Dennis and Ken
Thompson, 18
Rivera, Geraldo, 5
The role of Web ﬁlters and
ﬁrewalls, business-
government policies, and
laws aimed at Internet
censorship, 100–105
Business-government
policies and laws for Internet
censorship, 103–105
Web ﬁlters and ﬁrewalls,
100–10
Ryan, A., 127
Salehi, Neda, 188–189
Samutsevich, Yekaterina,
189–191
Schifreen, Robert, and Steven
Gold, 21
Schmidt, Eric, 34
Schneier, Bruce, 54
Sculley, John, Steve Jobs, and
Steve Wozniak, 3
Shaikh, Raju, 71
Smith, David, 24
Snowden, Edward, 11–14,
66, 191–192, 297
Index
331

Correa, Rafael, view on
case, 13
Feinstein, Dianne, view on
case, 11–12
Greenwald, Glenn, view on
case, 13–14
Snowden, Edward, view on
case, 161
Social Networking Web Sites
deﬁned, 44
SOPA, 36, 95, 111
Spooﬁng deﬁned, 47
Stallman, Richard, 21
State-directed censorship, 53–54
Statistics on Internet usage
worldwide, 210
Stop Online Piracy Act
(SOPA) and the
PROTECT IP Act
(PIPA), 234–235, 244
Suess, Randy, and Ward
Christensen, 20
Swartz, Aaron, 111,
192–195, 216
Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act (CFAA), 193
Eckersley of EFF, 193
Granick, Jennifer, 193–195
Page, Clarence, 195
Segal, David, 195
SOPA and PIPA, 192
Wikipedia, 193
Telnets deﬁned, 45
Theriault, Alanda D.,
147–156
30 years after Orwell’s Ninety
Eighty-Four: pseudopri-
vacy online, 138–144
Tomlinson, Ray, 19
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership
Agreement, 196–198
2600: The Hacker Quarterly,
21, 159–160
Corley, Eric, and
Ruderman, David, 159
Cummings, Ed (aka
Bernie S.), 159
Digital Millennium Copyright
Act (DMCA), 160
U.S. Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ARPA),
14–15, 37, 72, 86
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001
and PATRIOT Act II,
224–225
U.S. Computer Emergency
Response Team
(U.S.-CERT), 27
U.S. Department of Justice’s
Computer Crime and
Intellectual Property
Section (CCIPS), 251–252
U.S. Internet growth, 41
VeriSign iDefense Labs, 35
Virus and worm production
and release deﬁned, 47
The Voice of Russia’s
“On the Human Rights in
the USA,” 121
332
Index

Web ﬁltering categories,
104–105
conﬂict/security, 105
Internet tools, 105
political, 105
social, 105
Web ﬁlters deﬁned, 102
blacklists deﬁned, 102
keyword blocking
deﬁned, 102
What the Internet is as
compared to an intranet,
14–17
ARPAnet, 15–16
Intranet or portal, 17
World Wide Web
(WWW), 16
WikiLeaks, 198–199
Assange, Julian, 198–199
Manning, Private, 199
Xiabo, Liu and Liu Xia,
182–183
Yousafzai, Malala,
199–201
Youssef, Bassem,
201–202
Zinn, Herbert, 22
Index
333

This page intentionally left blank

About the Author
Bernadette H. Schell is well published in the hacking and IT
domain. She has coauthored books such as The Hacking of
America (2002), Cybercrime (2004), The Internet and Society
(2007), and The Webster’s New World Hacker Dictionary
(2006). In December 2011, Dr. Schell’s chapter on the ﬁc-
tional character Lisbeth Salander as a hacker appeared in the
recently published book The Psychology of the Girl with
the Dragon Tattoo. She has also coauthored two books with
Dr. Tom Holt—Corporate Hacking and Technology-Driven
Crime (2011) and Hackers and Hacking (2013). Currently
the vice-provost at Laurentian University in Barrie, Ontario,
Canada, Dr. Schell was formerly the founding dean of business
and information technology at the University of Ontario
Institute of Technology (UOIT) in Oshawa, Ontario, Canada.

