
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS

This page intentionally left blank

Interconnection Noise in
VLSI Circuits
by
Francesc Moll
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain
and
Miquel Roca
Universitat Illes Balears,
Palma de Mallorca, Spain
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK, BOSTON, DORDRECHT, LONDON, MOSCOW

eBook ISBN:
0-306-48719-5
Print ISBN:
1-4020-7733-5
©2004 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
Print ©2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers
All rights reserved
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without written consent from the Publisher
Created in the United States of America
Visit Springer's eBookstore at:       
http://www.ebooks.kluweronline.com
and the Springer Global Website Online at:         http://www.springeronline.com
Dordrecht

Contents
List of Figures
List of Tables
Preface
Acknowledgments
1. MICROELECTRONIC INTERCONNECTIONS
1
Signal transmission in interconnects
1.1
1.2
The problem with interconnections
Physical factors in interconnect design
2
On-Chip interconnections
2.1
2.2
2.3
Technology
Scaling trends
Electrical reference connection schemes
3
Package level interconnections
3.1
3.2
3.3
Technology
Scaling trends in packaging
Power voltage distribution and switching noise
2. INTERCONNECT MODELING
1
Physical foundations for circuit models of interconnections
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
TEM waves
Quasi-TEM model
Simplifications of the RLGC model
Validity of the quasi-TEM assumption
2
Lossless transmission line model
2.1
2.2
2.3
Resistive driver model
Effect of signal rise time
CMOS driver with open circuit load
v
ix
xvii
xix
xxi
1
1
2
4
4
4
6
6
7
7
8
8
11
12
13
17
18
20
22
23
28
30

vi
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
3
Lossy transmission line model
3.1
3.2
Effect of semiconductor substrate
Example simulations
4
Optimum line model selection
4.1
4.2
4.3
Effect of input rise time
Effect of driver impedance
Effect of line length
3. CROSSTALK EFFECTS IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS
1
Spurious signals
1.1
1.2
1.3
Spurious signal characterization
Propagation of spurious signals through VLSI digital
circuits
Measurement of spurious signals
2
Crosstalk induced delay
2.1
2.2
Experimental measurement approaches
Experimental results
3
Energy dissipation due to crosstalk
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
Energy calculation for a single transition
Contribution of driver and interconnect to dissipated
energy
Transitions in both nodes
Discussion
4
Crosstalk effects in logic VLSI circuits
4.1
4.2
Static circuits
Dynamic circuits
4.
PACKAGING INTERCONNECTS
1
Packaging structure
1.1
1.2
1.3
Body fabrication technology
External connections
Chip connection
2
Lumped electrical parameter modeling of packages
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
Calculation of circuit parameters
Concept of Partial Inductance
Skin effect calculation
Resistance and inductance calculation
3
Circuit modeling from measurement
3.1
Setup for measuring inductance
33
34
38
40
43
44
44
47
48
48
56
59
65
66
71
73
75
78
82
84
88
89
90
97
97
98
99
101
103
103
104
105
105
107
108

Contents
vii
3.2
3.3
Time domain measurement methods
Frequency domain measurement methods
4
Power distribution modeling from EM simulation
4.1
4.2
Stimulus definition for EM simulation
Circuit model obtained from EM simulations
5
Simulations of package effects
5.1
5.2
5.3
Effect of SSN
Effect of crosstalk
Discussion
5. TECHNIQUES FOR AVOIDING INTERCONNECTION NOISE
1
Crosstalk avoidance
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Technology solutions
Interconnection layout
Driver sizing
Tolerant circuits
2
Switching noise avoidance
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
Package technology
Use of decoupling capacitors
Pin assignment
Circuit techniques
6. NOISE DETECTION IN LOGIC CIRCUITS
1
2
The noise detection problem
Brief introduction to the testing of logic circuits
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
ATPG for stuck-at faults
Backtrace and backtrack procedures in PODEM
SSN detection problem
Crosstalk detection problem
3
Crosstalk-induced spurious signal detection
3.1
3.2
3.3
Crosstalk fault controllability and observability
ATPG for crosstalk
Results
4
Other test techniques
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
ATPG with timing implication considerations
Delay fault testing
test approaches to crosstalk detection
Design for testability and on line detection
111
115
117
117
119
122
125
127
130
137
137
138
140
149
150
152
154
154
160
164
171
171
172
173
175
176
177
177
179
180
182
184
184
185
186
188

viii
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Index
About the Authors
191
195

List of Figures
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
Cross section of a typical on-chip interconnection stack-
up.
Ideal physical structure for describing a digital switch-
ing phenomenon.
Physical structure of a waveguide.
Validity range in terms of frequency of different line
models: non-inductive, inductive and full wave (non
electrical, valid for any frequency).
Graph of maximum dimension such that the quasi-TEM
model is valid, following expression 2.40. The effec-
tive relative permittivity is varied. Also shown the graph
for zero average conductivity.
Impedance discontinuity in a line
A line terminated in open circuit
Graph method for calculating reflections in the line.
In this case, the load impedance is zero (open circuit
termination).
Diagram for a line with 
and
The response is a voltage oscillation around the steady
state value.
Diagram for a line with 
with
(left),
and 
(right). The response tends asymptoti-
cally towards the steady value without any oscillations,
although an initial overshoot at the driver end is ob-
served in the first case.
7
13
14
20
23
24
25
26
27
28
ix

INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.22
2.23
2.24
3.1
3.2
28
29
30
31
31
32
33
34
35
37
39
40
41
42
43
48
50
Diagram for a line with 
and
The response is a voltage oscillation around the steady
state value.
Diagram for a line with 
with 
(left),
and 
(right). The response tends asymptoti-
cally to the steady value without any oscillations.
Displacement of the driver characteristic during a finite
rise time input transition.
Schematic of a line with a CMOS inverter as a driver
Output characteristic of a CMOS inverter for
and
Method of Characteristics with CMOS nonlinear impe-
dance. If
 only minor ringing is possible.
HSPICE simulation comparing the response to three
different sizes of PMOS transistor
and 
of the
line is
Vertical structure of a line over semiconductor substrate,
with reference contacts on the top and bottom surfaces.
Electrical diagram of the parameters of a line over semi-
conductor substrate.
Frequency dependent conductance and capacitance per
unit length, when no ground line is present
and when there is a nearby ground line
Frequency dependent resistance and inductance per unit
length, when no ground line is present, and when there
is a nearby ground line.
Transient response of Lossy transmission lines with con-
stant and non constant parameters, for a line 
long.
Transient response of Lossy transmission lines with con-
stant and non constant parameters, for a line 1 mm long.
Transient response of Lossy transmission lines with con-
stant and non constant parameters, for a line 5 mm long.
Process for the selection of an inductive or non-inductive
line model.
Circuit model for crosstalk between two lines.
Spurious signal amplitude as a function of total node
resistance ratio.
x

List of Figures
xi
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
3.14
3.15
3.16
3.17
3.18
3.19
3.20
3.21
3.22
3.23
Spurious signal width as a function of total node resis-
tance ratio.
Spurious signal amplitude as a function of the victim
node resistance for fixed culprit–victim resistance ratio
(1, 10 and 100).
Spurious signal width as a function of the victim node
resistance for fixed culprit–victim resistance ratio (1,
10 and 100).
Spurious signal amplitude in function of 
for
equal node resistances.
Spurious signal width in function of
for equal
node resistances.
Spurious signal amplitude in function of                for a
resistance ratio of 10.
Spurious signal width in function of             for a re-
sistance ratio of 10.
Spurious signal amplitude as a function of line length
for several driver resistance ratios.
Spurious signal width as a function of line length for
several driver resistance ratios.
SS waveform and US and LS signals.
Chain of inverters with equal load capacitance.
Critical curve for k=1. Width is expressed in normal-
ized units of
penetration critical curves. Width is expressed
in normalized units of
RS sensor architecture.
Coupling measurement in the victim line.
Microphotograph, a detail of RS NAND sensors and
the buffered inverters.
Crosstalk spurious signal amplitude measurements in a
BiCMOS technology.
Simulated crosstalk induced delay.
Schematic of the circuit considered for crosstalk delay
evaluation.
Photograph of the circuit considered for crosstalk delay
evaluation.
Comparison between correct behavior and minor delay
behavior.
51
51
52
53
53
54
54
55
55
58
58
60
60
62
63
64
65
66
68
68
70

xii
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
3.24
3.25
3.26
3.27
3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
3.32
3.33
3.34
3.35
3.36
3.37
3.38
3.39
3.40
70
71
72
73
74
74
76
79
80
80
81
82
83
86
87
87
89
Comparison between correct behavior and major delay
behavior.
Simulation results. Clock signal (top), circuit output
without crosstalk (middle) and circuit output with cross-
talk (bottom)
Schematic cross section of the coupled lines in the cir-
cuit photographed in figure 3.22.
Measured waveform at the circuit output.
Measurement results for the situation when victim in
metal 2 level.
Measurement results for the situation when victim in
metal 1 level.
Electrical circuit modeling the structure of two coupled
lines with inverter drivers.
Structures considered in the analysis of coupling geom-
etry influence on the energy consumption.
Drivers and crosstalk contributions to total energy con-
sumption for structure A.
Drivers contribution to total energy dissipation, com-
paring A, B, C and D structures.
Crosstalk contributions to total energy dissipation, com-
paring A, B, C and D structures.
Driver dependence in energy dissipation of lines.
Schematic transient waveforms for two coupled out-
puts. Phases A and B for the total energy calculation
in the case of non- simultaneous transitions. All 4 pos-
sible cases are shown.
Energy dissipation vs. relative delay between input tran-
sitions for unbalanced, equal drivers.
Energy dissipation vs. relative delay between input tran-
sitions for balanced, equal drivers.
Energy dissipation vs. relative delay between input tran-
sitions for balanced, different drivers.
Output waveforms of gate 1 (top) and gate 2 (bottom)
for different ratios between driver strength. Labels re-
fer to the value of NMOS width, in 
for the respec-
tive drivers. PMOS width is, in all cases, 2.5 times the
corresponding NMOS width.

List of Figures
xiii
3.41
3.42
3.43
3.44
3.45
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
Electrical schema of a serial full adder implemented
using NORA techniques.
HSPICE simulation of the NORA full adder. The effect
of transitions of 3 lines coupled to an internal adder line
when the latter is in high impedance state is illustrated.
Electrical schema of a memory cell structure.
HSPICE simulation of the memory cell. Correct behavior.
HSPICE simulation of the memory cell. Faulty behavior.
Types of packages in terms of their external connection.
Wire bonding chip connection.
TAB type chip connection.
Flip chip connection.
Cross-section discretization of a circuit segment to cal-
culate the skin effect.
Example of complete modeling and simplified model-
ing of two package leads with partial inductances. Re-
sistances are omitted from the drawing for the purpose
of clarity. Dashed lines indicate inductive coupling.
A simplified package (only two leads) provides current
to a switching circuit from an external power supply.
Schema of the measurement setup. Each segment can
be assigned a partial inductance.
Three ports and their partial inductances.
Partial inductances in the measurement setup to obtain
measured loop inductances.
Loop inductance calculation through leads 1 and 2 us-
ing PEEC inductances and measured inductances.
Equivalent circuit for measurement of capacitance with
a ramped input.
Contribution of other leads to measured capacitance.
Equivalent circuit for measurement of self inductance
with a ramped input.
Waveform from self inductance measurement with a
ramped input.
Equivalent circuit for measurement of mutual induc-
tance with a ramped input.
Impedance profile obtained from the reflected voltage
waveform.
91
100
102
102
103
105
107
108
109
109
110
110
112
112
113
113
113
114
92
93
94
94

xiv
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
4.18
4.19
4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
4.24
4.25
4.26
4.27
4.28
4.29
4.30
4.31
116
119
120
121
121
122
123
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
Circuit model assumed for comparison with measured
S-parameters. Mutual inductances are omitted for clar-
ity purposes.
Schematic depiction of an internal switching event (top),
and the corresponding stimulus definition necessary for
EM simulation (bottom).
Structure and dimensions of the package power distri-
bution used for the EM simulations.
Topologies for the equivalent circuit.
Results of both SPEED and HSPICE simulations after
optimization of a one LC stage model. Left: pack50.
Right: pack100.
Magnitude of the impedance obtained from SPEED and
HSPICE after optimization of a one LC stage circuit
model. Left: pack50. Right: pack100.
Results from SPEED simulation and HSPICE simula-
tion of pack100 using a 3 LC stage model. Left: fre-
quency response (impedance magnitude). Right: tran-
sient response to a 300 ns width gaussian.
Complete circuit simulated, including the two sets of
coupled lines, chains of inverters, and I/O pads.
Vertical structure of the 6 coupled lines used to evaluate
the effect of crosstalk.
Package pin-out used in the simulations, insw is the
signal causing the transition to be measured, inxtk are
transitions simultaneous to the previous one, either in
the same direction, or the opposite direction, inq is a
quiet input, connected to zero.
Reference delay with line 1 as victim. The lines switch-
ing in each case are: 1+2, 1+2+4, 1+2+4+5, 1+2+3+4+5,
1+2+3+4+5+6.
Reference delay with line 2 as victim. The lines switch-
ing in each case are: 1+2, 1+2+5, 1+2+3+5, 1+2+3+4+5,
1+2+3+4+5+6.
Reference delay with line 4 as victim. The lines switch-
ing in each case are: 4+5, 1+4+5, 1+2+4+5, 1+2+3+4+6,
1+2+3+4+5+6.
Reference delay with line 5 as victim. The lines switch-
ing in each case are: 4+5, 2+4+5, 2+4+5+6, 1+2+4+5+6,
1+2+3+4+5+6.

List of Figures
xv
4.32
4.33
4.34
4.35
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.10
5.11
5.12
5.13
5.14
5.15
5.16
5.17
Crosstalk delay with line 1 as victim. The switching
order of the lines is the same indicated in figure 4.28.
Crosstalk delay with line 2 as victim. The switching
order of the lines is the same indicated in figure 4.29.
Crosstalk delay with line 4 as victim. The switching
order of the lines is the same indicated in figure 4.30.
Crosstalk delay with line 5 as victim. The switching
order of the lines is the same indicated in figure 4.31.
Two lines in the same metal level on a silicon grounded
substrate.
Two overlapping lines on a silicon grounded substrate.
Simulation results for different width of lines.
Reduction of coupling capacitance due to screen effect.
Physical structure of the cases considered for the eval-
uation of crosstalk avoidance techniques. All dimen-
sions expressed in
Schematic of the circuit used to analyze crosstalk.
Crosstalk spurious signal for the case 
(a) min-
imal space, (b) SPA 
(c) UPP, (d) SPA+UPP
techniques.
Crosstalk spurious signal for the case 
(a) min-
imal space, (b) SPA 
(c) SPA 
(d)
INS technique.
Crosstalk spurious signal for the case 
(a) min-
imal space, (b) SPA 
(c) UPP, (d) SPA+UPP
techniques.
Crosstalk spurious signal for the case 
(a) min-
imal space, (b) SPA 
(c) SPA 
(d)
INS technique.
Crosstalk spurious signal for the case 
(a) mini-
mal space, (b) SPA 
(c) UPP, (d) SPA+UPP.
Crosstalk spurious signal for the case 
(a) min-
imal space, (b) SPA 
(c) SPA 
(d)
INS.
Circuit for driver size analysis.
Simulation results of driver sizing analysis.
Conventional latch structure.
Tolerant latch structure.
Measurements on the tolerant latch structure.
130
131
132
133
138
139
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
147
148
148
149
150
151
152
153

xvi
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
5.18
5.19
5.20
5.21
5.22
5.23
5.24
5.25
5.26
5.27
5.28
5.29
5.30
5.31
5.32
One-stage LC circuit model of a package power distri-
bution network, with and without decoupling capacitance.
Physical structure of the package used in the simulations.
Dimensions of the PLCC package modeled.
AC impedance without decoupling capacitance, and with
several values of decoupling capacitance.
Transient simulation of the noise in the power supply,
without decoupling capacitance, and with several val-
ues of decoupling capacitance. The noise is not distin-
guishable in this case for a capacitance of 100 pF.
Effect of ESR in the value of AC impedance.
Effect of decoupling capacitance ESR in the power sup-
ply noise voltage transient waveform.
Influence of P and G assignment on the equivalent power
distribution impedance.
Pin Assignment example. Internal switching elements.
Pin Assignment example. External switching elements.
Maximum and minimum noisy power supply voltage
for 90 simultaneously switching internal CMOS inverters.
Maximum and minimum noisy power supply voltage
for 9 simultaneously switching CMOS output inverters.
Noise generated due to one switching output buffer.
Signal operation for the modified low SSN output buffer.
Total current consumption giving a nearly zero current
derivative during circuit operation.
Example of stuck-at fault detection.
Circuit example to illustrate backtrace and backtrack
procedures.
Circuit example to illustrate crosstalk test pattern gene-
ration.
Phase 1 in ATPG process.
Phase 2 in ATPG process.
Phase 3 in ATPG process.
Circuit illustrating delay fault test.
Circuit with no crosstalk problem.
Circuit with crosstalk problem.
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
155
156
156
157
158
159
159
161
162
163
163
164
166
167
167
174
176
180
181
182
183
186
187
187

List of Tables
3.1
3.2
5.1
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
Dissipated energy from HSPICE simulations, in pJ, for
coincident transitions, and single transitions. The last
column shows theoretical energy, considering only en-
ergy due to switching output capacitances.
Dissipated energy from HSPICE simulations, in pJ, for
different relative driver strengths and combinations of
output transitions. The input transition of driver 2 is de-
layed by 1 ns with respect to input transition of driver 1
(line 1 switches first).
ITRS 2001 predictions for wiring dimensions [2].
AND function with 9-valued algebra.
OR function with 9-valued algebra.
NOT function with 9-valued algebra.
ATPG fault coverage percentage for ISCAS combina-
tional circuits, considering 200 random faults.
86
143
178
178
178
184
89
xvii

To our families

Preface
Interconnections are a most important design issue nowadays. Trends in the
microelectronic industry are leading to unwanted interconnect effects, espe-
cially noise, becoming more important. This increasing importance is mainly
due to three reasons: increasing integration, increasing signal frequency spec-
trum components, and increasing complexity.
The increase in integration and frequency of signals account for coupling
problems between adjacent lines and a growing importance of parasitic com-
ponents (capacitance and inductance). These two phenomena introduce analog
effects in digital design, and are therefore direct causes of the noise problem.
The increase in complexity is perhaps more indirectly related to noise and
the interconnection problem, but it is also very important. The drive to reduce
the time to market of new electronic products make design verification ex-
tremely important and this pre-fabrication verification must be as accurate as
possible to reduce the risk of having to redesign failed prototypes. However,
the analog effects introduced by interconnections make traditional digital ver-
ification tools inappropriate for addressing the problem. Recently there have
been many advances in interconnect simulation algorithms and efficient simu-
lators can calculate solutions for sophisticated models. This is a very important
subject and, with these algorithms and computer availability, accurate noise
waveforms for a small number of coupled interconnections can nowadays be
calculated easily. The problem is that from the point of view of the whole in-
tegrated system, the applicability of these sophisticated models is necessarily
limited because today’s digital designs are so complex and the number of inter-
connections is so large that a complete electrical simulation of the whole chip
is impossible, as it would take weeks or months.
Given this complexity problem for verification, there are two possible so-
lutions: one is to simplify the interconnect models. The other is to address
interconnect issues from the beginning of the design process, so they can be in
some way implemented as design rules in the design flow.
xix

With respect to interconnect models, the old consideration of an intercon-
nect as an ideal short-circuit has successively evolved to a capacitive, a resistive-
capacitive, and finally an inductive model and transmission line models, as the
necessity to include more effects has arisen. However, the fundamental basis
of these models is often unknown to electrical designers, so it is difficult to
judge when one model or another is more suitable.
The establishment of a design flow oriented to integrate interconnect prob-
lems must start from the knowledge of what the mechanisms for these noise
problems are. Eventually, this knowledge must be implemented into CAD
tools. Some existing physical design tools already take into account these ef-
fects. Other tools are needed, such as functional verification tools modeling
interconnection noise as high-level models, and expert systems that automati-
cally guide the designer.
This book addresses two main problems with interconnections at the chip
and package level: crosstalk and simultaneous switching noise. It is intended
to provide the notions required for understanding the problem of modeling
starting from physical arguments, so that it is possible to select an appropriate
interconnection model that is both simple and accurate for the type of prob-
lems arising. Also, simple models of crosstalk and switching noise are used
to give general ideas that may eventually lead to CAD implementation as dis-
cussed above. Finally, some verification and test issues related to interconnec-
tion noise are discussed. Throughout the book, the examples used to illustrate
the discussion are based on digital CMOS circuits, but the general treatment of
the problems is made from a fundamental point of view, so that the discussion
can be applied to different technologies. The book should be of interest to chip
designers, especially to digital designers dealing with interconnect problems
who want a deeper explanation of these phenomena. In this sense, the book’s
orientation is towards giving general information rather than being a compila-
tion of practical cases. Each chapter contains a list of references for the topics
dealt with, both recent and classic ones.
The six chapters of the book are grouped in the three topics mentioned
above. The first two chapters provide a physical foundation for on-chip and
package interconnect models. First, chapter 1 is an introduction describing
the general aspects of the technology of this type of interconnection, while the
main topic of chapter 2 is the derivation of electrical models of interconnec-
tions and their relationship to electromagnetic wave propagation laws. In the
second block, chapters 3 and 4 describe and model the kind of noise effects
of on-chip and package interconnections respectively. The third block relies
on the previous chapters to derive some general design rules regarding on-chip
and package interconnections in 5, and finally, chapter 6 deals with a not so
familiar topic: detection and testing for interconnection-induced noise.
xx
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS

Acknowledgments
During the preparation of this manuscript, there were many people who
made the work possible.
Firstly, we would like to thank professor Antonio Rubio for introducing us
to this subject at the beginning of our scientific careers. His encouragement and
enthusiasm always guided us. We also want to thank our respective research
groups at the UPC in Barcelona and at the UIB in Balearic Islands. At the UIB,
we particularly would like to thank Eugeni Isern for his collaboration on part
of the results, and for his help with the editing tasks.
Also, Francisco Mesa, from the University of Sevilla, kindly answered some
questions on wave propagation in lossy media.
Finally, our families were very patient while the manuscript was being pre-
pared. Thanks to our wives, Teresa and Maria, and daughters, Maria and An-
tonia.
This work has been partially supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science
and Technology, and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) from
the European Union through the projects TIC2001-2337 and TIC2002-1238.
xxi

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 1
MICROELECTRONIC INTERCONNECTIONS
The research topic known as Signal Integrity, or also, as recently proposed,
Electrical Modeling of Interconnects and Packages [1], is a very important part
of the electronic system design process. Its objective is to obtain a model of
the physical phenomenon of signal propagation that can be used by electronic
designers to predict any distortion of the information transmitted. Thus, the
extracted model can either be electrical, for use with electrical design using
currents and voltages as observable variables, or it can be logical, for use with
higher level description tools.
The problems concerning signal propagation through interconnects are briefly
explained in the first section. After this, the main technological characteristics
of microelectronic interconnections, inside the chip and at package level, are
also explained.
1.
Signal transmission in interconnects
Any electronic system, at any level, is composed of functional blocks (tran-
sistors, gates, sub-circuits, IPs, cores, processors, boards...) interconnected
with each other; that is, capable of transmitting information from one part to
another. This information is in the form of a voltage or a current value.
Ideally, the communication between two interconnected blocks should be
instantaneous and without any distortion. Under these conditions, the system
is completely described by its building blocks and the way they are connected.
However, this ideal picture cannot be achieved in practice. The reason is that
physically, there is always a propagation time for transmitting the information
from one point to the other. If the signals vary very slowly compared to this
propagation time, the transmission may be considered instantaneous and the
ideal picture is valid. If, on the other hand, the signals vary rapidly compared
to the propagation time, several effects may be observed:
1

2
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Signal Delay. This fact must be taken into account when designing the
system to ensure that all blocks receive the information at the expected
time.
Reflections coming from the end of the interconnection and interfering with
the signal sent.
Interference between nearby interconnections (crosstalk).
All these non-ideal effects may influence the behavior of the system and
they represent a limitation on performance. If not properly addressed at the
design stage, they may be large enough to completely distort the transmitted
information and therefore cause a system malfunction.
1.1
The problem with interconnections
The evolution of electronic technology, as dictated by Moore’s law, is to-
wards denser, more complex, and faster systems. All three trends imply a
larger interconnection effect, once considered only from the functional point
of view. Today, a microelectronic design that does not consider interconnection
effects from the beginning of the design process is most probably condemned
to a large number of trial and error iterations, with the associated increase in
cost and time to market.
The reason for the ever-increasing importance of interconnections can be
understood using electrical models of the interconnections. The physical foun-
dations of the electrical models will be fully justified in Chapter 2, but let us
for the moment use them as an introductory explanation.
The electrical parameters that characterize an interconnection are resistance
(R), capacitance (C) and inductance (L). The interconnection response to a
certain voltage or current excitation can be derived from the relative values
of those parameters. Roughly speaking, one can consider that the delay is
mostly dependent on R and C (although L is also important for high frequency
signals). On the other hand, crosstalk interference depends on mutual C and
L between close lines. Let us qualitatively analyze the influence of technology
trends on parameters and their effect on signal integrity.
1.1.1
Increase in integration
As the number of devices per unit area increases, the interconnections be-
tween them must evolve towards a reduced cross-sectional dimension and a
greater number of vertical conductor layers.
The reducing cross-sectional dimension leads to more tightly coupled inter-
connections, and therefore a higher probability of unwanted crosstalk interfer-
ence between them.

Microelectronic Interconnections
3
The increased number of vertical interconnection layers imply that the up-
per layers are further away from the reference (connected to the substrate) un-
less neighboring upper layer conductors are devoted to reference. In general,
though, upper layers show lower capacitance, and higher inductance, and this
makes the conductors more susceptible to perturbations as higher frequency
components in the signal spectrum become more important in new technolo-
gies.
At the same time, the increase in device density forces a reduction in cross-
sectional dimensions that increases R. This increase in R produces a double
effect: on one hand, adding to the delay budget, and on the other hand, produc-
ing a signal distortion.
1.1.2
Increase in complexity
The impact of chip technology trends on the delay was studied in the 1980s
[2], [3], and it was shown that the increase in complexity implies an increase
in the length of global interconnections, and therefore, in delay. This increase
in length can be expressed as a function of the chip’s area for global intercon-
nections:
Also associated with the increase in complexity, is an increase in number of
conductor layers to interconnect the high number of devices.
1.1.3
Signal frequency
Device (transistor) driving capability increases as a result of technology
scaling. This means higher frequency components in signals are transmitted
through interconnections. Here, frequency refers not only to sinusoidal sig-
nals, but to the frequency spectrum of digital signals. From Fourier analysis, a
digital signal with a smaller rise time, will show higher frequency components.
A simplified analysis [4] can give a dependence between the rise/fall time of a
digital signal transition and its maximum significant frequency,
Higher frequency content means two things: firstly, circuit parameters L and
C will have a great influence on the line impedance (its effect is proportional
to frequency). For example, coupling between lines will increase from DC
or low-frequency signals to high frequency signal propagation, because the
capacitance between them cause the impedance between one line and the other
to reduce with frequency.
Secondly, reflections of the signal are greater for high-frequency signals.
There are two ways of looking at this: one is in the time domain, considering

4
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
that reflections will be important if the signal at the driver end has reached its
full amplitude before arriving at the end of the line:
where 
is the time of propagation of the signal along the line and 
is the rise
time of the signal at the driver end.
A second way of examining the importance of reflections is to relate the
time of propagation to the line length (through propagation velocity), and the
signal rise time to signal wavelength. Both magnitudes can then be compared
by using a worst-case approach with the shortest wavelength, corresponding to
1.2
Physical factors in interconnect design
As discussed above, the quality of signal transmission will eventually de-
pend on physical factors of the interconnections that determine the respective
values of R, C and L.
There are three physical factors influencing electrical parameters:
Material properties of the conductors forming the interconnections and the
dielectrics between them: conductivity in the case of conductors, and di-
electric constant (as well as possible losses) from the dielectrics. This in-
fluences R and C respectively.
Dimensions of conductor and dielectric materials: length, width and thick-
ness of conductors, distance between centers of lines (pitch), and dielec-
tric thickness, which determine distance between stacked interconnections.
This influences R, C and L.
Connection of the conductors carrying reference voltages, usually known
as power supply distribution. Influence on C and L.
The first item depends exclusively on technology, the second one depends
on technological restrictions and design, and the third item depends mostly on
design, but is also restricted by the type of technology used.
2.
On-Chip interconnections
2.1
Technology
A typical microelectronic manufacturing process consists of successive steps
to create the transistors on a semiconductor substrate. After that, several layers
of conductive material separated by dielectric layers are deposited and selec-
tively etched to form the interconnections between transistors [5]. After the

Microelectronic Interconnections
5
deposition process of the conductive material, a photolithography process de-
fines the horizontal dimensions (width and pitch) of interconnections.
2.1.1
Conductive materials
Aluminum and copper are the two conductive materials currently used for
on-chip interconnections. Each material defines the type of fabrication pro-
cess: aluminum-based alloys for mature processes, and copper-based alloys
for modern, high performance processes. The aluminum is deposited using a
physical vapor deposition (PVD) or chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process.
In addition, diffusion barriers based on TiN are deposited to avoid contamina-
tion of lower layers. The main limitation of the aluminum-based process is
its higher resistivity, compared to copper. To have interconnection lines both
narrow and with low resistance, the solution is to increase the metal thickness,
or aspect ratio. This increase in aspect ratio makes the additional planarization
process —either chemical, mechanical, or both— necessary. Aluminum can
be doped with copper to obtain a lower resistivity interconnection.
The transition to copper interconnections, commercially introduced by IBM
in the late 1990’s, allows the manufacture of narrower lines with the same
resistance as aluminum lines, and, therefore, more densely interconnected sys-
tems. The copper can be deposited by an electrochemical process, or by vapor
deposition (CVD or PVD). Copper is a more serious contaminant than alu-
minum, and therefore, stop barriers based on tantalum are deposited before
the copper to protect the underlying silicon devices. Also, the copper is not
as easily etched as aluminum, so the damascene process is used, consisting of
depositing the copper on previously etched oxide trenches, and later removing
the upper copper layer by CMP (chemical mechanical polishing). This process
uses an extra etch-stop layer, usually 
[6]. As this etch-stop layer has a
high dielectric constant (around 5), its presence can influence the capacitance
of the interconnection lines if it is not properly controlled.
The manufacturing difficulties related to Cu interconnections make it a more
expensive solution than Al-based interconnections, but this extra cost can be
compensated for by better performance. A hybrid alternative in which the
lower layers are Al interconnections and the upper layers are Cu, is also possi-
ble. In either case, the effective resistivity of manufactured lines is higher than
the bulk material’s resistivity (Al or Cu) because the deposition process causes
the formation of grains that affect electron mobility, and this fact must be taken
into account when calculating line resistance.
2.1.2
Dielectric materials
The most common dielectric material between conductive layers is silicon
dioxide 
due to its good dielectric properties and its compatibility with
the rest of the process steps. The dielectric material influences the value of

6
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
capacitance between conductors through its dielectric constant 
The higher
the dielectric constant, the higher the line capacitance, and therefore, the bigger
the delay and potential crosstalk interference between lines. With regard to
delay in particular, there is a very intensive search for a compatible dielectric
with a smaller dielectric constant 
dielectric materials). Silicon dioxide
has a value of 
around 3.9. New materials and deposition processes give
rise to less dense materials that present constants between 2.5 and 1.5 [7], [8],
although most of them are currently at the development stage.
2.2
Scaling trends
After the manufacturing process is finished, the physical structure of on-
chip interconnections is the one represented in figure 1.1. High- performance
processes nowadays offer up to seven or eight metal layers, while a low-cost
process may have only two or three. The large number of metal layers al-
lows the design of more compactly interconnected systems. Lower layers are
devoted to local routing, interconnecting nearby elements (transistors inside
gates and neighboring gates). The upper layers are devoted to global routing,
transmitting signals along the whole chip and voltage references. As the global
routing lines are the longest, their cross-section must be bigger than local rout-
ing lines, in order to keep their resistance into reasonable values. Therefore, a
reverse scaling scheme is applied with respect to interconnections: the lower
layers are scaled down with the rest of the technology, to increase interconnec-
tion density, while the upper layers are scaled up to decrease the resistance of
global routing, as is schematically shown in figure 1.1.
2.3
Electrical reference connection schemes
The voltage signals transmitted by interconnections are actually a voltage
difference with respect to a fixed voltage reference. The two references that
are present in the electrical connection system are the power supply connec-
tions, denoted as 
or 
(highest voltage) and 
or GND, “ground”1
(lowest voltage). The distance between the signal conductor and the conduc-
tors carrying the reference voltages has a severe influence on the quality of
the signal waveform, improving this quality as the distance between signal and
reference decreases, as will be seen in subsequent chapters. Thus, the way the
reference voltages are physically distributed along the chip will also have an
influence on the quality of the signals transmitted.
In silicon integrated circuits, the semiconductor substrate is connected to
GND or 
through chip lines contacting the substrate in order to bias the
1Actually, the term “ground” used as the lowest voltage reference is misleading, because its actual voltage
is not necessarily the same as the real ground voltage. However, as the term is used extensively, it will be
employed here as equivalent to

Microelectronic Interconnections
7
transistors. Therefore, the substrate can be considered as another reference
conductor, sometimes being the closest reference conductor especially for lower
layers. This means that the line capacitance of lower interconnect layers is very
much dependent on the distance to substrate. Upper layers are mostly screened
from the substrate effect by lower layers and, to ensure good signal integrity,
reference lines must be routed close to them, especially for high-speed signals,
which are more susceptible to noise perturbations.
The semiconductor substrate usually shows back metallization that makes
electrical contact with the package die attach pad. This die attach pad can
either be externally connected to the ground terminal or left unconnected. If
connected, it can act as a small reference plane for lead-frame packages which
do not provide special package layers for reference planes, and this can there-
fore improve signal transmission.
3.
Package level interconnections
3.1
Technology
The manufacturing process and materials for microelectronic packages are
more diverse than the chip manufacturing. Several characteristics of package
families are summarized in chapter 4.

8
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
3.2
Scaling trends in packaging
Chips cannot accomplish the function for which they were designed if they
cannot communicate with other components of the system sending and receiv-
ing data and receiving the voltage supply. Packages, then, have a double mis-
sion: to provide the physical substrate for communication and power supply
and to give protection to the chip in hazardous environments. Another very
important aspect is thermal management; the package must be able to provide
a low thermal resistance path between the chip and the environment, such that
the power dissipated by the chip does not increase its temperature excessively.
Packages provide the bridge between the silicon and system (board) level.
As the technological development of both parts is not moving at the same pace,
an increasing distance between them is observed. On one hand, the increase
in chip complexity has translated as an increase in I/O demands. This increase
is modeled as Rent’s Rule [9], which gives an empirical formula relating the
number of components in a given sub-system to the number of I/O terminals
necessary for communication with the rest of the system:
T being the number of I/O ports, K the mean I/O ports of each gate in the
circuit, G the number of gates in the circuit, and the so-called Rent exponent,
an empirical parameter taking a value between 0.5 and 1 depending on the cir-
cuit architecture. This ratio expresses an exponential increase of I/O ports with
circuit complexity. This is a tough challenge for circuit packaging, which must
be capable of accommodating this large number of I/O ports and distributing
them to the board level connections, which have a larger pitch than available
for chip-level interconnections.
A simultaneous trend is to reduce the size and weight of the whole sys-
tem, which obviously implies a need for the miniaturization of microelectronic
packages. Chip Scale Packages (CSP) are packages that show a footprint area
of at most 1.2 times that of the bare die [10]. However, the miniaturization
possibilities for the package are not the same as for the chip.
At the same time, the package must propagate the signals without introduc-
ing more distortion. This is done using several manufacturing technologies
and package types, from single layer interconnection structures to complex
multi-layer interconnections, including reference planes at package level. The
choice between the many alternatives is a complex one, where factors as di-
verse as signal integrity, mechanical reliability, power dissipation capability,
size/weight, and cost must be taken into account.
3.3
Power voltage distribution and switching noise
The reference voltages are distributed in the package either through package
leads, just as signal lines are, or through planes. The way they are distributed

REFERENCES
9
is an important issue affecting the quality of the signals transmitted. Some
package technologies allow the use of planes for power distribution and some
do not. In any case, a number of leads in the package will be devoted to power
distribution and the way these leads are geometrically assigned has an influence
on signal integrity, as will be shown in chapter 4.
Switching noise (or Simultaneous Switching Noise, SSN) is one of the main
electrical effects introduced by packages. It is produced when there is a sudden
current demand by a part of the circuit. Due to the inductance of the power and
ground voltage distribution, the current derivative causes a voltage fluctuation
to appear at the power and ground terminals of the circuit. This fluctuation
affects not only the switching element, but the whole circuit and, if important
enough, it may affect the logic value of storage elements and propagate to other
interconnected chips.
As a first approximation, the noise can be expressed as a function of the
number of switching elements of the circuit [11], [12]:
being N the number of switching elements, and 
the so-called effective
inductance. The value of the effective inductance is a combination of the self
and mutual inductances of the different pins involved in the switching and can
be put explicitly as a function of these inductances only for very simplified
cases [12].
In general, the effective inductance concept is a particular case of the equiv-
alent complex impedance of the power distribution system. For an ideal power
distribution, its impedance should be zero, and in that case, there would not
be any switching noise. In reality, there is complex impedance depending on
frequency. When there is a current demand, a voltage is produced that alters
the value of power supply voltage seen by the switching element, or by any
other element connected to the same power distribution system. Thus, it is
possible to characterize the power distribution by its equivalent impedance, as
a function of frequency.
References
Ruehli A.E. and Cangellaris A.C. “Progress in the methodologies for the electrical mod-
eling of interconnects and electronic packages”. Proceedings of the IEEE, 89(5), May
2001.
Saraswat K. C. and Mohammadi F. “Effect of Scaling of Interconnections on the Time
Delay of VLSI Circuits”. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 17(2), April 1982.
Bakoglu H. B. Circuits, Interconnections and Packaging for VLSI. Addison-Wesley,
1990.
[1]
[2]
[3]

10
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Johnson B., Quarles T., Newton A. R., Pederson D. O., and Sangiovanni-Vicentelli A.
SPICE3 Version 3e User’s Manual. University of California, Dpt. of Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Sciences. University of California. Berkeley, CA, 94720, 1991.
Quirk M. and Serda J. Semiconductor manufacturing technology. Prentice Hall, 2000.
Lin X.W. and Pramanik D. “Future interconnect technologies and copper metallization”.
Solid State Technology, 41(10), October 1998.
Kikkawa T. “Present status and future trend of low-k dielectrics/interconnect technology
for ULSI”. In 7th International Symposium on Plasma- and Process-Induced Damage,
2002.
Lin S., Changming Jin, L. Lui, Minghsing Tsai, Daniels M., Gonzalez A., Wetzel J.T.,
Monnig K.A., Winebarger P.A., Jang S., Yu D., and Liang M.S. “Low-k dielectrics
characterization for damascene integration”. In IEEE 2001 International Interconnect
Technology Conference, 2001.
Donath W. E. “Wire Length Distribution for Placements of Computer Logic”. IBM J.
Res. Develop., 25(3), May 1981.
Lai Z. and Liu J. The nordic electronics packaging guideline. http://extra.ivf.se/ngl/,
2000.
Davidson E. E. “Electrical Design of a High Speed Computer Package”. IBM J. Res.
Develop., 26(3), May 1982.
Katopis G. A. “Delta–I Noise Specification for a High–Performance Computing Ma-
chine”. Proceedings of the IEEE, 73(9), September 1985.
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

Chapter 2
INTERCONNECT MODELING
IN CIRCUIT SIMULATION
As stated in the previous chapter, the performance of electronic systems is
more and more critically dependent on the effects introduced by interconnec-
tions. It is therefore very important to have good models of the interconnection
effect at the design phase to prevent design-manufacturing iterations and to re-
duce the time to market of electronic products.
There are several possible models, with varying degrees of accuracy: from a
simple capacitor to a frequency-dependent parameter transmission line. All of
them are a more or less simplified interpretation or model of the fundamental
physical phenomenon, which is the propagation of an electromagnetic wave in
the complex metal-dielectric structure formed by the interconnection network
of an electronic circuit. The problem is that a detailed electromagnetic analy-
sis of a complete digital circuit with millions of interconnections and devices
is beyond the computation capabilities possible today. Electromagnetic phe-
nomena are therefore reduced to electrical models. Even complex electrical
models are reduced, when accuracy is not critical, to simpler electrical models
because the simulation time of all the system would otherwise be prohibitively
long. The question is, then, how to assign a proper model to each interconnec-
tion sub- system so that the model predicts only the number of possible effects
important for that sub-system, without being so complex that the simulation
time is too large.
This chapter presents the different models, starting from a description of
the fundamental physics of signal propagation, to give an understanding of
the difference between them, and attempting to establish rules for selecting, a
priori, the model to use when simulating a system.
11

12
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.
Physical foundations for circuit models of
interconnections
We will start by trying to understand the physics behind simple digital switch-
ing of a gate from the point of view of signal propagation in an interconnect.
Let us consider an idealized 2D physical interconnect structure, but still
fundamentally similar to the phenomenon we are interested in, shown in fig-
ure 2.1. It consists of two conductors with an externally applied electric field
between them. These two conductors represent the 
and 
lines in a cir-
cuit and the electric field is applied via an external power supply. In the middle
of these conductors, a third conductor (what we will call a signal line) can be
alternatively connected at one of its ends either to 
or to 
by two ideal
switches (a model of a digital gate).
Figure 2.1 schematically shows the two different static charge and electric
field distributions resulting from connecting the signal line either to one or the
other reference metal. In one case, the electric field is confined in the region
between the lower metal and the line, while it is null in the region between the
signal and the upper metal. In the other case, the field is confined in the region
close to the upper metal. Clearly then, a change of state implies a change in
the electric field, which in turn causes the appearance of a magnetic field as
described by Maxwell’s equations:
An electromagnetic wave is therefore generated because of the switching
event, propagated in the dielectric between conductors. This wave carries the
information that the switching event occurred and will arrive at the end of the
line, to be interpreted by the subsequent gate. At the end of the line it will
probably be partially reflected, and, after some trips back and forth, it will
eventually disappear, giving rise to a new static electric field distribution.
From the above description, then, it follows that an electronic circuit inter-
connection is in reality a waveguide: a metal structure to confine and guide the
propagation of the electromagnetic signal. Its success in doing so will deter-
mine the quality of the interconnection and the signal it transmits (generally
referred to as signal integrity).
From the point of view of the electronic designer, however, the interest lies
describing the phenomenon in terms of voltage and current at the connection
points of each circuit element, rather than in terms of electromagnetic fields at
each point in space. Therefore, there is a great reduction in complexity. Fur-
thermore, electronic semiconductor devices and components are modeled in

Interconnect modeling
13
terms of voltage-current responses and many methods for designing and an-
alyzing electrical circuits have been developed and implemented in computer
programs.
In this chapter, a brief justification of electrical models for interconnections
will be presented, based on electromagnetic theory. This will enable us to
understand the limitations and range of validity of such models, which will
subsequently be used throughout this book.
1.1
TEM waves
Considering ideal conductors (null resistivity) and dielectrics (null conduc-
tivity), neither the electrical nor the magnetic fields will have components in
the direction of the propagation of the wave. These waves are therefore called
TEM, for Transverse ElectroMagnetic waves [1].
Taking as 
axis the direction of propagation (figure 2.2) and following
Maxwell’s laws:

14
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
being 
and 
the transverse electric and magnetic fields respectively, and
and 
the unit vectors in the x- and y-direction respectively.
The wave equation for the transverse electric and magnetic fields can be
derived from the other components of vector equations 2.1 and 2.2 :
The solutions of the above equations are wave functions propagating in the
direction, with a velocity
1.1.1
Electrical model for TEM waves
In order to put the Maxwell’s equations in more compact form, a transverse
curl operator of a vector field with only 
and 
components, 
is
defined as:

Interconnect modeling
15
From the 
component in equation 2.1, the following expressions are ob-
tained for the electric field:
Equation 2.7, means there is an equivalent to the electrostatic potential,
in the plane orthogonal to the direction of propagation of the wave
for each value of 
Correspondingly, a definition exists for the potential dif-
ference for each
where the path of integration is arbitrary between conductors 1 and 2, as in the
electrostatic case. This result justifies the calculation of the electrostatic field
of the transverse structure for the analysis of uniform transmission lines (in the
z-direction).
From equation 2.10, with 2.8 and 2.9:
where, vector 
is a differential vector orthogonal to the differential
line vector dl.  It can then be interpreted as a surface-per-unit-length vector,
and the last integral, as the surface integral of 
per unit length in the
direction of propagation. Now, using the definition of inductance:
Equation 2.11 can be written as the first Telegrapher’s equation:
where now L represents an inductance per unit length, and I the current in any
one of the conductors in the direction of propagation.
Similarly, current in one of the conductors can be obtained from the usual
definition of magnetostatics, assuming that current density is only non-zero

16
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
inside the conductors and it is only in the direction of propagation
Therefore
and
being 
the displacement vector.
In this case, the path of integration is arbitrary and closed around any of
the two conductors. As before, the last integral may be interpreted as a surface
integral per unit length, and with Gauss’s law and the definition of capacitance,
the second Telegrapher’s equation is obtained:
being C a capacitance per unit length in the direction of propagation.
It is easy to see that the two telegrapher’s equations represent wave equa-
tions for voltage and current with a propagation constant given by 
With a
phasor formulation
with
The solution is then
Using either equation 2.12 or 2.18, it is possible to find the relation between
current and voltage amplitudes:

Interconnect modeling
17
The relation between voltage and current amplitudes is defined as the char-
acteristic impedance:
On the other hand, 
gives the velocity of propagation:
Both magnitudes, 
and 
are real and independent of frequency, which
means there are no losses in propagation and the waves propagate undistorted.
This case is therefore called the lossless or ideal transmission line.
The assumptions made to derive the telegrapher’s equations from field equa-
tions are:
1
2
There are no field components in the direction of propagation. This is the
case when there are no losses in the conductors nor in the dielectric.
Current density is exclusively in the direction of propagation, and zero out-
side the conductors.
1.2
Transmission lines with small losses (quasi-TEM
model)
Real conductors and dielectrics will show losses due to finite conductivity
and resistivity respectively. In this case, the conditions enumerated in the pre-
vious section no longer hold. However, if losses are small, it is still possible to
find an approximate interpretation in terms of quasi-static voltage and current
in the orthogonal plane, and, therefore, an electrical model [2], [3]. As it is
obtained from a perturbation of the solution for the TEM model, it is called the
quasi-TEM model.
where now R and G are series resistance and parallel conductance per unit
length respectively, and they are obtained from a static analysis of the cross-
section. In principle, therefore, their value is independent of frequency. We

18
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
will see later that frequency-dependent parameters are considered for special
cases.
The assumptions made to arrive at these equations are:
1
2
Current on the conductors flows only in the direction of propagation.
There is only a small perturbation of the fields with respect to the TEM
solution.
Under these conditions, a formulation in terms of voltages and currents de-
fined in the transverse plane of the structure can be found. The solution of
the above equations for V and I is an attenuated wave propagating in the z-
direction. The propagation constant is
which is complex, meaning that there is an attenuation constant,
Now, the velocity of propagation, obtained from 
is dependent on fre-
quency. There will, therefore, be some dispersion in the different frequency
components of the signal, which means the signal will be distorted besides
being attenuated.
The expression for characteristic impedance is:
This latter expression assumes implicitly 
and 
(small
losses).
1.3
Simplifications of the RLGC model
The “complete” RLGC electrical model derived from physical assumptions
can, in some circumstances, be simplified by neglecting some of the electrical
parameters, In this way, the response given by the simplified model within a
certain frequency range of interest is very similar to that of the RLGC model,
at a much smaller computational cost. For the purpose of this book, we will
classify electrical models as non-inductive or inductive.

Interconnect modeling
19
1.3.1
Non-inductive models
At DC (zero frequency) and low frequency, given that the line termination is
capacitive and the line is electrically isolated, no DC current flows through the
interconnection. Thus, the simplified model consists of neglecting R, L and G,
giving rise to a single (lumped) capacitive line model. At higher frequencies,
as AC currents through the capacitors increase, the effect of line resistance
starts to be significant, and, therefore, the RC model should be considered.
For the lower range of frequencies, a single resistor and capacitor is accurate
enough (lumped RC model), but as frequency increases, more RC stages may
be necessary, and at the limit, the distributed RC model is made up of an infi-
nite number of RC stages, with equations corresponding to the RLGC model
with null L and G:
This equation corresponds to a diffusion equation and no longer to wave
propagation. It is therefore physically incorrect and should be regarded as a
mathematical simplification for the sake of simplicity.
In general, all solutions of the non-inductive models have in common that
they do not describe oscillations with a monotonic excitation. These models
are therefore inadequate under ringing (oscillations due to successive reflec-
tions) conditions, as will be discussed later.
1.3.2
Inductive models
For still higher frequencies, line impedance is not purely resistive, but has a
non-negligible AC component, and a line model with inductance is necessary.
Conductance can be neglected up to a certain frequency limit, when the com-
plete, more physical RLGC model is necessary. This will be valid while the
physical quasi-TEM approximation is valid.
In principle it is possible to consider a lumped RLC model, but, given the
frequency range involved, it usually makes more sense to consider a distributed
RLC model, with equations:
These equations are wave equations for V and I, and they are therefore more
accurate.
Figure 2.3 shows the validity range qualitatively in terms of frequency of
the models following the above classification and indicating the complexity

20
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
(in computational cost) of each type of model. The maximum frequency of va-
lidity for each model is not exact, because it also depends on the accuracy re-
quired. For example, a digital simulation in the early stages of physical design
will probably need only a rough estimate of delay and therefore a capacitive
model will be enough.
It should be noted that the frequency for validity for each model refers here
to the frequency spectrum of the signal propagating inside the line, not at the
driver input. This is an important distinction, because parameters like line
resistance, and driver resistance can attenuate high-frequency components of
input signals, and the propagating waves will show a lower frequency content,
leading to the possibility of using a simpler model. This issue will be examined
in a later section.
1.4
Validity of the quasi-TEM assumption
As explained before, the quasi-TEM model was derived using several as-
sumptions about the propagating fields. In reality, both conductors forming a
transmission line will have finite conductivity. This means the current in the
conductors will generate a longitudinal electric field due to Ohm’s law. In ad-
dition, the skin effect will concentrate the conductor longitudinal current at the
periphery of the conductor, causing an increase in resistance and a decrease in
inductance for high frequencies. All these effects, if significant, may lead to
deviations from pure TEM wave propagation and therefore, make the electrical
models derived from it invalid.
Firstly, it is important to try to determine the limits of the electrical model
from physical dimensions. Several papers have addressed this problem [4], [5].
In addition, Brews [6] presented a way of deriving an electrical model even for
high loss, non-TEM waveguides.

Interconnect modeling
21
Mesa et al. [4], [7] presented a dimensional analysis to assert the validity of
the quasi-TEM analysis for a waveguide structure with substrate losses. This is
a practical case, since in all integrated circuits the substrate is a semiconductor
with moderate conductivity, which, at least in principle, can invalidate quasi-
TEM assumptions. In the case in which the losses are very significant, a full-
wave analysis is necessary for analyzing signal transmission.
The analysis is based on the condition that the longitudinal fields
  and
are much smaller than their transverse components, but on a spatial average
rather than on a point-to-point basis.
where 
means spatial average, 
means modulus, and 
means vector
norm.
The analysis in [7] is for lines embedded in general media which can present
dielectric and magnetic anisotropy, and generally both magnetic permeability
and dielectric permittivity will be complex ( and 
respectively). The con-
dition obtained is related to characteristic transverse dimensions of the line
structure 
to 
and 
and to signal frequency, 
as:
where, in the above equation, the spatial averages for 
and are in the region
where the fields are non-zero (or at least, sufficiently important).
For the usual simpler cases of CMOS integrated circuit technology, in which
magnetic permeability is practically the same for all materials, only the permit-
tivity varies with position, r. For 
or air, the permittivity is real, while for
silicon substrate, it will be complex because of its conductivity (0.01 S/mm to
0.02 S/mm for current technologies):
Hence, for the cases of silicon integrated circuits:
Now, let us make some rough but reasonable estimates of the validity of the
quasi-TEM model for lines in silicon ICs.
Let us take some extreme cases. The first case to consider will be one in
which the fields are far away from the substrate. In this case, conductivity

22
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
is essentially zero in the region of interest, and therefore, so it is its spatial
average. In general, this situation can be expressed as:
Under this condition, the range of validity for the quasi-TEM model is:
The spatial average of permittivity will have a value between that of air
8.9 pF/m and the value for 
The most restrictive
situation is that of a spatial average close to 35.4 pF/m. If we take 
as
a typical value for the dimension of a transmission line structure cross-section,
the validity of quasi-TEM model holds for signal frequencies such that:
Such a frequency limit is beyond significant frequencies of digital signals in
integrated circuits today and for the near future, so the quasi-TEM model is
clearly applicable in these cases.
Now, let us consider the general case in which the fields extend to the semi-
conductor substrate. In this case, the spatial average should consider the region
of the silicon substrate as well as the 
and, possibly, air. Hence, the spa-
tial average conductivity will not be zero, but a value of between, say, 20 S/m
and 0 S/m for current CMOS technologies. The spatial average permittivity
will also increase, because silicon presents a higher real permittivity. In order
to obtain a rough estimate for the range of validity, let us model the spatial
average permittivity and conductivity as a function of a parameter: effective
relative permittivity, 
We will assume that when 
is close to that of
then the average conductivity will approach zero. When 
is close to
that of Si substrate, the conductivity will reach the value for silicon, which we
take as 20 S/m in this example. Although simplified, this is an intuitive behav-
ior. The results are shown in figure 2.4, where dmax represents the maximum
cross-section dimension such that the quasi-TEM approximation is still valid,
in function of signal frequency propagating in the interconnection structure.
Here, two regions can be seen: for low frequencies and finite conductivity the
dependence of  
is like 
For high frequencies, it goes like 
as the
case when conductivity is zero.
In any case, it is seen that the frequency limit for a distance of 
is
of the order of 100 GHz, which validates the quasi-TEM model with RLGC
parameters in the majority of cases for current CMOS integrated circuits.
2.
Lossless transmission line model
Now we have introduced the physical foundations for the electrical models,
we will concentrate on examining the response of these electrical models to

Interconnect modeling
23
common situations found in integrated circuits. The objective of the following
sections is to try to find a set of rules for selecting a model which is both
accurate and simple for simulating the conditions found (type of driver, load,
line length and frequency characteristics of the signal to be transmitted).
One effect of signal transmission in interconnections is the appearance of
oscillations (ringing). This kind of voltage oscillation may induce transient er-
rors, or in general, a distortion of the original transmitted waveform. They are
physically related to reflections of the electromagnetic wave, which translate
in the electrical model into reflections of voltage and current waves.
Firstly, the resistive driver model will be considered for an analysis of ring-
ing. Then, the effect of signal rise time in resistive drivers will be considered
and, finally, a more realistic CMOS driver model will be analyzed.
2.1
Resistive driver model
Whenever an incident voltage wave encounters a discontinuity in impedance,
such as a change in line parameters or the impedance of the load of the line
(figure 2.5), part of the wave is reflected and part of it is transmitted. From the
figure it can be written:

24
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Applying the definition of characteristic impedance, we can find the ex-
pression of the transmitted and reflected voltages for a general case where
the incident voltage in the transmission line (impedance 
) arrives at an end
(impedance 
) where there is an arbitrary fixed voltage source, 
From the
equation for currents 2.44:
that is,
The dependence of the reflected and transmitted voltages on the incident
voltage is determined respectively by the reflection 
and transmission
coefficients:
The final waveform at the end of the line is given by the sum of the volt-
ages due to successive reflections. In order to illustrate the calculation of the
successive voltages at the driver and load ends of the line, we consider the ex-
ample of a line with characteristic impedance 
and generic time of
propagation 
with a driver impedance 
terminated in open circuit
Note that 
In these conditions, the response to an ideal
step waveform of amplitude 
(figure 2.6) will be given for subsequent
time steps as:

Interconnect modeling
25
1 At 
incident and reflected waves are zero, so from equation 2.45 the
voltage at the driver and load ends are:
2 At 
incident voltage amplitude at the load end of the line is
and transmitted and reflected amplitudes are given by equations 2.46 and 2.45
respectively. The voltage at the driver and load ends is:
3 At 
incident amplitude at the driver end of the line is 
(reflected
wave from load end) and transmitted and reflected amplitudes are again
given by equations 2.46 and 2.45 respectively. The voltage at the driver
and load ends is:
4 At 
incident amplitude at the load end of the line is 
and the
voltage at the driver and load ends are:

26
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
5 At 
incident amplitude at the driver end of the line is 
and the
voltage at the driver and load ends are:
As shown, the subsequent voltage amplitudes at driver and load ends oscil-
late and converge to a steady value after a number of iterations which depend
on the reflection coefficients at the driver and load ends, 
and 
given by:
However, the response is not always an oscillation of voltages (ringing). In
order to see the condition for ringing intuitively, it is possible to use a graph
method for determining the waveform after reflections [8], that we will call
here Method of Characteristics. In figure 2.7 a case is presented for illustration
considering linear (resistive) impedances of driver and load.
Firstly, a straight line is drawn with 
being 
the driver impe-
dance, and such that this line cuts the voltage axis at a value equal to the step

Interconnect modeling
27
amplitude, 
The initial voltage and current at the driver end of the line
is given by the intersection of this straight line and the one corresponding to
the characteristic impedance, with slope 
It is easy to see that this first
point corresponds to expression 
Drawing another straight line from this
point, with slope 
the values for voltage and current at the load end of the
line 
are obtained from its intersection with a second straight line with
slope 
corresponding to the load impedance (which in the case of figure 2.7
is a horizontal line because the line is terminated in open circuit). The volt-
age again coincides with the analytical method voltage, 
Repeating this
process successively, the different values for voltage and current are obtained
graphically.
This method enables the impedance values for line, driver and load for
which there will be oscillations (ringing) to be predicted easily. It is impor-
tant to identify this situation, because it may give rise to problems due to the
extra time the signal takes to become stable and may cause false commutation
events in digital circuits.
If the driver and load have linear characteristics, the condition for the ap-
pearance of ringing is (figures 2.8 and 2.10):

28
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Therefore, ringing will appear if the value of     is in between of driver
and load impedances,
and
In other cases (illustrated by figures 2.9
and 2.11), ringing is not produced.
2.2
Effect of signal rise time
The amplitude of the oscillations in the case of ringing is maximum for
ideal step transitions (zero rise time). For rise times much greater than that,
oscillations are effectively suppressed and a simpler non-inductive line model
would suffice to describe the response of the interconnection accurately.

Interconnect modeling
29
It is possible to find an expression to find the rise time value that will cause
total suppression of voltage oscillations, by using the method of characteristics
shown above. For the sake of simplicity, let us consider a resistive driver. Let
us assume that the input voltage changes linearly from 0 to 
over a time
Using the graph method of characteristics, this means that the driver character-
istic is displaced during time 
from the origin to its final position (figure 2.12).
Depending on the number of times the wave travels back and forth in the in-
terconnection before the input voltage reaches its steady value, ringing can be
eliminated. Knowing that in the case of ringing the maximum peak voltage is
during the first reflection (from 
to 
), we can find the condition
for non-ringing by imposing that this maximum voltage must be smaller than
Unlike the ideal case of zero rise time, the load end voltage during a period
is not constant, but changes, as does the driver end voltage. We are therefore
interested in load voltage at time 
and the condition for a non-ringing
waveform is:
Thus, assuming a ramp input:

30
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
For the case 
(open circuit), imposing condition 2.53 for non-ringing
response gives:
Note that the non-ringing condition for 
is the same as the particular
case of zero rise time and open circuit load. Also note that, for
ringing is impossible for any value of 
(which is always positive).
2.3
Lossless lines with a CMOS driver and open circuit
load
Another advantage of the graph method is that it enables easy considera-
tion of drivers and loads with non-linear characteristics, that is, those whose
impedance varies with voltage. As an important example, a CMOS inverter is
considered as the driver in this section (figure 2.13).
In order to cause a transition 
at the inverter output, 
is assumed to
change instantly from 
making it consequently the NMOS transistor
cut-off. Following Sah model MOS transistor equations, due to the fact that
there will be two different zones of current behavior depending on
the inverter’s output voltage

Interconnect modeling
31
Saturation region,
These equations give rise to a non-linear characteristic represented in fig-
ure 2.14.
As schematically shown in figure 2.15, ringing will occur when:
Linear region,

32
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
being 
the first amplitude in the line. Actually, it is the same condition as
for a linear driver when the load has infinite impedance, because in that case
and condition 2.61 reduces to
This condition can be translated to a condition relating circuit parameters,
as shown in the following paragraphs. We will distinguish two situations:
If 
can only be greater than 
in the linear region.
The expression for 
is obtained from:
From this last expression, condition 2.61 translates to:
For such low values of 
with respect to 
condition 2.61 corresponds
to an intersection in the saturation region:
And the condition for
2.3.1
Case
2.3.2
Case

Interconnect modeling
33
Figure 2.16 shows a simple demonstration simulation of an 
transmis-
sion line and a CMOS driver with PMOS having
and 
Equation 2.63 gives a value of W equal to
for series termination, and the figure shows that values of W different
than this value cause over- or undershoots.
3.
Lossy transmission line model
In the preceding sections, the response of lossless lines was analyzed to
evaluate the importance of reflections on response to a voltage change. This
lossless line model is a reasonable approximation for off-chip lines; at PCB
level, and it is the usual model for the analysis of, for example, termination
schemes [9].
However, for interconnections inside the chip, as technology scales down,
line resistance cannot be ignored. In addition, the semiconductor substrate is
not a perfect conductor. Therefore, a lossy model must be used to evaluate the
response of the interconnections.
The effect of losses can be understood as a perturbation of the lossless case
response. The effect will be to attenuate oscillations and to slow down the re-
sponse. In this respect, then, the previous section’s analysis is already useful:
the lossless model conditions for ringing are a worst case when considering a
lossy case. That is, when oscillations are not possible in the lossless model,

34
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
they will not be possible either with the lossy model. When ringing is sig-
nificant in the lossless case, the lossy effect may be significant, depending on
the magnitude of losses. Ho et al. [10] derived a limiting expression for RLC
lines, comparing the value of 
(total resistance of the line) with the value
of the lossless characteristic impedance, 
They found that a total
resistance of the line 
greater than approximately 
would attenuate
to negligible levels the possible ringing, and therefore the inductive effect of
the line. This type of a priori analysis allows to select an interconnect model
which is simpler than the complete transmission line and reduce the complex-
ity of the simulation task.
In the following paragraphs, the effect of semiconductor substrate losses
will be illustrated, giving some background theory, and some simulation ex-
amples.
3.1
Effect of semiconductor substrate
In integrated circuits, interconnections are made by metallic deposition over
a silicon dioxide or other type of insulator between the interconnection and the
semiconductor substrate (figure 2.17).
The semiconductor substrate is connected to the reference voltage through
an electrical contact on top, or in some technologies, through back metalliza-
tion covering the entire bottom surface of the substrate. In some chip config-
urations and depending on the packaging options, the backplane is not electri-
cally connected to the reference voltage, but rather left floating.
The semiconductor substrate introduces several effects that affect intercon-
nection modeling [11]. Physically, the capacitance of the line is a combination
of the capacitance to the substrate in series with the capacitance of the semi-
conductor, 
and 
respectively (figure 2.18), plus the capacitance to the
parallel power/ground lines,

Interconnect modeling
35
Also, the semiconductor has a non-zero conductivity that depends on dop-
ing, giving rise to a conductance represented by
All these components show an equivalent admittance to ground that can be
expressed as:
Therefore, this admittance can be identified as lossy RLGC transmission line
admittance with frequency-dependent conductance and capacitance,
with 
and
Depending on the frequency of the signal, the line has different operational
regimes:
Slow wave mode: for low frequencies, the equivalent line conductance
and the equivalent capacitance
This can be
interpreted in the sense that the skin depth in the semiconductor substrate
is greater than substrate thickness 
and the substrate
conductivity 
acts like a short-circuit, bypassing capacitance
(see fig-
ure 2.18). Inductance depends on the distances of the line from ground
lines, 
as well as to the backplane,
Skin depth mode: for mid-range frequencies, the return current path is in-
side the semiconductor; inductance is then determined by distance
Dielectric mode: for high frequencies 
the equivalent line
conductance is
and the equivalent capacitance is

Firstly, we consider the case where no ground line is present nearby. In this
case, 
and a rough estimate of the other parameters involved can be
obtained with the following expressions:
being W the line width, L the line length,
substrate resistivity,  
and
the dielectric constants of substrate and 
respectively.
To determine the order of magnitude of the transition frequency for each
mode, a numerical example is presented for a silicon wafer 
thick. If
The value of 
for which 
equals substrate thickness is:
which corresponds to a signal frequency 
For lower frequen-
cies, the skin depth 
is greater than the substrate thickness, so the return cur-
rent path is through the backplane and not through the semiconductor substrate
for the majority the digital signal spectrum.
For this configuration, a 
wide line has the following values per unit
length:
When there is a nearby ground line connected to substrate, two main differ-
ences are to be noted: substrate conductance 
increases because the distance
to nearest ground is reduced, and a parallel direct capacitance to ground ap-
pears, 
For conductance, again, a rough estimate can be made with the
following expression:
being now 
the distance to the ground line.
Figure 2.19 shows the frequency dependent conductance and capacitance,
where the transition between slow wave and dielectric modes is clearly ob-
served, for two cases: one corresponding to a nearby ground line, with
and 
and the second case without a nearby ground
line, where
and 
As was to be expected, the addition of
36
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
silicon is doped p-type with
its resistivity will be:

Interconnect modeling
37
a nearby ground line tends to increase the range of frequencies for which the
line has constant parameters (slow wave mode). In other words, with nearby
ground lines, the influence of the semiconductor substrate becomes less impor-
tant for transmission characteristics.
In summary, the existence of several modes translates to the usual RLGC
transmission line with frequency-dependent parameters. Recent advances in

Once obtained, the frequency variation of line parameters can be intro-
duced in the description of a transmission line in modern circuit simulators,
like Avant’s HSPICE [15]. The parameter variation, however, becomes appar-
ent only in the Giga-Hertz range for practical substrate and line technologies.
Therefore, some examples are shown here to illustrate the difference between
a constant-parameter model (RLC, as G is null at zero frequency), and one
with varying parameters
We will take two examples: one for a signal line close to ground return lines
as shown in figure 2.17, and a second case with the same structure without the
nearby ground lines, so the return is through the backplane.
The frequency dependent parameters C and G are those of figure 2.19, while
L and R are calculated from Fasthenry [16] simulations (figure 2.20). In both
cases, the small variation in inductance should be noted in the frequency range
of DC up to 10 GHz. The DC value of inductance for the nearby ground line
case is smaller than the other case, as should be expected. Taking the DC values
of L and C, it is possible to calculate the ideal line characteristic impedance,
As stated above in section 3, this magnitude must be compared
to total line resistance and to driver resistance to determine the possibility of
ringing in the line. For the two cases considered in this example, the values of
are 
for the near ground line case, and 
for the case without
a nearby ground line.
The simulations consist of comparing three models: a lossy RLC model
with constant parameters, a frequency dependent RLGC transmission line,
and a simple lumped RC model. The driver for all models is a resistance of
This means that for the nearby ground case, 
and therefore,
no ringing can be observed. The opposite is true for the case without a nearby
ground line, although the small difference between 
and 
allows for only
small oscillations.
The results are shown in figures 2.21 to 2.23. The general conclusion is
that the presence of a nearby ground line makes the response of the constant-
and frequency dependent- lossy transmission line models almost the same, for
practical signals (the rise time considered was 15 ps). The importance of dis-
persion in the frequency dependent parameter model, as observed in the cases
with no nearby ground line, is worthy of note. In those cases, dispersion leads
to an apparent reduction of the propagation time: the voltage starts to increase,
albeit slowly, very soon after the stimulus, similar to what happens with the
RC model, also shown. It is also clear that the difference between both RLC
38
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
the simulation algorithms [12], [13], [14], have allowed the incorporation of
such models in standard circuit simulation tools.
3.2
Example simulations of frequency-dependent
parameters

Interconnect modeling
39
and 
models is apparent and significant only for long lines. In addi-
tion, for the cases where there is no ringing, the lumped RC model is a good
approximation, particularly with respect to propagation delay.

40
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
This chapter has presented different possibilities for electrically modeling
an interconnection, together with the physics that justifies them. It has been
shown that, in certain situations, there is almost no difference between the
models. In other cases, the differences are not significant for the particular
waveform property of interest (e.g. transition delay, or overshoot). These
4.
Optimum line model selection

Interconnect modeling
41
situations depend on line characteristics (parameters, line length), as well as
driver and load characteristics, and on the frequency of the signals propagating
through the interconnection. While the most complete model will always be
more accurate, it is also true that the simulation of the complete model will
take longer. Given the huge number of interconnections to be simulated in an
integrated circuit, it is good to have an estimate for using the simplest model,
which gives the response within a desired accuracy range.

42
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Following the classification of line models into inductive and non-inductive,
as considered in section 1.3, we will use the above analysis of ringing as an
orientation for deciding which electrical model to select. Depending on the
input signal, the driver characteristics and line length, the response to a step
voltage can be approximated as a non-inductive model (C or RC model) when
there is no ringing, or as a more complex model including inductance (RLC
or RLGC model). It is assumed here that parameters per unit length of the

Interconnect modeling
43
The comparison between the signal’s rise time and propagation time was
shown to be important in section 2.2. However, the rise time to be compared
is the one for the signal after the driver. In the case of a resistive driver model,
it can be certain that the signal rise time at driver output will always be greater
than the input rise time, but for active non-linear drivers, as in reality, this
cannot always be assured.
Therefore, in general, the input rise time is not a definitive parameter for
selecting the line model, although for cases when it is much greater than the
propagation time, non-inductive models can be used to simulate and check the
value of the rise time at driver output. If this approximate rise time is still
greater than 
then the inductive model can be discarded.
It must be noted that 
depends proportionally on line length, 
as well as
on the line’s electrical parameters. From the velocity of propagation (expres-
line, R, L and C, are obtained from a layout analysis. The selection process is
described in figure 2.24.
4.1
Effect of input rise time

44
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
sion 2.26):
4.2
Effect of driver impedance
As shown in section 2, the driver impedance must be compared to the char-
acteristic impedance of the ideal line for assessing the possibility of ringing,
and therefore, the need for an inductive model. The usual capacitive intercon-
nection termination of integrated circuits is assumed, so that 
and
the condition for ringing is 
In general then, low impedance drivers
will have greater chances of needing an inductive model for interconnection.
verify 
the non-inductive model is valid for any value of line
length.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
Ramo S., Whinnery J. R., and Van Duzer T. Fields and Waves in Communication Elec-
tronics. Wiley and Sons, 2nd edition, 1984.
Collin R. E. Field theory of guided waves. IEEE Press, 2nd edition, 1991.
Montgomery C. G., Dicke R. H., and Pureell E. M., editors. Principles of microwave
circuits. Dover, 1965.
The range of impedances in integrated circuits lies in the 50 to
approxi-
mately [17].
4.3
Effect of line length
Line length influences model selection in two opposite directions. One is
the already mentioned effect of propagation time: as length increases, reflec-
tions are more important (if the other parameters allow them to be). The other
direction is related to line resistance: as line length increases, so does the total
resistance, which therefore helps attenuate the possible oscillations. In sum-
mary, for inductive models to be necessary, two inequalities must be verified:
or:
From this last expression, it can be concluded that the inductive model will
be useful only for intermediate length lines, and that for some lines which

Mesa F. L., Cano G., Medina F., Marques R., and Horno M. “On the Quasi-TEM and Full-
Wave Approaches Applied to Coplanar Multistrip on Lossy Dielectric Layered Media”.
IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 40(3), March 1992.
Matthaei G. L., Shu J. C.-H., and Long S. I. “Simplified Calculation of Wave-Coupling
Between Lines in High-Speed Integrated Circuits”. IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems,
37(10), October 1990.
Brews J. R. “Transmission Line Models for Lossy Waveguide Interconnections in VLSI”.
IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices, 33(9), September 1986.
Horno M., Mesa F.L., Medina F., and Marques R. “Quasi-TEM analysis of multilay-
ered, multiconductor coplanar structures with dielectric and magnetic anisotropy includ-
ing substrate losses”. IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 38(8), August
1990.
DeFalco J. A. “Reflection and Crosstalk in Logic Circuit Interconnections”. IEEE Spec-
trum, 7(7), July 1970.
Ethirajan K. and Nemec J. “Termination techniques for high-speed buses”. EDN Maga-
zine, February 1998.
Ho C. W., Chance D. A., Bajorek C. H., and Acosta R. E. “The Thin-Film Module as
a High-Performance Semiconductor Package”. IBM J. Res. and Develop., 26(3), May
1982.
Watts R.K., editor. Submicron Integrated Circuits, chapter 6, pages 269–331. John Wiley
& Sons, 1989.
Achar R. and Nakhla M.S. “Simulation of high-speed interconnects”. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 89(5), May 2001.
Kuznetsov D..B. and Schutt-Aine J.E.
“Optimal transient simulation of transmission
lines”. IEEE Tran. on Circuits and Systems–I, 43(2), February 1996.
Odabasogliu A., Celik M., and Pileggi L.T. “PRIMA: Passive reduced-order intercon-
nect macromodeling algorithm”. IEEE Trans. on Computer Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits, 17(8), August 1998.
Avant! Corp. Star-Hspice 2001.2, June 2001.
Kamon M., Tsuk M.J., and White J. “Fasthenry: a multipole-accelerated 3-D inductance
extraction program”. IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 42(9), Septem-
ber 1994.
Moll F., Roca M., and Rubio A. “Inductance in VLSI interconnection modelling”. IEE
Proc.-Circuits, Devices and Systems, 145(3), June 1998.
REFERENCES
45
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 3
CROSSTALK EFFECTS IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS
This chapter deals with the description of the main effects that crosstalk
coupling can introduce in integrated circuits. The coupling phenomenon is
present in both digital and analog blocks. However, digital blocks are more
densely interconnected and, for this reason, coupling tends to be more signifi-
cant in this type of circuit. While the electrical models used in this chapter to
model crosstalk effects can be also used to analyze analog circuits, this chapter
analyzes it for digital circuits. The effects analyzed here are the first step in
devising verification and test techniques for the crosstalk problem. This topic
is addressed in chapter 6.
The circuit models used in the chapter are based on capacitive coupling. As
shown in chapter 2, the inductance of the lines can be significant in some cases,
but in integrated circuits, capacitance is the main parameter for describing in-
terconnection response. The models used are very simple and this gives the
advantage of providing an intuitive understanding of the problem that is useful
for deriving design rules for preventing crosstalk.
One of the results of interconnect coupling in VLSI and ULSI circuits is the
appearance of spurious (undesirable) signals in the coupled lines. This chap-
ter starts with an analytical characterization of these spurious signals, show-
ing their dependence on circuit parameters and their propagation capability
throughout the circuit, together with measurement techniques.
A second crosstalk effect, very important in today’s digital circuits, is the
induced delay of transitions due to noise. This effect will be analyzed in depth
in this chapter, including an extensive experimental measurement description.
Finally, the appearance of spurious signals in circuit lines can lead to changes
in energy consumption due to these extra signals in the circuit. The implica-
tions of crosstalk noise in energy dissipation will be discussed through a simple
coupling modeling of interconnect lines and drivers.
47

48
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
The increase in interconnection density may cause interference between
neighboring lines. Electrically, this interference can be modeled through mu-
tual capacitance, and in certain situations, also through mutual inductance. The
phenomenon is called line coupling, or crosstalk.
When there is a voltage transition in one or more of several coupled lines,
the quiet lines suffer a voltage perturbation which may be regarded as a spu-
rious signal. In some cases, this spurious signal will be so small that it will
produce no measurable effect. In other cases, it will be significant enough to
affect the circuit’s response. We can define the lines causing the perturbation
affecting (where a normal voltage transition occurs) as the affecting or culprit
lines, while the lines suffering the perturbation, where the spurious signal are
generated, can be defined as the affected or victim lines.
In this section, we will analyze how the voltage waveform characteristics
of a spurious signal depend on line and driver parameters, how this spurious
signal propagates throughout the logic of the circuit and finally, how it can be
measured.
1.1
Spurious signal characterization
1.
Spurious signals
In order to make a simple initial characterization of a spurious signal (SS)
due to coupling noise in integrated circuits, let us consider the simple circuit
model depicted in figure 3.1. In this scenario, one affecting line is modeled
as an RC lumped line model, with 
being the driver resistance plus the line
resistance, and 
being the line capacitance including load capacitance. In the
same way, an affected line is modeled with a resistance 
and a capacitance
Finally, 
represents the coupling capacitance between the two lines.
An ideal step input is assumed as the input of line 1, while line 2 is connected
to zero through its driver resistance,
A detailed analysis of this model will provide us with some knowledge
about how the different line and driver parameters affect the spurious signal

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
49
produced, that is, how they influence the width and amplitude of the spuri-
ous signal. Considering the circuit in figure 3.1, the equations describing the
waveform in the affecting line are [1]:
where
and
being 
the unitary step function:
For the affected line, the result can be expressed as:
In the above expressions, 
is:
and 
and 
are the roots of the following second-order algebraic equation:
The amplitude of the spurious signal produced in line 2 is obtained calcu-
lating the maximum of 
by evaluating equation 3.6 at 
being

50
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
The width of the crosstalk waveform (evaluated at half amplitude) must be
calculated numerically, because no analytical expression for this magnitude
can be found.
By applying the above expressions, it is possible to analyze the influence
of the different circuit parameters such as driver sizes, line configuration, line
loads, etc. Figures 3.2 and 3.3 show how the amplitude and width depends
on the ratio between victim and affecting total node resistance (including both
driver and line resistances). The calculations presented are made considering
two lines with 170 fF of ground capacitance each, and 300 fF of mutual capac-
itance between them. The resistance of the victim line 
considered is
As can be seen, the amplitude increases asymptotically with the ratio between
driver resistances, tending to a value 
determined by the following
capacitance relation:
It is also shown that for equal driver resistances 
the value
of the amplitude is quite small, about 40% of the value predicted by expres-
sion 3.10. (Note that in all the cases depicted, the signal amplitude in the
affecting line is assumed to be 1 V, in other words, the amplitude of all figures
is normalized).
In figures 3.4 and 3.5, the amplitude and width of crosstalk spurious signals
are computed in terms of victim resistance driver. The values of capacitances
are in this case 170 fF for both ground and crosstalk capacitances. Node re-

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
51
sistance ratios of 1, 10 and 100 are considered. It is shown that the amplitude
is independent of the value of resistance and only depends on the resistance
ratio. In addition, the signal width increases with the affected node resistance,
as may be intuitively expected because the victim line RC constant increases.
We will study now the dependence of amplitude and width in function of
the capacitance ratio 
Figures 3.6 and 3.7 show the plots of these
magnitudes for different values of coupling capacitance to affecting line ca-

52
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
pacitance ratio 
and taking equal node resistances. It can be observed
that the crosstalk amplitude increases with the x axis as can be expected from
expression 3.10, and also with the ratio between coupling and affecting line’s
ground capacitances. On the other hand, the width of the spurious signal de-
creases as the ratio 
increases. It is important to note in this case that
the amplitude never reaches the usual logic threshold voltage of digital CMOS
circuits 
independently of the value of capacitances. Therefore, a de-
sign rule for averting potential problems in logic circuits is to try to balance
the resistance of coupled lines.
Figures 3.8 and 3.9 show the same results as figures 3.6 and 3.7 for the case
where the driver resistance of the victim line is 10 times bigger than the driver
resistance of the affected line. Similar trends are obtained as in the case of
equal driver resistances, but now greater values of amplitude and width are
obtained. In this case, the amplitude can reach values bigger than usual logic
threshold voltage of digital CMOS circuits.
Finally, this simple coupling line model allows the possibility of analyzing
the effect of the line length in the crosstalk phenomenon. In this case, the
node’s resistance and capacitance are explicitly put in terms of the parameters
of the line and the driver as:

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
53
where 
and 
are line parameters, represents the line length,
and 
are driver resistances and 
and 
are load capacitances of
the lines.
It can be shown [1] that when 
and 
are null, so that the
resistance and capacitances are strictly proportional to length, the crosstalk
amplitude is independent of length and the width is quadratic with length.

54
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
The situation changes when a non-null driver and load parameters are con-
sidered. This case is shown in figures 3.10 and 3.11, for two different values
of the relation of driver resistances
It is shown that for increasing
values of
greater values of amplitude and width are obtained, in accordance
with the results of figures 3.2 to 3.5.  An interesting result obtained in this
case is the appearance of a maximum in the curves for a large driver resis-
tance ratio, indicating that for a given case it exists a value of length implying
maximum amplitude of crosstalk.  When line length increases, coupling capac-

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
55
itance increases, but the rise time of the affecting signal is increased due to
the increased RC constant of the affecting line; that is, two opposite factors
play an important role in the crosstalk noise phenomenon and this explains the
maximum observed in these figures.

56
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.2
Propagation of spurious signals through VLSI digital
circuits
The effect of spurious signals on the logical behavior in digital circuits will
be analyzed here. Depending on the amplitude and duration of the spurious
signal, the subsequent digital gate may interpret it as an actual valid signal, and
then a logic error is produced and propagated. This error can be permanent if
it affects the circuit’s sequential block. In combinational blocks, only transient
errors will appear.
The main waveform parameters influencing the effect of spurious signals
through logic are its amplitude and its width. In order to cause a logic error
in a digital gate, the signal amplitude must be higher than the logic threshold
voltage (switching voltage) of the affected gate (the gate with the spurious sig-
nal at its input). If the amplitude does not reach this value, a logic error cannot
be generated, and for this case we do not consider spurious signal propagation
through the gate.
When the amplitude is higher than the switching voltage of the affected gate,
then the possibility of propagation of the signal will depend on its width and
also on the propagation delay of the affected gate. The study of the propagation
capability of a signal is addressed in the next section.
1.2.1
Penetration depth of a spurious signal
The fact that the propagation depends on both amplitude and width makes
it natural to characterize any spurious signal as a square voltage pulse.
In order to evaluate the propagation capability of a given signal, we present
the following definition [2]:
DEFINITION 3.1  The penetration depth of a spurious signal is defined as the
number of gates that the signal can pass through, causing a logic error at the
last one.
Now, the characterization, or the process of assigning a square voltage pulse
to a given spurious signal, can be made using two different criteria:
To choose an equivalent pulse that has a propagation effect equal to the
spurious signal considered. The main problem of this criteria is that the
effect of the spurious signal is unknown, therefore it is impractical.
To find an equivalent pulse with a penetration depth that is an upper or
lower limit of the spurious signal’s penetration depth.
The following definition will be used to find upper and lower limits of a
spurious signal’s penetration depth:

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
57
DEFINITION 3.2  A given signal A is said to cover a signal B if, after a cer-
tain time shift of one of them, it is verified that:
for all the time interval during which 
where 
and
are the moduli of voltage variation of both signals compared to their
initial steady state value, and 
is the threshold voltage of the MOS transis-
tors.
Considering that the incremental transient output voltage function of an
electronic logic device follows a monotonic behavior with respect to the in-
cremental input voltage [3], the following statement can be made:
LEMMA 1 Given a signal A covering a second signal B, and their output
waveforms from a certain logic gate at which both signals arrive being O(A)
and O(B), respectively, it is verified that signal O(A) covers signal O(B) as
well.
From this, it is possible to see that a signal A covering a second signal B
will have a propagation depth (number of logic gates that the signal can actively
traverse) greater than or equal to that of signal B.
Now, given a certain spurious signal SS, we can define two sets of square
voltage pulses: one set (US) consisting of the pulses covering SS, and a sec-
ond set (LS) composed of the pulses covered by SS. From the above state-
ment, it is easy to see that the penetration depth of any signal from the set US
is an upper limit for the spurious signal’s penetration depth, while the penetra-
tion depth of any signal LS is a lower limit. Figure 3.12 shows the waveforms
of an arbitrary spurious signal, US and LS signals.
1.2.2
Example: penetration depth of a spurious signal through a chain
of CMOS inverters
As an example of this formulation, we consider now an unlimited chain of
identical CMOS inverters as is depicted in figure 3.13, each of them loaded by
identical equivalent capacitances. Then, given a square pulse of amplitude H
and width W, we calculate the maximum number 
of inverters such that the
spurious signal produces an incremental signal with amplitude above the logic
threshold (assumed 
at the output of the last one. In relation to this
problem, the following definitions can be given.
DEFINITION 3.3  We define
critical pulse as an ideal square pulse
with amplitude H and width W such that it produces a signal of amplitude
equal to the logic threshold value at the output of the 
stage.

58
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
DEFINITION 3.4 We define             penetration critical curve as the relation-
ship between amplitude H and width W of all the 
critical pulses.
Thus, the calculation of pulse penetration depth consists of calculating all
penetration critical curves, for 
ranging from 1 to the number of gates
of the path the spurious signal (SS) has to follow to the output. For each pulse
amplitude value, H, there is a set of pulse widths 
corresponding to the
critical pulses. Each 
corresponds to a solution of the equation
with 
depending only on technological parameters.
This calculation allows an analytical treatment for 
alone, with the
MOS devices of the inverter (PMOS and NMOS transistors) being modeled
using the Sah model [4]. The solution for 
in function of H is given by
the following expressions [5].

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
59
Case
Case
Case
where 
and 
the
power supply voltage, 
the threshold voltage (assumed the same in NMOS
and PMOS), 
the transistor transconductance (the same for PMOS and
NMOS in balanced inverters), and 
the loading capacitance of each inverter
in the chain.
Figure 3.14 shows the 1-level critical curve, where the width axis W is nor-
malized by 
The points to the left of this curve cause no logic re-
sponse at the output of the first inverter, while the points to the right are able
to cause a signal of amplitude at least above the logic threshold at the output
of the first stage. This curve is related to the well-known concept of the dy-
namic noise immunity of a logic device, and its analytical equation depends on
technology and design parameters.
An extension to an arbitrary value of can be made using numerical meth-
ods to solve the equations. Figure 3.15 shows the results of the calculation of
the 
penetration critical curves for different values of 
and with the
same time normalization as indicated above. As can be seen in the graph, for
increasing values of 
the difference between the curves becomes smaller and
smaller.
1.3
Measurement of spurious signals
In order to evaluate crosstalk models correctly it is important to be able to
measure the signals produced because of crosstalk. However, this phenomenon
is very difficult to characterize experimentally because it is produced at an
internal node and its effect may or may not be transmitted to an external output.
A first measurement approach consists of designing the circuit with metal
pads connected to internal nodes, and then using contact probes to measure
the crosstalk waveforms directly. However, this is not a good solution because

60
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
the inclusion of pads will dramatically modify the physical interconnection
structure, leading to important changes in the values of the lines’ parasitic ca-
pacitance.   Important changes are therefore introduced in the crosstalk phe-
nomenon.
Other solutions include noise measurements at the external pins of the cir-
cuit.  In this case, packaging and bonding effects can alter the noise as well,

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
61
so this kind of methodology is not suitable for determining crosstalk noise in
integrated circuits experimentally.
Another approach consists of an integrated diagnosis system using an elec-
tron beam microscope based on secondary electron reflections from the metal
lines on the circuit. However, this method can not be used for precise crosstalk
characterization. The reason is that crosstalk noise is masked by other noise
coming from oxide diffraction and also because only upper layer measure-
ments can be made with acceptable accuracy. Lower metal lines are screened
by the presence of upper layers.
For all of these reasons, it seems that indirect measurements are necessary
for evaluating noise inside integrated circuits. These indirect measurements
consist of analyzing the effect of noise in well-known circuit blocks, or in per-
forming internal sampling strategies. J. Cartrysse, in [6] presents a method for
measuring waveform distortion of an opamp due to substrate coupling. The
same author, in [7] describes crosstalk measurement techniques through ana-
lyzing the effect of crosstalk in a latch structure.
The problem is similar when the objective is to characterize waveform prop-
agation in the interconnection structure of silicon technology. With this objec-
tive, Soumyanath et al. published in [8] an interesting measurement approach
to accurately evaluating on-chip interconnect behavior. In this work, a delay
measurement system is developed based on a rail-to rail comparator applied to
a set of several lines. The comparators are connected to the beginning of the
lines and to the end of the lines. Then, by comparing the results obtained at the
beginning with the results obtained at the end, time domain characteristics can
be extracted. This technique is applied to a technology including five metal
levels.
In [9], [10] and [11], another strategy is presented, based on a sampling sen-
sor. A sampling transistor is delayed with respect to an affecting signal, so that
each time a different point of the spurious signal is sampled (it is assumed that
the spurious signal is exactly the same at each crosstalk event). An amplifier in
follower configuration gives the sampled data at its output. When this method-
ology is applied, a reconstruction task is essential in order to obtain the voltage
waveform.
Yet another approach, focused on measuring noise peak and delay changes,
can be found in [12].
In this section, we will present a sensor for on-chip crosstalk measurements
between coupling metal interconnects based on the indirect effect of crosstalk
on a latch structure, in a similar way to [7]. The application of this sensor
to several structures and integrated technologies can be found in [13]. The
sensor provides precise crosstalk noise amplitude measurement not altered by
test pads or probes.

62
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.3.1 
Sensor structure and operation
The sensor architecture is shown in figure 3.16, where three different parts
can be distinguished:
Noise generator: this is constructed using a tapered inverter chain in order
to obtain a sharp edge to the source signal. The last inverter has a high
fan-out capability in order to induce strong coupling.
RS latch: it is constructed with NAND gates to measure inverted spurious
signals, and with NOR gates for non-inverted ones. The latch switching
voltage is denoted by 
The value of 
can be determined by properly
designing the NOR gate (NAND gate) transistor dimensions.
Pre-charge circuit: this is constructed using an MOS pass transistor. This
pass transistor is an n-channel MOS for NOR RS to have an accurate pre-
charge of the set line in the range 0 to 
For a NAND RS,
the pass transistor is a p-channel MOS. The selection of one or another
depends on the direction (inverted or non-inverted) of the spurious signal
to be detected.
The procedure for measuring the crosstalk noise (figure 3.17) is as follows:
first, the RS latch is reset 
and after that, the NMOS pass-transistor
is turned on (by activating 
at time 
Consequently, the Set line (vic-
tim line) is pre-charged to an externally fixed analog value 
chosen to
be lower than the latch switching voltage 
It is possible with this circuit to
modulate the equivalent driver resistance in the victim line: if the pass tran-
sistor is cut off, the victim line shows a very high impedance and, depending
on the value of 
and the pass transistor dimensions, the impedance of

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
63
the line is lower. From the analysis in section 1.1, the ratio between node re-
sistances has a strong influence on crosstalk noise characteristics. After that,
the noise generator is activated by inducing a sharp transition in the source
line 
Due to crosstalk, this transition produces a noise peak that pulls
up the Set line. If the noise is strong enough to put the Set line to a voltage
beyond the commutation point 
then the output sensor 
switches to
an erroneous state. Let 
be the limit pre-charge voltage such that the RS
latch is not affected by noise. The voltage difference 
will then be the
crosstalk noise amplitude.
As an example of measurement application of the sensor, we mention here
some results obtained with BiCMOS technology. More examples can be found
in [13], where an exhaustive set of different sensors applied to different tech-
nologies is presented. The example here considered deals with the comparison
between simple and multiple crosstalk, that is, what is the effect of crosstalk
when the affecting line is a line near the victim, or the affecting lines are two
lines, at either side of the victim line. The sensor architecture considered is
based on RS NAND sensors, so the objective is the detection of inverted spu-
rious signals. The noise generator is made of three buffered inverters. The
coupling structure is composed of three lines at the first metal level, of min-
imum width and with minimum distance between them. The central line is
the victim, while the adjacent lines are the culprits. A microphotograph of the
integrated circuit can be seen in figure 3.18.
The measurements have been developed in the following way. First, the
switching voltage of the RS latch 
has been measured. Once this value has
been obtained, the procedure for coupling measurement has been applied, as
described above. Different line impedances have been considered (by changing
the voltage at the gate of the PMOS pass transistor). Two different cases have
been measured, first with only one affecting line switching, and second when
the two affecting lines make simultaneous transitions. The results are depicted

64
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
in figure 3.19. The y-axis is the difference between           and        that is, the
crosstalk noise amplitude measured, while the x-axis represents the impedance
of the equivalent driver of the victim line. This value of impedance is the
equivalent impedance of the pass transistor, which is in linear region for all the
measurements performed. Thus, this impedance is approximately given by the
expression:
where       is the transconductance of the transistor, and can be expressed as:
The parameters of the last equation are given by the foundry, except W and
L, which corresponds to the width and length of channel transistor, fixed by
our design. It is observed in the figure that simple crosstalk represents about
50% of double crosstalk. A similar experiment has been performed by chang-
ing the role of the different lines. This means considering that a surrounding
line is the victim and the central one plus the other surrounding the victims.
From this measurement we have obtained the fact that the greatest effect is due
to the central line and we can conclude that in crosstalk noise analysis only
neighboring lines need to be considered [13].

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
65
2.
Crosstalk induced delay
The problem of spurious signals, dealt with in the previous section, is not the
only one that can be produced by crosstalk. A second very important effect is
the introduction of changes into signal propagation delay. This effect appears
when the two coupled lines are switching simultaneously. This case can be
understood as a spurious signal superimposed on the switching victim signal.
Thus, a change in delay of the propagated signal is observed.
Figure 3.20 shows a simulation of this effect. The upper signal represents
the waveform simulated at the affecting line, a low-to-high (LH) transition in
the node. Almost simultaneously, the victim line is making a transition in the
opposite direction (HL). The signal at the bottom of the diagram represents the
waveform at the victim line when no coupling between lines is considered. The
middle waveform corresponds to the waveform obtained through simulation
in the victim line when capacitive coupling between lines is considered. A
positive spurious signal added to the switching waveform of the victim line
can be observed, which implies an increase in the effective delay of the victim
line 
Actually, in the case of simultaneous transitions, both lines are at the
same time victims and culprits, and the first line in the diagram will also show
a variation in transition delay due to crosstalk. As happened with spurious
signals, the least resistive node (line plus driver) will be the least affected and
the most resistive node will be the most affected.
It must be noted that this delay variation can be positive or negative, depend-
ing on the direction (LH or HL) of the two simultaneous transitions. If both
transitions have the same direction, the propagation delay for both transitions
is decreased and if transitions are in opposite directions, delay is increased. An

66
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
important factor determining the magnitude of this effect is the synchronism
between transitions. In addition, the width of the spurious signal responsible
for the delay variation is more important than its amplitude. Thus, highly re-
sistive lines generating broad spurious signals can be very susceptible to this
effect. The consequence of all this is that spurious signals with amplitude
smaller than the switching voltage of the logic can have important effects on
the behavior of the circuit, in contrast to what happens with pure propagation
of spurious signals through logic.
The influence on the behavior of the circuit will depend on the value of
the additional delay. This value will depend on various factors, some of them
the same as those influencing spurious signals, plus others, such as the syn-
chronism between transitions. This effect can be very important in sequential
synchronous circuits where erroneous logic values can be stored due to timing
crosstalk problems.
2.1
Experimental measurement approaches
For the same reasons mentioned in the experimental measurement of spu-
rious signals, it is not easy to perform direct measurements in order to obtain
waveforms similar to those of the signals in figure 3.20. Indirect measurements
are also, therefore, the most effective approach in this case. In this way, the
variation in the delay caused by coupling can be evaluated by looking into the
effect that this variation has on a given circuit.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
67
The circuit considered for the measurements is a flip-flop one. In any syn-
chronous circuit, there is a direct relationship between the minimum clock pe-
riod allowed and the logic path delay:
being 
the clock period, 
the flip-flop delay, U the setup time, and
the maximum logic path delay. If one of the nodes in the logic path is
coupled to another line of the circuit and there is a simultaneous transition in
that second line, the total path delay of the synchronous circuit will be affected.
Two different cases can be distinguished:
The transition in the affecting line is in the same direction as the transition
in the affected line. In this situation, the affecting signal causes a decreased
transition delay and the circuit may operate correctly for a value of clock
period smaller than that allowed when there is no crosstalk between these
signals.
The transition in the affecting line is in the opposite direction to that of the
transition in the affected line. Now the affecting signal causes an increased
transition delay and, in this case, if the clock period is near the minimum
allowed, faulty behavior may be observed due to violation of equation 3.22.
1
2
Thus, by measuring the minimum allowed clock period (following rela-
tion 3.22) of a synchronous circuit with and without crosstalk coupling, it is
possible to estimate the coupling effect introduced to the delay.
In order to show the applicability of this technique to measure crosstalk- in-
duced delay, a specific integrated circuit has been designed and manufactured.
The circuit diagram can be seen in figure 3.21 while the photograph of the
chip is shown in figure 3.22. The circuit consists of a D-type flip-flop, with its
output inverted by a logic block, which feeds the D input of the flip-flop. In
this way, as the D input is the flip-flop output inverted and delayed, the nor-
mal operation of the circuit is a periodic oscillation with frequency half the
clock frequency. The inverting logic block consists of one NAND gate with an
external input which enables or disables the oscillation, plus a group of four
inverters, then a long metal 2 line (victim) running in parallel to a second line
(affecting line) separated by the minimum distance allowed by the technology
and driven by another external input, and then a second group of six inverters.
The length of the coupled lines is 1 mm approximately. The logic path presents
a delay of 20 ns approximately (according to HSPICE simulations). The lay-
out parameter extraction gives a capacitance to ground of 198 fF for the victim
line, 175 fF for the affecting one, and a coupling capacitance of 46 fF between
both.

68
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
When coupling introduces changes in propagation delay, the different be-
haviors that can appear may be classified into the following types:
Introduce small increase in delay.
Introduce a great increase in delay.
Decrease in propagation delay.
Figures 3.23 and 3.24 illustrate the expected faulty output for a small and
great induced delay. In figure 3.23, a comparison of the different behavior of
the circuit without crosstalk and with crosstalk is shown. At the top of the
diagram, the minimum period clock waveform allowing correct behavior is
represented. It is assumed that the delay between the flip-flop output and the
D input of the flip-flop is 5 time-units (the same as for HL and LH transitions).
The set-up time of the flip-flop is 2 time-units, and the time delay of the flip-
flop is 1 time-unit. As can be seen at the top of the diagram, the flip-flop input
changes just before 2 time-units of the positive edge of the clock signal, and
then, after 1 time-unit, the flip-flop output takes the value of its input. In this

mine the minimum clock period without crosstalk 
(no activity is forced
in the affecting line) that gives a correct output. After that, taking a clock pe-
riod smaller than the previously measured minimum, a periodic signal with
half the clock frequency is applied to the affecting line, such that it reduces
the transition delay in the victim line and the circuit still behaves correctly. By
measuring the minimum clock period under these conditions, 
it is pos-
sible to determine the delay subtracted by coupling, which will be given by the
difference between both minimum clock periods.
In contrast, to determine the added delay due to crosstalk, one must first
start with a clock period greater than the normalminimum, 
Then, forc-
ing a signal in the affecting line so that the path delay is increased, if faulty
behavior is observed it means that the initial clock frequency is smaller than
Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
69
situation, the correct behavior is a signal of twice the period of the clock at the
flip-flop output.
At the bottom of this diagram (separated from the top by the axis repre-
senting the time-units considered) the clock signal, flip-flop input and flip-flop
output are shown. Now, due to noise in the feedback of the signal, the delay
between the output of the flip-flop and input of the same module changes to
a value of 6 time-units for the LH transition at the input and 5 time-units (as
in the correct behavior) for the HL transition on D. Therefore, a violation of
the flip-flop set-up time appears in the first case and, as seen in the diagram,
the flip-flop output cannot follow all the changes to the input. In this case, the
behavior of the circuit changes, and an oscillation is observed with a period
three times the period of the clock signal at the output. We call this situation a
case of minor delay, because violations are only produced at one of the edges.
Figure 3.24 analyzes the case known as a major delay, where violations of
flip-flop set-up time are produced in both edges of the signal. At the top of this
diagram, correct behavior is again represented so it can be compared with the
faulty behavior. At the bottom of the diagram 3.24, the delay time between flip-
flop output and input is now 6 time-units for both transitions (HL and LH). A
set-up violation is produced for both edges and the flip-flop output now shows
oscillating behavior with four times the period of the clock signal.
Finally, if the noise means a decrease in the delay of the signal between flip-
flop output and input, the result will be that the clock period can be reduced
from the “normal” minimum (without crosstalk-induced delay), and the correct
behavior (flip-flop output oscillating at twice the period of the clock signal)
will still be shown. As a numerical example, following the same data as the
previous examples, if the delay is now reduced by 1 time unit, that means the
delay between flip-flop output and input is now 4 time units for both signal
edges, then the clock period (which is 8 time units in the previous examples)
can be reduced to 6 time units and correct behavior is maintained.
Given the above analysis, the measurement procedure will be firstly to deter-

70
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
the minimum with added delay, 
This 
can be found by consecutively
increasing the initial clock period until no faulty behavior is observed.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
71
To illustrate the method, figure 3.25 shows some simulation results using pa-
rameters extracted from the layout and device models provided by the foundry.
At the top, the clock signal (21 ns period) can be seen. The middle wave-
form represents the circuit output without crosstalk, showing faulty behavior:
a waveform with a period three times the clock period. This means that the
normal operation of the circuit does not allow a clock period of 21 ns, and a
slower clock is needed (in this case the minimum clock period determined by
simulation is 22 ns). The waveform at the bottom represents the output of the
circuit with crosstalk (implying a reduction in signal delay), and, as can be
seen the circuit can operate correctly with a clock period of 21 ns. Using this
procedure in the experiment, an evaluation of the delay introduced by coupling
can be made.
2.2
Experimental results
The chip on which the measurements were performed has two identical sets
of six lines, differing only in the victim line: in one of them the victim line is
laid out in Metal 1, while in the other the victim line is in Metal 2, as can be
seen schematically in figure 3.26. Each set will be measured separately. For
each set of measurements, we can distinguish the following cases:

72
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Case 1 only one laterally adjacent line is switching simultaneously with the
victim.
Case 2 two adjacent lines are simultaneously switching.
Case 3 the vertically adjacent line is causing the crosstalk.
Case 4 three adjacent lines switch simultaneously with the victim.
As the nature of the errors is somewhat random, especially at the transition
between normal and faulty behavior, a statistical measurement based on error
rate is shown. The oscilloscope is set up to be triggered by pulses separated by
more than 1.5 times the clock period. First we start by choosing the minimum
clock period without crosstalk. Figure 3.27 shows the measurement performed
on the circuit applying a clock period of 23.95 ns (situation where victim is
in Metal 2). As can be seen, the circuit shows a correct output for several
clock cycles, but a faulty output (denoted by output pulse width greater than
the clock period) appears at certain time intervals. By making a number (500)
of requests asking for the triggering status of the oscilloscope, it is possible to
determine a fault percentage, which is the magnitude displayed in the vertical
axis of figures 3.28 and 3.29. In these figures, the four measured coupling
cases are shown. For each case, two sub-cases are depicted labeled I and D.
The I cases correspond to the situation in which crosstalk noise introduces an
increase in the path delay, while the D cases correspond to a decrease in the
path delay, allowing a higher working frequency.
Figure 3.28 shows that, for the set with victim line in Metal 2, the minimum
clock period allowing normal operation is approximately 23.98 ns when there
is no coupling. If a crosstalk signal is present and it is properly synchronized
with the internal victim signal, the minimum clock period can be as low as

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
73
23.40 ns, which means a crosstalk effect of around 0.6 ns. This situation corre-
sponds to Case 4, where three adjacent lines simultaneously interfere with the
victim line.
The same measurements for the situation where the victim is in Metal 1
level are shown in figure 3.29. In this case, the same trends as in figure 3.28
are observed, but the crosstalk delay effect is less significant than when Metal 2
level is the victim. In the previous case, differences in delay of 600 ps were
obtained, while now these differences are around 350 ps in the worst case
(Case 4). This difference can be explained considering that Metal 1 presents a
capacitance to the substrate that decreases the crosstalk effect.
3.
Energy dissipation due to crosstalk
One important problem in today’s VLSI integrated circuits is the evaluation
of circuit energy consumption. The reason is the need to know with a good de-
gree of accuracy the power consumption (the energy of one operation divided
by the time this operation takes to execute) of the chip in order to consider heat
dissipators properly, to design power supply and ground lines adequately (with
enough width to avoid electro-migration problems) and to increase power au-
tonomy in portable electronic equipment.
Technological trends dictate an increase in capacitance between lines [14].
In the usual analysis of switching power consumption, this capacitance is ig-
nored, or at least, included implicitly in a total capacitance to ground [15].

74
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
However, the effect of this coupling capacitance is very different from capac-
itance to ground because it depends on the switching activity of the drivers.
An estimate in [16] gives an increase factor of 4 in energy consumption due to
coupling between lines.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
75
The increase in energy dissipation due to interconnect structures shows two
different contributions: the first one is the spurious signal produced because of
the coupling capacitance, which causes extra dissipation in the coupled lines’
driver resistance. The second contribution is due to the logical propagation of
this spurious signal in the nodes following the coupled signal. The first con-
tribution will be quantified in this section, showing how much more energy
is consumed by the presence of capacitance between lines. This aspect was
mentioned in [17]. An analysis of the energy consumption considering tran-
sistor devices, formally including short-circuit, sub-threshold and input-output
capacitance current contributions, is developed in this section.
A set of different line structures is analyzed through electrical simulation in
order to calculate the energy dissipated, taking into account the lines’ coupling
capacitance. An evaluation of the different contributions to the total energy
dissipated will be made, allowing the introduction of some rules depending on
the structure, which are very useful in energy estimation tools for optimizing
the algorithms they use.
We will start by presenting a simple model for a set of two coupled lines
with CMOS inverters as drivers. Single transitions will be analyzed from a
mathematical point of view. Some simulations will be also performed and the
relative significance of different contributions for total energy dissipation will
be analyzed. This section will end with the case of multiple transitions.
3.1
Model for energy calculation of two coupled lines. Case
of single transition.
In order to calculate the dynamic current consumption of two coupled lines,
let us consider the circuit depicted in figure 3.30. Two interconnect lines are
driven respectively by two CMOS inverters. Each line is described as a capaci-
tance to ground and a coupling capacitance between them, modeling capacitive
crosstalk. For the electrical structure of figure 3.30, the relation between the
different currents is given by the following expressions:
The energy dissipated in the transistors during a certain time interval can be
obtained by integrating the power, that is the voltage drop in each transistor
multiplied by the current:

76
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Let us first analyze the case of a positive transition in 
while the driver
input of the other node 
is kept at a constant value, 
In this case,
is constant and therefore its derivative and increment are null. Driver 1 is
making a positive transition and thus the current through transistor 
is the
driver’s short-circuit current contribution. On the other hand, driver 2 has a
constant value 
at its input, and, therefore, the current through transistor
is only a sub-threshold contribution. Substituting equations 3.23 and 3.24
into 3.25 gives:
A spurious signal due to crosstalk will be produced at node 2, but after
the steady state is reached, the final output of node 2 will be the same as at
the beginning, hence 
Then, taking a sufficiently long integration
period, the output voltages will reach stable values, and the resulting voltage

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
77
differences will be 
and
Inserting these values in equation 3.26 leads to the follow-
ing expression:
This result applies for a positive transition at the input of driver 1, while
input of driver 2 is at 
The other cases must also be studied: a positive
transition in 
while 
is at GND, a negative transition in 
while 
is
at GND and a negative transition in 
while 
is at 
The methodology
for analyzing these other cases consists of finding in equations 3.23 and 3.24,
the switching currents, depending on voltage derivatives and non-switching
currents: the current of the transistor in the sub-threshold region (cut-off from
the quiet driver) and the current of the transistor which contributes with a short-
circuit current (transistor of the active driver that is in cut-off state at the final
stable state). Then, the energy is obtained from equation 3.25. In all cases, the
total energy can be expressed as a sum of different contributions:
In equation 3.28 the following contributions can be identified:
Short-circuit energy 
due to the transistor of the active driver (driver 1
in our case) which is cut off at the end of the transition. In the contribution
of this transistor, a sub-threshold component is also present once the steady
state is reached. This is included in the same
Sub-threshold energy 
due to the quiet driver’s (driver 2 in our case)
transistor, which is cut off all the time.
A contribution at the active driver due to input-output parasitic capacitance
of the devices 
This contribution is given by [18]:
a)
b)
c)
For positive transitions of
For negative transitions of

78
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
d) A contribution due to interconnects 
In all cases, given by
Contributions a), b) and c) depend on the driver’s transistors, while contri-
bution d) depends only on the interconnect structure.
A different problem appears if there are simultaneous transitions in both
lines. In that case, a more complicated mathematical treatment is needed, and
two new parameters play an important role: the relative direction of the tran-
sitions (opposite or equal direction) and, especially, the relative delay between
transitions. A study of this problem will be made at the end of this section.
3.2
Contribution of driver and interconnect to dissipated
energy. A case study
In order to analyze the importance of the different contributions to the en-
ergy consumption, some HSPICE simulations were conducted on the same
circuit used to derive the analytical expressions in the previous section (fig-
ure 3.30). A 0.18 
CMOS technology with one poly and six metallization
levels is considered. HSPICE simulations have been performed using a level
49 model for the MOSFET devices, with a supply voltage of 
The
energy dissipation values have been calculated by numerically integrating the
simulated transient current through the transistors, multiplied by their voltage
drop.
Parasitic capacitances 
have been calculated using the 2D
field solver integrated into HSPICE [19]. Also, an estimated fan-out capaci-
tance of 
(equivalent to six minimum-size gates) has been added to
the calculated capacitance to ground to give the node ground capacitances
and
Four different structures have been considered in order to analyze the effect
of different line geometries in the energy dissipation contribution of coupling
(figure 3.31). For the coupling configuration labeled Struct A, different cases
have been considered concerning the size of the driver transistors:
Equal and unbalanced drivers (equally sized transistors
Equal and balanced drivers
Different and balanced drivers
For the other coupling structures, only the case of equal drivers with equally
sized transistors is reported. For all the cases considered, three energy values
have been obtained:

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
79
The total energy including crosstalk effects ( 
value obtained from field
solver), by HSPICE simulation.
The total energy without considering crosstalk effects 
by HSPICE
simulation.
The line contribution to the total energy, labeled 
which can be
analytically calculated.
Two comparisons are presented here. Firstly, the energy dissipation due to
drivers (contributions a, b and c above) is compared with the energy dissipation
from the total energy dissipation calculated by HSPICE. The second
comparison is total energy obtained by HSPICE simulation, between the case
with coupling capacitance, and with no coupling capacitance (i.e. repeating
the simulation with
Let us first focus on the geometry labeled Struct A in figure 3.31 that consists
of two equal lines of minimum width and minimum separation at the first level
of metallization. The results obtained are depicted in figure 3.32 for different
line lengths. It can be seen that the drivers’ contribution represents 50% of the
total energy dissipation for a very short line 
and this decreases rapidly
when line length increases. For example, for a line of 
in length, the
contribution of drivers is only around 10% of total energy consumption. This
result shows that in energy dissipation analysis of VLSI circuits, the effect of
lines can never be neglected, while the effect of drivers (due to short-circuit
plus sub-threshold current) can be neglected for lines longer than a certain
value. This result can be used in energy dissipation estimation tools to obtain
due to interconnect capacitances 
The latter component is obtained
analytically, and the former component is obtained by subtracting the value of

80
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
accurate results and improve analysis time. In figure 3.32 the contribution of
crosstalk is also analyzed. It can be seen that for               long lines crosstalk
contribution is around 40% of the total energy dissipation. Only for short lines
can this contribution be neglected. This implies that energy estimation tools
cannot disregard the contribution of crosstalk (coupling parasitic capacitance)
because it represents a very important percentage of total energy dissipation.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
81
Figure 3.33 shows a comparison of drivers’ contribution to energy dissipa-
tion for the four structures in figure 3.31 (A, B, C and D), The same trends
can be observed in all structures. The device contribution is around 50% (equal
contribution of drivers and lines) for short lines 
and decreases
for longer lines. For 
length lines, the drivers’ contribution is around
20% of total energy dissipation, except for structure C, where this contribution
is near 30%. It must be noted that for structure C, the drivers’ contribution
is more important than for the other structures, due to the screening effect of
metal 1 on the upper metal layer, resulting in a small value for metal 2 ground
capacitance, thus reducing the total capacitance involved in this case.
Figure 3.34 shows the importance of crosstalk contribution to total energy
dissipation for the structures analyzed. Once more, similar trends are obtained
in all the structures. For short lines, the effect of crosstalk is negligible, while
for long ones it is very significant. For lines up to 
the crosstalk contri-
bution represents more than 40% of total energy dissipation, except for struc-
ture C. Structure C shows less crosstalk significance (20% of total energy
dissipation), for the above- mentioned reasons. In figure 3.34 it can also be
seen that the crosstalk effect is more significant in structures A and D. This
fact is related to the previously mentioned result that crosstalk noise increases
when the ratio between coupling and ground capacitance increases. This is
also true for extra energy dissipation. Comparing structures A and B, the cou-
pling capacitance is almost the same, while the ground capacitance is greater
in structure B due to the wider lines considered, reducing the ratio between
coupling and ground capacitance. The same happens with structure D, but in

82
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
this case it is not so intuitive because of the different values for width, height
and distance between lines.
Figure 3.35 analyzes the effect of driver sizes. It is observed that when line
length increases, the drivers’ relative contribution to total energy consump-
tion decreases. Considering different driver sizes, it can be seen that the sig-
nificance of the contribution of drivers is more relevant when the size of the
drivers increases, as intuitively expected. Comparing the cases of unequal bal-
anced and equal balanced drivers (the first case has transistors with a channel
width five times that of the second case), the result is that, in unequal balanced
case, the importance of drivers’ contributions is more significant than for the
equal balanced case (for a line length of 
the values change from 70%
to 30% respectively).
3.3
Transitions in both nodes
In this section, the more complicated case of non-simultaneous transitions
at sources is dealt with. The total dissipated energy calculation will be split
in two phases, A and B (see figure 3.36), so that each phase corresponds to
a single transition. The main difference with respect to the single transition is
that phase A has an integration period which is not infinite, as in the case of the
energy computation for a single switching node, but lasts only until the second
transition (phase B) begins. Thus, at the end of phase
and 
Voltage differences 
and 
are explicitly
shown in figure 3.36.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
83
Following the notation in figure 3.36 and after some algebra applying equa-
tions for a single transition in all the cases (different direction transitions and
different values at quiet nodes), it is possible to calculate the total energy dis-
sipated in terms of these intermediate values for the different switching event
cases. A detailed analysis can be found in [18].
As a summary of the analysis, there are only two different cases to consider:
transitions in the same direction and transitions in opposite directions. In terms
of the absolute value of         and
we   have for opposite transitions:

84
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
where 
depends on 
and 
as well as on the coupling capacitance, and
can be expressed as:
On the other hand, for transitions in the same direction:
In the previous equations, 
and 
correspond to the transistors’ sub-
threshold and short-circuit current as before, while 
corresponds to all
terms proportional to 
or
3.4
Discussion
Assuming the usual case is that the maximum occurs at
for transitions at both nodes in opposite directions (Cases 2 and 3), the effect is
an increase in energy. This maximum effect can be calculated, giving for both
cases:
In the case of signals switching the same direction (Cases 1 and 4), a de-
crease in energy is obtained:
This is the base for the algorithms which attempt to find codes minimizing
the number of opposite transitions in coupled lines, and favoring transitions in

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
85
the same direction [20], [21], [22]. However, if one of the transitions is delayed
with respect to the other, at least one of 
or 
will be non-zero and
the energy dissipated will have a value between the case of two independent
transitions, and the above 
or 
Therefore, these algorithms will
be useful when “simultaneous” transitions are really simultaneous and are not
skewed by different logic paths by an amount greater than a certain limit.
3.4.1
Effect of relative delay between input transitions
These effects will be illustrated with several HSPICE simulations. We have
used a level 49 MOSFET model (BSIM3v3) of a 
CMOS technology.
Power supply is chosen to be 3 V, and input signal rise time, 200 ps. The load-
ing capacitances are 
Three configurations
are studied:
1
2
3
Both drivers are equal, with equally- sized PMOS and NMOS transistors,
(unbalanced, equal drivers).
Drivers are equal and balanced,
Drivers are different and balanced:
We calculate the energy dissipation obtained from expressions 3.35 and 3.36
without including technological contributions
and
as they are assumed much smaller than loading capacitance
contribution for long lines. The values thus obtained are 2.925 pJ for a single
transition at node 1, 2.475 pJ for a single transition at node 2, 3.15 pJ for
simultaneous transitions in same direction and 7.65 pJ for opposite direction
simultaneous switching. These values compare well with those in table 3.1 for
the configurations mentioned above. After careful evaluation of the simulation
results, the differences between the three cases shown in table 3.1 can, in this
case, be attributed mainly to various contributions in short-circuit current and
I/O coupling capacitance. An overall contribution of the short-circuit current,
sub-threshold current, and I/O coupling capacitance is obtained of between
50 fJ and 75 fJ per driver, given this particular configuration.
With these values, the energy obtained from HSPICE as a function of rel-
ative delay between input transitions is shown in figures 3.37 to 3.39. These
diagrams show that the influence of coupling capacitance in the case of double
transitions is only important for a certain range of relative delays. The question
of what this particular range is therefore arises. From the analysis in the pre-
ceding sections, it is clear that this range corresponds to the situation in which
(the output variation in the first switching output) is less than 
or
(the output variation in the coupled line due to the first switching out-
put) is non-zero. In other words, the range in which crosstalk coupling has a

86
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
significant influence is determined by the slowest response of either the first
transition 
or the corresponding crosstalk waveform
Observe, for example, figure 3.37. As both drivers are unbalanced (PMOS
response is slower than NMOS’s), the range of relative delay in which coupling
capacitance is significant is greater for 
output transitions than for
transitions. A negative delay indicates that the transition at the input of driver 2
precedes that of driver 1, so for negative delay, transition
in line 2) has a greater range of influence than 
transitions, while
the opposite occurs for positive relative delays. This is shown in the clear
asymmetry of the curves 
and 
with respect to the origin in

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
87
the x-axis. Also, the difference between curves 
and 
is due
to the same cause.
This asymmetry does not appear in figure 3.38, as the response of PMOS
and NMOS is approximately the same and drivers are equal. As for fig-
ure 3.39, there is an asymmetry coming from the different strength of each
driver: driver 2 is stronger and has a faster response (equal for
or
as the drivers are balanced). Therefore, when there is a positive relative delay
(driver 1 switches first), the coupling capacitance influence has a greater extent
than for negative relative delays, as the figure shows.

88
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
In general, as a rule of thumb, we can conclude that the range of influence
of coupling capacitance is directly related to the output response, or output
rise time. Input transitions delayed by more than the value of the output rise
time will not produce energy dissipation significantly different to that of two
separate transitions.
3.4.2
Influence of relative driver strength
The formulation presented here allows an explanation of the dependence of
energy consumption on the characteristics of the output. Let us consider the
output response of two equal drivers to a double transition delayed by a certain
amount of time. If we compare the result to the response of two drivers in
which one of them (namely, gate 1, the first switching) is more resistive, we
will observe that, in the latter case (driver 1 more resistive), the corresponding
voltage difference at the end of Phase A, 
is smaller than in the former
case (equal drivers). Also, 
the voltage difference in the victim node,
will be quite similar because driver 2 has the same strength in both cases.
Observing equations 3.32 and 3.34, we can conclude from this rough analysis
that in the second case the energy dissipation will be larger if the transitions are
in opposite directions, and smaller if the transitions are in the same direction.
In general, then, we can conclude that if driver 1 is more resistive (weaker)
than driver 2, opposite transitions tend to worsen the energy dissipation and
transitions in the same direction alleviate it, compared to the case of equal
driver strengths. The opposite occurs when driver 1 is stronger than driver 2.
Figure 3.40 shows the influence of relative driver strength on output wave-
forms. As driver 1 strength decreases with respect to driver 2, the value of
also decreases, while 
hardly varies. Therefore, as predicted by
equation 3.34, the dissipated energy must increase as driver strength increases
for this particular case (both transitions in the same direction). This is con-
firmed by the results obtained from HSPICE simulations, shown in table 3.2.
The only exception is case 16/4 which for opposite transitions should show
lower energy than 8/4 case according to the rule of thumb we use. In this case,
as can be seen from the waveforms in figure 3.40, driver 1 is so fast that the
transitions are essentially independent of a relative input delay of 1 ns, and
the resulting energy is approximately the sum of energy for each transition.
Note that the increase in transistor size of driver 1 implies an increase in
and 
with respect to the theoretical values obtained only from line
parameters shown in table 3.1.
4.
Crosstalk effects in logic VLSI circuits
In this section we will discuss how crosstalk effects are translated into logic
effects in digital circuits. This section is divided in two sections: one for static
circuits, and the other for dynamic circuits.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
89
4.1
Static circuits
As already pointed out, there are two effects that can cause problems in
combinational blocks. One is an increase or decrease in the delay of the cir-

90
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
cuit. The difficulty in handling this extra delay is that it is data-dependent,
because otherwise it could just be added to the delay associated with devices
and routing. This data-dependency may appear as random errors produced by
set-up or hold time violations when the delayed transition arrives at a storage
element (a latch or a flip-flop).
The second effect is the generation of spurious signals. They introduce only
a transient error in the circuit. The problem, again, is that this transient error
may reach a storage element and then a wrong logic value may be stored.
The study of spurious signal propagation must determine if the penetration
depth is greater than the distance (measured in number of gates traversed) to
a storage element, or to a primary output, where it can affect other chips. The
propagation issue, besides determining the penetration depth in terms of the
signal’s amplitude and width, must consider the set of logic values that allow
propagation through a logic path1. This latter aspect is dealt with in chapter 6.
In summary, the problem with crosstalk in static circuits is the possibility of
storing a wrong logic value, either by an induced (positive or negative) delay, or
by a spurious signal propagated to the input of a storage element. In addition,
there is increased energy dissipation, as analyzed above.
4.2
Dynamic circuits
Dynamic circuits are commonly used in high-speed design because they
show attractive features which include reduced area (the number of transis-
tors usually is much smaller than the number of transistors in typical CMOS
complementary technologies), and increased speed. However, this logic style
is more susceptible to coupling noise because in the normal operation mode,
during some time periods some nodes of the gate are in a high impedance state.
As already shown, during these time intervals these internal nodes are therefore
more susceptible to crosstalk noise. In this section we will show how crosstalk
noise can affect this kind of circuit through two examples of dynamic circuits:
a full adder as a combination circuit, and a dynamic RAM cell as a storage
element.
4.2.1
NORA full adder
Let us start by considering a serial full adder implemented using the NORA
technique [23]. Figure 3.41 shows the transistor diagram of the circuit. Several
nodes of this structure, such as nodes labeled 
and 
are
good candidates to be highly crosstalk sensitive as they are in a high impedance
state during some semi-periods of the clock input 
As an example, the
1 For example, a spurious signal at one input of a 2-input NAND gate can never be propagated to its output
if the other input is set to logic value 0.

Crosstalk effects in digital circuits
91
effects of the simultaneous transitions of 3 lines which are coupled by parasitic
capacitances to line 
have been simulated. Device models for a CMOS
and 3.3 V voltage supply technology are used in the circuit simulation.
The values of parasitic capacitance between lines are of the same order than
the ground capacitances of the lines.
Figure 3.42 presents the HSPICE simulation results of the full adder for sev-
eral input values. Panel (c) illustrates how the transitions of the affecting lines
affect the victim line 
A spurious signal can be observed of around
1.8 V in amplitude and less than 1 ns duration in this signal. Panel (d) shows
the outputs 
and 
of the full adder without coupling, that is, in nor-
mal operation mode. Panel (e) shows the same result considering coupling in
A permanent logic error in this output is observed in this panel. These
errors can be further propagated through other logic blocks fed by the adder
outputs.
From the point of view of circuit type, a dynamic full adder like the one pre-
sented here is a combinational circuit, but, in order to work properly, it needs
to include some latch structures to maintain values at certain nodes. In essence,
this is what allows the increase in speed of dynamic circuits: in addition to a

92
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
smaller driver resistance there are fewer series transistors. Therefore, the faulty
behavior due to coupling in dynamic circuits can be translated as a permanent
logic error and not a transient one as in static circuits.
The problems related to crosstalk can be alleviated by the modification of
the circuit to include “keeper” transistors, which reduce the impedance in the
high impedance state while allowing dynamic behavior. Several dynamic fam-
ilies use this modification [24].
4.2.2
Dynamic RAM cell
Now we will analyze the behavior of a dynamic memory cell with crosstalk
interferences. Figure 3.43 shows the structure of the cell. The content of the
cell is stored in capacitor         transistors 1 and 2 activate the refresh operation,
transistors 3 and 4 select the mode read-write, the sense amplifier is imple-

REFERENCES
93
mented with transistors 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, and the address circuitry drives
transistor 11.
The high crosstalk susceptibility of this circuit is due to capacitor 
being
in a high impedance state while the cell is in storage mode. During this pe-
riod of time, crosstalk may produce a change in the voltage stored in 
due
to interconnect activity. If this change is large enough to reach the switching
threshold voltage of the technology, then the content of the cell can be per-
manently changed. Figure 3.44 shows the simulated waveforms in the case
of correct behavior, while figure 3.45 shows the situation in which crosstalk
causes a change in the voltage of 
large enough to produce an erroneous
state. In these simulations, a logic 1 is first stored in the cell, and then this
value is read as 1 in the correct behavior, and as 0 in the erroneous one. It can
be seen in figure 3.45 that the voltage stored in 
decreases due to commuta-
tion in a near line coupled with node
Concerning the behavior of this cell, it can be pointed out that another crit-
ical state when crosstalk can be dangerous is the time after the pre-charge of
the bit line and before the charge is transferred from 
to the bit line. In this
interval, small changes in the bit line voltage can produce the reading of an
erroneous state at the output.

94
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
References
[1] Roca M., Moll F., and Rubio A. “Electric Design Rules for Avoiding Crosstalk in Micro-
electronic Circuits”. In 4th International Workshop on Power an Timing Modelling for
Performance of ICs, 1994.

REFERENCES
95
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
Moll F. and Rubio A. “Spurious Signals in Digital CMOS VLSI Circuits: A propagation
Analysis”. IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems–II, 39(10), 1992.
Shoji M. CMOS digital circuit technology. Prentice-Hall International, 1988.
Sah T. “Characteristics of the Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Transistor”. IEEE Trans. on
Electron Devices, 11(7), July 1964.
Moll F. Parasitic effects due to interconnections in microelectronic design. PhD thesis,
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, March 1995.
Cartrysse J. “Measured Distortion of the Output-waveform of an Integrated Opamp Due
to Substrate Noise”. IEEE Trans. on Electromagnetic Compatibility, 37(2), May 1995.
Cartrysse J., Sinnaeve A., and Vandecastele G. “Measured Crosstalk on Chips Using
Specially Designed Components”. IEEE Trans. on Electromagnetic Compatibility, 37(2),
May 1995.
Soumyanath K., Borkar S., Zhou C., and Bloechel B. “Accurate On-Chip Interconnect
Evaluation: A Time-Domain Technique”. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 34(5),
May 1999.
Caignet F., Delmas S., and Sicard E. “On the Measurement of Crosstalk in Integrated
Circuits”. IEEE Trans. on VLSI Systems, 8(5), October 2000.
Caignet F., Delmas-Bendhia S., and Sicard E. “The challenge of signal integrity in deep-
submicrometer CMOS technology”. Proceedings of the IEEE, 89(4), April 2001.
Delmas S., Caignet F., Sicard E., and Roca M. “On-chip sampling in CMOS Integrated
Circuits”. IEEE Trans. on Electromagnetic Compatibility, 41(4), November 1999.
T. Sato, Sylvester D., Cao Y., and Hu C. “Accurate in situ measurement of peak noise and
delay change induced by interconnect coupling”. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits,
36(10), October 2001.
Fourniols J., Roca M., Caignet F., and Sicard E. “Characterization of Crosstalk Noise in
Submicron CMOS Integrated Circuits: An Experimental View”. IEEE Trans. on Elec-
tromagnetic Compatibility, 40(3), August 1998.
Werner C.,
and Ramacher U. “Crosstalk Noise in Future Digital
CMOS Circuits”. In DATE 2001, 2001.
Chandrakasan A. P. and Brodersen R. W. Low Power Digital CMOS Design. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1995.
Sotiriadis P.P. and Chandrasakan A. “Bus Energy Minimization by Transition Pattern
Coding (TPC) in Deep Submicron Technologies”. In International Conference on Com-
puter Aided Design, November 2000.
Kim K.-W., Jung S.-O., Narayanan U., Liu C. L., and Kang S.-M. “Noise-Aware Power
Optimization for On-Chip Interconnect”. In Proc. ISLPED ’00, 2000.
Moll F., Roca M., and Isern E. “Analysis of dissipation energy of switching digital CMOS
gates with coupled outputs”. Microelectronics Journal, 34(9):833–842, September 2003.

96
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
Avant! Corp. Star-Hspice 2001.2, June 2001.
Kim K-W., Baek K.-H., Shanbhag N., Liu C.L., and Kang S.-M. “Coupling-driven sig-
nal encoding scheme for low-power interface design”. In International Conference on
Computer Aided Design (ICCAD), 2000.
Machiarulo L., Macii E., and Poncino M. “Low energy encoding for deep submicron
address buses”. In International Symposium on Low Power Electronic Design (ISLPED),
2001.
Sotiriadis P.P., Wang A., and Chandrakasan A. “Transition pattern coding: an approach
to reduce energy in interconnect”. In European Solid State Circuits Conference, 2000.
Goncalves N. and de Man H. J. “NORA: A racefree dynamic CMOS technique for
pipelined logic structures”. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 22(3), June 1983.
Bernstein K., Carrig K.M., Durham C.M., Hansen P.R., Hogenmiller D., Nowak E.J., and
Rohrer N.J. High speed CMOS design styles. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999.

Chapter 4
PACKAGING INTERCONNECTS
As explained in Chapter 1‚ the development of microelectronic technology
and the increase in complexity of integrated circuits have an important impact
on package requirements‚ especially in terms of number of I/O and power dis-
sipation requirements.
This chapter is centered on the electrical aspect of packages and‚ in partic-
ular‚ on how packages contribute to noise generation. Firstly‚ a brief introduc-
tion to packaging interconnection structure is presented and then several meth-
ods are introduced for deriving an electrical model for the package in order
to evaluate the overall performance of the chip-package system. Finally‚ some
electrical simulations are presented to illustrate the main effects that packaging
interconnects introduce into electrical signals.
1.
Packaging structure
In order to make an electrical characterization of packages‚ a physical and
geometrical description is needed. In this section‚ common package struc-
tures are described. From the point of view of electrical connections‚ several
technologies and package families exist‚ especially concerning external con-
nections (to the printed circuit board‚ PCB)‚ and connections to the chip.
It is not the purpose of this section to give comprehensive information on
manufacturing processes‚ but to identify common interconnect structures that
need to be described in an electrical modeling tool‚ for example‚ for obtaining
electrical parameters. However‚ some notions of manufacturing processes are
needed in order to understand the different parts of the package‚ and they are
briefly given here.
97

98
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.1
Body fabrication technology
There are two families of packages as far as materials are concerned: plastic
and ceramic. These determine not only the package’s electrical and thermal
characteristics‚ but also the interconnection structure of the package.
1.1.1
Plastic packages
Plastic packages are used for lower performance circuits in which cost is
the main driving factor‚ because they are easy to manufacture and‚ therefore‚
cheaper than their ceramic counterparts.
The manufacturing process consists of soldering the chip to a metal frame
(leadframe)‚ which will form the package interconnection‚ and then molding
the whole structure in a polymer‚ usually epoxy [1]. The metal of the leadframe
is usually aluminum‚ or copper covered in gold to avoid chip contamination [2].
This process implies that only one interconnection layer exists and there is no
reference plane‚ so the electrical characteristics of the interconnections are not
very good. Only the die attach pad can be considered as a reference plane for a
limited area close to the chip. Otherwise‚ the PCB must provide the reference
plane. One exception is the case of plastic BGA packages (PBGA) in which
the leadframe is replaced by an epoxy glass substrate to which the chip is
attached and connected. After that‚ it is molded in plastic. In this latter case‚
the substrate may include several routing layers and reference planes‚ although
usually only bottom and top layers are used for reasons of cost.
The advantages of plastic packages are a low dielectric constant (around 5)‚
which gives rise to a low capacitance of interconnections and a higher velocity
of propagation of signals. Another advantage is that their thermal expansion
coefficient is very similar to the one used in printed circuit boards (PCB)‚ and
mechanical stress is therefore avoided when the temperature of the circuit rises.
On the other hand‚ the disadvantages are low thermal conductivity‚ which
makes them unsuitable for applications where a large amount of power is dis-
sipated‚ and the already mentioned non-existence of a reference plane in the
package.
1.1.2
Ceramic packages
The alternative to plastic packages are ceramic ones‚ whether they are all
ceramic or have only a ceramic substrate with upper levels of other dielectric
materials [3].
The most common technology is the one known as doctor blading [1]‚ [4]‚
in which a ceramic solution is deposited on a polyester film and dried. In this
way‚ a thin and flexible layer of ceramic is obtained‚ which can be cut into
pieces. On each of these layers‚ a thick-film metallization process is applied
and then several ceramic layers are stacked‚ with fine alignment. They are then

Packaging interconnects
99
pressed and sintered in a thermal cycle reaching 1500° C. This process leads
to a great volume reduction‚ of about 40%‚ and therefore‚ it is not possible to
achieve fine dimensions for thick-film metallizations.
The materials used for conductors are refractory metals (molybdenum or
tungsten) for the ceramic substrate that have the disadvantage of high resistivity
It is also possible to deposit several thin-film metallization layers
on top of the ceramic substrate [5]‚ [6]. In this case‚ copper 
or
aluminum 
are used.
One of the advantages of ceramic substrates is the possibility of using a
large number of metallization layers‚ (up to 150 [5]) and thereby achieving a
very high interconnection density‚ which makes them very suitable for MCM
applications. In addition‚ their thermal conductivity is very high and they can
dissipate large amounts of power.
Their disadvantages are a high dielectric constant (around 10) and a thermal
expansion coefficient very different from the material (epoxy) used in PCBs.
This causes a big problem in circuits with high power dissipation and surface
mounting technology‚ because the circuits can become detached from the PCB
due to the mechanical stress caused by thermal expansion.
In order to reduce the problem of the high dielectric constant‚ the thin-film
metallization on top of the substrate may use 
dielectrics‚ such as poly-
imide or silicon dioxide. This has the additional advantage of increasing inter-
connection density because the thin-film process allows smaller interconnec-
tion dimensions.
1.2
External connections
As regards external connections‚ the traditional classification of packages
is based on the method of connecting the package to the PCB‚ through-hole
mounting (THM) and surface mounting (SMT). From the point of view of ge-
ometric structure‚ a different classification can be made between packages with
connections on their edges‚ and packages with connections within their area.
Both approaches (edge and area) have versions of THM and SMT packages.
Figure 4.1 shows some of the most commonly used package types.
1.2.1
Periphery connection packages
These packages are simpler in construction than the area connection pack-
ages and therefore cost less. They show only one layer of interconnection
routing‚ although the body material can be plastic or ceramic.
In this type of package‚ we can make a further classification depending on
the number of sides which have electrical connections: one‚ two or four sides.
As the requirements for connection density at PCB level increase‚ packages
with connections on all four sides are more common and the lead or pin pitch
decreases.

100
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Without trying to be comprehensive‚ the types of packages in this group are
known by the following acronyms:
SIP/SIMM  Single Inline Package/Single Inline Memory Modules are pack-
ages designed to achieve a high component density at the PCB level‚ by
placing the components vertically. They therefore have leads on only one
side of the package.
DIL/DIP  Dual InLine/Packages are rectangular packages with the leads on
two opposite sides‚ to be soldered into the holes of the PCB (THM technol-
ogy). The separation between leads in these packages is usually 100 mils
(1 mil = 0.001 inches = 0.0254 mm).
SOIC  Small Outline Integrated Circuits also have leads on only two sides of
the package‚ but they are designed for surface mounting and have a smaller
lead pitch than DIL packages. They therefore have a smaller package body.
Leads are either gull-wing type or J-lead type. The J-lead pins occupy a

Packaging interconnects
101
smaller area on the PCB‚ but they generally need a larger pitch than gull-
wing leads.
LCC/QFP Leaded Chip Carrier/Quad Flat Packages have connections on all
four sides of the package. LCCs have J-lead pins and QFPs have gull-
wing pins. QFPs have the greatest connection density among periphery
packages‚ achieving almost 500 leads for a 40 × 40 mm at a 0.3 mm pitch.
1.2.2
Area connection packages
In order to further increase the number of I/Os and connection density at the
PCB level‚ grid array packages were developed. These packages have connec-
tions in a whole area of the package substrate instead of only at the periphery.
Routing is much more complex than periphery packages and for high perfor-
mance packages with many I/O terminals‚ several routing layers and power
reference planes are integrated in the package substrate.
Both ceramic and
plastic packages are available.
There are two families‚ depending on the PCB mounting technology:
PGA Pin Grid Array packages have leads for THM technology. These are the
highest lead count packages available‚ of the order of 2000.
BGA Ball Grid Array packages are a development of PGA packages‚ with
metallized and plated pads for surface mounting instead of pins. They allow
a smaller lead pitch than PGAs.
1.3
Chip connection
The third characteristic concerning package structure—and one which has
an important influence on its electrical performance—is the method used to
connect the chip to the package.
1.3.1
Wire bonding
Wire bonding (figure 4.2) is the traditional method for chip connection (it
was developed at Bell Labs in the late 1950s [7]). It is still the most widely used
technique today‚ especially for low-cost applications. It consists of connecting
the chip and package pads with a thin gold or aluminum wire (with a diameter
of the order of 
by a thermosonic or thermocompression bonding pro-
cess [8]. All the connections must be made sequentially‚ but‚ with automated
equipment‚ the time taken for each connection can be as low as 100 ms.
The two main drawbacks of this technique are‚ firstly‚ that all connection
pads on the chip must be located at on the edges‚ so the high I/O count increases
the chip area and therefore its cost. Secondly‚ as the wire takes a loop form‚ it
has a relatively high inductance‚ which degrades signal integrity.

102
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.3.2
TAB
Tape Automated Bonding is a development of wire bonding. It consists of
printing the interconnections on a polymer film (figure 4.3) where the chip and
package pad positions are determined. The film is then placed over the chip
and solder joints are made using previous deposits of solder bumps on the chip
and package pads. After that‚ the chip and film are attached to the package and
connections made to the package bond pads. The details of the process can be
found‚ for example‚ in [8].
This method provides shorter connections to the package‚ with a consequent
reduction in inductance. The method also allows all the bonds of the chip to
be made simultaneously‚ as well as all the bonds in the package.
1.3.3
Flip Chip
Flip chip (shown in figure 4.4)‚ also known as C4 (Controlled Collapse Chip
Connection‚ developed by IBM in the 1960s) is the equivalent of area connec-
tion at chip level. It consists of putting small solder bumps directly on the chip
pads. The chip is then placed face to face with the package surface (hence
the name flip-chip) and bonds are formed by thermocompression or ultrasonic
processes.
This method provides very low inductance and‚ therefore‚ maximum elec-
trical performance. In addition‚ the chip pads need not be at the periphery‚
but can be scattered all over the chip surface‚ giving maximum interconnect
density.

Packaging interconnects
103
The main disadvantage of this approach is reliability and testing‚ as well as
cost (related to yield).
2.
Lumped electrical parameter modeling of packages
The modeling problems for packages are the same as those found in inte-
grated circuits. The only difference is in magnitude of the different electrical
parameters of lines‚ drivers and loads. At the package level‚ interconnection
modeling is usually a lumped RLC model [9]‚ [10]‚ especially for single-chip
carriers. However‚ the high switching speed of high-performance circuits may
need a transmission line modeling [11]‚ [6]. The power supply lines are espe-
cially important because of simultaneous switching noise. For this problem‚
the most common model is a lumped inductance one [6]‚ [12]‚ [13]‚ [14].
2.1
Calculation of circuit parameters
The tools used to extract circuit parameters from a 3D geometric description
of the package conductor can be divided into two families. The first obtains
resistance and inductance from different input and output ports‚ corresponding
to the package I/O ports. This method is called Partial Element Equivalent
Circuit (PEEC) [15] and it allows the skin effect to be taken into account‚ so the
parameters are frequency-dependent. To obtain capacitance‚ Finite Element
(FEM) or Boundary Element (BEM) methods are used.
As capacitance is calculated separately from resistance and inductance‚ there
is some degree of inaccuracy‚ unless the conductors are finely discretized. In
this case‚ a set of partial resistances‚ inductances and capacitances is obtained
for each lead-wire conductor. At the limit of infinitessimal discretization‚ it can
be shown that this method is equivalent to a full-wave solution to the problem.
The most important phenomenon related to power supply distribution is the
so-called switching noise [13]. It consists of a power supply fluctuation at the
chip connection due to the complex impedance of the physical power supply
distribution. When the chip node switches‚ a current demand is created and
the impedance causes a voltage variation‚ which affects all the elements con-
nected to the internal power node‚ even when only part of the chip is actually
switching.
This phenomenon is related mostly to the inductance of the conductors
forming the power supply distribution network. When a current derivative ap-
pears‚ the power supply voltage varies. The resistance also causes a voltage
variation because of constant current consumption‚ but this parameter is more

104
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
easily controlled because the network is designed to have a low resistance.
On the other hand‚ parasitic capacitance is also important because it creates a
resonant circuit‚ together with the inductance which cause voltage oscillations
around the DC power supply voltage.
2.2
Concept of Partial Inductance
Inductance as a physical concept has a meaning only in relation to a loop of
current (what is referred to as loop inductance). Its value is defined as the re-
lation of magnetic flux through the area defined by the loop and the magnitude
of the current causing the magnetic flux‚ which can be expressed as [16]:
being and two closed loops‚ 
their tangent vectors‚ and 
the cross-
sectional area of the conductors forming the loop.
Ruehli [16] introduced the concept of partial inductance by considering a
discretization of the loop in rectilinear segments‚ so that inductance is obtained
by a summation instead of closed line integrals:
where loop is divided in K segments while loop 
is divided in M segments‚
each segment with constant cross-section.
This last expression enables a partial inductance to be defined for each seg-
ment‚ so that the loop inductance is the summation of the partial inductances
of each segment forming the loop:
In this way‚ an inductance value is assigned to an individual piece of conduc-
tor‚ but a physical inductance is not present until several conductors are put
together to form a closed loop. Each piece of conductor has a self partial in-
ductance and mutual partial inductances with other conductors depending on
their relative distance and orientation. These partial inductances can be directly
used in a circuit simulator to obtain a realistic electrical model based on loop
geometry.
However‚ it is important to note that to obtain a realistic response‚ the phys-
ical description must be a quasi-closed loop‚ because otherwise an important

Packaging interconnects
105
part of the contribution to the loop inductance (the only physically meaningful
one) is missing. For example‚ a package model with partial inductances may
not be useful because the whole loop corresponding to the external power dis-
tribution is not described and therefore not taken into account in the model.
Therefore‚ this kind of model must be created with care and its applicability
must be carefully analyzed before its use.
2.3
Skin effect calculation
Another feature of the PEEC method is that it allows resistance and induc-
tance values to be considered in function of frequency. At high frequencies‚ the
current density distribution is concentrated at the conductor surface‚ due to the
finite conductor conductivity. This phenomenon is known as skin effect [17].
This effect can be calculated in the PEEC scheme by performing a cross-
section discretization‚ as shown in figure 4.5. This way‚ each conductor seg-
ment is composed of a number of filaments. The current in each filament is cal-
culated by assuming a uniform current density in each filament and taking into
account the interaction between different filaments of the same segment. After
obtaining the current and voltage for each segment‚ it is possible to calculate
its impedance‚ that is‚ resistance and inductance. This method is implemented
in a well-known public domain tool‚ Fasthenry‚ developed at MIT [18].
2.4
Resistance and inductance calculation
The PEEC method assigns a value for partial resistance and inductance for
each segment in the circuit‚ as well as a capacitance between individual seg-
ments. The complete circuit model is equivalent to the electromagnetic model‚
if retardation effects (because of finite velocity of propagation of EM waves)
can be neglected [15]. Retardation effects can also be included in the formula-
tion. In this case the results are equivalent to a full-wave solution [19].
However‚ the resulting description can be too complex for a typical geom-
etry and‚ therefore‚ the corresponding circuit simulation may be too slow to
be practical. A simplification of the model consists of finding a relation be-
tween physical I/O node currents and voltages at a given frequency. The real
part of such a relation will be the resistance and the imaginary part divided by

106
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
frequency will be the inductance. With this simplification‚ only one resistance
and self-inductance‚ plus mutual inductances‚ are obtained for each I/O port
(figure 4.6).
The calculations involved for obtaining resistance and inductance are briefly
sketched here for illustration. A more detailed explanation can be found‚ for
example‚ in [20].
In terms of partial resistance and inductance elements‚ one can write for
partial elements (and consequently the same number of circuit branches):
of the different conductor segments (branches)‚ and 
‚ 
their
partial resistance and inductance matrices.
From network analysis formulation‚ currents and voltage at 
terminals
can be related by means of an incidence matrix‚
where 
is the vector of external (I/O) current sources‚ and 
is the
vector of all node voltages. Using equation 4.5 it is possible to find the relation
between external currents and induced node voltages:
From equation 4.8‚ by setting consecutively unity current source for each
I/O port and solving the matrix equation‚ it is possible to find the corresponding
node voltages and compute the induced voltage difference for each port. The
real part of this value will be the port’s equivalent resistance and the imaginary
part divided by 
its inductance‚ self and mutual.
Therefore‚ the problem depends on the solution of the matrix equation 4.8.
In order to speed up the solution‚ iterative methods can be used. In addition‚
an alternative mesh analysis‚ as opposed to the nodal analysis sketched here‚
gives a more simplified solution [20].
With this method‚ circuit description complexity is greatly reduced‚ but‚ of
course‚ some accuracy is lost because the partial capacitances of the segments
are neglected. Capacitance can later be added to the model by separately com-
puting the capacitance of the conductors that form the physical structure.
Where 
and 
are currents and voltage differences respectively

Packaging interconnects
107
3.
Circuit modeling from measurement
Experimental characterizations of packages are needed for two purposes:
one is to validate the calculations of parameters obtained by simulation. The
second reason is in order to give an evaluation figure for the package‚ so it can
be compared with other packages.
This section briefly reviews several measurement methods that can be found
in the literature. For more specialized information‚ see for example [21] or [22].
In order to derive an equivalent circuit‚ the measurements performed find
the relation between voltage and current using different techniques. To deter-
mine capacitance‚ an open circuit configuration is used and‚ for the inductance‚
a current loop must be defined‚ so the configuration used is a connection to a
common node for all the leads. We will see that the measurement set-up has
a great influence on the absolute value of the measured inductance. However‚
the same response can be obtained when introducing the measured values into
an electrical simulator‚ even with different set-ups. On the other hand‚ for com-
paring different packages it is very important to define a standard measurement
set-up so the measurement results can be fairly compared.

108
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
3.1
Influence of measurement set-up on measured
inductance
The partial inductances of a given current loop are not unique‚ as shown by‚
for example‚ Young [23]. They are a useful mathematical artifice for describing
the physical element—loop inductance. Given a certain current loop‚ of all the
possible partial inductances‚ the ones obtained by the PEEC method are equiv-
alent to loop inductances with the return current path located at infinity [16]
and they are therefore uniquely defined.
In the case of measurement‚ the measurement set-up defines a current loop
for each of the leads to be measured and‚ of course‚ what is obtained is the cor-
responding loop inductance. Depending on the particular loop or measurement
set-up‚ the inductance obtained will be different.
It can be shown that regardless of the particular set-up and defined loop‚ and
despite the fact that inductances obtained are different‚ the results of using such
inductances are always the same provided there is a common return current
path for all the leads in the package.
To show this‚ let us consider a simplified case: a two-lead package. In
order to measure the inductive effect of a circuit connected to the power supply
through the two leads‚ as shown in figure 4.7‚ two alternative methods can be
devised:
To define the current loop as the two leads‚ shorting the inner leads and
measuring the relation between external voltage and current (figure 4.7).
The current loop is uniquely defined and so is the obtained inductance.
To measure each lead separately using a common return path‚ obtaining a
self inductance for each lead and a mutual inductance between them (fig-
ure 4.8). The values obtained depend on the measurement set- up (basically‚
the chosen return path).
1
2
The point to be proved is that any approach will give the same result when
trying to evaluate the voltage-current relation.
To see that‚ let us assign to each segment of the circuit (package leads and
rest of the current path) its partial inductance as uniquely defined by PEEC
method (see figure 4.8). The return current path will have a self inductance

Packaging interconnects
109
and mutual inductances to the two leads that will depend on the particular
path used in the measurement setup. Therefore‚ the relation between currents
and voltages for the three-port system (the two leads plus return lead)‚ as shown
in figure 4.9 is:
When inductances are measured‚ the ports labeled o are connected together
and voltage relative to 
is measured‚ so that‚ from the previous expressions‚
and 
(figure 4.10). The voltages obtained‚
and 
can thus be expressed in function of the partial inductances as:

110
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
From the above expressions it is clear that different return current paths
(giving different 
will give different measured inductances for the same
package.
However‚ if the we analyze the original problem of inductance for the con-
figuration of figure 4.7‚ we can do it for both approaches‚ partial inductances
and measured loop inductances (figure 4.11). For partial inductances‚ we have
that 
and
If‚ instead‚ the measured values in function of partial inductances are used:
That is‚ the result is the same for both cases and is independent of the return
current path used in the measurement. As a conclusion‚ if one wants to com-

Packaging interconnects
111
pare the measurements from different packages‚ it is very important that the
return path configuration is the same for all the measurements. If‚ instead‚ one
is interested in using the measured values for package evaluation‚ for example
by using the values in a circuit simulator‚ then the return path location is not
important.
3.2
Time domain measurement methods
There are two types of measurements from which an equivalent circuit can
be derived.
3.2.1
Measurements with ramped stimuli
This method was presented by Quint et al. [10]. It derives a lumped capaci-
tance by measuring the voltage induced when a ramp input voltage is applied‚
with the lead in open circuit configuration. The equivalent circuit is shown
in figure 4.12. If the ramp is long enough to let the output voltage achieve a
steady value‚ then the value of this steady value is:
Knowing the input ramp (derivative)‚ the oscilloscope input impedance‚
and the output voltage‚ 
can be determined. This method allows the capac-
itance between any pair of package leads to be determined by leaving all the
leads in the package in open circuit and then driving one lead and measur-
ing the other. Note that what is actually measured is the total capacitance
between leads‚ including the contribution of the equivalent capacitance of the
other leads‚ as shown in figure 4.13.
In order to obtain the value for self inductance‚ the lead to be measured
is connected to ground‚ forming a loop as shown in figure 4.14. The oscil-
loscope impedance will normally be much greater than the lead impedance‚
so the source current is very approximately equal to the current in the lead.
Solving for the output voltage‚ after a transient behavior of time constant
the response is also a ramp‚ following the expression:
where K is the ramp input voltage (time derivative) and where 
is
assumed. After the ramp‚ with constant input voltage‚ the output voltage takes
a constant value after a transient:

112
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
The value of 
can then be calculated from this last steady value‚ knowing
the input ramp amplitude 
and the source resistance‚
while 
can
be obtained from the difference between the maximum output voltage and the
steady final value‚ as shown in figure 4.15.
The value of mutual inductance‚ 
can be calculated by measuring the
induced voltage in a shorted neighboring lead‚ as shown in figure 4.16. After a
transient‚ the voltage is constant‚ while the input increases linearly‚ achieving
a constant value:
This technique is simple to implement and does not need very sophisticated
equipment. The only requirements are that the oscilloscope must have good
resolution and the voltage source must be capable of providing the current
demanded by the inductance measurement. The result is a lumped parameter
model‚ which‚ although it is obtained from low frequency measurements‚ can
be useful up to high frequencies: at least‚ up to the first resonance frequency.

Packaging interconnects
113
3.2.2
Time domain reflectometry
This technique is based on analyzing the voltage waveform obtained from
successive reflections of the discontinuities in the interconnect path after a
sharp voltage transition is injected. By analyzing the successive voltages‚ it
is possible to derive an impedance profile‚ in function of time measured‚
In the case of multiple reflections‚ the different impedances associated with
each path segment can be derived using several algorithms [24]‚ [25] [26].
Figure 4.17 shows the difference between the voltage waveform obtained and
the impedance profile.

114
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
There is a relation between the measured time‚ 
of the impedance profile
and the distance along which the discontinuity is located. This relation is given
by the velocity of propagation and line length‚ or‚ equivalently‚ the time of
propagation:
This latter expression enables the value of inductance and capacitance to
be calculated from the impedance profile obtained. Remembering that for a
lossless transmission line‚ given a length of line 
the total inductance can be
obtained as:

Packaging interconnects
115
using equation 4.14‚ for a constant value of impedance‚
the total induc-
tance depends on the time measured corresponding to the time of propagation:
This last expression can be generalized to the case where 
is not constant‚
by taking small segments of line length and then summing‚ which leads to an
integration between times 
and 
corresponding to distances from the point
of signal injection:
Similarly‚ the total capacitance between two distances corresponding to times
and 
can be obtained:
In summary‚ time domain reflectometry is a technique that needs complex
post- processing of the measured waveform. In principle‚ it is not necessary to
connect the package leads in a predetermined manner for measuring inductance
and capacitance because the technique can identify several segments with their
distinct characteristic impedance. However‚ in order to be able to distinguish
the different segments‚ the rise time of the signal must be much smaller than the
signal propagation time through that segment‚ which is a serious limitation for
small packages‚ as the shortest generated rise times for this type of equipment
are on the order of tens of pico-seconds. Otherwise‚ expressions 4.17 and 4.18
can be used to compute a lumped inductance or capacitance. In this case‚ the
best approach is to use the standard set-up (short-circuit for inductance and
open-circuit for capacitance).
3.3
Frequency domain measurement methods
Methods for measuring package parasitics in the frequency domain have
the advantage of considering parameters with values dependent on frequency‚
unlike time domain methods that obtain constant parameter values.
These methods are based on two types of instruments: LCZ meters‚ for a
small frequency range (up to 10 MHz)‚ and Vector Network Analyzers‚ for
measurements up to several tens of GHz. In the second case‚ an equivalent
circuit is derived from the measured S-parameters.

116
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
3.3.1
LCZ meter measurements
The LCZ meter measures complex voltage and current at a certain port and
calculates its complex impedance. By configuring the package connection as
a short-to-ground or open circuit‚ its inductance and capacitance can be cor-
respondingly measured. Even though the measurements are performed at a
relatively low frequency‚ the equivalent circuit is valid up to a much higher
frequencies‚ as with the time domain ramped input technique.
3.3.2
Network Analyzer Measurements
This instrument measures the S-parameters of the device under test‚ in this
case an interconnect. Several techniques can be found in the literature based
on this principle [27]‚ [28]‚ [29]‚ [30]. Briefly explained‚ they all assume a cer-
tain circuit model with lumped parameters‚ calculate the circuit’s S-parameters
for various configurations (at least‚ open and short) and then they obtain the
circuit parameter values comparing the circuit response with the S-parameters
measured.
In general‚ the circuit model is like the one shown in figure 4.18. By con-
necting all the inner leads to ground‚ one can assume that all capacitors are
shorted and that they do not contribute to measured S-parameters in that con-
figuration. From this set-up‚ values for inductance and resistance are obtained.
If all leads are left open‚ currents can be assumed to be zero and inductance
does not influence the parameters measured. The values for capacitance are
then extracted from this second set-up.
On one hand‚ the measurements are more precise than those obtained by an
oscilloscope. However‚ although it is possible to measure at a high frequency‚
the assumption of lumped parameter circuit behavior is not valid at such high
frequencies. In addition‚ the complexity of the lumped parameter model is

Packaging interconnects
117
limited by the different configurations that can be used with the package con-
nections.
4.
Power distribution modeling from EM simulation
The above sections have explained how to calculate a lumped parameter
model for package (or‚ in general‚ interconnection) geometry. This model en-
ables electrical simulations to be performed using standard SPICE-like cir-
cuit simulators or behavioral simulations‚ for which the standard approach is
IBIS [31]. However‚ the lumped approximation mode is valid only for a limited
range of frequencies.
The electromagnetic simulations compute the electrical and magnetic fields
in the structure for a user-defined stimulus and given a certain conductor geom-
etry. The voltage and current at certain spatial positions can later be calculated
from the field magnitudes.
Generally speaking‚ there are two types of solutions for Maxwell’s equa-
tions: in the frequency domain and in the time domain. Frequency domain
tools usually compute S-parameters for the terminals in the structure. This in-
formation can be introduced directly into some circuit simulators and the tran-
sient response computed by a convolution approach [32]‚ [33]. Time domain
simulators obtain transient waveforms for voltage and current at the structure
terminals. From these‚ frequency-dependent magnitudes (typically‚ impedance)
can be obtained by means of the Fourier transform.
While EM simulation of complex packaging structures is a very computer
intensive task [34]‚ for very high frequencies‚ the lumped parameter approxi-
mation is no longer valid and a more rigorous model is necessary. Innovative
algorithms and computer implementations‚ together with advances in computer
speed capabilities enable the applicability of this approach to be extended for
structures of moderate complexity [34].
4.1
Stimulus definition for EM simulation with FDTD
approach
The Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) approach [35] discretizes the
physical structure and solves Maxwell’s equations directly in the time domain.
It therefore allows the transient response of the electric and magnetic fields to
a certain transient stimulus to be obtained directly. In this respect‚ it is more
attractive than frequency domain methods‚ because it is even possible to link
the EM simulation directly with a transient circuit simulation.
One important application field for EM modeling is the calculation of Si-
multaneous Switching Noise (SSN)‚ which is the voltage fluctuation at a chip’s
power supply terminals because of a current demand (current derivative) [14].

118
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
In order to obtain an approximate response from the FDTD simulation‚ it
is necessary to analyze the phenomenon of the switching event and the way
in which the switching current circulates through the package. Two possible
switching scenarios must be considered: one is when one or more on-chip
nodes are switching (internal switching). The other is when one or more pack-
age output nodes‚ or off-chip nodes‚ switch (external switching ).
In the case of an internal switching event‚ there is a current demand from the
chip’s power supply terminals so that an on-chip node capacitance is charged
(or discharged). The total charge associated with this event is:
where 
is the current supplied for the switching‚ 
is the power supply
voltage (assuming all the nodes switched are charged to this value)‚ and 
is
the capacitance of each node simultaneously switching.
In this situation‚ switching modeling of a circuit is carried out as shown in
figure 4.19. An independent current source (stimulus for the EM simulation)
is connected to the internal power terminals of the package‚ while the exter-
nal power terminals are connected through a small resistor which accounts for
the internal resistance of the power supply. In addition‚ a capacitor between
the current source terminals can be added to emulate on-chip parasitic capaci-
tance. In this way‚ voltage fluctuations obtained in the internal power terminals
result from the simulation of EM waves propagating inside the structure as a
consequence of the current source‚ usually modeled as a gaussian waveform.
Once the voltage waveform is obtained‚ it is possible to compute the Fourier
Transform for both waveforms (current stimulus and computed voltage) and
then to obtain the impedance of the structure as a function of frequency. This
is a useful magnitude for identifying resonance frequencies‚ which may cause
problems if the bandwidth of the signals propagating in the package is near one
of these frequencies.
This approach obtains voltage waveforms similar to a realistic case. How-
ever‚ realistic waveforms for voltage switching noise cannot be obtained be-
cause the excitation is an independent source‚ while in reality the current wave-
forms for devices are‚ in turn‚ affected by noise and therefore a certain feedback
is produced [14]. Then‚ instead of this simplified setup‚ it is possible to couple
the FDTD simulation with a standard circuit simulation‚ including non-linear
devices such as the switching elements. This gives realistic results‚ but it is
very expensive in terms of computation resources. Besides‚ modern technolo-
gies demand complex device models which are not usually implemented in the
circuit simulators coupled to FDTD tools.
In the case of external switching‚ the simplified FDTD analysis is not pos-
sible because there are several current paths: part of the current goes through

Packaging interconnects
119
the signal line to the load, part of it goes from the on-chip positive to the neg-
ative power supply terminals. Therefore, it is not possible to consider a single
current source stimulus as in the case of internal switching.
In order to model SSN, one can consider coupled FDTD-circuit simulation,
or, alternatively, try to “extract” a suitable circuit from the results of the EM
simulation such that this circuit model has a validity range beyond that of the
lumped parameter calculations presented in section 2. In addition, the model
thus obtained can be readily used in conjunction with commercial circuit sim-
ulators, which include very advanced and accurate semiconductor device mod-
els. This is the approach illustrated in the following sections.
4.2
Circuit model obtained from EM simulations
In order to illustrate this method, let us consider the following problem [36]:
to extract a circuit model for the power distribution of a simple package struc-

120
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
ture consisting of two planes, as depicted in figure 4.20. Two identical struc-
tures are simulated, with different dimensions:
pack50 ps: 50 mm, vs: 1 mm, vp: 10 mm.
pack100 ps: 100 mm, vs: 5 mm, vp: 5 mm.
This structure is first simulated with an FDTD tool, SPEED2001 [37]. Then,
in order to obtain an equivalent circuit model, HSPICE optimization features
are used [38]. Starting from a certain circuit topology defined by the user, the
program is able to find the parameter values such that the results match a set of
characteristics (for example, peak amplitude, time for zero-crossing, etc.) The
characteristics are extracted by observing the EM simulation.
This optimization can be made from time-domain characteristics with a tran-
sient circuit simulation, or from frequency-domain characteristics and then per-
forming a frequency domain (.AC) circuit simulation.
The circuit topology used in the circuit simulations for matching the phys-
ical structure of figure 4.20 is shown in figure 4.21. It consists of several LC
stages.
The results obtained are presented below, with a comparison between tran-
sient and frequency domain optimization.

Packaging interconnects
121
4.2.1
Time domain optimization
The complexity of the circuit topology to be optimized depends on the fre-
quency components of the excitation, as discussed later in more detail. If the
switching current has a small bandwidth compared to the resonance frequency
of the structure (in other words, it varies slowly with respect to the time of
propagation of signals through the structure), then a simple model with a small
number of stages is sufficient to model the power distribution accurately. If, on
the other hand, the current variation is very fast, then a more complex model
will be necessary.
This can be observed in figure 4.22, where two cases are shown: one corre-
sponding to package pack50 defined above, and the other to package pack100.
Both are equally excited with a gaussian current waveform of 300 ns width. A
simple circuit model of one stage only is considered. The optimization goals
are set to the peak voltage of the first, second and third peak, as well as the time
of first crossing by zero. For case pack50 the results for this simple model are
fairly good, while for the bigger package, pack100, the results are not accurate.
This difference in the success of the optimization process can be explained
by looking at figure 4.23. The frequency-domain impedance is represented
there for both the SPEED simulation and HSPICE results. For package pack100,
the first resonance frequency is lower than for pack50 (because the physical di-
mensions are greater). As the model considered, with one LC stage, presents

122
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
just one resonance peak, the optimizer obtains a compromise resonance fre-
quency for pack100, trying to accomplish the goals of the peaks and zero
crossing times, which finally translates in an inaccurate result. It is clearly
seen from this figure that either a more complex circuit model is needed or the
frequency validity of the one-stage model limited to before the second reso-
nance peak (around 2.5 GHz for pack50, and 1 GHz for pack100), in which
case a stimulus of 300 ns width cannot be applied.
4.2.2
Frequency domain optimization
The approach of performing the optimization in the frequency domain al-
lows better control of the frequency range for which the circuit model is valid.
For example, a 3-stage circuit like the one shown in figure 4.21 allows the
adjustment of up to 3 resonance frequencies, which in the case of packl00, en-
ables the validity of the circuit model to be increased to approximately 3 GHz.
Figure 4.24 shows the optimization result in the frequency domain, taking
as goals the values of impedance magnitude peaks, as well as frequencies cor-
responding to different crossings with zero magnitude. Also shown is the tran-
sient simulation with the model obtained from frequency domain optimization.
Now, the circuit simulation is much more similar to the EM simulation.
5.
Simulations of package effects
As an illustration of the models, some simulations are presented here show-
ing the effect of package contribution to the overall noise inside the integrated
circuit [39].
The objective is to see the delay variation due to two causes: crosstalk (si-
multaneous transitions in neighboring lines, as explained in chapter 3), and
package parasitics (mainly, power supply fluctuations due to simultaneous switch-
ing noise).

Packaging interconnects
123
The circuit chosen to see these two effects is shown in figure 4.25. There is
a logic path containing 6 coupled chip lines (their vertical structure is shown
in figure 4.26). The delay simulated in one of them depends on the activity of
the other 5 lines. In order to compare the delays with and without crosstalk, an
identical set of 6 lines is included as shown in figure 4.25 so that all the other 5
lines in this second set are quiet. Therefore the delay in this second set serves
as a reference delay, without the effect of crosstalk. The delay is “measured”
from nodes 703 to 1303 in the reference set, and from nodes 703 to 1903 in the
crosstalk-affected set. Before and after the coupled lines, there is a chain of 10

124
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
inverters for each line so a realistic delay path is simulated. The total number
of inverters switching in the worst case is (6 + 6) × (10 + 10) = 240. Each of
the 12 first inverter chains is driven by a signal provided by input driver pads
(7 input pads, corresponding to the 7 different signals needed to simulate the
cases of interest), and there is an output driver pad for each of the 12 inverter
chains after the coupled lines.
In order to simulate the package parasitics, electrical models of three dif-
ferent packages have been used: DIL24, QFP44 and PLCC44. The circuit
delay is, therefore, measured with the package parasitics for each package and
without any package parasitics to see how much the delay is affected by pack-
age. Figure 4.27 shows the package pin assignments used for each simulation.
The signal assignment is similar for all packages to enable an easy comparison
between the three of them.
In order to illustrate the effects stated in the introduction, two types of results
are presented:
1 How the reference delay (without crosstalk) changes with the rest of the
circuit increased activity due to package parasitics (SSN). This is shown in
figures 4.28 to 4.31.
2 Changes in delay because of crosstalk, with and without package parasitics
(figures 4.32 to 4.35).
There is a different effect depending on the transition polarity of the tran-
sitions causing the variation in delay with respect to the transition in the ref-
erence line. In all the graphs, the corresponding results are noted as     or
which stand for “advancing” (if both transitions are in the same direction,
causing an “advanced delay”) or “retarding” (if transitions are in the opposite
direction, causing a “retarded delay”) [40].

Packaging interconnects
125
5.1
Effect of SSN
The first set of graphs, in figures 4.28 to 4.31 show the dependence of the
delay in the reference set of lines, that is, without crosstalk effect, only due to
package parasitics. There are two graphs for each of the lines in the coupled
set, taking into account the fact that because of the symmetry in line structure
shown in figure 4.26, the results for line 3 and line 6 are equal to those of line 1
and line 4 respectively. Case 1 to 5 means different circuit activity. From one
case to the next, circuit activity is increased by 20 inverters plus one input pad
and one output pad.
Several observations can be drawn from this set of figures. Firstly, as fully
expected, the type of package is a primary influence on SSN. In this respect,
the DIL package cause a greater delay variation than the other two packages
considered here. The way in which the different victim lines show different
path delays depending on the total capacitance they present, can also be ob-

126
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
served. In order of increasing delay, they are as follows: line 4, line 5, line 1
and line 2.
Secondly, it can be seen how the polarity of the input transitions cause ei-
ther an increase or a decrease in a given signal delay inside the chip. This
difference in behavior is due to the different paths of switching current when a
particular driver switches with a HL or a LH transition. The superimposition of
all the current waveforms of each driver gives an overall result, which is very
difficult to predict analytically. In general, this overall effect will produce a
certain amount of signal jitter when an arbitrary and varying number of signals

Packaging interconnects
127
are switching in either direction. The effect of the package must therefore be
strictly controlled in order to minimize this SSN-induced jitter.
5.2
Effect of crosstalk
A second set of graphs is presented in figures 4.32 to 4.35. They show
the effect of line coupling on path delay, for each of the six coupled lines
considered as the victim. In all the graphs, Case 1 corresponds to a single line
delay, without crosstalk or SSN effects.
The results shown in these graphs require some discussion for a proper in-
terpretation. The data corresponding to the circuit structure without package

128
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
shows the expected behavior of advancing and retarding the transition. It is
interesting to note that in the case of retarding transitions, Case 5 and 6 ap-
pear to have a smaller effect than Case 4, although there is a greater number
of lines switching. The explanation is that, in the case of retarding transition,
simultaneous coupling produces an important undershoot (or overshoot) be-
cause the coupled signal is opposite to the victim line transition. Although
this under(over)shoot is correspondingly more significant for Cases 5 and 6,
this fact does not influence the transition delay as much as other cases. On
the other hand, the advancing transitions do not cause any under(over)shoot,

Packaging interconnects
129
and therefore the increasing effect with a larger number of switching lines is
observed.
These graphs also allow to evaluate the relative importance of package ver-
sus crosstalk influences for delay variation, by observing the difference be-
tween data corresponding to delay without package and data obtained includ-
ing package parasitics. Again, the different behavior of advancing and retard-
ing transitions should be noted. As was shown in figures 4.28 to 4.31, in the
particular configuration of the simulated circuit, advancing transitions produce
an increase in delay because of package parasitics (while crosstalk produces
the opposite effect). This explains why, in the graphs corresponding to retard-

130
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
ing transitions, the delay in circuits with packages is generally smaller than the
delay calculated without packages.
It can be seen from graphs that the difference between the data with and
without packages is small, from 50 ps to 400 ps, while the crosstalk effect
produces a much greater variation, ranging from 500 ps to 2 ns.
5.3
Discussion
The results shown in this section indicate an important dependence of delay
on activity in neighboring lines. The relative importance of this effect depends

Packaging interconnects
131
on the nominal delays involved: if these are small, as happens for example in
pipelined structures, the crosstal k-induced delay can be 30% or more of the
path delay.
Package parasitics have also an impact on path delay, as shown in fig-
ures 4.28 to 4.31. However, the most important influence on delay variation
is due to crosstalk for closely spaced lines and the package has a relatively mi-
nor influence. This is so even though the pin-out considered (only one VDD
and GND connection at opposite pins) does not favor low simultaneous switch-
ing noise. In this sense, the results presented here may be considered as a worst

132
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
case with respect to package behavior, because several improvements, like bet-
ter pin assignment and the use of on-chip or on-package decoupling capacitors
are able to reduce the influence of the package [41].
References
[1] Seraphim D. P., Lasky R., and Li C.-Y. Principles of Electronic Packaging. McGraw–
Hill, 1989.

REFERENCES
133
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
Bakoglu H. B. Circuits, Interconnections and Packaging for VLSI. Addison-Wesley,
1990.
Johnson B., Quarles T., Newton A. R., Pederson D. O., and Sangiovanni-Vicentelli A.
SPICE3 Version 3e User’s Manual. University of California, Dpt. of Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Sciences. University of California. Berkeley, CA, 94720, 1991.
Jr. Blodgett A. J. “Microelectronic Packaging”. Scientific American, 249, July 1983.
Terasawa M., Minami S., and Rubin J. “A Comparison of Thin Film, Thick Film, and Co-
Fired High Density Ceramic Multilayer with the Combined Technology: T&T HDCM

134
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
(Thin Film and Thick Film High Density Ceramic Module”. The Int. Journal for Hybrid
Electronics, 6(1), 1983.
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
Ho C. W., Chance D. A., Bajorek C. H., and Acosta R. E. “The Thin-Film Module as
a High-Performance Semiconductor Package”. IBM J. Res. and Develop., 26(3), May
1982.
Lai Z. and Liu J. The nordic electronics packaging guideline. http://extra.ivf.se/ngl/,
2000.
Brown K.M. Physical achitecture of VLSI systems, chapter 2, pages 23–98. John Wiley
& Sons, 1994.
Davidson E. E. “Electrical Design of a High Speed Computer Package”. IBM J. Res.
Develop., 26(3), May 1982.
Quint D. W., Aziz A., Kaw R., and Perezalonso F. J. “Measurement of R, L, and C
Parameters in VLSI Packages”. Hewlett-Packard Journal, October 1990.
Vidano R. P., Cummings J. P., Jensen R. J., Walters W. L., and Helix M. J. “Technology
and Design for High Speed Digital Components in Advanced Applications”. In 33rd
Electronic Components Conference, 1983.
Val C. M. and Martin J. E. “A New Chip Carrier for High Performance Applications:
Integrated Decoupling Capacitor Chip Carrier (IDCC)”. IEEE Trans. on Components,
Hybrids and Manufacturing Technology, 6(3), September 1983.
Katopis G. A. “Delta-I Noise Specification for a High–Performance Computing Ma-
chine”. Proceedings of the IEEE, 73(9), September 1985.
Senthinathan R. and Prince J. L. “Simultaneous Switching Ground Noise Calculation
for Packaged CMOS Devices”. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 26(11), November
1991.
Ruehli A.E. “Equivalent circuit models for three-dimensional multiconductor systems”.
IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 22(3), March 1974.
Ruehli A. E. “Inductance calculations in a complex integrated circuit environment”. IBM
J. of  Research and Development, 16, September 1972.
Ramo S., Whinnery J. R., and Van Duzer T. Fields and Waves in Communication Elec-
tronics. Wiley and Sons, 2nd edition, 1984.
Kamon M., Tsuk M.J., and White J. “Fasthenry: a multipole-accelerated 3-D inductance
extraction program”. IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 42(9), Septem-
ber 1994.
Ruehli A.E. and Heeb H. “Circuit models for three-dimensional geometries including
dielectrics”. IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 40(7), July 1992.
Kamon M. Efficient techniques for inductance extraction of complex 3-d geometries.
Master’s thesis, Massachusets Institute of Technology, February 1994.
Martens L. High-frequency characterization of electronic packaging. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1998.

REFERENCES
135
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
Wartenberg S.A. RF measurements of die and packages. Artech House, 2002.
Young B. Digital signal integrity. Prentice Hall PTR, 2001.
Jong J.-M. and Tripathi V.K. “Time-domain characterization of interconnect discontinu-
ities in high-speed circuits”. IEEE Trans. on Components, Hybrids and Manufacturing
Technology, 15(4), August 1992.
Bruckstein A. and Kailath T. “An inverse scattering framework for several problems in
signal processing”. IEEE ASSP Magazine, 4(1), January 1987.
Burkhart S.C. and Wilcox R.B. “Arbitrary pulse shape synthesis via nonuniform trans-
mission lines”. IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 38(10), October
1990.
Tsai C.-T. and Yip W.-Y. “An experimental technique for full package inductance
matrix characterization”. IEEE Trans. on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing
Technology–Part B, 19(2), May 1996.
Young B. and Sparkman A. “Measurement of package inductance and capacitance ma-
trices”. IEEE Trans. on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology–Part B,
19(1), February 1996.
Jeong J., Nam S., Shin Y.S., Kim Y.S., and Jeong J. “Electrical characterization of Ball
Grid Array packages from S-Parameter measurements below 500 MHz”. IEEE Trans. on
Advanced Packaging, 22(3), August 1999.
Horng T.-S., Wu S.-M., and Shih C. “Complete methodology for electrical modeling of
RFIC packages”. IEEE Trans. on Advanced Packaging, 24(4), November 2001.
ANSI/EIA-656A. I/O Buffer Information Specification, 1999.
Vakanas L. P., Cangellaris A. C., and Palusinski O. A. “Scattering Parameter-Based
Simulation of Transients in Lossy Nonlinearly Terminated Packaging Interconnections”.
IEEE Trans. on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology–Part B, 17(4),
November 1994.
Achar R. and nakhla M.S. “Efficient transient simulation of embedded subnetworks
characterized by S-parameters in the presence of nonlinear elements”. IEEE Trans. on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, 46(12), December 1998.
Ruehli A.E. and Cangellaris A.C. “Progress in the methodologies for the electrical mod-
eling of interconnects and electronic packages”. Proceedings of the IEEE, 89(5), May
2001.
Yee K.S. “Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems involving Maxwell’s
equations in isotropic media”. IEEE Trans. on Antennas and Propagation, AP-14:302-
307, May 1966.
Moll F. and Fang J. “Extraction of equivalent circuit models of package power supply
distribution systems from full wave electromagnetic simulations”. In 7th Topical Meeting
on Electrical Performance of Electronic Packaging, October 1998.
Sigrity Inc. SPEED Manual, http:/www.sigrity.com edition, 2001.

136
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
Avant! Corp. Star-Hspice 2001.2, June 2001.
Moll F. and Roca M. “Effect of package parasitics and crosstalk on signal delay”. In
Signal Propagation in Interconnects, 2001.
Moll F., Roca M., Rubio A., and Sicard E. “Analysis and Measurement of Crosstalk-
Induced Delay in Integrated Circuits”. In Signal Propagation in Interconnects. Kluwer,
1998.
Garben B., McAllister M.F., Becker W.D., and Frech R. “Mid-Frequency Delta-I Noise
Analysis of Complex Computer System Boards with Multiprocessor Modules and Veri-
fication by Measurements”. IEEE Trans. on Advanced Packaging, 24(3), August 2001.

Chapter 5
TECHNIQUES FOR AVOIDING
INTERCONNECTION NOISE
The previous chapters were concerned about the correct modeling of inter-
connection-related problems: how to model the phenomena in terms of elec-
tric circuits and a description of these phenomena. It was shown that, under
certain circumstances, interconnections cause signal perturbations which can
negatively affect overall performance, maybe causing transient or permanent
errors in a digital system.
This chapter concentrates in analyzing the circumstances causing such prob-
lems, and consequently, giving a set of intuitive rules so that the effect of in-
terconnections is minimized. In most cases, a detailed analysis using advanced
tools is necessary, but it is very useful to have, at least, an intuitive perception
of the reason why the tools do their job so an attempt can be made not to incur
problems from the very beginning of the design process.
1.
Crosstalk avoidance
Based on the description of chapter 3, the there are four main parameters
influencing the crosstalk problem, ordered from physical to design level:
Technology. The materials of lines and dielectrics and their minimum sizes
and distances determine the worst coupling case. Manufacturing tolerances
also must be considered when analyzing the problem.
Interconnection layout. By choosing appropriate line dimensions and spac-
ings, crosstalk magnitude can be controlled.
Driver sizing. Also, the relative characteristics of drivers in coupled lines
have an important influence on the effect the signals produce.
1
2
3
137

138
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Tolerant circuits. Finally, if the presence of crosstalk noise cannot be pre-
vented by the previous parameters, the design of circuits which are not
affected by these perturbations can be considered.
4
We will give some examples showing the influence of the respective param-
eters on the crosstalk problem.
1.1
Technology solutions
Considering the capacitive crosstalk models in chapter 3, the manufacturing
process will influence the line resistance and capacitance (both coupling ca-
pacitance and capacitance to ground). The main aspect related to technology
consists of the ratio of vertical to horizontal dimensions.
1.1.1
Vertical dimensions
Generally speaking, the choice of horizontal dimensions (width of lines, and
length) above minimum values determined by the technology is the designer’s
responsibility, while all vertical dimensions depend exclusively on the chosen
manufacturing process.
A very simplified but insightful analysis can be made of the influence of
vertical and horizontal dimensions of lines on the crosstalk problem. We con-
sider as a simple example the case of two lines placed over a silicon substrate
as depicted in figure 5.1. A first approach to the parasitic ground capacitance
per line 
and coupling capacitance between the two lines
can
be obtained using the infinite parallel plane approximation:
If we consider the simple ideal model of lumped capacitances described in
chapter 3, the amplitude of a crosstalk spurious signal can be written as:

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
139
Therefore, in order to minimize noise, the ratio between 
and
must be at a maximum. This ratio is expressed as:
From the previous expression, it is seen that both 
and 
(the vertical di-
mensions) must be as small as possible to minimize crosstalk. However, it
must be taken into account that a reduction in 
implies an increase in ground
capacitance (hence the crosstalk reduction) and this causes an increase in terms
of the line’s signal propagation delay. Also, a reduction in causes an increase
in the line’s resistance and, therefore, also has an impact on propagation delay.
In this respect, the use of copper lines with a lower resistivity than aluminum
allows the use of thinner lines and therefore reduces crosstalk. However, as
line pitch 
becomes smaller, coupling capacitance is more and more depen-
dent on fringing capacitance effects (in this case, on line width), so reducing
does not translate into a proportional reduction in
Likewise, a similar analysis for crosstalk between lines in different layers
(figure 5.2) leads to the conclusion that to minimize crosstalk, the interlayer
dielectric 
should be as thick as possible. Line thickness 
has a second-
order influence through fringing capacitance, but the effect is the same as in
the previous case: a smaller gives a smaller crosstalk effect.
In summary, the vertical dimensions could be tuned to reduce the effect
of crosstalk, but at the expense of an increase in propagation delay which,
on the other hand, can be compensated by driver sizing or layout techniques,
translating the problem to an increase in power or area.

140
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.2
Interconnection layout
As pointed out in section 1.1.1, the crosstalk effect also depends on hori-
zontal dimensions of the lines, defined by the layout. Layout techniques to
minimize crosstalk can be implemented in automatic place and route tools to
drive the physical design stage of the circuit [1].
Two different changes in the layout interconnects are principally analyzed
here:
changes in line width
screening techniques and changes in distance between lines.
1.2.1
Increase in line width
In order to illustrate the impact of change on line width, let us consider two
parallel coupled lines,one affecting line and one victim line. As shown in
expression 5.4, a possible solution to reduce the noise signal is to increase the
width of both coupled lines, as shown with a HSPICE simulation in figure 5.3.
On the top panel, the spurious signal produced in the victim line is shown. It
can be seen that the amplitude is reduced when the width is increased. This is
due to the increase in ground capacitances while coupling capacitances remain
approximately the same because the distance between lines does not vary. As
can be seen in the bottom line, the signal propagation on the affecting line
will slow down due to the increase in ground capacitance. There is a trade-off
between crosstalk noise and propagation delay. In order to reduce the impact
on delay and on area overhead, the minimum increase in width so that crosstalk
amplitude is below the required dynamic noise margin is considered as the best
solution.
1.2.2
Screening and line separation
The second technique presented in this section is based on screening effects.
Screening techniques consist in adding a close line connected to ground or
either between the coupled lines, or above them. In both variants the
capacitance to ground of each line increases and therefore crosstalk decreases.
If the screen is inserted between the lines, the coupling capacitance is also very
much reduced, adding to the crosstalk reduction effect.
In order to illustrate the importance of screening in terms of crosstalk noise
immunity, we can observe figure 5.4. In this figure two curves are depicted,
representing coupling capacitance between lines in function of line separation.
One of the curves (labeled NON-SCREEN EFFECT) is the coupling capaci-
tance of the two lines. The other curve represents the coupling capacitance of
both lines at the same distance as the previous curve when 
grounded lines are
inserted between them (with 
from 1 to 5). It can be seen that adding multiple

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
141
screen lines implies a very high reduction in coupling capacitance (represented
in log scale) and this reduction is much more important than the reduction in
the non-screening distribution when only increase in distance between lines is
considered.
It should be noted that the grounded screen line must be noise-free in order
to be effective. As they are connected to one of the power lines, the existence
of switching noise in the power distribution network tends to reduce the advan-
tages of screening lines.

142
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
1.2.3
Analysis of crosstalk avoidance layout rules
Presented here as an example, a simple analysis of the efficiency of differ-
ent rules related to interconnect layout solutions for avoiding or minimizing
crosstalk depending on the cross-section dimensions of the lines.
The aspect ratio (height to width) of the line’s cross-section develops along
with technology. As width shrinks with each generation of technology accord-
ing to Moore’s law, the line’s height is also reduced,but on a scale smaller than
width in order to not increase line resistance very much. Therefore, aspect ratio
(A/R) tends to increase with each generation. This is shown in table 5.1, where
the predictions of the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors
(ITRS) for wiring are displayed [2].
Based on this table, we will analyze the effectiveness of different schemes
for minimizing crosstalk depending on different values of the aspect ratio and
vertical dimensions. Let us consider the structures presented in figure 5.5,
where the 
parameter represents aspect ratio (A/R). The first structure is com-
posed of two coupled lines on a silicon substrate in a typical 
technol-
ogy. This structure shows an 
parameter equal to 1.6, and it will be used as an
example of a modern technology (year 2001 according to table 5.1) with min-
imum size lines, typical of local wiring. The second case considers a smaller
value of 
(0.4) and it may represent a modern technology where the lines are

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
143
wider than the minimum value, typical of longer interconnection,for example
a bus. Finally, the third case represents a situation where  is equal to 2. It cor-
responds to an extrapolation of current cross-section dimensions for possible
future nanometric technology with a wiring pitch of 140 nm.
Interlayer dielectric thickness does not scale as aggressively as metal thick-
ness. For this reason, we consider a constant dielectric thickness for the three
structures analyzed. The derivation of the parameters characterizing the behav-
ior of the coupled lines has been done using a 2D electromagnetic field solver
integrated in HSPICE [3]. From the cross-section geometry description of the
lines, the field solver provides the RLC matrix description of the coupling. A
transmission line model is considered in the simulation environment.

144
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
The circuit configuration used can be seen in figure 5.6. Two CMOS in-
verters drive two coupled lines of length equal to 100 
which are feeding
two other minimum size inverters. The culprit line inverter is dimensioned to
have 10 times more driving capability than the victim line inverter. An in-
put transition with 
ps is applied to the input of the culprit inverter,
whereas the input of the victim inverter is held to a logic value of one
voltage). A spurious signal is expected to appear on the victim line due to the
coupling. The amplitude of this spurious signal, 
will be used to quantify
the crosstalk effect.
Three strategies (which can be seen also in figure 5.5) to reduce crosstalk
will be simulated and compared, that is:
SPA increasing spacing between lines to a multiple of the minimum distance,
UPP adding a screen ground line in an immediate upper metal layer.
INS inserting a screen ground line in between lines.
Some HSPICE simulations have been conducted for this circuit and the 3
line topologies of figure 5.5, using a level 49 model for the MOSFET devices,
and a supply voltage of 
The results obtained can be summarized
as follows:
Case 
equal to 1.6 (Today’s technology). Figure 5.7 shows an HSPICE
simulations for the two coupled lines geometry described before. Along
with the original two coupled lines (a), results are shown for three crosstalk
minimization techniques: (b) spacing out the lines by
(SPA), (c)
adding a ground line in the immediate upper metal layer (UPP), and (d)
combining both techniques. Figure 5.8 shows a HSPICE simulations, com-
paring: (a) the original two coupled lines, (b) with spacing lines by
(c) spacing the lines by 
and (d) inserting an screen line (minimum
width) between them. This last case involves the same increase in area as
(c) spacing solution.

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
145
Considering results from Figure 5.7 the results obtained with the SPA tech-
nique can be seen as the UPP technique improves and the consideration of
both techniques simultaneously involves a reduction of nearly 60 % of the
glitch amplitude. Observing Figure 5.8, it can be concluded than the INS
technique is the best solution, minimizing the crosstalk effect (the glitch
practically disappears). It is clear that SPA 
and INS presents the
same area overhead, but, on the other hand, INS improves the SPA results
a great deal.
Case 
equal to 0.4, (A bus example in a modern technology). Figure 5.9
shows a HSPICE simulations for the two coupled lines in the structure cor-
responding to 
Results are shown for (a) the two original coupled
lines, (b) spacing out the lines by
(SPA), (c) adding a ground line in
the immediate upper metal layer (UPP) and (d) combining both techniques.
Figure 5.10 shows a HSPICE simulations, comparing: (a) the original two
coupled lines, (b) lines spaced twice the minimum distance, (c) spacing the
lines by 
and (d) inserting a screen line (minimum width) between
them. As before, this latter case implies the same increase in area as the (c)
spacing solution.

146
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
For the case of buses the results are different. Considering the results from
Figure 5.9‚ SPA technique now seems to be better than UPP technique and
considering both techniques simultaneously improves the results. Observ-
ing Figure 5.10‚ the same conclusions as in the previous case are obtained.
Case 
equal to 2. (Nanometric advanced technology). Figure 5.11 presents
HSPICE simulations for the two coupled lines geometries depicted corre-
sponding to the structure with 
The simulations correspond to (a) the
two original coupled lines‚ (b) spacing out the lines by 
(c) adding
a ground line in the immediate upper metal layer (UPP)‚ and (d) combin-
ing both techniques. Figure 5.12 shows HSPICE simulations‚ comparing:
(a) the original two coupled lines‚ (b) lines spaced at twice the minimum
distance‚ (c) spacing the lines by 
and (d) inserting a screen line
(minimum width) between them.
Considering the results from Figure 5.11 it can be seen that the UPP tech-
nique does not have any effect as a technique for preventing crosstalk. SPA
by 
technique allows crosstalk reduction but with a smaller effect
than in the previous cases. Observing Figure 5.12‚ it can be concluded
that INS technique is the best solution‚ minimizing the crosstalk effect (the
glitch practically disappears).

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
147

148
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
149
From these results, it is clear that different alternatives for reducing crosstalk
effects should be applied depending on the value of 
In today’s technologies,
and when minimum width lines are concerned, the combination of spacing out
and screening an immediate upper metal layer with a ground line is better. If
wider lines are involved, then spacing out is a good solution. Finally, it may be
predicted that if current reduction trend is maintained in future technologies,
then the solution of introducing a screening ground line in between the two
coupled lines will be the best option, both in terms of crosstalk minimization
and area overhead.
1.3
Driver sizing
As was analyzed in section 1.1 of chapter 3, the optimum crosstalk noise
amplitude corresponds to a ratio of driver resistances conducting these lines
equal to one. This result can be considered as a design rule for preventing
crosstalk.
A demonstration of this rule can be made by considering the circuit in fig-
ure 5.13 made up of two lines modeled as a capacitance to ground and a cou-
pling capacitance between them. Each line is driven by a CMOS inverter. We
have analyzed the effect of crosstalk by electrical simulation (using HSPICE),
making a comparison between the cases when the ratio between transistor sizes
of the affected and affecting line inverters are 1:1, 10:1 and 100:1. These sim-
ulation results are presented in figure 5.14. In the upper panel the expected
result that the amplitude and width of the crosstalk spurious signal is reduced
when the drivers’ ratio is 1:1 and it is at its maximum when the drivers’ ratio is
1:100 can be seen. Meanwhile, the affecting signal is represented in the lower
panel of figure 5.14, and it can be seen that the propagation time increases
when crosstalk reduces. In order to reduce this penalty in propagation signal
delay, a rescaling of the two drivers may be necessary to obtain acceptable
propagation times.
Another technique related to driver sizing is the use of buffers or repeaters
along the line to minimize crosstalk [4]. This technique is based on the re-

150
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
duction of the RC constant of driver-line. By using the same driver repeated
along the line, each stage drives a smaller total capacitance (self- plus coupling
capacitance) and this produces a smaller crosstalk amplitude and width, even
when the capacitance ratio is the same. This was also seen in the crosstalk
analysis as a function of line length of chapter 3 (figure 3.10).
1.4
Tolerant circuits
In this section we will mention two different kind of solutions. The first one
is the use of differential signaling inside the chip and the second solution is the
use of crosstalk-tolerant logic blocks in the parts of the circuit more susceptible
to crosstalk noise.
Differential signaling methodologies are more robust to crosstalk because
crosstalk will affect only one of the signals, or both signals as a common mode
noise that is automatically eliminated. As a drawback, there is a complexity
and area overhead compared with conventional single end signaling because
two lines are needed per signal. On the other hand, due to the complementary

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
151
signaling, these technologies do not need the use of inverters in the design.
It will be seen later that differential signaling is also a very good solution for
reducing simultaneous switching noise.
The second solution deals with the use of tolerant blocks. Assuming that
crosstalk cannot be eliminated by using technology, layout or driver tech-
niques, the objective is to modify logic blocks so that they are tolerant to noise
in some or all of their inputs. These modified blocks can be used in critical
areas where noise is found to be more important.
As an example [5], a crosstalk tolerant latch is shown here. Figure 5.15
shows a conventional transistor structure for a D-latch cell. The circuit is com-
posed by ten MOS transistors. The data line is labeled as D, the differential
clock signals are CLK and CLKB, while Q is the output of the latch. The
behavior of the circuit is as follows:
when CLK is at 1, output Q follows data D (transparent state).
when CLK is at 0, output Q maintains the same value (memory or latch
state).
This conventional structure is not crosstalk tolerant to common mode noise
in the CLK/CLKB signals. As both signals are complements of one another,
a positive pulse in both of them will only affect the one which is at 0, and a
negative pulse will only affect the signal which is at logic 1. While a crosstalk
noise in the transparent state will only cause a transient signal at the output,
if the noise occurs while the latch is in the memory state, it can change the
stored value. For example, this can happen if the stored value is a logic 0, and

152
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
a positive spurious signal arrives at both CLK and CLKB while CLK = 0. If
this happens while D = 1, for a short time the latch becomes transparent and
a wrong logic 1 is stored at the output. Other situations exist causing a logic
error. In order to prevent these errors, a new structure could be considered.
In figure 5.16 a modified latch structure with four more transistors than the
previous conventional structure (this is the penalty in block area compared to
the conventional one) can be seen. This new structure is crosstalk tolerant to
noise in the CLK lines. In figure 5.17 measurements on a tolerant structure
implemented in a VLSI circuit are presented. It is shown in this figure that
spurious pulses in CLK signal (those periods of time when CLK and CLKB are
not inverted) do not affect the behavior of the latch. The behavior of this latch
is the same as the behavior of the previous non-tolerant structure. This tolerant
structure can be adopted as a latch in the situations on the VLSI circuit more
susceptible to crosstalk noise, allowing noise immunity with a small impact in
area overhead.
2.
Switching noise avoidance
At package level, measures for reducing noise are strongly related to the
problem of Simultaneous Switching Noise (SSN). As pointed out in chapter 1,

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
153
this phenomenon is directly related to the impedance of the power/ground dis-
tribution network in function of frequency: if the impedance was zero for the
whole frequency range, there would not be any noise generated. The following
parameters influence noise generation and are therefore candidates for avoid-
ance rules:
1 Technology. The packaging technology determines its primary character-
istics, especially with respect to the existence of power and ground planes,
number of interconnection layers, etc.
2 Power and ground pin assignment. The pin assignment to physical package
leads implies that the coupling between critical signals can be increased or
decreased.
3 Use of decoupling capacitors. Decoupling capacitors can alleviate prob-
lems related to SSN, if they are appropriately placed. Capacitor placement
is an important decision.
4 Circuit techniques. Switching circuits cause SSN, and therefore the noise
generated can be controlled by controlling the way that different parts of
the circuit switch.
A more detailed discussion follows, developing the different parameters.

154
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
2.1
Package technology
The impedance of the power distribution network depends on the resulting
inductance, capacitance and resistance resulting from the physical structure.
As explained in chapter 4, inductance depends on the current path and not on
the materials used. The case is different for capacitance and resistance, directly
related to the dielectric and conductive materials respectively.
At DC, the impedance is determined by the resistance. The use of low re-
sistivity conductors, like copper or gold, gives a reduction in impedance.
However, as frequency increases, the equivalent impedance is dominated
by the inductance and its value is determined by the number of connections
to 
or 
and by the distance between conductors carrying current to
and from the power supply. The shorter the distance between conductors (and
the shorter their length), the smaller the value of the inductance and therefore
the less noise generated. As a consequence, the use of small size packages
has an added benefit for high integration at PCB level: that is, better electrical
performance because the inductance is smaller. An example of this trend is
the so-called Chip Scale Packaging (CSP) [6], in which the package is roughly
the same size as the chip. This packaging strategy normally uses flip-chip type
connections between chip and package to achieve the ratio between chip and
package area close to unity. For larger packages, power distribution can be
made through planes, so that there are several conductor layers, complicating
the package structure and increasing its cost.
On the other hand, the parasitic capacitance between conductors connected
to 
and conductors connected to
causes, in conjunction with the in-
ductance, several resonance peaks at selected frequencies. For those frequen-
cies, the value of the impedance may rise significantly, even by an order of
magnitude, or more in some cases. If the resonance frequency is close to the
frequency of the switching current, then the noise problem becomes very seri-
ous. The value of capacitance can be modified using a different dielectric, so
there is a technological solution for changing the resonance frequency. In prac-
tice, solutions based on design (lead assignment, addition of decoupling capac-
itors and circuit techniques) are easier and cheaper to implement for changing
the resonance frequencies.
2.2
Use of decoupling capacitors
One way of reducing switching noise is to use decoupling capacitors. When
a capacitor is placed physically close to the switching element (a package at
PCB level, a chip at MCM level, or a gate or logic block at chip level), the
current demanded by the switching event is partially given by the capacitor
instead of the power distribution network. Therefore, the noise generated is
reduced compared to the case in which all the current has to traverse the en-

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
155
tire impedance of the distribution network from the power supply. Therefore,
the design of a system’s power distribution network includes the placement
of different decoupling capacitors at the different hierarchical interconnection
levels: motherboard, board, package, and chip.
The effect is very well illustrated by the computation of the equivalent
impedance of the power distribution network seen from the switching element.
We will analyze the difference between this impedance with and without de-
coupling capacitance at package interconnection level.
2.2.1
Switching of internal nodes
First, the case of internal switching is analyzed (see figure 4.19 in chapter 4).
The equivalent impedance from the terminals of the switching element can be
computed with an AC analysis of the circuit model, as shown in figure 5.18. It
can be seen intuitively by examining the circuit topology of this diagram that if
the decoupling capacitance is not present, the equivalent impedance rises with
frequency (after one or more resonance peaks, depending on the complexity
of the model). The effect of the decoupling capacitance is to short the power
terminals at high frequency, and the resulting impedance is therefore smaller
for high frequencies.
The effectiveness of this reduction depends on several factors:
The decoupling capacitor must be located as close as possible to the switch-
ing element. If possible, the best solution is to integrate on-chip capacitors
for this purpose.
The capacitor must have a low series inductance, because otherwise the to-
tal impedance again increases at high frequencies, beyond its self-resonant
frequency.
The inclusion of the decoupling capacitance may introduce extra resonant
frequencies, which should differ from the fundamental operating frequen-
cies of the switching current to prevent problems.
1
2
3

156
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
In order to illustrate the effect on a typical package, a lumped RLC model
of a PLCC with 20 leads has been generated using the tool RF IC Package
Modeler from Cadence [7]. The dimensions and physical structure are shown
in figures 5.19 and 5.20.
The frequency-dependent impedance can now be simulated by connecting
an AC voltage source between, for example, bond-pins 1 and 2 and a termi-
nating resistor emulating the power voltage source between the correspond-
ing outer terminals1. The rest of the leads are connected to external ground.
Figure 5.21 shows the impedance without decoupling capacitance, and with
several decoupling capacitors. If no decoupling capacitance is present, the
1We are only concerned by the noise generated by the chip package. It is assumed that the voltage is
perfectly regulated outside the package and this implies, among other measures, the use of decoupling
capacitors at PCB level.

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
157
impedance increases because of the total effective lead inductance (except for
some resonance peaks). The decoupling capacitance compensates for this in-
crease by effectively shorting the inner terminals at high frequency, therefore
reducing the impedance and, consequently, the noise generated. The bigger the
capacitor is, the lower the impedance at high frequency.
Figure 5.22 shows the result in the time domain for simultaneous switching
of nine CMOS inverters, with channel sizes
A significant reduction in noise amplitude is observed when there is
a decoupling capacitance.
Note that there are also decoupling capacitors at PCB level, located as close
as possible to the packages in the PCB. The rules for selecting the appropriate
value and type of capacitor are similar because the problem is essentially the
same. However, the capacitors at PCB level show relatively high parasitic se-
ries inductance, which cause its total impedance to increase at high frequency–
therefore making the decoupling capacitor useless for such frequencies [8], [9].
In order to address the SSN problem at the package level, the decoupling ca-
pacitor must be integrated on- chip. Therefore, its associated series inductance
is negligible, or, at most, comparable to the own on-chip power distribution
network. The use of on-chip capacitors implies an increase in chip area and,
correspondingly, in cost. However, it should be noted that an important amount
of decoupling capacitance already exists as parasitic capacitance of PN junc-
tions in P- and N-wells and in transistor drains. All the gates and blocks not

158
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
switching contribute to this “free” decoupling capacitance. The problem with
this capacitance is parasitic series resistance [10] (equivalent series resistance,
or ESR) and not inductance. Figure 5.23 shows the difference in impedance for
decoupling capacitors of 10 pF and 100 pF with an ESR of 10 
compared to
the case of ideal capacitors. This resistance has as a benefit that the resonance
is damped, but, at high frequencies beyond resonance, the behavior is worse
(although still normally better than without any decoupling capacitance). Fig-
ure 5.24 shows the transient simulation with ESR and without ESR for the
same 10 pF decoupling capacitor.
However, on-chip parasitic capacitance is not the solution to switching noise.
The problem is that this parasitic capacitance can only function as decoupling
capacitance for non-switching gates. As the number of switching gates varies
with time, the amount of total capacitance is not fixed, and, what is worse,
it is smaller when most needed, that is, when more gates are simultaneously
switching. For this reason, it is necessary for high-performance circuits to inte-
grate additional decoupling capacitance in spite of the cost in area. Decoupling
capacitance can also be integrated into the package, next to the silicon die [11].
2.2.2
Switching of external nodes
However important, on-chip decoupling capacitance does not completely
address all the noise generated in the chip. The reason is that the chip out-

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
159
put buffers (those that are switching capacitances outside the package) are not
affected by on-chip decoupling capacitance [12].
In the case of external switching nodes, all the current going out through
the output lead to charge the external load must necessarily return through the

160
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
external (package) power distribution network. Even though part of this current
may have been supplied initially by on-chip capacitance, the current has to go
through the whole package inductance and, therefore, no noise reduction can
be observed.
Consequently, the case of output buffers is more critical from the point of
view of noise. To reduce it, other strategies, like lead assignments and output
buffer circuit design, must be tried. These are dealt with in the sections below.
2.3
Pin assignment
Pin assignment to physical package leads has a strong influence on the noise
generated, for both internal and external switching [13]. There are two fac-
tors in pin assignment that influence noise. The first one is how many package
leads are assigned to the power pin, P (connected to 
terminal of the power
supply distribution) and to ground, G (connected to 
terminal). It is easy to
see intuitively that the more leads dedicated to power and ground, the smaller
the equivalent (effective) inductance of the respective connections, because the
resulting effective inductance is the connection in parallel of several induc-
tances. The mutual capacitance between leads also has a certain influence by
determining the resonance frequencies.
The second, less obvious, factor with respect to pin assignment is how the P
and G assigned leads are located with respect to each other. Remember that the
loop inductance depends on the area of that loop. If the loop area is reduced, the
inductance corresponding to that loop is also reduced. Considering again the
case of internal switching, the current loop area is determined by the distance
between one P lead and its closest G lead. As a consequence, if P and G
leads are adjacent, the associated inductance is minimal and so is the generated
noise [14].
As an illustration of the influence of these two factors, let us take the pack-
age model for a PLCC20 used in the previous section. Figure 5.25 shows the
equivalent impedance of the package power distribution network for differ-
ent lead assignments. Firstly, the case of a single P/G pair is shown for two
different assignments: maximum distance between P/G leads (1 and 11), and
adjacent P/G lead (1 and 2). Adjacent leads present a smaller impedance due
to smaller equivalent or effective inductance, as denoted by the displaced curve
at mid-frequencies in the log-log plot. The second class of curves correspond
to four pairs of P/G leads assigned differently: in one case, all the P leads are
located next to one another (1, 2, 3, 4) and at maximum distance from the G
leads (11, 12, 13, 14). In the other cases, the P and G pairs are adjacent, but
with contiguous pairs (1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8), or separated, one pair in each side
of the package (1,2, 6-7, 11-12, 16-17). As shown in figure 5.25, the DC value
(dependent on equivalent resistance) is the same for all three cases, but as fre-
quency rises (and effective inductance dominates the value of impedance), the

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
161
cases with adjacent P/G pairs are better than the others. The best overall case
in terms of equivalent impedance is the one with P and G lead pairs consec-
utively grouped. However, the case with all reference leads grouped together
increases crosstalk coupling between signal package leads, and, therefore, an
intermediate solution may be better.
In the case of logic blocks switching nodes outside the package, it is not pos-
sible to calculate the equivalent impedance because there are several possible
paths. However, the same principle as in the case of internal node switching
applies: increasing the number of package leads assigned to P and G reduces
the effective inductance and, therefore, the noise will also decrease.
In order to illustrate this dependence, the following simulation examples are
presented, using the same package model as in previous sections.
Figures 5.26 and 5.27 show the assignments used in the simulations. In both
cases, leads number 1 to 10 are assigned to either quiet inputs (externally con-
nected to ground, internally to the input of inverter blocks), or to P/G grouped
in pairs. In one group of simulations (figure 5.26), the other leads (number 11
to 20) are externally connected to a switching voltage, and internally connected
to the input of 9- inverter blocks, giving a total of 90 switching internal nodes.
In the other group of simulations (figure 5.27) lead 11 is connected to a block
of 9 inverters and the output of each inverter is connected to another inverter
connected to leads 12 to 20, so, in this case, 9 outputs and one input block
are simultaneously switching. For each group of simulations, the quiet input

162
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
blocks are progressively replaced by connections to P or G, from one pair to 5
pairs, giving a total of 5 simulations.
Figure 5.28 shows the results of the simulations for the internal switching
nodes. For each simulation, the maximum and minimum internal power volt-
age are given. Although it can be argued that it is an incomplete noise charac-
terization, it gives an idea of how important switching noise is for each case.
The same simulations have been repeated for different values of on-chip decou-
pling capacitance. The results show two main features: one, that the bigger the
decoupling capacitance is, the smaller the noise generated. This illustrates the
discussion about the internal impedance in function of decoupling capacitance
for internal switching nodes given above. The second feature is that there is, in
general, a reduction in noise when the P/G pairs increase in number. However–
there are some irregularities because, when substituting one pair of quiet input
blocks for a pair of P/G, there are two opposing effects: one is to reduce the ef-
fective inductance, and the other is to reduce the parasitic on-chip capacitance.
Therefore, it is not easy to predict, a priori, whether or not the substitution will
be beneficial from the point of view of noise.
Analyzing the results of the circuit with switching output nodes (figure 5.29)
shows a clearer dependence of noise amplitude on the number of P/G pairs. As

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
163

164
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
already discussed, the decoupling capacitance has no influence on the switch-
ing output noise, but here a certain dependence can be observed because there
is a block of 9 switching inverters, which benefits from the decoupling capaci-
tance.
2.4
Circuit techniques
In addition to improving the power distribution system, choosing an ad-
vanced package technology, adding decoupling capacitors and suitably assign-
ing P and G pins to package leads, some improvements can be made at the
circuit design level. There are several techniques for improving noise immu-
nity or reducing the noise generated. Among these, we will briefly address
four of them: use of differential signaling, controlling the skew between quasi-
simultaneous transitions, specific output buffer design, and special digital ar-
chitectures for low-noise generation.
2.4.1
Differential signaling
One of the circuit techniques is the use of differential signaling instead of a
single wire interface [15]. The use of differential signals has two advantages.
From the point of view of noise immunity, it has a clear advantage because any
voltage reference fluctuation will equally affect both lines and is, therefore, a
common mode noise that is cancelled by the differential receiver [8]. From the
point of view of noise generation, differential drivers based on current steering

Techniques for avoiding interconnection noise
165
also have an advantage over conventional CMOS static drivers, because the
current is always constant, its time derivative is null and, therefore, they do not
generate switching noise [16].
The increased noise immunity provided by differential signaling has two
positive consequences: one is that the number of package leads dedicated to
power and ground pins can be smaller. This advantage is compensated by the
need to use two leads per signal I/O. The second consequence, more important,
is that the voltage swing can be very small compared with single-ended signals
that need to have a large S/N ratio.
One example of this type of signaling is the standard LVDS (Low Volt-
age Differential Signaling [17]). This low voltage swing implies that dynamic
power dissipation is much smaller than conventional single end signaling and
it is also faster. The reduced dynamic dissipation compensates the constant
current consumption and it makes it a very attractive alternative for very high
data rate transmission [18].
2.4.2
Controlled skewing of output drivers
As the generated noise increases with the number of simultaneously switch-
ing devices, one way of limiting the noise is to avoid simultaneity. This can
be achieved by appropriately skewing the “simultaneous” transitions so that
they are no longer simultaneous [19]. This solution obviously delays the bus
switching because the bus value is not stable until all outputs have their defini-
tive value. Additionally, it must be taken into account that switching noise
shows an oscillatory behavior. Therefore, the skew 
between consecutive
switching outputs must not be in phase with the noise because then the noise
would increase instead of decrease. This certainly complicates the design of
the skew control and makes this technique difficult to apply.
2.4.3
Output buffer design
Another field with possibilities for improvement is the design of chip output
buffers. Remember that output buffers do not benefit from decoupling capac-
itors and the only way to decrease the noise they generate is by adding P/G
assigned leads.
One technique already mentioned regarding the design of output buffers is
the use of current-steering logic [20]. This logic style is differential by nature
and therefore also shows high noise immunity.
There are other techniques that can be applied to conventional static single-
ended logic [21], [19]. These techniques are based on minimizing the current
derivative when a switching event occurs. First, let us analyze the switching
characteristics to understand how this works.
Figure 5.30 shows a simplified schematic of the currents involved in the
switching of an external node. The generated noise inside the package power

166
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
and ground terminals, represented as 
and 
can be related to the current
derivatives and approximately expressed as follows:
Normally, in the switching process, there is a certain amount of through
current (also known as overlapping or short-circuit current), due to simultane-
ous conduction of the NMOS and PMOS transistors during a certain interval.
From expressions 5.5 and 5.6 it can be seen that if the overlapping current does
not exist 
for a LH transition and 
for a HL transition) the cor-
responding component derivatives 
will also be zero and the noise
generated is therefore smaller. To design output buffers with no overlapping
current, the usual technique is to use a structure based on a tri-state buffer, in
which the PMOS and NMOS transistors are driven by the same signal, but de-
layed conveniently such that they are never ON at the same time (figure 5.31).
The NAND gate has two series NMOS transistors and the NOR gate two par-
allel NMOS transistors, so the transition HL is much faster for the NOR gate
driving the output NMOS than for the NAND gate. The complementary case
happens for LH transitions. With this structure, the output buffer presents a
small interval in a high-impedance state, but the overlapping current is nearly
zero and the resulting noise generated is reduced with respect to the case of a
conventional output buffer. The penalty is an increase in complexity and, most
importantly, an added output delay.
Also, it should be noted that, for a conventional output buffer, the overlap-
ping current is also reduced if the output is much slower than the input. As a
general rule then, slower outputs will generate a smaller amount of noise.

REFERENCES
167
2.4.4
Special architectures
Finally, another way to design low SSN noise circuits is by trying to control
the current waveform of the switching blocks [22]. Taking into account that the
noise is in direct relation to the current derivative, the way to reduce noise is to
reduce this current derivative. Current steering logics achieve this goal at the
price of constant current consumption. An intermediate solution is to design in
such a way that the current is nearly constant during the time of operation, by
assuring that the overlapping of the blocks’ current consumption is constant.
To achieve this, the delay of each block must be the same, as well as the current
peak of each individual block (figure 5.32). Therefore, the current derivative
is non-zero only when the operation starts and ends, instead of having several
peaks for the switching of the different blocks. This technique is well suited
to specific regular structures, like multipliers [23], but may be more difficult to
apply to general structures.

168
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
References
Vittal A. and Marek-Sadowska M. “Crosstalk reduction for VLSI”. IEEE Trans. on
Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 16(3), March 1997.
ITRS. International Roadmap for Semiconductors: 2001, 2001.
Avant! Corp. Star-Hspice 2001.2, June 2001.
Alpert C. J., Devgan A., and Quay S. T. “Buffer insertion for noise and delay optimiza-
tion”. IEEE Trans. on Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits, 18(11), November
1999.
Rubio A., Pons J., and Anglada R. “A Crosstalk Tolerant Latch Circuit”. IEE Proceed-
ings on Circuits, Devices and Systems, 38( 1), February 1992.
Harada A., Kaizu K., Yamanaka N., and Kawamura T. “Development of plastic chip scale
package for ATM switching systems”. In IEEE/CPMT Electronics Packaging Technology
Conference, 1998.
Cadence Inc. RF IC Package Modeler, 2003.
Johnson H.W. and Graham M. High-speed digital design: a handbook of black magic.
Prentice Hall, 1993.
Smith L.D., Anderson R.E., Forehand D.W., Pelc T.J., and Roy T. “Power distribu-
tion system design methodology and capacitor selection for modern CMOS technology”.
IEEE Trans. on Advanced Packaging, 22(3), August 1999.
Larsson P. “Parasitic resistance in an MOS transistor used as on-chip decoupling capac-
itance”. IEEE J. of Solid State Circuits, 32(4), April 1997.
Val C. M. and Martin J. E. “A New Chip Carrier for High Performance Applications:
Integrated Decoupling Capacitor Chip Carrier (IDCC)”. IEEE Trans, on Components,
Hybrids and Manufacturing Technology, 6(3), September 1983.
Bakoglu H. B. Circuits, Interconnections and Packaging for VLSI. Addison-Wesley,
1990.
Lin L. and Prince J. “SSO noise electrical performance limitations for PQFP packages”.
IEEE Trans. on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology–Part B, 20(3),
August 1997.
Rainal A. J. “Computing Inductive Noise of Chip Packages”. AT&T Bell Laboratories
Technical Journal, 63(1), January 1984.
Rainal A. J. “Eliminating Inductive Noise of External Chip Interconnections”. IEEE
Journal of Solid State Circuits, 29(2), February 1994.
Allstot D.J., Kiaei S., and Zele R.H. “Analog logic techniques steer around the noise”.
IEEE Circuits & Devices Magazine, 9(5), September 1993.
TIA/EIA-644A. Electrical characteristics of low-voltage differential-signalling (LVDS)
interface circuits, 1996.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

REFERENCES
169
Boni A., Pierazzi A., and Vecchi D. “LVDS I/O interface for Gb/s-per-pin operation in
CMOS”. IEEE J. of Solid State Circuits, 36(4), April 2001.
Senthinathan R. and Prince J. Simultaneous switching noise of CMOS devices and sys-
tems. Kuwer Academic Publishers, 1994.
Ng H.-T. and Allstot D.J. “CMOS current steering logic for low-voltage mixed-signal in-
tegrated circuits”. IEEE Trans, on Very Large Scale Integration Systems, 5(9), September
1997.
Leung K. “Controlled slew rate output buffer”. In IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits
Conference, 1988.
Aragongs X., Gonzalez J.L., and Rubio A. Analysis and solutions for switching noise
coupling in mixed-signal ICs. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999.
Gonzalez J.L. and Rubio A. “Low delta-I noise CMOS circuits based on differential logic
and current limiters”. IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems I: Fundamental Theory and
Applications, 46(7), July 1999.
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 6
NOISE DETECTION AND TESTING IN
LOGIC CIRCUITS
The effects of crosstalk and SSN on circuit behavior are very similar: either
they cause an unwanted pulse (spurious signal) in a quiet line, or a change in
transition delay in a switching line. However, in the case of crosstalk, unlike
SSN, the generation of these effects is localized. The magnitude of these per-
turbations depends on the values of the electrical parameters involved: lines,
drivers and load capacitances. A great deal of work has been published to
evaluate the amplitude and width of the spurious signal produced by crosstalk,
especially in the case of capacitive crosstalk and, more recently, including in-
ductive crosstalk [1], [2].
Once the actual circuit is built and manufactured, it is necessary to check
whether the existence of crosstalk and SSN can alter its functionality. There-
fore, just as with any physical defect, the circuits must be tested for noise. As
with traditional tests, the problem consists of applying a set of inputs that max-
imize the possible error. Here is where crosstalk and SSN tests differ, because
the excitations for maximum crosstalk are not generally the ones that produce
maximum SSN.
This chapter presents the work on noise testing, with a special emphasis on
crosstalk tests. Where appropriate, the relationship with SSN tests will also be
pointed out.
1.
The noise detection problem
After the circuit is manufactured, it must be tested and potential crosstalk
problems must be analyzed from an experimental point of view. Due to the
enormous reduction in dimensions in today’s technologies, crosstalk and SSN
is becoming more important. The question currently arising is: if the layout
has been analyzed, why is the detection of crosstalk necessary after manufac-
turing the integrated circuit? Why must post-manufacture detection be carried
171

172
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
out? Various facts justify a positive answer. While it is clear that all efforts
must be made at the design stage to prevent noise-related problems, the great
complexity of modern chips involves the analysis of hundreds of thousands of
interconnections. This analysis can only be carried out with simplified models,
on a reduced number of interconnection groups which are potential candidates
for significant crosstalk effects. The design tools currently handling this issue,
guiding the routing phase of the design, are based on RC models, neglect-
ing inductance. As discussed above, inductance can be important in certain
cases and, therefore, the crosstalk effect in these cases may be underestimated.
Besides, capacitance values are extracted or estimated based on simplified for-
mulas. And, even when these necessary simplifications are close to reality,
process parameter fluctuations may induce an increase in the effect previously
calculated, which will only appear in the field. Therefore, efficient testing
methods must be devised which consider noise as a fault that must be detected
experimentally. An indication of the interest and importance of the problem
of detecting noise at post-manufacturing stages is the inclusion of specific ses-
sions on crosstalk detection and testing in today’s most important test-related
technical and scientific conferences. In this respect, from the point of view of
circuit testing, noise may be considered as a soft fault, in the same family as
single events caused by ionizing radiation effects.
The main tool in the detection of noise after fabrication is ATPG (automatic
test pattern generation), which consists of applying certain algorithms for find-
ing the appropriate vectors that may produce noise and allow its propagation
to an external output or to an internal memory cell, where it can be observed.
In the following section, some basic ideas and algorithms for generating test
patterns in general will be commented on. After that, specific algorithms for
the noise detection problem will be presented.
2.
Brief introduction to the testing of logic circuits
The testing of integrated circuits is considered to be of strategic importance.
The great complexity in the operation of modern integrated circuits makes the
alternative of checking its functionality by exhaustively applying all the pos-
sible input combinations impossible. Therefore, the structural test approach is
taken, consisting of trying to find structural defects, that is, those located in
some specific part of the circuit. In this way, the required number of inputs is
very much reduced compared with a functional test approach. For a structural
test, the following aspects must be considered:
Defects, faults and fault models In order to clarify the objectives of the test-
ing process, it is necessary to define two different concepts: defect and
fault. A defect refers to a change in physical structure from the designed
specifications. For example, a short-circuit between two different lines due

Noise detection in logic circuits
173
to a spot on the mask, or a short in the gate oxide of an MOS transistor. A
fault refers to a type of misbehavior of the circuit, which may correspond
to several different defects. Test strategies are therefore oriented towards
faults, which may be modeled at different levels of abstraction, from logical
to physical. The fault model needs to be accurate to describe the response
of the circuit, but simple enough to devise a rapid testing strategy. Exam-
ples of fault models include the stuck-at fault (logical level), or the bridge
fault (physical/electrical level).
Observable magnitudes Each fault model induces a change on a set of given
variables, and these variables (called observables) are the ones monitored
to detect a problem in the circuit. The test technique is related to the type
of observable considered and it consists of all the necessary procedures for
checking and monitoring this magnitude. Examples of different observable
magnitudes are output logic values, temperature, current consumption, in-
put/output delay, etc.
Test vectors Given a certain fault, the problem of testing is to detect it by
monitoring the observable magnitude. There will be certain circuit excita-
tions for which no abnormal behavior is observed, and it is therefore neces-
sary to find precisely those excitations that produce abnormal behavior for
a particular fault at a specific location. The circuit inputs that produce such
excitation are what are called test vectors. The procedure for finding test
vectors (test pattern generation) is carried out before applying the test, by
using several algorithms.
2.1
ATPG for stuck-at faults
The techniques presented in a later section for addressing the detection and
testing of crosstalk faults are based on the stuck-at fault model. The stuck-at
fault is a logic-level fault model that consists of assigning a fixed logic value
at a certain node of the circuit, independently of the applied inputs. If the
fixed value is a logic 1, it is a stuck-at-1 fault and it is a stuck-at-0 fault if the
fixed value is a 0. This fault model is somewhat unrealistic, but nevertheless
it provides important coverage of real defects, and it is still widely used, in
conjunction with more realistic fault models.
The test pattern generation procedure for stuck-at faults can be split in two
phases:
Controllability It consists of finding an input vector that puts the node where
the stuck-at fault is at a logic value opposite to the stuck-at fault considered.
Observability After the controllability phase, the discrepancy in the faulty
node must be propagated to an external output (primary output) so it can be
observed.

174
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Figure 6.1 shows an example of a how a stuck-at fault is detected. In the
logic circuit in the figure, a stuck-at-0 fault at node M has to be detected. We
want to find an input vector such that a discrepancy from the normal output
due to this fault is observed.
First, the controllability phase consists of putting node M at logic 1. This
can be achieved, for example, putting a 1 in primary (external) inputs E and
F. The rest of the primary inputs are unassigned for the moment. Now, the
observability phase has to achieve the propagation of the value at node M to
one of the primary outputs, O1 or O2. To indicate that there is a discrepancy
due to a fault, the value at node M is denoted as D. The propagation of D to
output O2 is blocked because the controllability phase fixed the output of gate 6
to 1, and therefore, O2 is also fixed to 1. Therefore, the only output where D
can be observed is O1. In order to allow this propagation, one possibility is
putting A = C = D = 1, so that the opposite value of node M is observed:
a logic 0 if there is no fault and a logic 1 if there is a fault. This is denoted as
logic value       Note that a 5-valued logic is used to describe the circuit in the
presence of faults, the five possible values being {1,0, D,       X}.
In general, for complex circuits it is almost impossible to find the test vectors
manually as in the previous example. Several algorithms were developed to
generate the test patterns. The classical algorithms are the D-algorithm [3], the
PODEM algorithm [4] and the FAN algorithm [5]. As the algorithm explained
later for the crosstalk problem is based on PODEM, we concentrate on this
algorithm to explain some basic concepts.

Noise detection in logic circuits
175
2.2
Backtrace and backtrack procedures in PODEM
There are two main procedures in the PODEM algorithm: backtrace and
backtrack. In general, both controllability and observability phases have a
given objective, consisting of putting a desired logic value in the correspond-
ing node. The backtrace procedure traces the objective node back to one of the
primary inputs and assigns a logic value to it so that the objective is achieved,
in function of the type of logic gates making up the path. There are several
possible paths from the objective node to the input, and the selection of one
particular path is made depending on a set of criteria known as heuristics. The
heuristics can be varied: random, deterministic, probabilistic, etc. Generally,
more than one backtrace process is needed to achieve the desired objective.
When one backtrace process is completed (a determined value is assigned to a
primary input), three situations can arise:
The objective node has the desired logic value. Therefore, the objective is
achieved, and a new objective is chosen.
The objective node is still unassigned. In this case, a new backtrace opera-
tion is needed, with the same objective.
The objective node is set to a wrong value. This situation is possible be-
cause, when setting a primary input, several paths are activated that may
arrive at the same node. In this case, a backtrack operation is needed, as
explained below.
1
2
3
A backtrack operation is needed in the case of conflict between the objective
and the result obtained. The way to solve the conflict is, firstly, to set the last
primary input assignment to the opposite value. If the conflict situation still
persists, this last assignment is unset and the next last assignment is set to the
opposite value. This operation is repeated until there is no conflict, that is:
The objective node is unset, and therefore, a new backtrace procedure can
be applied, or,
The objective node is set to the desired value, and therefore a new objective
can be chosen.
Figure 6.2 illustrates the backtrace and backtrack procedures on a simple
circuit. In this case, the objective is to set node I to 1. The backtrace procedure
starts and, assuming the heuristic, selects the path given by nodes C – F – H –
I. It can be seen that the value 1 at input C is the least intrusive and, therefore,
this is the value assigned by this first backtrace procedure. At this stage, all
other nodes including the objective node I are left unassigned (value X). A
second backtrace procedure selects path A – D – F – H – I, and assigns a 0

176
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
to A. With this new assignment, D = 1, F = 1, H = 1, E = 0, G = 0 and
I = 0. Therefore, a conflict situation arises. A backtrack operation is called,
flipping the value of A (the last assigned input) and setting it to 1. This new
assignment sets the objective node I to X. Now, a new backtrace operation
selects path B – E – H – I (the only one left) and sets B to 1. This last
assignment achieves the desired objective of putting I to 1.
Once the controllability phase has been carried out, observability consists
of allowing the propagation of the discrepancy (value D or 
from the node
where the stuck-at fault is located to one of the circuit’s primary outputs, where
it can be observed. This is achieved by making the subsequent gates transpar-
ent: setting logic 1 at the inputs (other than the one that we want to propagate)
of AND and NAND gates, and a logic 0 to the inputs of OR and NOR gates.
Therefore, there is a succession of objectives until the observability phase is
completed, each with its backtrace and backtrack operations. The selection of
an efficient heuristic is very important in order to obtain the test vector more
quickly.
The success of a test pattern generation process is measured in terms of fault
coverage. Fault coverage is defined as the percentage of faults detected of the
total faults considered. Some of the non-detected nodes are due to inefficiency
of the algorithm and some faults can be truly undetectable because of the circuit
topology.
2.3
SSN detection problem
As already mentioned, crosstalk and SSN can be thought of as a fault, using
test terminology. In this case, the fault is not necessarily due to a defect.
In the case of SSN, the main difference with respect to a classical fault
model is that the fault is not located in a particular node, and thus, the control-
lability phase is different. The problem is not trying to create a discrepancy
in a certain node, but to excite the circuit so that maximum SSN is produced

Noise detection in logic circuits
177
and, after that, propagate the effect from the node considered for the fault to
a primary output (observability phase). The list of faults to be considered can
be exhaustive, as the whole circuit is approximately equally affected by SSN.
There are two faults to be considered: spurious signals and delay faults [6].
2.4
Crosstalk detection problem
In the case of crosstalk, of all the nodes in the circuit, only groups of nodes
that are close to one another need to be considered for the detection problem.
Therefore, in order to create a fault list for which to generate test vectors, a
layout observation is required. This analysis can be carried out using existing
tools that automatically select “hot spots” depending on the ratio between cou-
pling and ground capacitance, and driver resistance ratio, for example. These
tools are already used in the layout design stage to assist with the placement
and routing process.
Once the fault list has generated, the problem is similar to a classical stuck-
at test: for a victim line the controllability phase consists in causing a transition
in its neighbor line and the observability phase is almost the same as in clas-
sical test. An algorithm for the detection of spurious signal faults [7], [8] is
presented in the following section.
3.
Crosstalk-induced spurious signal detection
The fault model considered for the crosstalk problem is a spurious signal.
The delay fault associated with crosstalk will be discussed later on. The test
strategy is based on a logic level and, therefore, the spurious signal produced is
assumed to have enough amplitude to be interpreted by logic gates as a small
pulse with amplitude equal to 
and width T. The observable magnitude
and test technique are the same as in classical testing of stuck-at faults: the
observation of their logical values at the primary outputs.
The controllability phase consists of causing the crosstalk with a transition
(therefore, two input vectors are needed) and the observability phase is the
same as in a stuck-at fault test. Note that the second vector after the transition
is the one that must enable the propagation of the fault to some of the outputs.
A logic characterization of the crosstalk fault is needed so the following
logic variables are defined:
logic 1.
logic 0.
X. Not assigned.
TU. Up transition (0 to 1) at time
TD. Down transition (1 to 0) at time

178
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
P1. Positive pulse (0-1-0).
P0. Negative pulse (1-0-1).
TUD. Delayed up-transition, equal to
TDD. Delayed down-transition, equal to
Although values TUD and TDD may not seem necessary, they are needed to
complete the truth tables of the different logic functions. For example, TUD is
obtained with the AND of P0 and TU. As an illustration, tables 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3
show the 9-value truth tables of AND, OR and NOT functions.

Noise detection in logic circuits
179
Using this 9-value algebra, a modification of the PODEM algorithm allows
the generation of test vectors for the detection of crosstalk spurious signals.
3.1
Crosstalk fault controllability and observability
From a post-layout examination, a list of crosstalk faults is obtained, using
what is called inductive fault analysis (IFA). The result is a list of pairs of
nodes, (X,Y), where the first node is the affecting node and the second node is
the affected node (where the fault actually is). Note that in some cases, there
may be a possible fault in both coupled lines, so the same pair of nodes may
appear twice in the list in a different order. On the other hand, some pairs of
nodes may only appear once, indicating that one node of the pair is susceptible
to crosstalk, while the other is not. This is possible, for example, in the case
that the respective drivers are very different, as explained in chapter 3.
Considering a crosstalk fault at node Y due to a transition at node X, de-
noted here as C(X,Y), there are two possibilities for detecting it at some
output:
Causing a 0-to-1 transition at node X and propagating the resulting value
in Y to some output. In this case, a first input vector has to set both X and
Y to 0 (note that if Y was at 1, the spurious signal would be above
and subsequent logic gates would interpreted as logic 1, not as a spurious
signal). For this first vector, only the controllability phase applies. After
that, a second input vector has to keep Y to 0, and set X to 1. For the
second input vector, both phases (controllability and observability) have
to be carried out, first to set the correct values and then to propagate the
resulting fault (of value P1 at node Y) to some of the outputs.
Causing a 1-to-0 transition at node X. The initial values for the first input
vector at nodes X and Y have now to be 1 (controllability phase only). The
second vector needs to set X to 0 and keep Y to 1, and then propagate the
fault (controllability and observability).
Therefore, the problem of detecting spurious signals can be solved with an
extension of the classical stuck-at fault test, for which there are well-known
algorithms. Before explaining the algorithm used and the results obtained,
we show the procedure sketched above with an example. Figure 6.3 shows a
circuit where M is the affecting line and N the affected line (therefore, a fault
C(M, N)). We consider the detection by forcing a 1-to-0 transition at node M.
Therefore, the objective for the first vector is M = 1, N = 1. This objective
can be reached with primary inputs set to: A = E = F = X, B = C = 1,
D = 0. This is the first vector. The second vector has an initial objective of
M = 0, N = 1. By now setting C = 0, this first objective is met, so the values
of nodes M and N in the 9-valued algebra are M = TD and M = P0. This

180
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
P0 must be propagated, that is, either a P0 or a P1 value must be observable
at one of the outputs at the end of the observability phase for the second input
vector. To start the observability phase, the first objective is to set E = 1 and
then, F = 0 (as in this example, these are primary inputs, this is achieved
immediately). These two primary inputs were unset in the first vector and, in
order to avoid unwanted transitions, the first vector’s values for E and F are
forced to the same values as in the second vector. As A is also unset, its value
is also forced to be the same in both vectors, 0 or 1. Finally, there are two
possible pairs of input vectors (ABCDEF) that can be applied to observe a
P0 at the output: (011010)      (010010) or  (111010)      (110010).
3.2
ATPG for crosstalk
An ATPG algorithm was implemented, enabling the extraction of some re-
sults concerning the testability of spurious signals [8]. Other algorithms and
techniques are presented in a later section.
The algorithm begins with a list of crosstalk faults, as already mentioned in
the example. In addition, it is assumed that each crosstalk fault has a maximum
number of gates it can traverse (the penetration depth concept presented in
chapter 3). Therefore, each node has an associated number, MNG.
The algorithm is divided in three different phases:
Phase 1 This first phase obtains the first of the pair of vectors, setting the
value of the fault’s pair of nodes to the same value. The initial objective
(both nodes to 1 or both nodes to 0) is determined by a SCOAP-type heuris-
tic [9]. If this initial objective cannot be reached, the objective is changed.
If the new objective again cannot be reached, the fault is classified as unde-
tectable.
Phase 2 This phase consists of finding the second vector setting the victim
node at the same value as in the previous phase and the affecting node at an
opposite value, thus causing a transition in this node.

Noise detection in logic circuits
181
Phase 3 The third phase sets unused primary inputs of the second vector in
order to propagate the produced spurious signal. This problem of propa-
gation is equivalent to the propagation of a D (or 
value of the stuck-at
model. Now P0 or P1 is propagated, using a similar algebra to the one for
the stuck-at problem. In this phase, the limit on the propagation of the sig-
nal is taken into account by increasing the value of a counter variable each
time a gate is traversed in the path to the output and decreasing it when the
path is unable to propagate the signal (backtrack process). When this vari-
able reaches a certain limit (MNG, representing the SS penetration depth),
then a new path is chosen.
Figures 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6 show the charts for each of the phases. It can be
observed that Phases 1 and 2 follow the same structure as both of them cor-
respond to controllability problems. In Phase 3, the use of a counter for the
number of gates ensure that the selected path to the output contains a lower
number of gates than the spurious signal penetration depth MNG.

182
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
3.3
Results
Some results of applying the above algorithm are presented here. The cir-
cuits used to evaluate detectability are all combinational circuits, used as test
benchmark circuits, known as ISCAS85 circuits [10]. We worked from a gate-
level description without a layout, so to test the algorithm, 200 random faults
were considered. The fault coverage (percentage of detected faults) is obtained
from the algorithm. In order to see the influence of penetration depth on the
detectability of crosstalk faults, different values of MNG are considered: 2, 5,
10 and without limit. The results are shown in table 6.4.
It can be noted from the results table that the influence of MNG is quite
significant: for a small MNG the fault coverage drops dramatically for some
circuits compared to the case of unlimited propagation. In the case of crosstalk
faults, this is good news, because it means spurious signals with small pene-
tration depth will have a small probability of reaching an output and affecting
other circuits. On the other hand, a MNG of 10 gives almost the same results as

Noise detection in logic circuits
183
unlimited propagation for the ISCAS circuits. In summary, taking into account
the penetration depth, the number of actual faults to be considered may be very
much reduced.
The results presented are for combinational circuits. For sequential circuits,
the circuit can be partitioned in a combinational part driving a sequential part,
so that the propagation of P0 or P1 is to the input of the sequential block. After
that, Phase 3 would be re-applied in order to propagate a possible erroneous
state to a primary output.

184
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
4.
Other test techniques
The previous section illustrated an alternative to test circuits for spurious
signals induced by crosstalk. This topic, which is of practical importance be-
cause of the increasing effect of interconnects in deep-submicron circuits, is
the subject of considerable activity from several research groups worldwide.
This section shows some new approaches found in the literature.
We have classified the approaches into four topics: ATPG techniques includ-
ing timing issues, testing for crosstalk-induced delay, current testing applied
to crosstalk and design for testability and on-line detection.
4.1
ATPG with timing implication considerations
One possibility of a new ATPG strategy is to consider analog and timing
parameters, instead of only digital, as in the algorithm presented above [11].
From a lumped parameter capacitive model of crosstalk, spurious signals and
induced delay are modeled with a piecewise linear model [12]. Using an 11-
value algebra and adding signal arrival times, rise/fall times and input arrival
skews, the ATPG tool explores all the possible spacings of pairs of input vec-
tors using a modified backtrace algorithm. The objective is to generate a pair
of vectors so the crosstalk effect is maximum. For example, in the case of
crosstalk-induced added delay, given the timing of a clock-edge test generator,
the test generator may generate tests that cause a victim line signal to slow-
down and propagate the delayed signal in such a way as to violate the given
timing requirement at a D input of a flip-flop.
Three objectives are considered in creating a very severe crosstalk effect: a
weak driver on the victim line, a fast signal transition on the affecting line and
a propagation path that maintains or amplifies the noise effect until it reaches
an output. In order to evaluate this maximum noise created by the ATPG tool,

Noise detection in logic circuits
185
a cost function is defined, which contains a digital part (controllability, observ-
ability measures) and an analog part (gate’s capability to propagate noise). The
backtrace procedure takes into account timing requirements, and from the in-
formation mentioned above including also path delay information, timing win-
dows are obtained. These windows indicate time intervals in between which
transitions must be made in order to create an important crosstalk effect. The
ATPG tool can be applied to two different crosstalk effects, that is, crosstalk
pulses and crosstalk induced delays. In both applications two different exper-
iments are developed: firstly, if there is a fault, the tool can provide all the
test vectors and select the best choice. Secondly, if there is a set of faults, it
can provide a set of vectors for detecting these faults. Promising results are
presented in this study [11].
4.2
Delay fault testing
Physical defects may not cause a logic error, but still cause problems by
modifying the propagation delay of signals that cross the node where the defect
is located. This behavior is modeled as a delay fault and several test techniques
are devised to detect these faults. As crosstalk and SSN both produce a change
in delay, the delay fault test techniques may, in principle, be applicable to noise
testing and this is the reason they are briefly described here.
Similarly, as with the crosstalk test strategy described above, the delay fault
test needs two vectors in order to generate a transition on which its propagation
delay is somehow measured. The second input vector that generates the transi-
tion should preferably allow a single input to change, in order to avoid multiple
transitions in the circuit that might mask the result. Transient measurements
determine whether the observed transition at the output arrives inside or out-
side a given time window. In this scheme, the first vector defines the path
sensitization where the fault is tested (first part of a controllability problem)
and the second vector causes the transition and propagates it to one or more
outputs.
Figure 6.7 shows an example of delay fault test application in a simple cir-
cuit. If a delay fault at path A – B – C – D has to be detected, a first vector
that sensitizes this path is (001001) (with inputs ordered from top to bottom).
This vector enables the propagation of one transition from A to D by making
all the gates of this path transparent. Next, a change in A at time is forced, so
the second vector is (001101) and the resulting transition time at output D is
measured, which will occur at a certain time 
If the transition delay, T,
is outside the margin defined by 
and 
then the circuit shows a delay fault.
In the case of crosstalk-induced delay, a similar technique can be applied
by introducing slight changes. To start with, the first vector has to set the
coupled nodes in the same way as for the general case, by sensitizing the path
containing the victim line. The second vector is in the case of crosstalk delay

186
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
test more complicated to find, because it has to force simultaneous transitions
in the coupled nodes. The propagation delays from input to the coupled nodes
will play an important role here, because if the transitions are not simultaneous
the effect is very much reduced.
In [6] a test pattern generation technique is presented that includes the effect
of SSN on the delay fault. The conclusions of the paper are that the inclusion
of the SSN effects tends to significantly increase the circuit’s delays.
4.3
test approaches to crosstalk detection
The above-mentioned test techniques use the logic output of the circuit as
the observable magnitude (and, more precisely, the timing of the logic signals).
Another observable widely used for test purposes is the current consumption
of the circuit. The static current consumption technique, or 
is very
efficient in detecting physical defects like bridges, opens, and GOS (gate oxide
shorts in MOS transistors) [13], [14], [15], [16]. For defects that do not alter
static current consumption, the dynamic current consumption can be used as
the observable magnitude, as shown in recent works [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23].
As shown in chapter 3, crosstalk-induced delay due to simultaneous transi-
tions causes an increase in the energy consumed, which readily translates to
an increase in current consumption. Spurious signals also cause an increase in
current consumption because they represent extra voltage transitions in nodes
that would otherwise be quiet. Therefore, a crosstalk problem implies a current
consumption variation with respect to a circuit without crosstalk, as shown in
figures 6.8 and 6.9. In the case of the circuit with a crosstalk problem, there

Noise detection in logic circuits
187
are more switching nodes, and its corresponding current waveform will be dif-
ferent.
A test strategy for crosstalk based on dynamic current consumption
tries to cause the maximum crosstalk effect and the maximum propagation of
the spurious signal through logic, so that the number of switching gates is at a
maximum. In this strategy, whether or not the spurious signal arrives at some
output is not so important, because the current is the magnitude observed.
In [24] the so called ECR (energy consumption ratio) [25] 
test technique
is modified for detecting crosstalk. The resulting technique, called ECR-VDD,
is applicable to both spurious signals and crosstalk induced delay. The ECR
technique is based on the measure of the current consumption ratio of the cir-
cuit when applying two different input vectors. The ratio of average current
consumption is defined as the ECR. The advantage of the technique is that,
due to considering average currents, manufacturing process deviations to the
test result (which is one of the main limitations of the 
in general) are mini-
mized.

188
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
4.4
Design for testability and on line detection
Other aspects related to testing are design for testability and on-line crosstalk
detection. Several works address these topics.
In [26] a self-testing methodology to enable on-chip, at-speed testing of
crosstalk defects in system on-chip interconnects is described. The methodol-
ogy is based on the Maximal Aggressor Fault Model [27] which enables testing
of the interconnection with a linear number of test patterns. In this work, on-
chip test generators and error detectors are designed in order to be embedded
in the main cores. Test generators generate test vectors for crosstalk faults and
error detectors analyze the transmission of the test sequences received from
the interconnects, detecting any transmission errors. Test controllers manage
the transactions and allows diagnosis capabilities. This technique has been ap-
plied to the buses of a DSP chip and, by inserting self-test structures, self-test
capability has been obtained.
Finally in the area of self-testing and on-line testing, a recent work [28]
shows a modification of a scan flip-flop that enables on-line detection of delay
and crosstalk faults at the flip-flop’s inputs. This type of circuit allows the
circuit to have self- checking capabilities.
References
A. Deutsch, H. Smith, G.A. Katopis, W.D. Becker, P.W. Coteus, C.W. Surovic, G.V.
Kopcsay, B.J. Rubin, R.P. Dunne, T. Gallo, D.R. Knebel, B.L. Krauter, L.M. Terman,
G.A. Sai-Halasz, and P.J. Reslte. “The importance of inductance and inductive coupling
for on-chip wiring”. In Topical Meeting on Electrical performance of Electronic Pack-
ages, 1997.
T. Mido and K. Asada. “Crosstalk noise in high density and high speed interconnections
due to inductive coupling”. In Asia-South Pacific Design Automation Conference, 1997.
Roth J.P., Bouricius W.G., and Schneider P.R. “Programmed algorithms to compute tests
to detect and distinguish between failures in logic circuits”. IEEE Trans. on Electronic
Computers, EC-16(10), October 1967.
Goel P. “An implicit enumeration algorithm to generate tests for combinational logic
circuits”. IEEE Trans. on Computers, C-30(3), March 1981.
Fujiwara H. and Shimono T. “On the acceleration of test generation algorithms”. IEEE
Trans. on Computers, C-32(12), December 1983.
Krstic A., Jiang Y. M., and Cheng K.T. “Pattern Generation for Delay Testing and Dy-
namic Timing Analysis Considering Power-Supply Noise Effects”. IEEE Transactions
On Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 16(3), March 2001.
Moll F. and Rubio A. “Methodology of Detection of Spurious Signals in VLSI Circuits”.
In Proc. of European Test Conference, 1993.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

REFERENCES
189
Moll F., Roca M., Marche D., and Rubio A. “Detectability of Spurious Signals with
Limited Propagation in Combinational Circuits”. In IEEE 3rd Asian Test Symposium,
November 1994.
Goldstein L. “Controlability/observability analysis of digital circuits”. IEEE Trans. on
Circuits and Systems, 1979.
Brglez F. and Fujiwara H. “A neutral netlist of 10 combinational benchmark circuits and
a target translator in Fortran”. In International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, June
1985.
Chen Wei-Yu, Gupta Sandeep K., and Breuer Melvin A. “Test Generation for Crosstalk-
Induced Faults: Framework and Computational Results”. Journal of Electronic Testing:
Theory and Applications, 18(1), February 2002.
Chen Wei-Yu, Gupta Sandeep K., and Breuer Melvin A. “Test Generation in VLSI Cir-
cuits for Crosstalk Noise”. In Proc. International Test Conference, 1998.
Rodriguez R., Pineda J., and Volf P. “Resistance characterization for weak open defects”.
IEEE Design and Test of Computers, September 2002.
Roca M. and Rubio A. “Current Testability Analysis of Feedback Bridging Faults in
CMOS circuits”. IEEE Transactions on Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
and Systems, 14(10), October 1995.
Suehle J. W. “Ultrathin gate oxide reliability: Physical models, statistics, and characteri-
zation”. IEEE Transactions On Electron Devices, 49(6), June 2002.
Segura J. and Rubio A. “A detailed analysis of CMOS SRAM’s with gate oxide short
defects”. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 32(10), October 1997.
Beasley J., Righter A.W., Apodaca C.J., Pour-Mozafari S., and Huggett D. “Idd pulse
response testing applied to complex CMOS ICs”. In Proc. International Test Conference,
1997.
Makki R., Shyang-Tai S., and Nagle T. “Transient power supply current testing of digital
CMOS circuits”. In Proc. International Test Conference, 1995.
Sachdev M., Janssen P., and Zieren V. “Defect detection with transient current testing and
its potential for deep sub-micron CMOS ICs”. In Proc. International Test Conference,
1998.
Segura J., De Paul I., Roca M., Isern E., and Hawkins C. “Experimental analysis of
transient current testing based on charge observation”. IEE Electronic Letters, 35(6),
March 1999.
Picos R., Roca M., Isern E., and Garcia Moreno E. “Experimental results on BIC sensors
for transient current testing”. Journal of Electronic Testing: Theory and Applications,
16(3), 2000.
Singh A., Plusquellic J., and Gattiker A. “Power supply transient signal analysis under
real process and hardware models”. In IEEE VLSI Test Symposium, 2002.
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

190
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
Jiang W. and Vinnakota B. “Statistical threshold formulation for dynamic Idd test”. IEEE
Transactions On Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 21(6), June
2002.
Sun X., Kim S., and Vinnakota B. “Crosstalk Fault Detection by Dynamic Idd”. In Proc.
of the International Conference on Computer Aided Design ICCAD, 2001.
Jiang W. and Vinnakota B. “IC Test with the Energy Consumption Ratio”. In Proc. of
the Design Automation Conference, 1999.
Bay X., Dey S., and Rajski J. “Self-Test Methodology for At-Speed Test of Crosstalk in
Chip Interconnects”. In Proc. of the Design Automation Conference, 2000.
M. Cuviello, S. Dey, Xiaoliang Bai, and Yi Zhao. “Fault modeling and simulation for
crosstalk in system-on-chip interconnects”. In International Conf. on Computer Aided
Design (ICCAD), 1999.
Metra C., Di Francescantoni S., Favalli M., and Ricco B. “Scan flip-flops with on-line
testing ability with respec to input delay and crosstalk faults”. Microelectronics Journal,
34, 2003.
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

Index
affected gate‚ 56‚ 144
affected line‚ 48–52‚ 62–65‚ 67‚ 69‚ 71‚ 72‚ 88‚
91‚ 125‚ 127‚ 128‚ 140‚ 144‚ 149‚
177‚ 179‚ 180‚ 184‚ 185
affecting gate‚ 144
affecting line‚ 48–50‚ 52‚ 55‚ 61‚ 63‚ 65‚ 67‚ 69‚
91‚ 140‚ 149‚ 179‚ 180
aluminum‚ 5‚ 98‚ 99‚ 101‚ 139
area connection packages‚ 101
aspect ratio‚ 5‚142
ATPG‚ 172‚ 173‚ 180‚ 184‚ 185
automatic test pattern generation‚ see ATPG
back metallization‚ 7‚ 34
backtrace‚ 175‚ 176‚ 185
backtrack‚ 175‚ 176‚ 181
ball grid array‚ see BGA
BEM‚ 103
BGA‚ 98‚ 101
BiCMOS‚ 63
bonding wire‚ 101
C4‚ 102
capacitance‚ xix‚ 154
coupling‚ 48‚ 50‚ 51‚ 55‚ 67‚ 73‚ 75‚ 79‚
81‚ 85‚ 91‚ 139‚ 140‚ 160
extraction‚ 103‚ 172
ground‚ 36‚ 50‚ 52‚ 67‚ 73‚ 75‚ 81‚ 91‚
138–140‚ 149
input-output‚ 77‚ 85
line‚ 2‚ 3‚ 5–7‚ 34‚ 48‚ 60‚ 98‚ 104‚ 106‚
118‚138‚150‚159
load‚ 48‚ 53‚ 57‚59‚ 85‚ 171
measurement‚ 107‚ 111‚ 114–116
mutual‚ 138
ratio‚ 51‚ 81‚ 150‚ 177
semiconductor substrate‚ 34
transmission line‚ 16‚ 35‚ 36
ceramic packages‚ 98‚ 99‚ 101
chain of inverters‚ 57‚ 59‚62‚ 123
characteristic impedance‚ 17‚ 18‚ 24‚ 27‚ 34‚ 38‚
44‚115
chip area‚ 3‚ 8‚ 90‚ 101‚ 154‚ 157
chip scale packaging‚ 8‚ 154
circuit complexity‚ 3‚ 8‚ 97‚ 150‚ 166
CMOS‚ xx‚ 21–23‚ 30‚ 52‚ 57‚ 78‚ 85‚ 90‚ 91‚
165
coupled inverters‚ 75
inverter‚ 75‚ 149‚ 157
conductance
semiconductor substrate‚ 35‚36
transmission line‚ 17‚ 19‚ 35‚ 36
controllability‚ 173–177‚ 179‚ 181‚ 185
copper‚ 5‚ 98‚ 99‚ 139‚ 154
crosstalk‚ 2‚6
delay‚ 89
induced delay‚ 47‚ 65–73‚ 122‚ 127‚ 131‚
171‚ 177‚ 184–187
measurement‚ 59–64‚ 66–73
model‚ 48‚ 52‚ 59‚75
spurious signals‚ 47–64‚ 171‚ 177–183
test‚ 177–188
tolerance‚ 150–152
CSP‚ see chip scale packaging
culprit gate‚ see affecting gate
culprit line‚ see affecting line
current steering logic‚ 164‚ 165‚ 167
damascene process‚ 5
decoupling capacitors‚ 153–156‚ 164
on-chip‚ 132‚ 157‚ 158‚ 162
parasitic‚ 157‚ 158
PCB‚ 157
placement‚ 154‚ 155
series inductance‚ 155‚ 157
series resistance‚ 158
defect‚ 171–173‚ 176‚ 185‚ 186‚ 188
delay‚ 2‚ 3‚6‚ 20‚ 39‚40‚ 123‚ 124‚ 139‚ 167
gate‚ 56‚ 67
path‚ 67‚ 185
191

192
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
relative‚ 78‚ 85‚ 88
tradeoff‚ noise‚ 140‚ 149‚ 165‚ 166
delay fault‚ 185–186‚188
die attach pad‚ 7‚98
dielectric constant‚ 4–6‚ 36‚ 98‚ 99
dielectric mode‚ see transmission line
differential signaling‚ 150‚ 164‚165
DIL‚ 100‚ 124‚ 125
dispersion‚ 18‚ 38
doctor blading‚ 98
driver
impedance‚ 20‚ 26‚ 38‚ 44‚ 48‚ 50‚ 52–54‚
62‚64‚92‚ 149‚ 177
linear‚ see driver‚ resistive model
nonlinear‚ 43
characteristics‚ 30‚ 31
resistive model‚ 23‚ 24‚ 26‚ 27‚ 38‚ 48
driver sizing
crosstalk‚ 50‚ 88
reflections‚ 30–33‚ 44
dual in-line‚ see DIL
dynamic circuits‚ 90–93
dynamic RAM‚ 92–93
ECR‚ 187
ECR-VDD‚ 187
electromagnetic simulation‚ 117–122
FDTD‚ 117–120
energy consumption‚ 73–88
energy dissipation‚ 82
external switching‚ xvi‚ 118‚ 159–163
fall time‚ see rise time
Fasthenry‚ 105
fault‚ 172
fault coverage‚ 176‚ 182
fault model‚ 173‚ 176‚ 177
FEM‚ 103
flip-chip‚ 102–103‚ 154
flip-flop‚ 67–71‚90
fringing capacitance‚ 139
full adder‚ 90
global routing‚ 3‚ 6
gold‚ 98‚ 101
gull-wing pin‚ 100
heuristic‚ 175‚ 176‚ 180
hold time violation‚ 90
test‚ 186
187
impedance profile‚ 113
inductance‚ 2‚ 3‚ 9‚ 154
calculation‚ 103‚ 105–106
chip connection‚ 101‚ 102
effective‚ 9‚ 157‚ 160
line‚ 15‚ 19‚ 20‚ 35‚ 42
loop‚ 104‚ 160
measurement‚ 107–111‚ 114–116
partial‚ 104–105
inductive crosstalk‚ 171
inductive fault analysis‚ 179
inductive line model‚ 18–20‚ 42
integration‚ xix‚ 2‚ 154
interlayer dielectric‚ 4‚ 139‚ 143
internal switching‚ xiv‚ xvi‚ 118‚ 119‚ 155‚ 160–
162
inverter‚ 57‚ 75
ionizing radiation effects‚ 172
ISCAS85 circuits‚ 182
ITRS‚ 142
J-lead pin‚ 100
latch‚ 61–64‚ 90‚ 91‚ 151–152
layout‚ 171‚ 177‚ 179‚ 182
LCC‚ 101
leaded chip carrier‚ see LCC
leadframe‚ 98
line model selection‚ 40–44
logic threshold voltage‚ 52‚ 56‚ 57‚ 59‚ 62‚ 63‚
66
dielectric‚ 6
lumped parameter model
line‚ 19‚ 38
package‚ 103–106‚ 111‚ 112‚ 115–117
LVDS‚ 165
Maxwell’s equations‚ 12‚ 13
measurement
frequency domain‚ 115–117
LCZ‚ 115–116
TDR‚ 113–115
time domain‚ 111–115
vector network analyzer‚ 116–117
metal layers‚ 2–7‚ 99
method of characteristics‚ 26‚ 29
molybdenum‚ 99
Moore’s law‚ 2‚ 142
MOSFET dimensions‚ 33‚ 78
MOSFET transconductance‚ 59‚ 64
mutual capacitance‚ see capacitance‚ coupling
mutual inductance‚ 104‚ 106‚ 108‚ 109‚ 112
N-well‚ 157
noiseimmunity‚ 59
non-inductive line model‚ 19‚ 28‚ 42‚ 44
NORA dynamic circuits‚ 90
observability‚ 173–177‚ 179‚ 185
observable‚ 173‚ 177‚ 186
optimization‚ model parameters
frequency domain‚ 122
time domain‚ 121–122

INDEX
193
output buffer‚ 159‚ 165
overshoot‚ 28‚ 33‚40
P-well‚ 157
path sensitization‚ 185
PEEC‚ 103‚ 105‚ 108
penetration depth‚ 56–59‚90‚ 180–182
periphery connection packages‚ 99–101
permeability‚ 21
permittivity‚ 21‚22
PGA‚ 101
pin assignment‚ 153‚ 160–165
pin grid array‚ see PGA
place and route‚ 140‚ 177
plastic molding‚ 98
plastic packages‚ 98–99‚ 101
PLCC‚ 124‚ 156‚ 160
PODEM‚ 174–176‚ 179
power consumption‚ 73
power dissipation‚ 8‚ 97–99‚ 139‚ 165
power supply distribution‚ 4‚ 8‚ 9‚ 73‚ 101‚ 103‚
105‚ 108‚ 117–122‚ 141‚ 153‚ 154‚
157‚ 160‚ 164
impedance‚ 9‚ 103‚ 154‚ 155‚ 160
power/ground planes‚ 7‚ 8‚ 98‚ 101‚ 120‚ 153‚
154
primary input‚ 174‚ 175‚ 179–181
primary output‚ 173‚ 174‚ 176‚ 177‚ 183
printed circuit board (PCB)‚ 8‚33‚97–101‚ 154–
157
propagation
signal‚ see wave propagation
wave‚ see wave propagation
propagation constant‚ 16‚ 18
propagation of spurious signals‚ 47‚ 56–59‚ 75‚
90
propagation time‚ 24‚ 38‚ 43‚ 44
QFP‚ 101‚ 124
quad flat package‚ see QFP
quasi-TEM‚ 17‚ 19–22
RC model‚ 19‚ 38‚42‚48
reflection coefficient‚ 24‚ 26
reflections‚ 3‚4‚ 23‚ 26‚ 29‚33‚ 44‚ 113
Rent’s rule‚ 8
resistance‚ 5‚ 103
calculation‚ 103‚ 105‚ 106
driver‚ see driver‚ impedance
line‚ 2‚5‚ 6‚ 17‚ 19‚20‚ 33‚ 34‚38‚44‚48‚
50‚52‚ 63‚ 138‚ 139‚ 142‚ 154‚ 160
measurement‚ 116
partial‚ 105‚ 106
resonance‚ 112‚ 118‚ 121‚ 122‚ 154‚ 155‚ 157‚
158‚ 160
return current path‚ 108‚ 110‚ 111‚ 159
reverse scaling‚ 6
ringing‚ 19‚ 23‚ 26–31‚ 33‚ 34‚ 38‚ 39‚42‚44
rise time‚ 3‚ 23‚ 28–30‚ 38‚ 43–44‚ 55‚ 85‚ 88‚
115‚184
RLC model‚ 19‚ 34‚ 38‚ 156
S-parameters‚ 115–117
Sah model‚ 30‚ 58
scaling‚ 3‚ 6–8
screen line‚ 140–141
semiconductor substrate‚ 3‚ 4‚ 6‚ 7‚ 21‚ 22‚ 33–
38
set-up time violation‚ 69
short-circuit current‚ 75–77‚ 85‚ 166
energy‚ 77
signal integrity‚ 1‚ 2‚ 7–9
simultaneous switching noise‚ see SSN
skin depth‚ 35
skin effect‚ 20‚ 103‚ 105
slow wave mode‚ see transmission line
soft fault‚ 172
SOIC‚ 100
solder bumps‚ 102
spurious signals‚ 47–64‚ 90‚ 91‚ 171‚ 177–184‚
186‚ 187
SSN,9‚ 103‚ 117‚ 119‚ 124–127‚ 131‚ 141‚ 151–
167‚ 171‚ 185‚ 186
test‚ 171‚ 176–177
stack-up‚ ix‚ 7
static circuits‚ 89–90‚ 92
storage element‚ 90
stuck-at fault‚ 173–174‚ 176‚ 177‚ 179‚ 181
sub-threshold current‚ 75–77‚79
energy‚ 77
surface mounting‚ 99–101
switching current‚ 77‚ 118‚ 121‚ 126
switching voltage‚ see logic threshold voltage
TAB‚ 102
tantalum‚ 5
telegrapher’s equations‚ 15–17
TEM‚ 13‚ 17‚ 18‚ 20
termination‚ 19‚ 26‚ 33
capacitive‚ 44
series‚ 33
test
functional‚ 172
structural‚ 172
test patterns‚ see test vectors
test vectors‚ 172–174‚ 176‚ 177‚ 179‚ 188
thermal conductivity‚ 98‚99
thermal expansion coefficient‚ 98‚ 99
thermal resistance‚ 8
thick-film metallization‚ 98‚99
thin-film metallization‚ 99
through-hole mounting‚ 99
tolerant circuits‚ 138‚ 150–152
transmission coefficient‚ 24
transmission line

194
INTERCONNECTION NOISE IN VLSI CIRCUITS
dielectric mode‚ 35
frequency-dependent parameters‚ 11‚ 18‚
35‚ 37–39
ideal‚ see transmission line‚lossless
lossless‚ 17‚ 22–34
lossy‚ 33–39
skin depth mode‚ 35
slow wave mode‚ 35
tungsten‚ 99
undershoot‚ 33
velocity of propagation‚ 4‚ 14‚ 17‚ 18‚ 43
victim line‚ see affected line
wave propagation‚ 11–13‚ 15‚ 17‚ 19‚ 20
wavelength‚ 4
wire bonding‚ 101
thermocompression‚ 101
thermosonic‚ 101

About the Authors
Dr. Francesc Moll Echeto obtained his PhD degree in 1995 by the Universi-
tat Politecnica de Catalunya in the area of IC interconnect modeling and anal-
ysis. He is currently a professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering
of the Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya. During 1998 he was in a research
stay at the Dept. of Electrical Engineering of the State University of New York
at Binghamton‚ using electromagnetic modeling tools for electronic package
analysis. His research interests include VLSI physical design‚ noise analysis
and noise avoidance techniques.
Dr. Miquel Roca Adrover obtained the PhD degree in 1994 by the Universi-
tat de les Illes Balears. He was with the Department of Electronic Engineering
of the Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya in Barcelona between 1991 and
1993. During 1996 he was in a research stay at the Departement de Genie
Electrique et Informatique of the INSA in Toulouse (France). He is currently
a professor at the Department of Physics (Electronic Technology Area) in the
Universitat Illes Balears (Spain). His research interests include VLSI design
and test‚ high speed circuits and crosstalk problems analysis in VLSI Circuits.
195

